The Way of CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES CLEARED: In two TREATISES.

In the former, From the Historical Aspersions of Mr. Robert Baylie, in his
Book, called [A Disswasive from the Errors of the Time.]


In the latter, From some Contradictions of VINDICAE CLAVIUM:


And from, Some Mis-constructions of Learned Mr. Rutherford in his Book
entitled [The due Right of Presbyteries.]


By Mr. JOHN COTTON, sometime Preacher at Boston in Lincolne-shire, and now
Teacher of the Church at Boston, in New England.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for John Bellamie, at the sign of the
three Golden-Lions, in Cornhill. 1648.

An Epistle PACIFICATORY, To the Brethren dissenting from this Way.
HEre (Reverend Brethren) is presented unto you in Print, that very Copy,
which the worthy Author (Mr John Cotton, Teacher of the Church at Boston in New
England) sent together with his letter under his own hand unto me. His
honoring me therein (upon my real account) deserved his request, that I would
assist the Press, which with the greatst diligence opportunity put into my
hands I have performed. And the worth of the subject, and the Authors sweet and
solid handling of it, has richly rewarded my labor, legendo, perlegendoque,
in the usal and perusal thereof. The Man, most patient toward a sharp
Antagonist, (you your selves being judges.) The Manner of handling, gracious;
meek words, playing the Champion for Verity and Innocence, with arguments of
steel, unsheathed and shining with an amiable plainnes of speech, and a free
and sincere openesse of heart. The Matter partly Apologetical, partly
Controversal. In the former part you will meet with: 1. A true and terse
History of the purer Churches in later pudled times: The blots aspersed upon
them, clearly pummice^ and spunged off; and diverse precious Saints for learning
and religion (through whose sides Christ's ways by opponents have been sorely
wounded) (...), evidently and unrepliablely vindicated. 2. A very good account
of many singular Doctrinal points, not only of more speculative Theology,
ventilating the chaff from the wheat, Error from Truth; but of most practical
Soul-searching, Soul-saving, and Soul-solacing Divinity. I might give golden
instances, glating gloriously upon my Spirit, but for falling under a leaden
retarding of dispatch; fearing lest the press tarry for me; for it even treads
on my heel. In the latter part of this Book, being Controversal, you have a
fair Additional to the 1 Church government and Church C^venant.

2 The way of the Churches. in N. England.

3. The Apologet. Narrat.

4. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.

5. The model of the Church way. by M. Bartlot.

6. Answer to 32. Quest.


Models (before printed) of the Church way (so much called for by you;) not
Magisterially laid down, but friendly debated by Scripture, and argumentatively
disputed out to the utmost inch of ground, and defended Cap a pie (as they
speak) from the head to the heel, of every branch of Truth essential to the
controversy.

Now then (worthy Brethren) consider and view over what ye gain to your design,
whiles some among you endeavor by pen to blot the fair copy of Truth; (because
you at present 1. Pet. 1.12. (...) The Angels desire earnestly to stoop down to
look into the things of the Gospel.
Stoop not down low enough to see it a Truth) and to cross out of the Book of
men's memory and esteem the names of them whom God will honor, though you will
not? Surely the copy is written out fairer and fuller; books are multiplied;
more men read them; and by reason of the late mists hovering over Truth, and
cords of bondage streightning men's consciences; all men of conscience are more
eager to search out, and having found, to stand to, and sit down by those
Truths that clear their minds, and set free their spirits. Mists mantling and
masking, the Sun ascending, are soon cast off, and dispelled by its beams,
being near his Zenith. We grasp with men of rising parts, and high places, for
free speaking, about Text proof Points, to our loss. By an Antiperistatical
opposition, the zeal of godly learned Writers, (before concealedly clouded with
more silence) is set on fire: the cloud breaks, the voice of their thunder (as
the Historian speaks of that Greek Commander Pericles his Fulminating Oratory)
awakens the World, and the flame burns up the hay and stubble. 1. Cor. 3.12,
13. 14 etc.
Truth is like Camomile; the more it is trodden, the more it spreads. Like the
Wal-nut tree, the more it is beaten for its fruit this year, the more it
fructifies the next. Eclipses cause men more to stare after the Sun, and more
joy in the enjoying of its light, when got free. The Jews crying up Mosaical
Ceremonies, and humane traditions; Stephen, Peter, Paul, dispute, Preach,
Apologize for the Spirituality, and liberty of the Gospel. Act. 2. Act. 4.
What succeeds? thousands are converted, ten thousand are convinced, and the
World is overrun with the knowledge of the truth, as the waters cover the Sea.
The Gentiles likewise, (especially the Roman Empire) take the next turn to
dedignifie the christians, scandalize their religious practices, and to
persecute both (witness the ten persecutions.) What was the income, the return
of gain upon that adventure? Upstart those mighty Giants in Religion, awakned
with an holy inflammation of zeal, Aristides, Justinus, Melito Apollinaris,
Athenagoras, Apollonius, Tertulllanus, etc. And gloriously Apologize for the
Truth: James, Thomas, Andrew, Matthew, Philip, Mark, and others of the
Apostles; Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine cre vit, sanguine succrevit,
sanguine finis erit.
Simon and Parmenas of the 7. Deacons; Simeon, Zenon, Polycarp, and millions
more in ensuing ages by succession, die for Christ, and seal to the certainty
of the Truth with their bloods, making glorious confessions of it, whereby many
Martyrizers, become Martyrs. Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae. Whiles the
Persecutors marred (as they thought) Martyrs, they made Martyrs: and by their
opposition they increased shrill and conspicuous confessions and professions of
the Truth of Jesus. In so much that Plyny a great States man to the Emperor,
writes to him a persuasive to stay the persecution. At last, an Emperor himself
Constantine the Great, becomes a Christian, and then down went Barrabas, and
Christ was exalted. The Sun of the Gospel shone out once again over the face of
the whole earth.

Therefore my humble request to you my Reverend Brethren, is, that ye more
study Peace, and stir up Love, among Brethren, and less controversy in these
unparelleld times of universal contention, totally polemical, both
Scholastically, and civilly. And to this end let us be warned (by that good
account this Book renders unto us) of facil credulity, either to reports, or
letters, or Books, unless they be handed to us from the Authors themselves,
with whom ye have to do. Otherwise (as this book bears notable witness) our eyes
and ears shall be abused, and our judgments warped from the simplicity and
straitness of Truth. Suppose any real difference should be between us: if we
agree in foundation doctrinals, yea, and in the main Principles of the
constitution and jurisdiction, or power of a particular Congregational Church:
as that it should consist of Saints in union, invested with Power to take in
and cast out; I wonder it should amount to so high a contest, about degrees
(which alter not the kind) of forming and reforming such a Church. You say
SAINTS in outward profession is the Matter of such a Church; and an implicit
uniting, viz. a walking and communicating with you is a sufficient evidencing
of the form. We judge that real SAINTS uttering in discourse the breathings of
the Holy Spirit, and experiences of conversion, witnessed in a stricter
conversation, to be the Matter; and their solemn confession of their Faith, and
express open covenanting with the Lord to walk with such a body of Saints in
all the ways of Christ to their light and power for reciprocal edification, to
be the Manifest Form. How is it now that only a going before one another in
degrees of reformation, according to the National solemn League and Covenant,
should breed in you as it were a specifical opposition against us? If you have
a mind to ascend up higher to fetch down differences from above, about Appeals:
Nor here hence is their just cause to build up such Bulworks of Hostility
between Brethren. If in the reign of Episcopacy, those Parishes were quiet
where could not be found work for the Hierarchy to intermeddle; surely then
the Classes may conveniently permit particular Congregations, (prostrated below
them as it were at their feet) to rest in peace, whiles they meetly manage
their own Church affairs, within their own Sphere. If we need advise, we shall
willingly look on a company of Godly Elder and Brethren of other Churches,
called together for counsel by our, and other Churches (be the Assembly of them
smaller, greater, or greatest) as upon an Ordinance of Christ, and as bound by
the Truth of Christ as readily to receive, as they are to give counsel to us
according to the Truth. Only we cannot be contented to look absolutely upon
all their advise (without exception) as authoritative dictates, and Magisterial
Canons, necessarily to be obeyed sub poena under a penalty, how much soever our
consciences remain unsatisfied the mean whiles.

The case standing here abouts (as near as I could roughdraw the state of it in
this instantaneous have) let us I beseech you be rather Irenaei, then
Cassandri. Peacemakers, not Breach-makers.
As we do (...) ( Galat. 2.14.) walk even with the right foot in the Gospel; so
let us in discipline (whiles the difference in the thing is no wider) give one
another (as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 2.9.) the right hand of fellowship. Weems.
Pou^trait p. 1.
A learned Scot well observes, that there is a kind of justice among thieves,
else their society would soon be disbanded. And shall it not be among Brethren,
Saints, Ministers, least we dissolve Churches, yea, ordinary communion of
Saints? Let Idol-Dagon be half fish and half man, but let not Christ be
divided, nor the profession of his Truth be set at ods. If our hearts grudge
(and let that be our sorrow) yet let us not Act. 7.54.
gnash the teeth and saw one another repute a two, with the teeth of keen
words. Let not anger Ester. 1.18. The word signifies to be angry, and to foam.
(...) boil up into a foam, Chalde. Job. 16.20.
to throw the scum upon one another. (...) Syriac. John 16. v. 7. (...) Gr.
(...) In N.T. often Vet. Lat. Paraclitus, in N.T. often
Hereby else we slay both the souls of thousands, and the charity of 10000 to
their sin, and our discomfort. O it is a sad thought on my spirit, that we
should pretend to have the Paraclet (so called in many languages for its
comprehensive signification of Friend, Comforter, Doctor, Advocate,
Intercessor, etc.) that is, the Spirit to be our comforter, and yet it should
appear so little in us, to teach us and convince us of vilipending, or to work
in us love, friendship, and beseechings toward one another. Now that the Lord
would by his Spirit, with a second conversion (as the Scripture calls the
progress of mortification of some special corruption) trans-form our rugged
hearts into love, charity, yea dilection, is the prayer of yours to serve you
in the Lord, and for the Lord,

NATHANAEL HOMES.

The worthy name of the Reverend and Learned Author of this Treatise (which
with delight I have perused) is a sufficient argument to persuade, not only to
the reading of it, but also to a belief and expectation of something Excellent
therein.

Imprimatur

Imprimatur John Bachiler.
January 1. 1647.
The CONTENTS of the Chapters and Sections of the first Part.
Chapter 1.
OF the Title inscribed to M. Baylie his book; A diswasive from the errors of
the time, Page 1
Chap. 2.
Sect. 1. 2. Of those whom the diswader styles Brownists. p. 2 Sect. 3. Of M.
Brown and M. Barrow. p. 5 Sect. 4. Of M. Johnson and M. Ainsworth, p. 6 Sect.
5. Of M. Smith and M. Robinson. p. 6 Sect. 6. Of the contempt and contumely
said to be put upon the old Brownists, by the Independents. p. 9
Chap. 3.
An answer to the diswaders 3d. Chapter touching the original and progress of
the Independents in New England. p, 10 Sect. 1. Of the title put upon us, of A
Sect, Independent.
p. 10 Sect. 2. Of the number of the Congregational Regiment, and of the wisdom
threapt upon them, in engaging of note to them. p. 12 Sect. 3. Touching the
line of the pedigree of the Independents in New England. p. 12 Sect. 4. Of
Cottons pretended former dislik of the new English way, and after closing with
it. p. 17 Sect. 5. Of the pretended danger of the new English way unto the
world, after Cotton and others closing with it. p. 21 Sect. 6. Of Cottons
pretended misleading M. Davenport. M, Goodwin.
p. 23 Sect. 7. Of Cottons pretended sudden change to the passionate affecting
of the new English way, and the conversion of Mr. Goodwin to it. p. 25 Sect. 8.
Of Cottons pretended rashness in change of his mind in latter and former times.
p. 28 Sect. 9. Of Cottons pretended known failings, and M. Baylies pretended
just cause to discover them to the world. p. 30 Sect. 10. Of Cottons prelatical
tenants. p. 32 Sect. 11. Of Cottons pretended Pelagianisme, and Arminian
Errors. p. 32 Sect. 12. Of Cottons pretended Montanism. p. 35 Sect. 13. Of
Cottons pretended Antinomianisme and Familisme. p. 38 Quest. 1. Whether our
Union with Christ be complete before, and without Faith? p. 41 Quest. 2.
Whether Faith be an instrumental cause in applying Christ's righteousness to
our justification? p. ^2 Quest. 3. Whether the Spirit of God in evidencing our
justification, does bear witness in an absolute promise of free Grace, without
qualification or condition? p. 43 Quest. 4. Whether some saving qualification
may be a first evidence of justification? p. 45 Qu. 5. Whether Christ and his
benefits be dispensed in a Covenant of works? p. 46
Sect. 14. Of Cottons humiliation upon his former fall, as is reported by M.
Bailie. p. 62 Sect. 15. Of the shameful absurdities said to be found in the way
of Independency, notwithstanding the great helps, to prevent, or cover it and
first of those helps. p. 66 Sect. 16. Of the first absurdity said to be found
in our way of Independency. p. 69 Sect. 17. Of the second shameful absurdity,
said to be found in the way of Independency. p. 73 Sect. 18. Of the third
shameful absurdity said to be found in our way of Independency. p. 82 Sect.
19. Tending to rectify some mistakes of M. Bailey, in relating the former
absurdities. p. 87 Sect. 20. Tending to consider what better fruits might have
been expected from Presbyterian Discipline for the removing of the like
absurdities. p. 91
Chap. 4.
Sect. 1, 2, 3. Of the antiquity of Congregational discipline, compared with
Classical. p. 93
Chap. 5.
Of the fruits of Congregational Discipline. p. 100 Sect. 1. Of the fruits of
it in the Primitive times. p. 100 Sect. 2. Of fruits of Congregational
Discipline in our Churches in New England. p. 102 Sect. 3. Of the fruits of
Congregational Discipline in England. p. 102
The CONTENTS of the second Part.
THe second Part (being Doctrinal and Controversal) concerning Congregational
Churches and their Government. p. 1 Sect. 1. Of the Church to which Christ
committed the power of the Keys. p. 5 Sect. 2. What the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven be. p. 14 Sect. 3. Of the Subject to whom the power of the Keys is
given. page 19 Sect. 4. Touching the power of the Keys in the Church of
Believers without Officers. p. 21
Reader, be pleased (where its Printed false) to read right; as in these
instances.
Part. 1. p. 6. (...), p. 8. For^es, p. 42. (...) p. 44. erga, p. 79. l. 6.
Author. p. 83. l. 9. scelus. Part 2. page 30. (...) or rather (...) p. 31, l.
16. Constance.
Treatise I. PART. I.

CHAPT. I. Of the Title inscribed to Mr. Baylie his Book, A Disswasive from the
Errors of the Time.
NOah gave it for a blessing to his son Japhet (in a word both of Prophecy and
Prayer) God persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27. And if a
Persuasive to dwell in the Tents of Shem were a blessing; then a Disswasive
from the Errors of the Time (rightly so called) is a blessing also. But when
Mr. Baylie is pleased amongst the Errors of the time to reckon (that which he
calls) Independency; he may do well to consider, whether he bring not upon
his credulous Reader a curse in stead of a blessing.

The supposed Errors found in those who are called Independent Churches, are
chiefly two, upon which all the rest do depend: and both of them such as may
well be cleared by Noah's blessing.

For, 1. they hold, that Cham and Chanaan, whilst they are such, (that is,
graceless persons, and scorners at the falls and infirmities of the Saints)
they are not to dwell in the Tents of Shem. Noah did not pray for such a
blessing to them; yea, i^ had been a curse both to them and Shem (if he had so
prayed) and not a blessing.

2. They hold also, that Japhet himself should not be brought to dwell in the
Tents of Shem till God persuade him. They would not have Shem to enlarge his
Tents, to compass or compel Japhet to live under his shadow. It is one thing
for Japhet and Shem to dwell together by voluntary consociation; another thing
for Shem to rule over Japhet by undesired and unallowed jurisdiction. Let Cham
and Chanaan be as servants unto Shem and to Japhet too, (for so Noah
prophesied:) but let not Japhet be a servant to Shem, no more then Shem to
Japhet. But though these be the principal Tenants of Independents (as they
are called;) and indeed blessed truths in the blessing of Noah: yet Mr. Baylie
reckons these amongst the Errors of the Times; and the Independents
themselves amongst the wanderers on the right hand, together with Brownists,
(as he calls them,) Anabaptists, Antinomians, Seekers: As on the left hand,
he reckons Prelates, Papists, Arminians, Socinians, Erastians. And it should
seem, he takes Independents to be one of the most dangerous Sects of them all,
(at least, as the state of the times now stands:) or else he would not have
addressed all the whole force of his Discourse against them: Only taking up
Brownists (as he styles them) by the way, to usher in the other with the
greater prejudice. But for my part, I dislike not Mr. Baylie's zeal against
Errors where it is rightly placed: Only let him allow the like liberty to us,
which he takes to himself, That as he publishes a Disswasive against Errors;
so we may have leave to bear witness to the Truth.

CHAP. II. Of those whom the Disswader styleth Brownists.
SECT. 1.
MAster Baylie rightly observes, That in our departure and flight from Rome,
some took up their stand too soon, before they had passed the lines (he means
all the lines) of communication with the Whore: and others ran on too long (or
too far) beyond the bounds of truth and love. The former of these sorts he
makes the Lutherans, in respect of some defects in their Reformation. The
latter, he makes to be the Anabaptists in Germany. The successors of the
former, he makes to be Cranmer, Ridley, and those other Confessors and Martyrs
who settled Episcopacy and Ceremonies in England. The successo^s of the latter
sort, (the Anabaptists) he makes to be those whom he styleth Brownists.

But as there is a vast difference between the Episcopacy of England, and the
Superintendency of Germany, (the one ruling by Monarchical Power, the other by
the consent of the Aristocraticall Presbytery:) so neither is there such
correspondency between the Germane Anabaptism, and the English Brownism, as to
make Brownism a native branch of Anabaptism.

Yes, (says the Disswader) That Brownism is a native branch of Anabaptism, is
evidenced, by the frequent transition of the one to the other. The dissolution
of ice and snow into water, argues strongly their original from that element;
so the ordinary running over of the Separatists to the Anabaptists.

Answ. The dissolution of ice and snow into water, does indeed argue strongly
their original from water, because they are easily resolved into it without
putrefaction or corruption. But so i^ not the Separatist resolved into a German
Anabaptist, without a further degree of corruption and putrefaction. It is no
argument a man is bred of worms, because he is next resolved into worms; for he
is not so resolved without putrefaction. Say not, a man is resolved at last
into dust from whence he was first taken; and yet the resolution is not made
without putrefaction. For a man is not made of dust naturally, but by a
transcendent creating power above Nature. But the Disswader makes the
Separation a native branch of Anabaptism.

Besides, I suppose, it is not an obvious thing to hear of an Anabaptist turn
Separatist, though some Separatists have turned Anabaptists; which argues
there is not such a mutual frequent transition from the one to the other, as
is yearly found of ice and snow into water, and of water into ice or snow again.

SECT. II.
The first Separatist, which the Disswader says he has read of, was one
Bolton, who was a Minister of an old separate Congregation, and afterward felt
the sense of his Errors so grievous to his soul, (by the finger of Gods Justice
stirring in his conscience) that he did not only publicly at Pauls-crosse
recant them, but thereafter was so dogged with a desperate remorse, that he
rested not till he had hanged himself.

Answ. 1. Though Bolton may have been the first Separatist that the Disswader
has read of; yet he might have read of others before him. For in the Book
called The Register of memorable matters touching Reformation, there is
recorded a story of an hundred persons, who refused the common Liturgy, and
the Congregations attending thereunto, and used prayers and preachings, and
Sacraments amongst themselves: whereof 14 or 15 were sent to prison: Of whom
the chiefest was Mr. Smith, with Mr. Nixon, James Ireland, Robert Hawkins,
Thomas Boweland, and Richard Morecroft. And these pleaded their separation
before the Lord Mayor, Bishop Sands, and other Commissioners on June 20. in the
year 1567. which is about fourscore years ago; and this as it seems was many
years before Bolton; for Mr. Baylie reckons the wandering of the Separatists
to be about 50 years standing, ( page 59.) but this Smith and his company was
30 years before.

Answ. 2. Old Mr. Bruister (the reverend Elder of the Church of Plymouth, a man
of long-approved piety, gravity, integrity) his testimony of this Bolton may
take off the prejudice which the fearful fall of Bolton seems to Mr. Baylie
to cast upon the Separation: Which I will recite, not to justify that way of
his separation, but to take off unjust scandals. This Bolton (says he) partly
by the terrors of Bishops, and partly by flattery, was brought indeed to
recant. But afterward they sleighting him, the terrors of the Almighty fell
upon him, and considering how he had sinned against his conscience, he (
Judas-like) laid violent hands upon himself.

But the Disswader may be pleased to consider, that Apostasy from the way of
Separation, and terror of conscience even to desperation, and self-murder
following thereupon, are no just exceptions against Separation: no more than
Judas his apostasy from Christ, and terror of conscience even to desperation
and self-hanging following thereupon, were any just exceptions against
Christianity.

SECT. III. Of Mr. Brown, and Barrow.
Of Mr. Brown and Mr. Barrow, it is far from me to make any defense either of
their persons, or of their way of rigid Separation: the hand of God upon their
spirit, giving them up, one to a spirit of inconstancy and profaneness; the
other to a spirit of bitterness and rashness. Though it is no just conviction
of the errors of their way of Separation: yet it is a shrewd argument that
either their way was not right, or their hearts not upright in it.

But this let me say, be it so, that Brown did revolt from his way, and took a
Parsonage from the Bishop, and that in a Town by name called A-church in
Northamptonshire, (a real check to his error, who formerly counted every
Church in England no Church:) yet this back sliding of Brown from that way of
Separation, is a just reason why the Separatists may disclaim denomination from
him, and refuse to be called after his name, Brownists. If Judas, or Julian, or
Ecebolius do apostate from Christianity, no reason is there that all that
profess the way of Christianity should be called Judaites, or Julianists, or
Ecebolians. In the Ecclesiastical History, though Photinus was the disciple of
Marcellus in an heretical opinion touching Christ: yet the followers of them
both, when Marcellus had revoked his error, were not called Marcellini but
Photiniani. To speak with reason, if any be justly to be called Brownists, it
is only such as revolt from Separation to Formality, and from thence to
profaneness. For Mr. Barrow, though I neither excuse the unsoundnesse of his
judgment, nor the bitterness of his style: yet I doubt the Disswader is
deceived, when he says, That Queen Elizabeth was so impatient of his
contumelies, that she caused him in a morning to be hanged on the Tower Hill.
For there be grave Professors (who lived nearer those occurrences) who speak of
Queen Elizabeth as ignorant of Barrow's execution, and Greenwood's, and
displeased at it, when she heard of it afterward: neither was their execution
on Tower Hill, but at Tyburn, long after the sentence of death passed against
them.

SECT. IV. Of Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Ainsworth.
The Disswader is deceived when he says, Mr. Ainsworth with his half, did
excommunicate Mr. Johnson and his half. For, as I am informed by some judicious
Professors who lived in those parts, Mr. Ainsworth and his company did not
excommunicate Mr. Johnson and his, but only withdrew from them, when they
could no longer live peaceably with them. Mr. Johnson his last Book, argues he
had learned more moderation of spirit, then he did put forth in his former
times.

Mr. Ainsworth, a man of a more modest and humble spirit, and diligently
studious of the Hebrew Text, has not been unusefull to the Church in his
Exposition of the Pentateuch, especially of Moses his Rituals, notwithstanding
some uncircumcised, and ungrounded Rabbinicall observations recited, but not
refuted.

But when the Dissawder says, that M. Ainsworths company after his death,
remained long without all Officers;

There be sundry living that know the contrary. For when he dyed he left two
Elders over the Church, Mr. Delacluse, and Mr. May.

And therefore I do not see any ground of that speech,

That the weight and evidence of Gods hand against Ainsworth had so far
disgraced that Sect, as the Disswader expresses. For though in simplicity of
heart, in some things he went astray: yet the way he walked in, did not suffer
disgrace by him, nor by the weight and evidence of Gods hand upon him, for
ought I have ever heard or read of him, save in Mr. Baylie. The Lord knows
how to be merciful to such as seek him in simplicity of heart, according to
light revealed, though he do observe and chasten some Error in their way.

SECT. V. of Mr. Smith, and Mr. Robinson.
The fall indeed of Mr. Smith, and the Spirit of errors and instability that
fell upon him, was more observable: and a dreadful warning from heaven,
against (...) selfe-fulnesse, and self-pleasing. For though the tyranny of the
Ecclesiastical Courts was harsh toward him, and the yokes put upon him in his
Ministry, too grievous to be borne: yet neither was he alone in suffering:
Nor were those that suffered with him at that time, (Mr. Clifton, and Mr.
Robinson) such inconsiderable Persons, that he should affect to go alone from
them. It is true, he had found help by the conference (which himself had
requested) with Mr. Dod, Mr. Hilderson, and Mr. Barbon, before he left England:
yea and such help, that he thought he could have gained his Tutor Johnson,
from the Errors of his Rigid Separation. But he had promised them, not to go
over to him, without their consents: and they utterly dissuaded him therefrom,
as fearing his instability. And yet contrary to his Promise he went over to
him, yea, and that contrary to his own pretense and offer of another
conference with them before his going. Though the way of Rigid Separation had
been less Heterodoxall, then it is, yet to venture upon it in such breach of
manifest Rules, no marvel, if it led him into manifest temptations and
Abberations.

The Disswader is misinformed, when he says (page 16) he moved a great
company to follow him to Ley in Holland. For as I understand by such as lived
in those parts at that time, he lived at Amsterdam, and there dyed, and at Ley
in Holland he never came.

Of Mr. Robinson, the Disswader does rightly observe, tha^ he was a man of the
most learned, polished, and modest spirit of that way, and withal he might
have said, so piously studious, and conscientiously inquisitive after the
Truth, that (as the Disswader rightly observes) it had been truly a marvel,
if such a man as he, had gone on to the end a rigid Separatist.

As a fruit of his studious inquisition after the Truth, he resorted (as I
have understood) to many judicious Divines in England for the clearing of his
Scruples, which inclined him to separation: and when he came into Holland, he
addressed himself to Doctor Ames, and Mr. Parker: rather preventing them with
seeking counsel and satisfaction, then waiting for their compassion. But as
they excelled in learning and godliness, so in compassion and brotherly love
also; and therefore as they discerned his weanednesse from selfe-fulnesse, so
did they more freely communicate light to him, and received also somethings
from him. The fruit of which was (through the Grace of Christ) that the
Disswader himself confesses, he came back indeed the one half of the way:
Acknowledging the lawfulness of communicating with the Church of England, in
the Word and Prayer: but not in the Sacraments and Discipline, which was (says
he) a fair Bridge, at least a fair Arch of a Bridge for union. But when he
says, he came on to communicate with the Church of England in the Word and
Prayer, it must not be understood of the Common Prayer Book, but of the
Prayers conceived by the Preacher before and after Sermon: And yet in coming
on so far as he did, he came more then half way of any just distance.

For though he stuck at the Common Liturgy, Sacraments and Discipline: yet
since then it has appeared, there was no just ground of coming on to them.
The Honorable Parliament, and Reverend Assembly of Divines have (by the grace
of Christ) seen just cause to remove the Liturgy, to abolish the Hierarchy
(which was the Discipline he chiefly stuck at) and to give order for restraint
of ignorant and scandalous Persons from the Sacrament, which may well make up
two or three Arches more (as Mr. Baylie calls it) of that fair bridge for
union, far more then the half way.

It is true, Mr. Robinson did not acknowledge a National Church governed by
the Episcopacy to be a Church of Divine Institution. But though he
acknowledged the style and privileges of a Church in the New Testament to
belong to a particular Congregation of visible Saints: yet such National
Churches, French or Dutch, as were governed by Presbyters, and separate from
the world at the Lords Table, he did not disclaim Communion with them, I have
been given to understand, that when a Reverend and godly Scottish Minister
came that way, (it seems to have been Mr. John Tarbes) he offered him
Communion at the Lords Table: though the other for fear of offense to the
Scottish Churches at home, excused himself. Yea when some English men that
offered themselves to become Members of his Church, would sometimes in their
confessions profess their Separation from the Church of England, Mr. Robinson
would bear witness against such profession: Avouching, they required no such
professions of Separation from this or that, or any Church, but only from the
world. All which do argue, that his coming on to Protestant Churches, was
more then the half way. But (says the Disswader) this new Doctrine (or way) of
Mr. Robinson, though it was destructive to his old Sect; yet it became an
occasion of a new one, not very good. It was the womb and seed of that
lamentable Independency in Old and New England, which has been the fountain of
many evils already though no more should ensue, as anon shall be declared.

Answ. When this comes to be declared, I hope it will come to be declared
also, that the way of Independency has been bred in the womb of the
New Testament of the immortal seed of the Word of Truth, and received in the
times of purest Primitive antiquity, many hundreths of years before M. Robinson
was born: and that it has not been the fountain of any evils at all, much
less of such evils, as to deserve the style of lamentable Independency.

SECT. VI. Of the contempt and contumely said to be put upon the old Brownists
by the Independents.
TO shut up this Chapter, the Disswader tells us, That the way of the old
Brownists is become contemptible not only to all the rest of the world, but to
their own children also; even they begin to heap coals of contumelies upon
their Parents heads; as may be seen in the Elogies which both Mr. Cotton, and
the five Apologists are pleased to give them in Print; yea, so much are these
Children ashamed of their Fathers, that they usually take it for a contumely
to be called after their name. No Independent will take it well at any man's
hand to be called a Brownist either in whole, or in the smallest part.

Answ. 1. No marvail, if Independents take it ill to be called Brownists, in
whole, or in part. For neither in whole, nor in part do we partake in his
Schism. He separated from Churches and from Saints: we, only from the world,
and that which is of the world. He turned apostate from the Separation which he
had professed: and it is absurd to denominate either Sect or right way, from
such as apostate from it. If he had stood constant in his way, and his way had
been the same with ours, yet we were not baptized into his Name; and why should
we then be called after his Name? If schism be a manifest fruit of the flesh,
then they that give Nicknames tending to the reproach and division of
Brethren, they walk after the flesh; for they sow variance and schism amongst
Brethren.

2. It is an unjust and unworthy calumny, to call either Cotton or the
Apologers, the children of their Fathers, whom he styleth Brownists. They never
begot us, either to God, or to the Church, or to their Schism: a Schism, which
as we have lamented in them, (as a fruit of misguided ignorant zeal:) so we
have ever born witness against it, since our first knowledge of it.

3. Though we put not such Honor upon those he calls Brownists, as to own
them for our Fathers; yet neither do we put so much dishonor upon them, as to
heap coals of contumely upon their heads. We look not at them with contempt,
but compassion: Neither do we bear witness against their Schism in any words
of contempt and reproach, (which are the characters of contumely) but in words
of spiritual and just reproof; even in such terms, not which scornful wit,
but which holy Scripture suggesteth.

CHAP. III. An answer to the Disswaders 3 Chap. touching the original and
progress of the Independents in New England.
SECT. I. Of the Title put upon us of A Sect, Independents.

THe way of the Churches in New England is neither justly called a Sect, nor
fitly called Independency. Not a Sect; for we profess the Orthodox Doctrine of
Faith, the same with all Protestant Churches; we celebrate the same Sacraments;
and submit to the spiritual government of the same lawful Guides, so far as
Christ and our own choice has set them over us. And though we do not subject
our selves to the Government of the Elders of other Churches, (as many great
Churches do,) yet we acknowledge and reverence such Churches in the Lord, as
true Churches of Christ, and are willing to make use of their Brotherly
counsel and help as need shall require.

And though we do not open the doors of our Churches so wide, as to receive
all the Inhabitants of a Nation, or of every Town, into the fellowship of our
Churches; yet we do not separate from such Protestant Churches as do take
that liberty: but only we separate from the world, that is, from the worldly
sort of them, who either live in open scandal, or at least do not openly hold
forth any spiritual discerning of the Lords Body, and are therefore u^^eet to
communicate at the Lord Table.

Nor is Independency a fit name of the way of our Churches. For in some
respects it is too strait, and in others too large; it is too strait, in that
it confineth us within our selves, and holds us forth as Independent from all
others: whereas indeed we do profess dependence upon Magistrates for civil
Government and protection: Dependence upon Christ and his Word, for the
sovereign government and rule of our administrations: Dependence upon the
counsel of other Churches and Synods; when our own variance or ignorance may
stand in need of such help from them. And therefore this title of Independency
straitneth us, and restrains us from our necessary duty, and due liberty.

Again, in other respects, Independency stretches it self too largely, and
more generally, then that it can single out us. For it is compatible to a
National Church, as well as to a Congregationall. The National Church of
Scotland is Independent from the Government of the National Church of England;
and so is England Independent from Scotland. Nor is there any Sect at this day
extant, but shrowdeth themselves under the title of Independency. The
Antipaedobaptists, Antinomians, Familists, yea, and the Seekers too, do all of
them style themselves Independents. Nay, even the Pope himself, (who exalts
himself above all Civil and Church Power) yet even he also arrogateth the
title of Independency; Prima s^des a nemine judicatur; that is, the Sea of Rome
is Independent. Why then should Independency be appropriated to us, as a
character of our way, which neither truly describes us, nor faithfully
distinguishes us from many others? Wherefore if there must needs be some note
of difference to decypher our estate, and to dis^inguish our way from a
National Church Way, I know none fitter, then to denominate theirs Classical,
and ours Congregationall.

SECT. II. Of the number of the Congregationall Regiment, and of the wisdom
threaped upon them, in engaging Persons of note to them.
The Disswader acknowledges, We are not numerous, but the fewest in number of
the noted Sects, and not to consist of above One thousand persons within the
Lines of the Cities Communication.

Answ. 1. If we be the fewest of noted Sec^^, it was sometime the lot of Gods
Israel to be the fewest of all people, Deuteronomy. 7.7.

Answ. 2. If there be a thousand of our way within the Lines of the Cities
Communication, I hope there want not diverse more to be added to them in other
parts of England, besides some thousands more in New England. But it is not for
us to follow David's sin in numbering the people of the Lord; only the Lord
increase their number an hundredth fold, (yea, a thousand fold) and make them as
the stars of heaven for multitude.

But for the quality of the persons, the Disswader tells us, They have been
so wise, as to engage to their party some of chief note in both Houses of
Parliament, in the Assembly of Divines, in the Army, in the City, and
Countrey-Committees.

But in so saying, the Disswader puts a dishonor both upon God, and upon
those persons of chief note. It is a dishonor to God, to attribute that to the
wisdom of man, which is the mighty and gracious work of the wisdom of God.
And it is a dishonor to such men, to hold them forth as engaged to this way by
the wisdom and industry of men, who have been well known (and some of them for
many years) not to have engaged themselves or others any further, then the
grace of Christ, and the conscience of his Word has engaged them to do and
suffer, according to the will of God.

SECT. III. Touching the Line of the Pedigree of the Independents in
New England.
The Separatists (says the Disswader) were their Fathers. This is demonstrable
not only by the consanguinity of their Tenants, (the one having borrowed all
their chief Doctrines and practices from the other:) but also by deduction of
their Pedigree in this clear Line. Mr Robinson did derive his way to his
Separate Congregation at Leyden; a part of them did carry it over to Plymmouth
in New England: Here Mr. Cotton took it up, and did transmit it to Mr. Goodwin,
who did help to propagate it to sundry others in Old-England first, and after
to more in Holland; till now by many hands it is sown thick in diverse parts of
the Kingdom.

Answ. That the Separatists were our Fathers, we have justly denied it above;
seeing they neither begat us to God, nor to the Church, nor to their Schism.
That we are (through grace) begotten to God, and to his Church, we received
(many of us) from the blessing of Christ upon the Ministry of England. That we
grew weary of the burden of Episcopacy and Conformity, we received from the
Word of God by the help of the Non-conformists there. That we laid aside the
Book of Common Prayer, we received from the serious meditation of the second
Commandment, and not from the Writings of the Separatists, though they also
had taken up the same Conclusion upon other premises. The particular visible
Church of a Congregation to be the first subject of the power of the Keys, we
received by the light of the Word from Mr. Parker, Mr. Baynes, and Dr. Ames:
from whom also, (from two of them at least) we received light out of the Word,
for the matter of the visible Church to be visible Saints; and for the Form of
it, to be a mutual Covenant, whether an explicit or implicit Profession of
Faith, and subjection to the Gospel of Christ in the society of the Church, or
Presbytery thereof. And these be the chief Doctrines and practices of our way,
so far as it differs from other Reformed Churches. And having received these,
not from the Separatists, but from the Lord Jesus, by gracious Saints, and
faithful witnesses of Jesus; the consanguinity of our Tenants with any the
like found amongst the Separatists, will not demonstrate the Separatists to be
our Fathers.

It is very likely (and by the fruits of some of them, it is very evident) that
the Church of Plymmouth in New England received very much light and life, by
the blessing of Christ upon Mr. Robinson his Ministry, whilst he lived with
them in Holland: nor need we to be ashamed, to learn any truth of God from him,
or them, or from any other Saints of God, of far meaner gifts, then he or
they had received. But I must confess ingenuously, that his denial of the
Parishionall Congregations in England to be true Churches, (either by reason of
their mixed and corrupt matter, or for defect in their Covenant, or for excess
of their Episcopal Government) was never received into any heart, from thence
to infer a nullity of their Church Estate. Neither was our departure from
them even in those evil times, a Separation from them as no Churches, but
rather a Secession from the corruptions found amongst them, unto which also we
must have been forced to conform, even in our own Practice through the
Rigor of the times, unless we had timely departed from them. In which case,
Doctor Ames will excuse us (yea and the Holy Ghost also) from aspersion of
schism or any other sin, in so doing, De Conscientia, lib. 4. cap. 24. Numero
16. in Responsione 7. ad quaest. 3.

The Disswader is mistaken (when he says Page 54.) That after the death of
Ainsworth, there remained only a small handful of Separatists at Amsterdam,
and another small company at Leyden, under Mr. Robinsons Ministry, and besides
them, no other at that time were known in the world of that Religion.

For Mr. Jacob, whom Mr. Lothrop succeeded and after him Mr. Barbon being an
Elder governed the same Separate Church in Leyden which held Communion with Mr.
Robinsons Church, as appears by their Letters published in Print. And that
Church as it began before Mr. Robinson, so it continued after him, and still
does. And it is no less a mistake, when the Disswader makes the Divisions in
Mr. Robinsons Church, or his desertion of many of their Principles to be an
occasion of well-neare bringing that Church to naught: till some of them went
over to New England, and persuaded their neighbors who sat down with them in
New- Plymmouth to erect with them a Congregation after their Separate way.

For the Church at Leyden was in peace, and free from any division, when they
took up thoughts of transporting themselves into America with common consent.
Themselves do declare it, That the proposition of Removal, was set on foot
and prosecuted by the Elders upon just and weighty grounds. For (to use their
own words)

though they did quietly and sweetly enjoy their Christian and Church-liberties
under the States: yet they foresaw Holland would be no place for their Church,
and their posterity to continue there comfortably: at least in that measure,
which they hoped to find abroad, and that for these reasons, which I shall
recite, as I received them from themselves. 1. Because themselves were of a
different language from the Dutch where they lived, and the Dutch were settled
in their way; in so much that in ten years space, whilst their Church
sojourned amongst them, they could not bring them to reform the neglect of the
Lords D^y, or any other thing amiss amongst them.

2. Because their Counttrey-men who came over to join with them, by reason of
the hardness, and chargeablenesse of the Country, soon spent their estates,
and then were forced either to return back for England, or to live very
meanly.

3. Because the Country was a place of so great liberty to children, that they
could not educate their children, as their Parents had educated them: nor could
they give them due correction, without reproof and reproach from their
Neighbors.

4. Because their posterity would in a few generations become Dutch, and so
lose their interest in the English Nation, name and language.

These being debated at first in private, and thought weighty, were afterward
propounded in public, and after Solemn Days of Humiliation both in public
and private, it was agreed, that part of the Church should go before their
Brethren into America to prepare for the rest: And in case the major part of
the Church did choose to go over with the first, then the Pastor to go along
with them. But if the major part stayed, then he to stay with them: and to
follow afterward, when they should hear out of America of their safety and
health, and possibility of subsistence: But the Lord translated him to
himself, before the rest could prepare to go along to their Brethren.
Notwithstanding when the first company Embarked themselves for America, their
Brethren accompanied them to the Sea, and took their leaves with such abundant
expressions of Brotherly Love, as drew the neighbor Dutch to much observation,
yea and some Admiration of them, at Delph-Shoven in Holland.

Their departure therefore was not in a way of division among themselves, but
with mutual consent, and common intendment of peaceable cohabitation.

Neither did that company which came over to Plymmouth, erect here a New-Church
(as the Disswader takes it,) for by consent of the Church which they left,
they came over in Church Estate, and only renewed their Covenant when they
came hither.

Neither did the Church of Plymmouth (as the Disswader reports them)
incontinently leaven all the vicinity.

For (as themselves say) at the first coming there was no vicinity of
Christian habitation. They came over in the year 1620. Mr. Endicot, (the
Captain with his Company) came not over till the year 1628. and sat down at
Salem, 8. years after Plymmouth. The year following, Mr. Skeleton, and Mr.
Higginson came over, and sitting down with Mr. Endicot at Salem, entered into
a Church there. How far they of Salem took up any practice from them at
Plymmouth, I do not know: sure I am, Mr. Skeleton (their Pastor) was studious
of that way, before he left Holland in Lincolnshire.

Nor was there any other Church planted after Salem till Mr. Winthrop, and some
other godly gentlemen, and many good Christians came over together with Mr.
Wilson, and Mr. Philips, (Ministers of the Word:) whereof the one gathered a
Church at Boston, the other at Water-Towne, in the year 1630. The next year
followed Mr. Eliot, and the year after Mr. Weld, who gathered into a Church at
Rocksbury, as old Mr. Naverisk, and Mr. Warham had done the same before at
Dorchester.

It was in the year 1633. when Mr. Hooker, Mr. Stone, with my self arrived in
the same Ship together: and being come, we found several Churches gathered,
and standing in the same Order, and way, wherein they now walk: at Salem, at
Boston, at Water-Towne, at Charle-Towne, (which issued out of Boston) at
Dorchester and Rockesbury. So that the Disswader is much mistaken, when he
says, the Congregagation of Plymouth did incontinently leaven all the
vicinity: seeing for many years there was no vicinity to be leavened. And
Salem it self that was gathered into Church Order seven or eight years after
them, was above 40. miles distant from them. And though it be very likely,
that some of the first comers might help their Theory by hearing and
discerning their practice at Plymmouth: yet therein the Scripture is fulfilled,
The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
measures of Meal, till all was leavened, Matthew. 13.13.

But yet if the Disswader knew the spirit of those men who first came over
hither, after Plymmoth, (though before us) he would easily discern, they were
not such as would be leavened by vicinity of neighbors, but by the Divinity of
the Truth of God shining forth from the Word. The body of the people at that
time was not of such a carnal spirit, as so many of them to leave so fair
accommodations, and dear relations in our native Country, to come over into a
wilderness, to take up a Form of Government, upon any such ground as the
Disswader conceiteth, because it holds out so much liberty, and honor to the
people.

This were indeed not to seek out for Liberty of Conscience, but Elbow-roomth
of lust; and not to attend the honor, but the humor of the people. To pass
such a judgment upon strangers, had need to arise from Divine Revelation, or
else it will fall under the note of humane temerity.

But (says the Disswader) howsoever it was in a few years, the most who settled
their habitations in the Land, did agree to model themselves after Robinsons
pattern.

Answ. I do not know, that they agreed upon it by any common consultation: But
it is true, they did as if they had agreed (by the same Spirit of Truth and
unity) set up (by the help of Christ) the same model of Churches, one like to
another. But whether it was after Mr. Robinsons pattern, is spoken gratis: for
I believe most of them knew not what it was, if any at all. And if any did know
it, the men were such, as were not wont to attend to the patterns of men in
matters of Religion, (for against that many of them had suffered in our native
Country) but to the pattern of the Scriptures.

SECT. 4. Of Cottons pretended former dislike of the New-English way, and after
closing with it.
In pursuing this pedigree and descent of New-English Discipline, the Disswader
is pleased to present me to the world, to be the first who appeared in
displeasure against it, though afterward to have fallen into a liking of it.

But how does he make it appear, that I did appear in displeasure against it?
His proof is from a private Letter of mine to Mr. Skeleton, where I call it an
error, (whether in Mr. Skeleton, or some of his people) to conceive, that our
Congregations in England are none of them particular Reformed Churches. Surely,
if that be all the proof, I willingly acknowledge, I did appear against that
Error. But neither was I the first that did appear against it, (but diverse
godly English Ministers before me:) neither have I fallen to the liking of the
contrary opinion since.

But the Disswader is much deceived, if he take that Error to be the judgment
of the Churches of New England, howsoever some particular persons may lean that
way.

Nor will it yield any better proof, that which he alleges out of my Preface
to Mr. Hildersons Sermon upon John. For that which I there wrote, concerns
the way of the Rigid Separation, which renounceth the Churches of England as
Antichristian, and the godly members thereof, as no visible Saints. Neither is
my judgment altered at all in this Point to this day: which also I have lately
maintained in my Reply unto Mr. Williams his Answer of my Letter, and in a
Treatise concerning the Baptism of Children. And what I have written in this
Point is suitable to the judgme^^ of the Body of the Churches and Elders in
New England, and not at all repugnant to the way wherein we walk.

But I marvail, what should move the Disswader to report of me, That though in
England I fell off from the practice of some Ceremonies, and but of some of
them, and was distasted with Episcopal Government: yet so long as I abode in
England, I minded no more then the Old Nonconformity: For in this one sentence
he gives a double misreport of me.

First, that in England I fell off but from some of the Ceremonies. For (by the
grace of Christ) I forbore all the Ceremonies alike at once, many years before
I left England. The first grounds which prevailed with me to forbear one
Ceremony, would not allow me to practice any. The grounds I well remember were
two: 1 The significancy and efficacy put upon them in the Preface to the Book
of Common Prayer: That they were neither dumb nor dark, but apt to stir up the
dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable table
and special signification, whereby he may be edified, or words to the like
purpose.

The second was the limitation of Church Power, (even of the highest
Apostolical Commission) to the observation of the Commandments of Christ,
Matthew. 28.20. which made it appear to me utterly unlawful, for any
Church Power to enjoin the observation of indifferent Ceremonies which Christ
had not commanded. And all the Ceremonies were alike destitute of the
commandment of Christ, though they had been indifferent otherwise, which
indeed others have justly pleaded they were not.

What favor I was offered not only for connivence, but for preferment, if I
would have conformed to any one of the Ceremonies, I forbear to mention. Yea,
when I was suspended upon special complaint made against me to the King that
then was, and all hope of restitution denied to me, without yielding to some
conformity, at least in one Ceremony at least once; yet the good hand of the
Lord so kept me, that I durst not buy my Ministry so dear: And yet (I thank
the Lord) my Ministry was dearer to me (to speak the least) then any
preferment.

When the Bishop of Lincoln-Diocesse (Dr. Mountaigne) offered me liberty upon
once kneeling at Sacrament with him the next Lord's Day after: or else to give
some reason, why (in conscience I could not) unto Dr. Davenant (then
Bishop-elect of Salisbury, who was at that time present with him at
Westminster) I durst not accept his offer of liberty upon once kneeling; but I
gave them this reason for my excuse and defense, Cultus non institutus, non est
acceptus:
Genuflexio in perceptione Eucharistiae est cultus non institutus;
Ergo, non est acceptus.


The second misreport which the Disswader makes of me in his former sentence,
is, That howsoever when I was in England, I was then distasted with Episcopal
Government; yet so long as I abode in England, I minded no more then the Old
Nonconformity.

I pass by his unsavory metaphor of my distaste of Episcopal Government.
Conscientious judgment in matters of Religion is not led by taste or distaste:
will he say, that both the Parliaments of England and Scotland have abolished
Episcopal Government upon a distaste?

But when he says, I minded no more then the Old Nonconformity whilst I abode
in England, he must be more privy to my mind then any mortal man is, and then
my self too, to make it good. There were some scores of godly persons in Boston
in Lincolnshire, (whereof some are there still, and some here, and some are
fallen asleep) who can witness, that we entered into a Covenant with the Lord,
and one with another, to follow after the Lord in the purity of his Worship;
which though it was defective, yet it was more then the Old Nonconformity.
Besides, I had then learned of Mr. Parker, and Mr. Baynes, (and soon after of
Dr. Ames) that the Ministers of Christ, and the Keys of the Government of his
Church are given to each particular Congregationall Church respectively: And
therefore neither Ministers nor Congregations subject to the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction of Cathedral Churches, no, nor of Classical Assemblies neither,
but by voluntary consociation, and that in some cases; and those falling short
of that which is properly called subjection to their Jurisdiction. Which made
me then to mind not only a neglect of the censures of Commissary Courts,
(which bred not a little offense to them, and disturbance to my self) but also
to breath after greater lib^rty and purity not only of Gods Worship, but of
Church estate. But suppose that I had then minded no more then the Old way of
Nonconformity: yet the experience of the Godly will easily acknowledge, that
the way of the Lord is light and strength to the upright, and gives more and
more understanding and enlargement to them that walk in it.

Nay, the Disswaders own words might convince him, that I minded more then the
Old Nonconformity, whilst I abode in England. For if Mr. Cotton, and those
Brethren who went along with me, came over to New England, to join our selves
with those American Churches, (as he says) it argues plainly we did not upon
our coming hither, go contrary to our former judgment, and fall into a liking
of this way. For then we would never have taken so long and hazardous a voyage
to join to Churches, whose way was contrary to our judgments all the while of
our abode in England. Rational charity would conceive, that Christian men, who
chose rather to forfeit our Ministry, and maintenance, and all our dear
relations in our native Country, then to submit to a course contrary to our
judgments, would never transport our selves to America, to run a contrary
course to our judgments in a land of liberty. But thus in heat of pursuit of an
adversary (whether cause or person) men will not stick to suffer their tongues
and pens to run over, though for haste one word interfere with another.

SECT. V. Of the pretended danger of the New-English way unto the world, after
Cotton and others closing with it.
But to proceed, why should the Disswader conceive, That our coming over into
these parts, and joining with these American Churches, should cause this
New-way (as he calls it) to begin to grow dangerous to the rest of the world?

To which world (I pray you) has this way grown dangerous? to the Christian
world? or to the Antichristian world? or to the Pagan world?

The Pagan world of Indians here will acknowledge our sitting down by them, has
prevented the danger either of their dissolution or servitude. For the Indians
in these parts being by the hand of God swept away (many multitudes of them) by
the Plague, the manner of the Neighbor-Indians is either to destroy the weaker
Countries, or to make them Tributary: which danger ready to fall upon their
heads in these parts, the coming of the English hither prevented. And of late
(through the grace of Christ) one of our fellow-Elders, Mr. Eliot, Teacher of
Rocksbury, having gotten the knowledge of the Indian language preaches to them
every week one week to one Congregation on the fourth day, to the other on the
sixth the week following. And to him they willingly give ear, and reform their
vicious living according to his Doctrine; and some of them offer themselves to
be trained up in English Families, and in our Schools: and there be of them
that give good hope of coming on to the acknowledgment of the grace of Christ.
To them therefore our way is not dangerous.

To the Antichristian world, the more dangerous it is; I doubt not, it is the
more acceptabl^ to God, and I hope, it is not the less safe in Mr. Baylie's
eye. Some of the Jesuits at Lisborn, and others in the Western Islands have
professed to some of our Merchants and Mariners, they look at our Plantations,
(and at some of us by name) as dangerous supplanters of the Catholic cause. If
that be the greatest danger, I presume Mr. Baylie will not ab hoc dicto
secundum quid, pronounce us dangerous (simpliciter) to the rest of the world.

To the Christian world, what danger has accrewed by our means? many that knew
both our Magistrates and Elders, and the chief sort of our people, and knew how
little we affected to travel into foraign Countries to see fashions; they upon
our departure grew more inquisitive into the cause of our voluntary exile; and
thereupon, more jealous of corruptions at home in the Worship of God, and in
Church Discipline; more sensible of the burden and danger of Episcopal
tyranny, and consequently more ready to follow the good example of the Churches
and Commonwealth of Scotland, in rejecting and shaking off Episcopal
usurpations and intrusions of Liturgies. And has this been so dangerous to the
rest of the world?

Besides, if Books and Letters do not delude us with false intelligence, the
great salvation, and glorious Victories which the Lord has wrought for England
these late years by any English power, his own right hand has brought to pass
chiefly by such despised instruments as are surnamed Independents. And are then
the witnesses of that way so dangerous to the rest of the world?

Wherein then lies the danger of this way?

It seems the Disswader conceives (as some others have done) that this way
has bin a double danger to those Churches: 1 In becoming a dangerous inlet to
all kind of Sects, who shroud themselves under the name of Independents, and
claim impunity under their shadow. 2 In retarding the establishment and free
passage of the work of Reformation.

But for the former, if the devil come and sow Tares, yea Briars and Thorns,
where Christ has sown Wheat, is therefore the wheat a dangerous grain? And
if thereupon not only tares, but briars and thorns plead for freedom from
eradication, must therefore the wheat be plucked up, to root out the rest?
Surely the way which is practiced in New England cannot justly be taxed for too
much connivence to all kind of Sects: we here do rather hear ill for too
much rigor, which evidently argues, our way is of it self no inlet at all to
all kind of Sects, unless it be merely by accident: as Christianity has
been an inlet to all kinds of heresy; for where there is no Christianity,
there is no heresy.

As for the latter, the retarding of the work of Reformation, Surely we find
it here the readiest way to a speedy Reformation. The common disorders obvious
and ordinary in other Plantations are here either not found, or soon Reformed.
The Retarding of Reformation in England springs rather, partly from such as
would have no Reformation at all, but affect elbow-roomth to their own lusts:
partly from such as will have no Reformation, but in their own way. But if it
might please the Lord to bow the hearts, both of the Presbyterians, and of the
Congregationalls, so far as both of them are come, to walk by the same rule,
and mind the same thing, (both of them to mind Reformation according to the
rule of the Word, as they conceive it; both of them to redress abases, the
Presbyterians, the abuses found in their Churches, and the Congregationalls in
theirs,) doubtless, it need not to be feared the work of Reformation will
speedily find (by the blessing of Christ) a free and mighty passage through out
the three Kingdoms.

SECT. 6. Of Cottons pretended misleading Mr. Davenport Mr. Goodwin.

If it be true which the Disswader relates from Mr. Edwards, Page 56.
that before my departure from England, I had by conference in London brought
off Mr. Davenport, and Mr. Goodwin, from some of the English Ceremonies.

Why does he note me in his margent to be a Misleader of Mr. Goodwin and
others? Is it a misleading to lead men away from the English Ceremonies? Were
they Misleaders, who led the Honorable Houses of Ptrliament to fall off from
the Ceremonies? Or did the Parliament mislead the people of England to the
disuse of them?

But Mr. Baylie knows not Mr. Davenport, nor Mr. Goodwin, if he think the
ablest Divines in Christendom, much less such a poor weak thing as my self
could bring them off to forsake their public Ministry, wherein they were
notable instruments of good service to God and man, unless they saw the light
of the Word and Spirit of Grace to go before them in such ways. Virgin-soules
are wont to follow the Lamb, wheresoever he goes ( Rev. 14.4.) And the
Sons of God are led by the Spirit of God, ( Romans 8.14.) And therefore let Mr.
Baylie be entreated not so much to undervalue his holy Brethren, as to think
they were rather misled by me, then led by the Spirit and Word of Grace in
their own judgments and consciences. It is true, Mr. Davenport, Mr. Goodwin,
with some other godly Brethren had some conference with me at London, about the
cause of my sufferings, and of my purpose to leave the Land; which they said,
they desired the rather, because they did not look at me as a passionate man,
though the Disswader (who knows me not) be pleased so to represent me to the
world in this Paragraph. And upon their motion two Points were chiefly
debated: 1. Touching the limitation of Church Power, to matters of
commandment, not of indifferency, (which I touched before.) The 2. touching
the office of Bishops, whether the Scripture Bishops be appointed to rule a
Diocese, or a particular Congregation. Now both these being agreed upon
amongst us, Mr. Edwards is much mistaken, and Mr. Baylie too, when they say,
that neither Mr. Davenport, nor Mr. Goodwin, nor my self did mind any further
then the leaving of some few ceremonies. For grant the former principle, of the
limitation of Church Power to matters of Commandment, and all the Ceremonies
must be left off at once. And grant the latter, touching the limitation of
Bishops to a particular Congregation; and it will necessarily infer an
unavoydable Separation from under the shadow of Diocesan-Episcopall-Government.

Besides, presently after, I received Letters from Mr. Goodwin, (and as I take
it, before I left England) signifying, that as in our former conferences, we
had debated much of the negative part of the 2. Commandment, so he had since
meditated much, and seriously of the affirmative part of it, the positive
institutions of Gods Divine Worship in opposition to humane inventions. Whereby
I plainly discerned, ( England as the State of it stood then) could not hold
him long. It is an usual thing with God, in times of Reformation to enlighten
his Servants, though far distant one from another, with the same beams of
light of Divine Truth, which the world interprets, they have learned one from
another: but indeed all from the same Spirit, who distributeth to every one,
even as he will. But whether Mr. Davenport, and Mr. Goodwin received ought from
me, I do not know, sure I am, I have received much from them. The members of
the Body of Christ, are wont to minister supply one to another, according to
the effectual working of the Spirit of Grace in every part, to the mutual
edifying of themselves, and of the whole Body in Love, Ephesians. 4.16. And why
should mutual edification be made a matter of exprobration?

SECT. 7. Of Cottons pretended sudden change to the passionate affecting of the
New-English way, and the conversi n of Mr. Goodwin to it.
It seems to me a strange speech of the Disswader, and as far from Truth, as
from ingenuity, that as soon as I had tasted of the New English air, I fell
into a passionate affection with the Religion I found there.

For I knew their Religion before I came into New England, and himself said
above, that I came with a purpose to join with their Churches: Which argues, I
did not fall into an affection to their Religion, by tasting of New-English
Air. Nor has his speech any reasonable construction, that with tasting the
new English air, I soon fell into a passionate affection to their Religion,
unless he take me for one of those children, who are tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind (or air) of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. Nor do I
yet understand why he should account the Religion of New England another
Religion, then that of England and Scotland and other Reformed Churches.
Difference in some external form of Church administrations is not wont in the
writings of judicious Divines, to make up the note and name of a different
Religion.

Neither can I imagine what should move him to say, that I fell into a
passionate affection with the Religion here. A passionate affection, is a
strong, yea a violent, and inordinate affection. Did the Disswader ever read,
or hear me, to express any such violent or inordinate affection to the
Religion here professed?

How Mr. Goodwin comes to be accounted, and called of the Disswader, my
Convert, I do not know. It is not good to take liberty to use Scripture
Idioms, but in Scripture sense. The Scripture speaks not of conversion, but
in the sense of Regeneration begun, or renewed: neither does it style one man,
another man's Convert, but reserveth that solely and solidly to the Lord.

But I marvail why the Disswader should say, That M. Goodwin with little ado
was brought by my Letters from New England to follow in this step of my
progress.

For first, I do not remember that ever I wrote Letter to him from New England
about our way. And my Letter, which Mr. Baylie quoteth amongst his Testimonies
(in G) was not written to him, but to a brother of mine (by Marriage) in Boston.
Men that have been bred and brought up under a form of Doctrine, or Worship, or
Government, and never saw ground to scruple it, they may with little ado
receive it, and embrace, and follow it: which, it may be, has been the case of
many thousands in England, and usually falls out in settled Churches. But for
M. Goodwin to take up a way not only contrary to that wherein he has been
bred and brought up, but also discrepant from the judgments of so many godly
learned Brethren, to the hazard of his Ministry, and to the smothering of
himself in a cloud of calumny and obloquy, believe it who will, I cannot easily
believe it, that he took up such a way with very little ado. I cannot but
believe, it cost him many prayers, and sighs, and groans, much study,
meditation, and conference, before he could satisfy himself in such a course;
He being especially (as Mr. Baylie reports him) a man of a fine and dainty
Spirit, (and therefore loving and tender:) to which sort of men, it is most
unwelcome to offend Reverend Brethren by dissenting from them: and with whom it
is most usual to suspect their own judgments and ways, when they go alone.
Luther was not accounted a man of a fine and dainty spirit, but of a more
resolute and stern temper; and yet it was no small temptation even to him.
Nunquid tu solus sapis? Quoties mihi palpitavit tremulum Cor, and reprehendens
objecit fortissimum illud argumentum, Tu solus sapis? toine errant universi?
etc. Luther. in Praefat. de Abroganda Missa privata, etc.

Mr. Edwards his Antapology, I have not had the opportunity to come by, much
less to read: and therefore I cannot tell what sense to make of those words
which Mr. Baylie quoteth out of him (in H:) and wherein he says, Mr. Goodwin
was bold to boast of me in terms beyond the bounds of moderation. Sure I am,
Mr. Goodwin was not wont to be accounted, either a bold man, or a boaster. I
have many years known him and his modesty, and abhorrency both from boldness
and boasting: and if Mr. Baylie take up a report to the contrary from Mr.
Edwards (who is but one witness, and it may be prejudiced) I dare not follow
Mr. Baylie herein, but must allow Mr. Goodwin the privilege of an Elder,
against whom no accusation is to be received under two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. By what rule therefore Mr. Baylie receives this testimony against
Mr. Goodwin, by one single witness, he may do well to consider. Sure I am, it
agrees not with the Rules either of Congregationall or Classical
Church Government.

But if Mr. Goodwin himself do acknowledge such a speech, he knows best in
what sense he spoke it. For my self, I can own it only in the same sense
wherein Agur spoke it of himself, Prove. 30.2, 3. Surely I am more brutish then
man; I have not the understanding of a man: I have not learned wisdom, nor
know the holy.

The next testimony which Mr. Baylie quoteth out of Mr. Edwards to the same
purpose, speaks not of Mr. Goodwin, but of some other whom Mr. Edwards names
not. But such Apocrypha testimonies with judicious and equal minds, will
never go for authentical evidences. For the matter of the testimony it self,
I conceive, the form of Church Government wherein we walk does not differ in
substance from that which Mr. Cartwright pleaded for. For two things chiefly
there be wherein such as are for a Congregationall way, do seem to differ from
Presbyterians: 1 In the matter of their Churches; they would have none allowed
but visible Saints. 2 In the exercise of Church-censure, they leave that power
to the Elders and Brethren of the same Church whereof the delinquent is a
member. And in both these we find Mr. Cartwright's footsteps going plainly
before us. For, 1. he taxes in Bishop Whitgift, that speech of his; The Church
is full of Drunkards and Whoremongers, etc. Whereas Mr. Cartwright would not
have scandalous persons born withal in the Church. And for the 2. he speaks
fully, in 1 Cor. 5.4. Forasmuch (says he) as the Apostle reproves the Church
of Corinth, for that they had no^ (before his Letters) excommunicated the
Incestuous; It is evident that the Ministers, and the rest of the Church there
had power and authority thereunto.

The next Testimony which Mr. Baylie alleges to prove Mr. Goodwin's boasting
of this new light (as he calls it) beyond the lines of moderation, is from
the words of Mr. Williams in his examination of a letter of mine. His words be,
That some of the most eminent amongst them have affirmed, That even the
Apostles Churches were not so pure as the New-English Churches.

But what is this to M. Goodwin? M. Williams speaks of some of the most
eminent in New England, where Mr. Goodwin never came.

Besides, Mr. Williams does not ascribe these words to any definite persons in
New England. And, as I said before, Apocrypha testimonies will never go with
equal minds for authentical evidences. It is no new thing for Mr. Williams
to mistake both himself and others, as has appeared in the Reply both to his
examination of that Letter, and to his Bloody Tenent. I never heard of any man's
speech in New England so hyperbolicall in the praise of New-English Churches,
nor coming nearer to the words in hand, then the words reported of Mr. Williams
himself: That of all the Churches in the world, the Churches of New England
were the most pure; and of all New-English Churches, Salem (whereof himself was
Teacher) was the purest. But such arrogant comparisons are as smoke in Gods
nostrils, Esaias 65 5. the first born of vanity, and the first step to apostasy.

SECT. VIII. Of Cottons pretended rashness in the change of his mind in latter
and former times.
Mr. Baylie proceeds, and tells us, It had been happy for England, that Mr.
Cotton had taken longer time for deliberation, before that change of his mind.
He might have remembered his too precipitant rashness in former times, both to
receive, and to send abroad to the world such Tenants, whereof after he had
cause to repent.

I should think my self a most unhappy man, if England should be the less
happy for my sake. Mr. Baylie does either undervalue England, or overvalue me;
if he think the happiness or unhappiness of England does stand or fall upon
any deliberate or precipitate act of mine.

But what think ye, was that rash and precipitate act of mine, which has
impeached the happiness of England? It was, says he, that change of my mind.
What change was that? That which I mention in a Letter to some friends in
Boston, That if I were with them again, I durst not take that liberty which
sometimes I had done: I durst not join in Book-prayers: I durst not now partake
in the Sacrament with you: to wit, in respect of those scandalous persons who
communicate with you, and will settle upon their Lees with the more security by
your fellowship with them.

I do remember such a Letter I wrote; whether to one or more in Boston, I
remember not: Some say it is printed, but I know not, nor have I seen it: But I
take the contents as Mr. Baylie reports them. And concerning them, I durst
appeal even to Mr. Baylie himself, (though a stranger to me, and professing
opposition) yet let him speak in good earnest, whether if I had taken longer
time of deliberation even to this ^ay, I should not have found just cause to
have changed my mind, as I then did? Did I change my mind then to any other
judgment or practice, then what the Reverend Assembly of Divines, and the
Honorable Houses of Parliament have found (by the grace given to them) to be
the Truth, and by Public consent approved, and by Public authority
established? And does he think, that it had been happy for England, if the
Parliament and Assembly had neither of them changed their minds, but still
retained Book-service, and admitted scandalous persons to the Lords Table? How
shall a poor Christian do to satisfy his Brethren, that are not satisfied
with their own judgment and ways; if he be of the same judgment, or speak the
same thing with them? verily, it is not good in Gods sight (but even an
abomination to him) to keep a weight and a weight, a measure and a measure: to
judge the same act in themselves to be weighty, which in others they judge to
be light and rash. But the comfort is, the righteous God judges righteously,
not according to acceptance of persons, but according to Truth; and accepts
the work of his own Spirit of Truth and Grace wheresoever he finds it.

As for my too precipita^^ rashness in former times, which he he is pleased to
remember me of, let him be pleased to forbear his censure a while, till I may
give account thereof to Reverend Doctor Twisse. In the mean time let him know,
that those Tenants which he says I sent abroad to the world, whereof I had
cause after to repent, I neither sent them abroad to the world, (but wrote them
privately for the satisfaction of a neighbor Minister) nor do I yet know,
whether I have cause to repent of them or no, it being near thirty years ago
since I wrote them, and many years ago since I read them.

But in the mean time, let Mr. Baylie be pleased to understand, that I came
hither in September in the year 1633. and that letter of mine which I sent to
Boston, was dated (as himself quoteth) in October, 1635. And surely to write my
Opinion of such a case, which I had considered of for the space of two whole
years, does not seem to be a rash and precipitate act: Nor can it be said with
truth, That I did incontinent persuade to the New-English way, as soon as I had
tasted of the New-English air. Two whole years and more, gives a man more
then a taste of New-English air; nor is that an act done incontinently, which
is done upon two years deliberation.

SECT. IX. Of Cottons pretended known failings, and Mr. Baylies pretended just
cause to discover them to the world.
Mr. Baylie proceeds to discover my evident and known failings, (as he
calls them) and he conceives neither piety nor charity will hinder him to
remark them. And why so? me thinks it should be some great and weighty cause,
that himself, who is wont (as he says) to speak liberally to the praises of
men, who in his thoughts are much inferior to Mr. Cotton; should now give up
himself to speak liberally to the dispraise and disgrace of him, whom yet in
his entrance thereinto he seems to reckon amongst such as he calls the dear
children of God. Surely there is not the least child of God, but is ordained of
God to be a vessel of honor; and to make any such a vessel of dishonor, what is
it else but to endeavor to overthrow the eternal counsel of God? Nor is there
the least child of God, but is a member of the Body of Christ; and the natural
members of the Body are wont to cover the nakedness of such members as are
most uncomely.

But Mr. Baylie is of opinion, as he says, that when my gifts are turned into
snares, and made inducements to others to follow me in my wanderings: then the
discovery of my clear weakness may be a retractive to every Prudent man, and
a caveat from God, to beware of my ways. Belike then it will follow, that
though it be contrary both to the counsel and Commandment of God, and to the
Communion of his Mystical Body, to cast reproaches and dishonor upon the
least of Gods servants: yet for a good end, to keep others from idolizing of
them, it may be lawful to rans^ck all their former lives, and to hang them up
in the sight of the Sun, in chains of public infamy, and obloquy. But I
confess, I have not so learned Christ, as to allow my self to do evil that
good may come of it. Nor do I believe it had been a way of God, when the men
of Lystra so highly Idolized Paul and Barnabas, as to account one of them to be
Jupiter, and the other Mercurius, and to present them with Divine Worship, that
then some godly brother of Paul's company should have stepped in amongst them, and
said, Sirs, why do you these things? Paul has been a bloody persecutor of the
Truths of God, a Blasphemer, a scornful oppressor: and Barnabas is a man
subject to passion and dissimulation, and both of them mortal men, subject to
all kind of sinful corruption. Such zeal for the glory of God, I know not by
what rule of piety or charity, it could have been justified. God has
sanctified other means, to wean his servants from idolizing their Brethren.
Cornelius idolized Peter even with Divine honor, Act. 10.25. But did Peter
therefore, or any of the 6. Brethren that went along with him, think it a just
warrant, to proclaim to Cornel. Take heed what you do, this man whom you
idolize has been a liar, a perjured person, an horrible curser of himself, and
renouncer of the Lord Jesus before many witnesses? God forbid. Yea of latter
times, when the pregnant strength and glorious luster of many heroical and
excellent gifts of Luther had bin so idolized, that many and great Nations
followed him in some notorious errors of his way: yet Calvin thought it no just
ground, why Bullinger or other Divines should break forth against him, as he
had done ( atroci invectiva, to use Calvin's word) against them, but sweetly
professes, Saepe dicere solitus sum, etiamsi me Diabolum vocaret, me tamen hoc
illi honoris habiturum, ut insignem Die servum agnoscam: Calvin. Ep. 57. ad
Bullingerum. The want of this spirit is Fundi Anglicani calamitas, the
unhappiness of England at this day. But what if all these heresies or errors,
which Mr. Baylie charge upon me, be but so many errors of himself, or of his
witnesses? Will he still make it an act of piety, or charity to remarke them
(as he calls it) for my evident and known failings, and follies: which are
either no failings, nor follies at all, or none of mine?

Let us examine the particulars.

SECT. X. Of Cottons Prelaticall Tenants.
1. He instanceth in the Errors of my education, and my long continuance in
them: sundry of them (as he says) I confess stuck by me all the time of my
abode in England.

And this he proves from the testimony of mine own Letter (above mentioned)
from New England to my friends at Boston, October 5. 1635. As joining in
Book-prayers and fellowship at the Lords Table with scandalous Communicants. It
was but in the next foregoing Page, (page 56. of Mr. Baylie's Book) wherein he
makes it the unhappiness of England, that I changed my mind from those very
Tenants, which he now calls the Errors of my education, and Prelaticall
Tenants? But if they be Errors, why does he tax me for changing from them? And
why does he say, It had been happy for England, if Mr. Cotton had taken longer
time, before he had changed his mind from such Tenants? Let Mr. Baylie choose
which he will take; either these are no Errors nor Prelaticall Tenants; or if
they were, it was no Error in me, nor unhappiness to England that I changed
from them. A considerate and equal mind should not be so far transported
studio partium; nor so soon forget it self, as to censure it in one Page for an
unhappy change from such Tenants, which in the next Page he notes for
Erroneous and Prelaticall Tenants.

SECT. XI. Of Cottons pretended Pelagianism and Arminian Errors.
2. My next Error, he calls, My more dangerous fall into the gulf of
Pelagianism, some of the Arminian Errors. I did expect, he would have named
what those Pelagian or Arminian Errors had been. But for that, he refers me
to the Antapology, a Book which I do not know that ever I have seen. Sure I
am, I have often assayed to get, but cannot yet procure it. The testimony which
Mr Baylie quoteth out of it, refers me to the Preface of Dr. Twisse his
Answer. I have read his Preface, wherein I find no particular Tenants of mine
expressed as Erroneous. But this testimony he is pleased to give me, (which
might somewhat allay the ha^shnesse of the scandal of my fall into the gulf of
Pelagianism and Arminianism:) Mr. Cotton (says he) as I have heard, is very
sound and orthodox in the Point of Election: and comes to this work with a
gracious intent to clear the Doctrine of Predestination, (and that, in the
particular of Reprobation) from such harsh consequences as seems to be
derived from thence.

Dr. Twisse does indeed truly express that which (through grace) was my true
intent, to clear the Orthodox Doctrine of Predestination from such harsh
consequences, as are wonted to be derived from absolute Reprobation. For when I
was first called to Boston in Lincolnshire, so it was, that Mr. Doctor Baron,
son of Dr. Baron, (the Divinity Reader at Cambridge) who in his Lectures there,
first broched that which was then called Lutheranism, since Arminianism:) this
Dr. Baron, I say, had leavened many of the chief men of the Town with
Arminianism; as being indeed himself learned, acute, plausible in discourse,
and fit to insinuate into the hearts of his Neighbors. And though he was a
Physician by profession, (and of good skill in that art:) yet he spent the
greatest strength of his studies in clearing and promoting the Arminian
Tenants. Whence it came to pass, that in all the great Feasts of the Town, the
chiefest Discourse at Table did ordinarily fall upon Arminian Points, to the
great offense of the Godly Ministers both in Boston, and Neighbor-Towns. I
coming amongst them a young man, (as having gone to Cambridge in the beginning
of the 13th year of my age, and tarrying there not above 14 years in all,
before I was sent for to Boston:) I thought it a part both of modesty and
prudence, not to speak much to the Points, at the first, amongst Strangers and
Ancients: until afterward, after hearing of many Discourses in Public
meetings, and much private conference with the Doctor, I had learned at length
where all the great strength of the Doctor lay. And then observing (by the
help of Christ) how to avoid such expressions, as gave him any advantage in
the expressions of others, I then began publicly to Preach, and in private
Meetings to defend the Doctrine of Gods eternal Election before all foresight
of good or evil in the Creature: and the Redemption (ex gratia) only of the
Ellict: the effectual vocation of a Sinner per irresistibilem gratiae vim,
without all respect of the preparations of Free will: And finally, the
impossibility of the fall of a sincere Believer either totally or finally from
the estate of grace. Hereupon, when the Doctor had objected many things, and
heard my answers to those scruples which he was wont most plausibly to urge;
presently after, our public Feasts and neighborly meetings, were silent from
all further debates about Predestination, or any of the Points which depend
thereon, and all matters of Religion were carried on calmly and peaceably.
Insomuch, that when God opened mine eyes to see the sin of conformity, (which
was soon after:) my neglect of conformity was at first tolerated without
disturbance, and at length embraced in practice by the chief and g^eatest part
of the Town. But so it fell out, that a neighbor Minister dwelling about 16
miles off (and my very loving friend) hearing of some Answers of mine tending
to clear the Doctrine of Reprobation against the exceptions of Dr. Baron, he
seemed not to be satisfied therewith, but wrote to me seven or eight Questions
about the same; whereto I willingly gave him such Answers as then came to hand,
and that soon after the receipt of his Questions, which is now long since,
about 30 years ago. Little did I think, that a private Letter of mine written
to a very friend, should ever have been divulged abroad. But it seems some
got Copies of it; and in process of time, one Copy multiplied another, till at
length it came to Dr. Twisse his hand. None of his Writings against Arminius or
his followers had been then published: but he was then (by the report which
went of him) of such high esteem with me, as I wrote him a thankful Letter for
the pains I heard he had taken in examining my Answer to Mr. Pells Queries:
(for that was the neighbor Ministers name who sent them to me;) and desired
from him leave to see the copy of his Answer. He lovingly granted it, only
with desire after a time to return his (...): yet after that having got himself
another Copy, he sent me word, he was content I should keep his. Whereupon I
took it with me to New England; but since my coming hither have found such
constant diversion from such Contemplative Controversies, to attend Practical,
that I have not to this day been able to perpend the Doctors Answer, which I
see is now Printed: I hope, God will give me opportunity ere long (after two or
three other Treatises perused) to consider of this his labor of Love. I bless
the Lord, who has taught me to be willing to be taught of a far meaner
Disciple then such a Doctor, whose Scholasticall acuteness, pregnancy of wit,
solidity of judgment, and dexterity of argument, all Orthodox Divines do
highly honor, and whom all Arminians and Jesuits do fall down before with
silence. God forbid I should shut mine eyes against any light brought to me by
him. Only I desire I may not be condemned as a Pelagian or Arminian, before I
be heard, or be found more slow in retracting an Error, then in discerning it.

SECT. XII. Of Cottons pretended Montanism.
3. The next Error which Mr. Baylie is pleased to threape upon me is my old
Montanism, which he says, he has heard from some gracious Ministers; and
wherein some think I remain to this day.

Who those gracious Ministers are from whom he heard this, he does not mention;
nor what this old Montanism of mine should be, he does not express. But thus I
must stand guilty in Mr. Baylie's judgment, and by his relation, in the
judgment of all men that give credit to his testimony, of an horrible Heresy,
but I must not know what; and by the accusation of gracious Ministers, but I
must not know whom.

Augustine records (in his Catalogue of Heresies) Chap. 26. the Heresies of
Montanus to be: 1. That Montanus and his two harlot-Prophetesses, Prisca and
Maximilla, had received the Holy Ghost not in part, as the Apostles, but
without measure. 2 Second-mariages they condemn as whoredom. 3 The Bread in
the Lord's Supper, they mingle with the blood of a yearling Infant.

Daneus in his Comment upon that Book of Augustine, adds other Heresies, out
of other Authors: as for a 4. That Montanus himself was the Comforter promised
to the Apostles. 5 That incestuous copulations were not to be disallowed. 6
That Enthusiasms and Revelations were rather to be followed then the Word of
God. 7 That they confounded the Persons in Trinity, as did the Sabellians and
Patropassiani.

Now amongst all these Montanistick Tenants, I would entreat Mr. Baylie to tell
me (in faithfulness) which of them it is he charge upon me, and which he
calls, my old Montanism, wherein some think I do remain to this day.

Or if he say, (as he does) that he has heard of my old Montanism, by some
gracious Ministers, let him be pleased to entreat them to declare to me those
Points of Montanism, which they know by me, or suspect in me. Otherwise I shall
conceive, though they may be gracious Ministers that so told him, yet it was no
part of their graciousnesse so to speak; a speech that neither savored of
Truth, nor love, nor wisdom, nor faithfulness.

But in perusing the se^uel of this Discourse, I find a passage, which makes
me suspect, what Tenent of Montanism it is which he aims at, in Page 61.
speaking of the vileness of the errors of the members of our Churches; They
did (says he) avow openly, The personal inhabitation of the Spirit in all the
godly; his immediate Revelations without the Word; and these as infallible as
the Scripture it self. And this (says he) is the vilest Montanism.

These two latter Tenants, immediate Revelations without the Word, and them as
infallible as the Scripture it self, I willingly confess they are vile
Montanism; though I would not say (as he does) the vilest. For the vilest is,
to hold Montanus himself to be the Holy Ghost, or to have received the
Holy Ghost in a more full measure then the Apostles themselves.

But for the first of these Tenants, touching the Personal Inhabitation of the
Holy Ghost in the godly, it may further be considered before it be condemned.
Personal Inhabitation may be taken in a double sense: For, 1 It may hold forth
no more but this, the indwelling not only of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, but
of his Person also in the Regenerate. Or 2. it may hold forth further, the
indwelling of the Person of the Holy Ghost in the Regenerate, so far forth as
to make us one Person with himself, or to communicate with us some Personal
propriety of his own.

In this latter sense Mr. Baylie may well be allowed to call it, vile
Montanism: for the Errors are vile, and also wrapped up in Montanus his Tenants:
But for the former, the indwelling not only of the Gifts, but of the Person
also of the Holy Ghost in the Regenerate, I must profess, I neither believe
the Tenent to be vile nor Montanism. Not Montanism, for amongst all the Errors
of Montanus or his followers, I never read this imputed to them, by such as
have been the most diligent Recorders and Refuters of ancient Heresies. Neither
Augustine, nor Epiphanius before him, nor Daneus after him, did ever father
this Tenent upon the Montanists. Nor is the Tenent vile or erroneous, but an
holy Truth of God delivered to us from the Word of Truth. As may appear,

1. From the testimony of the Lord Jesus, Joh. 14.16, 17, 26. with Joh. 15.26.
The argument stands thus, The Comforter which proceeds from the Father and
the Son; even the Spirit of Truth, he dwells in the Disciples of Christ
Jesus.

The Comforter which proceeds from the Father and the Son, even the Spirit of
Truth, is the Person of the Holy Ghost himself.

Therefore the Person of the Holy Ghost himself dwells in the Disciples of
Christ Jesus.

2. From the testimony of the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 1.14. That Good thing (says
he) which is committed to thee, keep, by the Holy Ghost, which dwells in us.
That Good thing is fitly understood by our best Interpreters, Calvin and Beza,
to be, not only the sound Doctrine of ^he Gospel, and his Ministerial Office,
but also the excellent gifts of the Spirit of Grace furnishing him for
discharge of his Office, and dispensation of the Gospel. Whence the Argument
holds thus;

The Holy Ghost that keeps the good gifts of Grace in us, dwells in us.

The Holy Ghost that keeps the good gifts of Grace in us, is not the gifts,
but the person of the Holy Ghost distinguished from them:

Therefore it is the Person of the Holy Ghost, and not his gifts only that
dwells in us.

3. From another testimony of Paul, Romans 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised
up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead,
shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you.
Whence the Argument arises thus,

The Spirit that dwells in us, is the Spirit that raised Christ from the
dead, and shall also quicken our mortal bodies;

But it is not the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, but the Person of the Spirit
himself that raised up Christ from the dead, and shall quicken our mortal
bodies:

Therefore it is the Person of the Spirit that dwells in us.

It was not the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit of Christ himself, much less
our Gifts and Graces that did raise up Christ from the dead. Not the Gifts and
Graces of Christ himself; for they were but created. And it was an act far
above all created power, to raise up Christ from the dead. Much less were they
our Gifts and Graces that raised him up; for ours, are not only created, but
imperfect, and which is more, they were not then in Being, when God raised up
Christ from the dead.

To these three Divine Testimonies (which are the ground of my faith in this
point) let me add one humane Testimony of a learned Divine, who was never
tainted, nor taxed with Montanisme, I mean Zanchius, de Tribus Elohim Part
altera, lib. 4. cap. 1. His testimony comes in thus: Praeter alia argumenta,
quibus confirmavimus Spiritum Sanctum verum esse Deum, illud etiam non fuit
minimum, quod inde deduximus, quia Fideles vocantur Templum Spiritus Sancti, 1
Cor. 6.19. and 3.16.

Against this argument from the proof of the Godhead of the Holy Ghost,
Ochinus gave this answer amongst others: Dona Dei nobis concessa, hoc eodem
nomine notari: sed non tertium suppositum, hoc est personam, a Patre and Filio
distinctam, etc.

To this Zanchius replyeth: Non potest Spiritus Ochinianus nisi impudenter
inficiari, quin Spiritus Sanctus, hoc est, tertia haec persona (quae etiam
Spiritus Dei, and virtus Dei appellatur) habitet in Sanctis hominibus, and quin
illi sint hujus Templum, qui enim in iis habitat, judicio, and voluntate
praeditus est, and loquitur; Spiritus Patris vestri (inquit Christus) loquitur
in vobis, Matthew. 10.20. Spiritus autem Sanctus appellatur ipse Spiritus Dei,
and Spiritus Christi. Spiritus igitur Sanctus, hoc est tertia Persona, habitat
in Sanctis. Quod vero ait Spiritus Ochinianus, Non posse tertiam Personam
habitare in Sanctis, quin ibi etiam habitent reliquae, dictum est been. Nam
etiam Christus dixit, Ego and Pater ad eum veniemus, and mansionem apud eum
faciemus, Ioh. 14.23. Hoc vero ideo fit, quoniam omnes sunt una and eadem
essentia, etc.

SECT. 13. Of Cottons pretended Antinomianisme and Familisme.
The Disswader proceeds to point at (as he calls it) another more
dangerous fall of mine, which in his Margent, he names Mr. Cottons
Antinomianisme, and Familisme: and within a few lines, his wandering into the
horrible Errors of the Antinomians, and Familists, with his dear friend Ms.
Hutchinson, so far that he came to a resolution to side with her, and to
Separate from all the Churches in New England, as legal Synagogues.

If all this charge were true (as indeed, in all parts of it, it is false:) yet
the errors of Antinomianisme, and Familisme, then stirring in the Country, and
condemned in the Synod at New-Towne, were not more dangerous, then the old
Montanisme. I confess, the Familisme afterward broached by Mr. Garton, and
his followers, the same which Calvin in his Opuscula refuteth (in his
Instructio adversus Libertinos) as Calvin judges it more dangerous then
Popery, so I conceive it to be as dangerous as Montanisme, though I cannot say
more dangerous: for both of them overthrow al principles and foundations of
Christian Religion. But for the making good of this charge upon me, let Mr.
Baylie be pleased to instance in those horrible errors either of Antinomianisme
or Familisme, whereunto I either wandered or fell: Or let him make it appear
that I came to such a Resolution, to side with my dear friend Ms. Hutchinson,
and to separate from all the Churches in New England, ^s legal Synagogues.

Let us examine his proofs and Testimonies.

1. The first is from the parties themselves, the followers of Ms. Hutchinson,
who (says he) boast of Mr. Cotton for their Master and Patron.

And it is true, they professed so: just as Wightman who was burnt at Lichfield
for Montanisme, (avouching himself to be the Holy Ghost) professed he had
received all his grounds from Mr. Hildersam. And I confess my self, being
naturally (I thank God) not suspicious, hearing no more of their Tenants from
them, then what seemed to me Orthodox^ll, I believed, they had been far off
from such gross errors, as were bruited of them. But when some of my
fellow-Brethren (the Elders of Neighbor Churches) advertised me of the evil
report that went abroad of their corrupt Tenants, I desired to know what the
Tenants were, which were corrupt, and which they had vented here and there, in
my name. They mentioned some to me, some of those which are published in the
short story of that Subject: and named also to me the persons, who had uttered
the same. I therefore dealt with Mris. Hutchinson and others of them, declaring
to them the erroneousnesse of those Tenants, and the injury done to my self in
fathering them upon me. Both she, and they utterly denied, that they held
such Tenants, or that they had fathered them upon me. I returned their Answer
to the Elders, who had spoken to me of them: and I inquired, if any two of
them, or of their Neighbors could bear witness in this case. They answered
me, they had but one witness of any corrupt Tenent: and that one, loath to be
known to be an accuser of them. I replied, what course would you then advise
me to take? They answered, that I could not indeed bring the matter to the
Church for want of witnesses: But the best way would be, publicly and
privately to bear witness against such errors. I took their counsel, and
bare witness against the errors complained of, as well publicly as privately.
Which when some Elders and Brethren heard, meeting soon after with some of
these Opinionists: Lo, say they, now we have heard your Teacher bearing
witness openly against those very points, which you falsely father on him. No
matter (say the other) what you hear him say in public: we know what he
says to us in private. This answer bred in some of my Brethren and friends, a
jealousy, that my self was a secret fomenter of this spirit of Familisme, if
not leavened my self that way. Whereupon sundry Elders and Brethren perceiving
these Errors to spread, secretly and closely, they consulted among themselves,
and with me what I thought of a Synod, whether it might be of use in such a
case for the clearing of these Points, and the allaying of the jealousies and
differences in the Country? I answered, yea. Thereupon, with consent of the
Magistrates, a time, and place was appointed for a Synodicall meeting, and
sundry Elders were sent for, from other jurisdictions, and messengers from all
the Churches in the Country to assist in this work.

Against which time three things principally were attended for preparation.

1. A Solemn Fast kept in all the Churches: in which it fell out, that Mr.
Whelewrights Sermon was apprehended to give too much encouragement to the
Opinionists. And himself has since confessed, that being but new come into the
Country, having but little acquaintance but with his kindred, and their
friends, (who were many of them levened this way) he spoke some things, which
if he had before discerned their Familisme, he would not have expressed himself
as he did.

The 2. thing attended to, for preparation to the Synod, was, the gathering up
of all the corrupt and offensive Opinions that were scattered up and down the
Country, and to commend them to Public Disquisition in the Synod: that
howsoever, the Authors of them were loath to own them publicly, yet at least,
they might see them publickely tried, confuted, and condemned. The which was
accordingly done in the Synod: and the Opinions with their Confutations are
since printed in the short story, whence Mr. Baylie fetches many Testimonies.

The 3. thing thought needful for preparation to the Synod, was, to gather out
of my Sermons to the people, and my conferences (in word and writing) with the
Elders, all such opinions of mine as were conceived by some, to be erroneous:
and having gathered them together, to inquire in a brotherly conference with
me, how far I would own them, or how I did understand them, that so the true
state of the questions in difference might appear; and withal, if there were
any aguish distemper, or disaffection grown in any of our spirits amongst our
selves, it might be healed in a private brotherly way, and mutual satisfaction
given and taken on all hands. Accordingly we had such a meeting in private;
wherein five questions were propounded unto me, with desire of my plain and
explicit answer to the same: which also upon their demand, I gave suddenly.

Quest. 1. Whether our Union with Christ be complete before and without Faith?
Where I gave this answer, which was taken in writing: Not without, nor before
the habit (or gift) of Faith, but before the act of Faith; that is, not before
Christ has wrought Faith in us (for in uniting himself to us, he works Faith
in us:) yet in order of nature, before our faith does put forth it self to lay
hold on him.

For indeed I looked at Union with Christ, as equipollent to Regeneration. And
look as in Generation we are in a passive way united to Adam: so in
Regeneration we are united to Christ. And as the soul habet se mere passive
(in the judgment of our best Divines) in Regeneration, so also in union, and
by the judgment of Christ himself, who says, without Christ abiding in us (and
so united to us) we can do nothing, not bring forth any spiritual fruit at
all: much less can we before union with Christ, unite our selves to Christ,
which is the greatest and most spiritual fruit of all. I was not ignorant,
that some of the Schoolmen (even some Dominicans) and out of them Ferius, and
some others, (even of judicious Protestants) are of opinion, that Christ does
give the Soul by the Almighty power of the auxilium efficax of his Spirit, to
put forth an act of Faith, to lay hold on Christ, before he give them a habit
or gift of Faith. But I could not understand how this could stand with Christ's
Word, That without Christ abiding in us, we can do nothing. Which argues, no
spiritual act can be done by us without Christ habitually permanent in us.
And us acute and judicious Baynes says, (in Ephesians. 1.) This were to give a man
to see, without an eye to see withal: which though God can do by his Almighty
power, yet as the Philosopher said of Entia: so it may be much more said of
Miracula (which are extraordinary Entia) Miracula sine necessitate non sunt
multiplicanda.

QUEST. II. Whether Faith be an isntrumental cause in applying Christ's
righteousness to our Justification.
Whereto I answered,

Faith is an instrument to receive the righteousness of Christ applied to us
of God, for our Justification: but not properly an isntrumental cause.

Where I understood Instrument, as the Hebrews do, (...) which they
indifferently put for Instrument, or Vessel: For Faith emptying the soul of
all confidence in its own righteousness, is a fit vessel or instrument to
receive the righteousness of Christ offered and imputed; and so I took Faith
rather as a fit disposition of the subject to be justified, then as a proper
isntrumental cause of our justification: like the empty vessels of the
Prophets widow, which whilst they were empty, the oil ran forth into them (the
empty vessels being fit to receive it:) But yet the empty vessels were not
properly isntrumental causes of the running forth of the Oil, but only fit
instruments to receive it.

QUEST. 3. Whether the Spirit of God in evidencing our Justification does bear
witness in an absolute promise of free Grace, without Qualification, or
condition.
My answer was,

The Spirit in evidencing our Justification does bear witness either in an
absolute promise, or in a conditional: in case, the condition be understood,
or applied absolutely, not attending the condition as the ground or cause of
the assurance, but as the effect and consequence of it: or (as I might have
added, as before) as a fit disposition of the subject to receive it.

For I conceived, though the Spirit may evidence to us our Justification in a
Qualification or condition: yet sometime the condition is not there before the
promise, but freely given with the promise, as Acts 10.43, 44. where though
Cornelius and his household were believers, yet many of his kindred and friends
were not: who yet upon hearing the promise of Remission (or Justification) unto
Faith, they received both Faith and Justification, and the evid^nce of both,
all together: as did also the Jailor in the like sort, Act. 16.31. Sometime,
though the Qualification or condition be there before, and the Spirit do bear
witness to our Justification in that condition: yet the condition is not the
cause either of justification, or of the evidence of it, as in Luke 7.47.
Christ bears evident witness of the Remission or Justification of Mary
Magdalen, in her love to him. Nevertheless her love was not the cause, neither
of her Justification, nor of the assurance of it, but an effect of both. For
she expressed those evidences of her love to Christ, because her sins were
forgiven her, and because her self was assured of the forgiveness of them.

Sometimes the Qualification or condition mentioned in the promise, though it
be in the soul before, yet it is not evident there before. And then the
evidence of Justification springs not from the condition, but from the Grace
of the promise, clearing and evidencing both the condition and the
Justification. Thus Christ applies himself by his Spirit, to bruised Reeds,
o^ broken hearts. Isa. 57.15.

Lastly, if Faith it self be meant to be the saving qualification or
condition, and be also found, and that evidently in the soul to whom the
Promise of Justification is made; yet the Spirit may bear witness in the
Promise of Grace to the Justification of such a soul, without either the word
expressing the Condition in that place, or the soul attending the Condition at
that time: As when Christ said to the Woman, Luke 7.48. Thy sins are forgiven
thee, He neither mentions her Faith in that word, nor does it appear, that
she did reflect upon her Faith in receiving that Promise at that time. Many an
Israelite stung by the fiery Serpents in the wilderness, might look up to the
brazen Serpent for healing, and yet at that time not look to their eye, nor
think upon their eye by which they looked. And though afterward Christ do
make express mention of the woman's Faith, to which he attributes her
salvation, ( Woman, says he, thy Faith has saved thee, ver. 50.)
Nevertheless, that Faith, though it be an Evidence of Assurance in the subject
Person of his Justification: yet it is also an Effect or Consequence of the
Evidence and Assurance of the Object, that is, of the grace and mercy of God
clearly revealed and applied to the soul in the Promise, even to the begetting
of Faith it self, and the Assurance of it. As when Christ did promise (by the
Ministry of Paul) salvation to the Jailer in Believing; the Grace of Christ
clearly revealed and applied in the Promise did beget Faith in the Jailer, and
the Assurance of Faith. And so his Faith, and the Assurance of it was an Effect
and Consequence of the Grace and Assurance of it offered to him in the Promise.
Faith though it be an Evidence of things not seen (with bodily eye;) yet it is
an effect of a former Evidence, even of the light of Gods Countenance shining
forth through Christ in the Promise of Grace upon the soul, to the begetting of
Faith, and the assurance of it.

But howsoever, Faith being always of a self humbling efficacy, it is a fit
disposition of the subject to receive comfort and assurance, Isa. 57.15.

Calvin defines Faith to be Divinae ergo nos benevolentiae firmam certamque
cognitionem, quae gratuitae in Christo Promissionis veritate fundata, per
Spiritum Sanctum and revelatur mentibus nostris and cordibus obsignatur.
Institut. l. 3. c. 2. Sect. 7. Now when he comes to expound what he means
by the free promise of grace in Christ, upon which this knowledge (or assurance)
of Faith is founded, he makes it to be, not conditional. And he gives this
reason, Quoniam (says he) Conditionalis Promissio qua ad opera nostra
remittimur, non aliter vitam promittit, quam si perspiciamus esse in nobis
sitam. Ergo, nisi Fidem tremere, ac vacillare volumus, illam Salutis
Promissione su^ciamus oportet, quae a Domino ultro ac liberaliter, potiusque
miseriae nostrae quam dignitatis respectis offeratur; ibidem Sect. 29.

But what was the occasion of this Question from any speech or writing of mine,
I cannot call to mind, unless it were concerning the First evidence of
justification, which is the purport of the next Question. For otherwise, if
Faith and Assurance be first founded and bottomed upon a Promise of Free Grace,
I never doubted, but that Sanctification or Faith, (any saving qualification)
may be, (and is by the help of the Spirit) a clear and certain Evidence of
Justification. So that put the Question in terminis,

Whether the Spirit of God in Evidencing our Justification does bear witness in
an absolute Promise of Free Grace, without qual^fication or condition?

I should answer plainly and roundly, The Spirit does Evidence our
Justification both ways, sometime in an absolute Promise, sometime in a
conditional.

QUEST. 4. Whether some Saving Qualification may be a first Evidence of
Justification?
Hereto I answered,

A man may have an argument from thence, (yea, I doubt not a firm and strong
argument) but not a first Evidence.

For I conceived, Faith it self, which is an evidence of things not seen, and
the first saving Qualification that does Evidence Justification, is it self
founded upon a former evidence, even the Free Grace of God in Christ, revealed
in the promise of Grace, and applied to the soul effectually by the Spirit of
grace both in our effectual Calling (even to the begetting of Faith) and in
our Justification. Accordingly, the Apostle reckoning the Evidences that bear
witness of our life in Christ, gives the first plac^ to the Spirit, before
any fruit of the Spirit; There are three (says he) that bear witness on
earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, 1 John 5.8. First, the Spirit, to
wit, of illumination and drawing, whereby he reveals Christ to us, and
works Faith in us, 2 Cor. 4.6. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Joh. 6.44.45. Secondly, the
water of Sanctification. And thirdly, the Blood of atonement (or pacification)
pacifying the conscience.

Calvin also is of the same judgment in this Question, in 2 Pet. 1.10. and in 1 John 3.14. and 19.

And Zanchy likewise does at large dispute this Question, and conclude it
against Dr. Marbachius in his Miscellanies, in that part of it entitled,
Disceptatio inter duos Theologos, from page 598. to page 605. Editionis in
quarto.

QUEST. 5. Whether Christ and his benefits be dispensed in a Covenant of Works?
Whereunto my answer was,

Christ is dispensed to the Elect in a Covenant of Grace: to others he may be
dispensed in some sort, (to wit, in a taste of him) either in a Covenant of
works, or in a Covenant of grace legally applied.

To give an hint of the reason of mine answer. The Covenant on Mount Sinai,
(wherein Christ was dispensed in sacrifices and ceremonies) though to the
faithful seed of Abraham it was a Covenant of Grace, (wherein they saw Christ
and his benefits graciously dispensed to them, Psalm. 51, 7.) yet to the carnal
seed, it seemed to me to be a Covenant of Works, to prepare them for the saving
benefits of that Covenant of Grace which was formerly given to Abraham and his
seed, (but neglected by them in Egypt) and afterward renewed in the plains of
Moab, Deuteronomy. chap. 29. and Chap. 30. And so Paul makes that Covenant on Mount
Sinai, to be expressly a different Covenant from that of grace, to wit, a
Covenant gendring unto bondage, Gal. 4.24, 25. and the other Covenant ( Deuteronomy.
30.) to be of Grace, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. Moses also himself, having recited the
Covenant on Mount Sinai (Deuteronomy. 5.) he makes the observation of all the
Commandments to be the righteousness of the people, Deuteronomy. 6.25. and their
life, Levit. 18.4. And so Paul understands him, Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12. Now
that Covenant which gendreth unto bondage, and holds forth righteousness and
life upon obedience to all the Commandments, it is a Covenant of Works.

And so have the chiefest Germane Divines, as well as Piscator, and Polanus,
taken the Covenant on Mount Sinai to be a covenant of Works. See Piscaeor,
Ezekiel. 16. Observat. ultima in verse. 60.62. and Polanus ibidem.

How far there arose any consent or dissent about these questions, between my
Fellow-Brethren (the Elders of these churches) and my self, it is not material
now to particuralrize; it is enough, that upon our clear understanding of one
another minds and judgments, and upon the due proceeding of our Church
against convinced notorious errors and scandalls, we have ever since (by the
Grace of Christ) much amiable and comfortable Communion together in all
brotherly kindness. But this short relation may suffice.

To let Mr. Baylie know, and all them that shall read his Book, to consider,
what slender ground he had to speak of my wandering into the horrible Errors of
the Antinomians, and Familists, and siding therein with Mistress Hutchinson, and
therein to tell the world of a more dangerous fall of mine, then that of
Montanisme: And withal to clear up to him, what little ground Mistress
Hutchinson had, to pretend, that she was of Mr. Cottons judgment in all
things: that so Mr. Baylie may likewise observe what ground himself had to take
up such a report against me, upon her testimony. Which yet will the more fully
appear, if I proceed to relate a principal passage or two in the Synod, after
it was assembled. It was the first act of the Synod (after Prayer and choice of
Moderators) to propound the several offensive opinions, which had been
dispersed up and down in the Country, and briefly to argue them, and bear
witness against them. The opinions were about fourscore (more or less) which
being orderly propounded and argued against, I perceived that some of the
Members and Messengers of our Church, were ready to rise up, and plead in
defense of sundry corrupt Opinions, which I verily thought had been far from
them; especially such as concerned union with Christ before Faith,
Justification without Fiath, inherent righteousness, and evidencing a good
estate by it at all, first or last. Whereupon as soon as I could get liberty of
speech with them, Brethren (said I) if you be of that judgment, which you plead
for, all these Bastardly Opinions, which are justly offensive to the Churches,
will be fathered upon Boston. They answered me again, Though they were not
clear for those Opinions, which they spoke for, yet neither were they clear for
condemning of them, considering the tenderness of some Consciences: I replied,
if they were doubtful of the Erroneousnesse and danger of such Opinions, they
should have dealt openly with the Church at home, when they were chosen
Messengers, and should have declared their judgments before the Church: as
knowing such points amongst others were likely to come into agitation in the
Synod: whereas now look what they speak, it is conceived by the whole Country
to be the judgment of our Church.

Hereupon some of the Messengers of our Church withdrew themselves, and
appeared no more in the Synod, such as did appear, did much what forbear any
prosecution of argument in such causes. But that (to my remembrance) was the
first time of my discerning a real and broad difference, between the judgments
of our Brethren (who leaned to Mistress Hutchinson) and my self. And therefore
to clear my self, and the sounder Members of our Church from partaking in those
manifold errors there presented, I declared my judgment openly before all the
assembly, That I esteemed some of the Opinions, to be blasphemous: some of
them, heretical: many of them, Erroneous: and almost all of them,
incommodiously expressed: as intending to except those chiefly, wherein I had
declared mine own opinion, as before.

But because I would deal openly and ingenuously with Mr. Baylie, and hide
nothing from him, that might fortify his accusation against me, there was some
color of my leaning to one Antinomian Tenent in one day of the Synod. For
though in answer to the questions of the Elders before the Synod, I had
affirmed Faith to be an instrument for the receiving the righteousness of
Christ to our justification: yet for as much as some great Divines had let fall
some expressions, that seemed to favor the Antinomian party in a contrary
Tenent, I was desirous to hear that Point a little further ventilated, and to
see the difficulties a little more fully cleared. Dr. Twisse (not suspected for
an Antinomian, much less for a Familist) in his vindiciae gratiae, de
electione, Part 2. Section. 25. Numero 5. brings in Arminius, arguing
against Mr. Perkins, thus: The righteousness of Christ wrought or performed,
is not ours, as wrought or performed, but as by Faith imputed to us. Whereto
the Dr. answers,

Before Faith, this Righteousness of Christ was ours, and in the intention of
God the Father, and of Christ our Mediator, was wrought for us. And because it
is wrought for us, therefore God in his own time will give it us, and Grace of
every kind, even Faith it self amongst the rest. But Faith coming, (which the
Holy Ghost kindles in our hearts) then at length this love of God to us in
Christ, is acknowledged and perceived. Whence it is, that the Righteousness of
Christ is said to be imputed to us, by Faith, because it is not descerned to
be imputed to us, but by Faith: and then we are said to be justified with that
kind of Justification, and absolution from sin, which breeds peace in our
Consciences. And this (says he) I confirm by two arguments. 1. Because by the
Righteousness of Christ, we obtain not only Remission of sins, but Faith
it self, and Repentance, as it is written, God has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. Therefore even before Faith and
Repentance, the Righteousness of Christ is applied to us, as for which we
obtain Grace effectual to believe in Christ, and to repent. 2. Because
Justification and absolution, as they signify an immanent act in God, are ab
aeterno, etc.

Whereto he subjoyneth the Poets ingenuous verse to the reader.

Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; si non, bis utere mecum.
Before Dr. Twisse, Chamier (a Divine, as free as the other from suspicion of
Antinomianisme) denies Faith to be a cause of Justification; For if it were
(says he) Justification should not be of Grace, but of us. But Faith is said
to justify, not because it effects Justification, but because it is effected
in the justified person, and requisite to be found in him. De Fide libr. 13.
cap. 6. And to the same purpose, De Justificatione, libr. 22. cap. 12. he
contendeth, that Faith as it does not merit, nor bring Justification,so neither
does it (impetrare) obtain it. For if it were so, then tum ratione, tum tempore
Fides praecederet Justificationem, Faith should go before Justification, both
in nature and time: Which (says he) in no sort may be granted. For Faith is
it self a part of Sanctification; but there is no Sanctification, but after
Justification, quae and re, and natura prior est, which both in the thing it
self, and in nature is before it.

To the like purpose does Mr. Pemble deliver his judgment in his Book of the
Nature and Properties of Grace and Faith, Page 24. 26. of his Edition in Folio.

The Discrepance of all these Divines from the received expressions of the
most, gave just occasion, why in such an Assembly, the judgment of sundry acute
and judicious Elders, might be enquired. Accordingly, in one day of their
dispute in the Synod (with Mr. Whelewright, if I forget not) I interposed such
a word as this, God may be said to justify me before the habit, or act of
Faith, and the habit is the effect of my Justification, intending the same
sense, as has been expressed out of those Divines: upon which, the next day
was taken up in disputing and arguing that Point with me. And when I saw their
apprehensions, that they were suitable to Scripture phrase, and the contrary
difficulties might be removed sano sensu, I the next morning did of my self
freely declare to them publicly, my consent with them in the point, which (as
they professed) they gladly accepted.

Now upon all this relation (which is the substance of the whole Truth in this
cause) I desire Mr. Baylie might consider what ground he had, either to report
me to the World as sometimes dangerously fallen into the horrible Errors of
Antinomianisme, and Familisme: or to take Ms. Hutchinsons report in this cause,
That she was of Mr. Cottons judgment in all things. Let him please to read the
short story of the Errors and heresies, for which she was admonished publicly
in Boston Church, and compare them with the Tenants of mine now mentioned, and
let him judge of himself, whether she was of Mr. Cottons judgment in all things.

I would not have enlarged my self so much, either to clear her testimony, or
to elevate it, were it not to take off some scruples and surmises in Mr. Baylie
of some dangerous guilt in me of Antinomian, and Familisticall errors, which he
thinks cannot be avoided by what he collecteth from other testimonies, as well
as hers which may fully be prevented and avoided by this relation of the true
state of things.

But before I leave speech of her, let me speak a word to Mr. Baylie of the
Epithet he is pleased to give her, when he styleth her, my dear friend, with
whom I resolved to side and separate from all the Churches in New England, as
Legal Churches.

At her first coming she was well respected and esteemed of me, not only
because herself and her family were well beloved in England at Allford in
Lincolnshire (not far beyond Boston:) nor only because she with her family
came over hither (as was said) for conscience sake: but chiefly for that I
heard, she did much good in our Town, in woman's meeting at
Childbirth-Travells, wherein she was not only skillful and helpful, but
readily fell into good discourse with the women about their spiritual estates:
And therein cleared it unto them, That the soul lying under a Spirit of
Bondage, might see and sensibly feel the heinous guilt, and deep desert of sin,
and thereby not only undergo affliction of Spirit but also receive both
restraining, and constraining Grace likewise, (in some measure:) restraining
from all known evil (both courses, and companies) (at least for a season) and
constraining to all known duties, as secret Prayer, Family Exercises,
Conscience of Sabbaths, Reverence of Ministers, Frequenting of Sermons,
Diligence in calling, honesty in dealing and the like: yea and that the Soul
might find some tastes and flashes of spiritual comfort in this estate, and
yet never see or feel the need of Christ, much less attain any saving Union,
or Communion with him, being no more but Legal work, even what the Law, and
the Spirit of bondage (breathing in it) might reach unto. By which means many
of the women (and by them their husbands) were convinced, that they had gone on
in a Covenant of Works, and were much shaken and humbled thereby, and brought
to enquire more seriously after the Lord Jesus Christ, without whom all their
Gifts and Graces would prove but common, and their duties but legal, and in
the end wizzen and vanish. All this was well (as is reported truly, page 31.
of her Story) and suited with the public Ministry, which had gone along in
the same way, so as these private conferences did well tend to water the seeds
publicly sown. Whereupon all the faithful embraced her conference, and
blessed God for her fruitful discourses. And many whose spiritual estates
were not so safely laid, yet were hereby helped and awakened to discover their
sandy foundations, and to seek for better establishment in Christ: which caused
them also to bless the Lord for the good success, which appeared to them by
this discovery.

Hitherto therefore she wrought with God, and with the Ministers, the work of
the Lord. No marvel therefore if at that time, she found loving and dear
respect both from our Church-Elders and Brethren, and so from my self also
amongst the rest.

Afterward, it is true, she turned aside not only to corrupt opinions, but to
dis-esteem generally the Elders of the churches, (though of them she esteemed
best of Mr. Shepherd:) and for my self, (in the repetitions of Sermons in her
house) what she repeated and confirmed, was accounted sound, what she
omitted, was accounted Apocrypha. This change of hers was long hid from me: and
much longer the evidence of it, by any two clear witnesses. I sent some Sisters
of the Church on purpose to her Repetitions, that I might know the truth: but
when she discerned any such present, no speech fell from her, that could be
much excepted against. But further discourse about her course is not pertinent
to the present business. But by this Mr. Baylie may discern, how far Ms.
Hutchinson was dear unto me, and if he speak of her as my dear friend, till
she turned aside, I refuse it not.

But yet thus much I must profess to him, That in the times of her best
acceptance, she was not so dear unto me, but that (by the help of Christ) I
dealt faithfully with her about her spiritual estate. There things I told her,
made her spiritual estate unclear to me.

1. That her Faith was not begotten nor (by her relation) scarce at any time
strengthened, by public Ministry, but by private Meditations, or Revelations
only. 2. That she clearly discerned her Justification (as she professed:)
but little or nothing at all, her Sanctification: though (she said) she
believed, such a thing there was by plain Scripture.

3. That she was more sharply censorious of other men's spiritual estates and
hearts, then the servants of God are wont to be, who are more taken up with
judging of themselves before the Lord, then of others.

Now a word of that other passage, in Mr. Baylies speech, touching my
resolution to side with Ms. Hutchinson, and to separate from all the Churches
of New England, as legal Synagogues The truth is, I did intended to remove,
but not to Separate; much less with Ms. Hutchinson, and least of all from all
the Churches of New England: and yet less then the least of all, to separate
from them, as legal Synagogues.

The occasion of my intent of removal was this. After the banishment of Ms.
Hutchinson and sundry others by occasion of her, the general court made an
order, that none should be received to abide as Inhabitants in this
Jurisdiction, unless they were allowed under the hand of the Governor, or two
Assistants. The Assistants are our Magistrates. When this Law came to be put in
ure, I was informed that some godly passengers who hither arrived out of
England, were refused to sit down amongst us, because (upon trial) they held
forth such an union with Christ by the Spirit giving Faith, as did precede the
acting of Faith upon Christ: and such an evidence of that union, by the favor
of God shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy Ghost, as did precede the seeing
(though not the being) of Sanctification.

This took the deeper impression upon me, because I saw by this means, we
should receive no more Members into our Church, but such as must profess
themselves of a contrary judgment to what I believed to be a Truth. Besides I
was informed, that it was the judgment of some of place, in the Country, that
such a Doctrine of Union, and evidencing of Union, as was held forth by me, was
the Trojan Horse, out of which all the erroneous Opinions and differences of
the Country did issue forth.

Hereupon, fearing this might in time breed a renewall of Parozysmes, I called
to mind the intent of my coming hither, which was, not to disturb, but to
edify the Churches here: and therefore began to entertain thoughts rather of
peaceable removal then of offensive continuance. At the same time there was
brought to me a writing, subscribed with about threescore hands to encourage
me to removal, and offering their readiness to remove with me into some
other part of this Country.

I considered, If we removed, it would be matter of much various construction
amongst such as knew us, both in Old-England, and New; and I was loath to do
any thing, (especially of importance) but what I might give account of before
God, and his people; I took advice therefore of some friends here, especially
Mr. Davenport, and resolved, first to clear the certainty of the grounds of the
information given me of the rejections of those godly persons (of whom I had
heard) for their judgments sake in those points. 2. To see if my continuance
here would certainly, or probably breed any further offensive agitation: And 3.
If both those things were found clearly, then to take opportunity with common
consent to remove to Quinipya^k whereto at that time a door was opened.

But when I came to enquire the certainty of these informations, in conference
with some of our chief Magistrates and others, I found, though there had speech
been about such points between themselves, and some passengers: yet their
refusal of such passengers was not upon those points, but (as I remember) upon
denial of inherent righteousness in believers, and of any evidence of a good
estate from thence, first or last. Withal, they declared to me their minds
touching such points of Union, or evidencing of Union, which I had taught, that
they did not look at them to be of such Fundamental concernment either to
civil or Church-Peace, as needed to occasion any distance in heart, (much
less in place) amongst godly brethren. Which when I heard from them, and found
upon search, the mis-informations given me, were but misprisions, I then laid
down all thoughts of removal, and sat down satisfied in my abode amongst them,
and have so continued (by the help of God) to this day. By all this may appear
the truth of what I said, that though I had thoughts of removal, yet not with
Ms. Hutchinson, she being gone to Road Island, but I intending Quinipyack.
Much less had I any thoughts of Separation from all the Churches of
New England: for the Churches in Quinipiack are in New England. And those
Churches at the Bay (amongst whom I lived) It was far from my thoughts to
separate from them, whom I ever truly honored as the holy Spouses of Jesus
Christ. Nor did I ever look at such Points, as any just ground of Separation
from any Church, (so much as in place, much less in Communion:) no nor any
just ground of removal from them, unless a man were compelled to profess
contrary to his judgment. And least of all durst I turn my back upon such
Churches as Legal Synagogues, who do all of us hold Union with Christ, and
evidencing of Union by the same Spirit, and the same Faith and the same
holiness: though some may conceive the Union wrought in giving the habit, and
others rather refer it to the act: and some may give the second place to that,
whereto others give the first.

It was therefore too much credulity in Mr. Baylie, either to take up the
former testimony from Ms. Hutchinson, or this latter from Mr. Williams: though
if both of them had joined in one and the same Testimony, (which they do not)
yet the Testimony of two excommunicate Persons does not make up idoneum
Testimonium in Ecclesiastical causes.

No? Says Mr. Baylie, if I mistake not the humor of the man, (Mr. Williams he
means) he is very unwilling to report a lie of his greatest enemy.

I look not at my self, as his greatest, or least, or any enemy at all. I do
not know, that I did ever walk toward him either in the affection, or action
of an enemy, notwithstanding the provoking injuries, and indignities he has
put upon me.

Nor would I call it any man's humor (as Mr. Baylie calls it, Mr. Williams his
humor) to be very unwilling to report a lie of his greatest enemy.

But this I say, Mr. Williams is too too credulous of surmises and reports
brought to him, and too too confident in divulging of them. Which if Mr. Baylie
know not, he may (at his leisure, if he think it worth the while) peruse the
Reply, I have made to his answer of my Letter, as also my answer to his bloody
Tenent.

But Mr. Baylie gives the more credit to Mr. Williams his Testimony, because
Mr. Williams says in his examination of my ^etter, How could I possibly (says
he) be ignorant of their estate, when being from first to last in fellowship
with them, an Officer amongst them, had private and public agitation
concerning their Estate, with all, or most of their Ministers?

The answer is very easy both to Mr. Williams, and Mr. Baylie too, that Mr.
Williams speaks of the times before his banishment: then indeed he had some
fellowship with us, and might have had more, but that he supected all the
Statos conventus of the Elders to be unwarrantable, and such as might in time
make way to a Presbyteriall government. But this Testimony, which he gives
about my neerenesse to Separation from these Churches, was many years after
his banishment from us, when he was in no fellowship with us, sacred nor
civil, nor came any whit near any private or public agitation amongst us, nor
could have any intelligence of our affairs, but by report and fame, which is
tam ficti pravique tenax, quam nuncia very, and is indeed in this point, most
false.

But yet (says Mr. Baylie) the truth of this horrible fall (of Mr. Cotton) if
you will not take it, neither from the followers of Ms. Hutchinson, nor from
the Testimony of Mr. Williams: yet we may not reject the witness of Mr.
Winthrop, and of Mr. Wells in their printed relations of the Schisms there.
Both these, albeit, with all care and study, they endeavor to save Mr. Cottons
credit: yet they let the truth of Mr. Cottons Seduction fall from their Pens in
so clear terms, as cannot be avoided: yea so clear, as no Art will get Mr.
Cotton cleared.

Notwithstanding all this confident charge of Mr. Baylie, there will be no need
at al of any Art to clear Mr. Cotton, from seduction into any such horrible
fall, the naked truth (by the help of Christ) will clear both it self, and
him. The Testimonies of Mr. Winthrop, and Mr. Wells, are all delivered (as it
seems) in the short Story. There

In the Preface, page 7. It is said, By this time, they had to patronise them,
some of the Magistrates, and some men eminent for Religion, Parts and Wit.

Answ. 1. This were something, if there were no more men eminent for Religion,
Parts and Wit, in the Country but my self, who profess no eminency in any of
these in respect of many of my Brethren. But if I were eminent, the testimony
concludes not. Let not Art judge, whether the conclusion will follow from both
the premises particular: but let common sense judge of such men, as then lived
in the Country, whether there were not many eminent persons for Religion,
Parts, and Wit, who did patronise them, though I had been out of the Country.

2. I willingly confess, that I my self, though I did not patronise them, yet
I did countenance them (in my measure) whilst they held forth (to my knowledge)
no more then I have formerly delivered of my own Tenants: which yet I hope he
will not again tax, as an horrible fall into Antinomianisme and Familism. When
their Errors were brought to me, I bare public witness against them, even
before I was fully persuaded that those persons were guilty of them.

His next Testimony (which he quoteth from page 25. of the short Story) the
former part of it concerns Mr. Whelewright, and not me: though I must
confess I do not know how it can be collected from Mr. Whelewrights doctrine,
unless it were by a forestalled mis-apprehension and mis-application of those
hearers, who were leavened with corrupt Opinions. The latter part of the
testimony, That the former Governor never stirred out, but attended by the
Serjants with Halberts or Carrabines, but the present Governor was neglected: I
do not remember, that ceremony was any more then once neglected: and when I
heard it, I bore witness against it. And they excused their former observance,
by the eminency of the person. But sure I am, the present Governor (as he well
deserves all honor from this Peopole, so) he is seldom or never seen in
public, but in like sort attended with Halberts or Carrabines.

Next, he alleges a testimony from the Court, which (it is likely) was
delivered by Mr. Winthrop, being then Governor, page 35. of the short Story:
They soon profited so well, as in a few months, they outwent their Teacher.

Answ. This testimony is so far from taxing me of any horrible fall, that it
clearly acquiteth me from the fellowship thereof. For if they outwent their
Teacher, as the Court said (and said truly:) then I went not along with them
in their Tenants. And Teacher I was called, and their Teacher, as being called
to that Office in that Church, whereof many of them were Members.

The next testimony (from page 33. of the story) expresses, That upon the
countenance it took from some eminent Persons, her Opinions began to hold up
their heads in Courts of Justice.

Answ. This might indeed argue, that some Magistrates leaned more or less to
that way: but it reaches not me, who am seldom present at any Courts, but
when with other Elders I am sent for. And let it not be forgotten, what I
related above, that many held with those Opinionists (as they were called) when
they knew of no other opinions held forth by them, but what was publicly
taught in our Church: but after they were discovered to overgoe not so much
their Teachers, as the truth, and that so evidently, as could clearly be
convinced by the testimony of two or three witnesses, they were soon forsaken
by those, who esteemed better of them before.

His next testimony is from the story page 32.

It was a wonder, upon what a sudden, the whole Church of Boston (some few
excepted) were become her new Converts, and infected with her Opinions. And
Preface page 7. most of the Seducers lived in the Church of Boston.

Answ. That most of the Church of Boston consented with Ms. Hutchinson, (whilst
she openly held forth no more, then what was publicly taught) is true; but
nothing to prove Mr. Cottons horrible fall, for after she fell into any
horrible, or evident erors, it may clearly appear, the whole Church were not
become her canverts, by this undeniable evidence, that the whole body of the
Church (ezcept her own son) consented with one accord, to the public censure
of her, by admonition first, and excommunication after.

But (says Mr. Baylie) None of these erroneous persons were ever called to
account by the Presbytery of that Church, till after the Assembly, though the
Pastor of the Church, Mr. Wilson was always exceeding zealous against them.

Answ. 1. Mr. Baylie is mistaken, when he says, Mr. Wilson was always
exceeding zealous against them. For the whole Church will bear him witness,
he was a long time full of much forbearance toward them, and thought well of
them, and bare witness to the ways of free Grace in such manner, as testified
his good will to them and the Truth. Afterward in some private conference,
which one or more of them had with him, and (our beloved Sister) his Wife, he
discerned some more rottenness in them, and their way, then he suspected
before: And after that time indeed, he grew more zealous against them, but the
occasion of the offense was private, and (for a good space) unknown both to me
and the Church.

2. But why they were not called to account by the Presbytery of the Church,
the reason was evident: because their gross errors were not confirmed into us,
by two or three witnesses. And this I can truly profess, That when the Elders
of other Churches acquainted me with some of their Errors, (even when the
noise of them was spread far and near:) yet they acknowledged, the Erroneous
persons were so cautious, that they would never vent any gross Errors before
two witnesses. And this I can further truly avouch, that my self dealt sadly
and seriously with some chief leaders of them, both by word, and writing to
recover them from the Error of their way: which though they would argue for,
yet they would ever excuse themselves from settling upon any such things. I
dealt also with others (whom I began to suspect might be leavened by their
Leaders) and earnestly charged them to beware what Tenants they received from
them, lest by that means they might be corrupted themselves, and their Leaders
hardened. But they would not be known to me, that they drunk in any such
dregs, as afterward appeared.

His next testimony is taken from Ms. Hutchinsons speech in the open Court,
Preferring my Ministry in holding forth free Grace, above some, or most of the
other Elders. But of the invalidity of her testimony in these things I have
spoken, (I suppose) enough above. An evil Spirit (which sometimes breaths
both in good and bad persons,) may give a glorious testimony to some servants
of God, not so much to honor them, or their doctrine, as either to cover
themselves under their shadow, or else (but that was not her aim) to bring
them and their Doctrine into suspicion, and trouble, as the Spirit of the
Pythonesse did to Paul and Silas, Act. 16, 17, to 20. That speech of hers, I
bore witness against it, as prejudicial and injurious both to them and me.

Another testimony he alleges out of the Story, Page 50. That all the
Ministers consented in bearing some witness against Mr. Whelewright, except
their Brother the Teacher of Boston.

Answ. The Story relates those words, as the speech of the Elders; that they
speak of me, as their Brother, to wit, the brother of the Elders, lest any
should misconceive of their speech, as ranking me in a Brotherhood with
erroneous persons.

That I did not consent with the rest of my Brethren (the Elders) in drawing
the inference out of Mr. Whelewrights Sermon, which they (being required)
presented to the Court, I had a twofold reason for it. 1. Because I was not
present with them, when they searched Mr. Whelewrights Sermon, and gathered
that inference from it.

2 Because I could not speak it of mine own knowledge, That the Elders of the
Country did walk in or teach such a way of Salvation, and evidencing thereof,
as Mr. Whelewright describedeth, and accounts to be a Covenant of Works.

They knew what themselves taught in that point, better then I. The Elders
might testify what they knew: I could not testify, what I knew not. But it
seems any testimonies will serve turn, when such as these are thought
unavoidable, to lay me under the guilt of an horrible fall.

Yet one more remains, from page 21. That albeit the Assembly of the Churches
had confuted and condemned most of these new opinions, and Mr. Cotton had in
public view consented with the rest: yet the leaders in those Erroneous ways
stood still to maintain their New Light. Mr. Whelewright also continued his
Preaching, and Ms. Hutchinson her wonted meetings: and much offense was still
given by her, and others in going out from the Pastors Exercise.

Answ. 1. As the Assembly of the Churches confuted and condemned those Errors,
so I will not say, That the motion of confuting them (as I remember) arose from
my self. And my self also had an hand in confuting such of them, as the Elders
committed to my hand, as themselves took several likewise taskes, none of us
confuted all. My consent to the confutation, I have expressed above, and in
what sense. What I did in public view (as the Story expresses it) I spoke
before the Lord, and from the truth of my heart.

That notwithstanding this Act of the Assembly against the Errors, the leaders
still stood to maintain their way, it was because the Assembly did not fasten
these Errors upon any Persons either in our own, or other Churches. And what
corrupt opinions were maintained by our Members, it was done in private, and
not before such witnesses, as might reach to public conviction.

Mr. Whelewrights continuance in his preaching, was 8. or 9. miles distance
from us. And having been put into that place before by the Church, whilst the
Farmers there belonged to our Church, (which by reason of the distance, we
soon after dismissed into a Church Estate amongst themselves) we that were
Elders could not (if we would) discharge him from that work, without the
consent of the Church. But though he gave some offense in some passages at the
Assembly, (which he since upon further conference and consideration
retracted:) yet neither the Church, nor my self (notwithstanding those unsafe
expressions) did ever look at him, either as an Antinomian or Familist. Many of
us knew that he had taken good pains against both, and in that very place,
where he was wont to preach; insomuch that one of his hearers (who since
joined to Mr. Gortons society) openly contested against his doctrine as false
and Antichristian. And when Mr. Whelewright was put out of this Country
(though he be since restored) yet if he had cleaved to the Errors which Ms.
Hutchinsons company fell into, he would never have refused their earnest
invitation and call of him, to Minister unto them. They sent to him, and urged
him much to come to them, to a far richer soil, and richer company then where
he lived: yet he constantly refused, and upon that very ground, because of
the corruption of their judgments: Professing often, whilst they pleaded for
the Covenant of Grace, they took away the Grace of the Covenant.

Ms. Hutchinsons continuance of her weekly meetings we could not proceed to the
suppression thereof, with consent of the Church, before we received the
conviction of her personal Errors, which she still closely carried, till
after her civil censure. And then she declared her self more plainly, and
witnesses arose more fully, and the Church proceeded against her accordingly.

The going of her self and others out of the Congregation when our Pastor began
to Exercise, though many feared it was a turning their backs upon his
Ministry: yet the most of them were women, and they pretended many excuses for
their going out, which it was not easy to convince of falsehood in them, or of
their contempt of him.

But in fine, when her Antinomian and Familisticall Errors were held forth by
her before sufficient witnesses, our Church (as I said before) proceeded
without delay, first, to admonish her according to the rule, Tit. 3.10, 11.
Afterward when upon serious pains taken with her, Mr. Davenport, and my self
(as we thought) had convinced her of her erroneous ways in judgment and
practice, so as that under her hand, she presented a Recantation before the
whole Church, (indeed before many Churches then assembled at Boston) yet
withal, (after some passages of speech) Professing that she never was of any
other judgment,then what she now held forth, so many witnesses forthwith rose
up to convince the contrary, that with common consent both of the Elders and
Brethren of our Church, she was cast out of our Communion.

And now that (by the help of Christ) I have perused all the testimonies, which
Mr. Baylie has alleged to convince me of an horrible fall into Antinomianism,
and Familism, I desire him in the fear of God to consider, whether any or all
these testimonies severally or jointly, will amount to make good such grievous
scandalls, as he has charged upon me. Which if they neither will, nor can
reach unto, let him remember his promise in his Epistle Dedicatory, That in all
which he has said over and above (just testimony) he will undertake to give
ample satisfaction, wherein so ever he has given the least offense to any.
Mean while the Lord lay not this sin to his charge.

SECT. 14. Of Cottons humiliation upon his former fall, as is reported by Mr.
Baylie.
But yet let me add a word more, to a word of Mr. Baylies in his entrance of
this discourse of my Antinomianism, and Familism, which may else leave an
inpression upon the minds of some Reader, as if I had acknowledged this my
dangerous fall, and had been much humbled for it.

This other more dangerous fall (says he) as it has already much humbled his
Spirit, and opened his ear to instruction, and I trust will not leave working,
till it have brought him yet nearer to his Brethren: so to the worlds end, it
cannot but be a matter of fear and trembling to all, who shall know it, and of
abundant caution, to be very wary of receiving any singularity from his hand,
without due trial.

Answ. 1. Suppose all this were true in terminis, as Mr. Baylie has expressed
it, yet this were no impeachment at all to the doctrine and practice of that
(which he calls) our Independent Church way; nor is it any just ground of
caution to be wary of receiving my testimony to it. Peter's dangerous and
dreadful fall into the denial of Christ, (though he seemed to be a pillar)
was no impeachment, but advancement to Christianity. And if my fall were so
dangerous, walking in this Church Way, and stumbling so foully in it, the
greater Grace and witness from heaven was upon his Churches in this way, who
by the blessing of God were instruments of recovering me out of this fall, even
by a consultatory conference in a Synod, which did not assume to themselves any
power of Church Censures. Let me be accounted to have fallen, and to have
fallen (as Mr. Baylie represents it) horribly, so that the truth and ways of
Christ may stand and find free passage.

Neither is this fall of mine such a just ground of caution (as he would make
it) unto any, to be very wary of receiving my testimony to this Church way.
For the way is no way of singularity from my hand, but that which the body of
the rest of my Brethren, and of the Churches in this Country do walk in with
me.

Answ. 2. But yet, let not Mr. Baily make further speech or use of my
humiliation, then was performed, or intended by me. For God has not given me
to this day (upon my best search) to discern any such dangerous fall into
Antinomianisme, or Familisme, as either has, or might much humble my spirit.

It is true, my spirit had much cause to be humbled, (and so through mercy it
was) upon many just occasions at that time. As first, that so many Erroneous
and Heretical opinions should be broached in the Country, and carried on with
such Arrogance, and Censoriousnesse, and guile of spirit.

Secondly, That the principal offenders in this kind were members of our own
Church, and some of them such as had near relation to my self.

Thirdly, that my self should be so sleepy and invigilant, as that these (not
Tares only, but Briars) should be sown in our Field, and my self not discern
them, till sundry persons up and down the Country were leavened by them.

Fourthly, that such as endeavored the healing of these distempers, did seem
to me to be transported with more jealousies, and heates, and paroxysmes of
spirit, then would well stand with brotherly love, or the rule of the Gospel.

The bitter fruits whereof do remain to this day, in the Letters sent over
that year from hence to England. Whence also it came to pass finally, that in
the course taken for the clensing of Gods Field, it seemed to me, that some
good Wheat was plucked up with the Tares, some simple hearted honest men, and
some truths of God, fared the worse for the resemblance which the tares bare to
them.

Upon all which grounds, my self with our whole Church thought it needful to
set a day apart for public humiliation before the Lord, wherein these and the
like, both in Prayer and Preaching, were opened more at large before the Lord
and his people.

But all this will not amount to make good Mr. Baylies word, That my dangerous
fall into Antinomianisme and Familisme has much humbled my Spirit.

Nor can I say (as he does) that it has opened mine ears to instruction. For
I do not know, that they have been shut to it, when I discerned the Spirit,
and Word of truth breathing in it.

Nor can I say after him, That the humbling of my spirit for those dangerous
errors, will not leave working till it have brought me yet nearer to my
brethren.

For though I bless the Lord, who has brought me nearer to my brethren, and
them also nearer to me, which I trust will still grow whilst our selves grow
(in all the duties of brotherly love, wherein we have much sweet and frequent
intercourse:) yet I do not interpret this as the fruit of my spirits
humiliation for my Antinomy, and Familisme: but as the fruit of our clearer
apprehension, both of the cause and of the state of our differences, and of our
joint consent and concurrence in bearing witness against the common heresies,
and errors of Antinomianisme, and Familisme, which disturbed us all.

But Mr. Baily as he began his discourse of my dangerous fall with relation of
my humiliation for it: so he shuts it up, page 58. with a like close of my
grief of mind, and confusion for it.

I have been informed (says he) by a gracious Preacher who was present at the
Synod in New England, that all the Brethren there, being exceedingly
scandalized with Mr. Cottons carriage, in Mistress Hutchinsons process, did so
far discountenance, and so severely admonish him, that he was thereby
brought to the greatest shame, confusion and grief of mind, that ever in all
his life he had endured.

Answ. 1. I conceive it is not allowable in Presbyteriall discipline, (sure I
am, not in Congregationall) that an accusation shall be received against an
Elder under one witness, though he gracious and a Preacher: especially when
this gracious Preacher is namelesse, and his testimony hovereth in
generalities, without instance in particular offenses: as That all the Brethren
were exceedingly scandalized with Mr. Cottons carriage in Mistress Hutchinsons
process, but not expressing what carriage, nor what process, nor wherein they
were scandalized.

And that all the Brethren did so far discountenance him, and severely admonish
him, as that he was thereby brought to the greatest shame, and confusion, and
grief of mind, that ever in all his life he endured. But no mention for what
offense they did so severely admonish him, nor wherein they did so far
discountenance him.

Such words of infamy, and reproach may pass for Table talk, (which yet
moral Philosophy would not approve:) but surely in orderly Church Discipline,
such dealing could not pass without just reproof, unless there were too much
prejudice or partiality, the rule is plain and obvious, and not now the first
time violated in the Disswasive, 2 Timothy 5.19.

Answ. 2. I must (as justly I may) protest against that testimony, not only as
violating the rule of Love, but of Truth also. For,

1. It is untrue, that all the Brethren were scandalized with my carriage, much
less exceedingly scandalized at the Synod, or in any process about Ms.
Hutchinson. There were sundry godly brethren otherwise minded, and otherwise
affected.

2. It is untrue also, that such as were scandalized, did so severely admonish
me, or discountenance me; for I can neither call to mind any such deep
discountenance, nor any such severe admonition of Brethren, and yet I had
reason to know it, and to remember it well, as well as any Brother at the
Synod: the matter so nearly concerning my self, and more nearly and deeply,
then any man else.

3. It is most untrue, that I was so far discountenanced, and so severely
admonished, as that I was brought to the greatest shame, confusion and grief of
mind, that ever in all my life I had endured.

I should have little comfort in my own spirit, to look either God or man in
the face, if the discountenance or admonition of men (especially for such
carriage) were the greatest shame, and confusion, and grief of mind, that ever
in all my life I had endured. The rebukes of God upon the soul for sin will
put a man to far greater shame, and confusion and grief of mind, then any
discountenance, or admonition from Brethren, (especially for such offenses)
Psalm. 76.7. But whatsoever discountenance, or dis-respect I met withal, from
one hand or other, till the true state of my judgment, and car^iage was clearly
manifested, I have long ago left with the Lord: But I conceive I have met with
more hard measure in Letters to England, and in ungrounded reports there, then
ever I found from the admonition, or discountenance of any brethren here.

SECT. 15. Of the shameful absurdities said to be found in the way of
Independency: notwithstanding the great helps, to prevent, or cover it: and
first, of those helps.
Mr. Baylie now undertaketh to prove that which he calls a broad Assertion,
and well may he so call it: for it reaches far beyond all dimensions of
truth. His assertion is, That the way (which he calls) Independency has in a
few years (less then one week of years) flown out into more shameful
absurdities, then the Brownists to this day, in all their 50. years trial
have stumbled upon.

How will Mr. Baylie (think you) make this good?

His affirmation, that the way of the Brownism, and Independency (as he styleth
them) are both of them really one and the same, because he says, it will
appear hereafter, I refer it therefore to his place.

But before he comes to make his broad assertion good, yea and (as he
promises) palpable, he makes it also by the way, admirable, and that many
ways.

1. In that the Independency has been brought to the utmost pitch of
perfection, which the wit, and industry of its best Patrons were able to
attain: and has been fenced with the Laws of gracious Magistrates, who were at
our absolute devotion, and yet has flowen out, etc.

Answ. 1. We that judge that way (which he calls Independency) to be of God,
should account it blasphemy in our selves to accept such a style put upon us,
as to be the best Patrons of it. We do verily believe, that though our selves,
all of us, should employ our best wits and industry to join with Mr. Baylie to
subvert and deface it: yet the Lord Jesus would show himself a Patron to
maintain his own Institutions, though with the confusion of the faces, and
enterprises of us all. The Word which has gone out of his mouth for the
Government and ord^ring of his Church till his second appearing, he himself as
he has spoken it, will also show it forth in his times, who is the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.14, 15.

Answ. 2. We cannot but with thankfulness acknowledge the goodness of God in
our gracious Magistrates, and their assistance to us in the work of the Lord:
But when Mr. Baylie makes them to be at our absolute dev^^ion, his (...) is
too too injurious in debasing them, and (in their eyes) advancing us. For
neither are they devoted to us at all, nor much less absolutely. Though they
sometimes consult with us in matters of conscience; yet they take our counsel
no further then they see it cleared from the Word. And besides, it is too vast
an advancement of us, to make them absolutely of our devotion. For devotion in
matters of Religion, (or as Thomas speaks, in iis quae ad Dei cultum, and
famulatum pertinent) is a divine worship due to God only; in as much that
Aquinas takes it to be too high a worship to be terminated in Saints, 22ae.
Quest. 82. Art. 2. And yet he allows more divine worship to Saints, then any
orthodox protestant can excuse from Idolatry.

Again secondly, It may seem to make the palpablenesse of our outflowings the
more admirable, in that (as he says) much of our way is yet in the dark.

Thirdly, In that none of our selves have proclaimed our discords to our own
shame.

Fourthly, That none who have fallen from us, have of purpose put pen to Paper,
to inform the world of our ways.

Fifthly, That none of us have been willing to reply to any of the books written
against us, etc.

Answ. It were much I confess, if we had all these advantages of concealment
which he mentions, and yet nevertheless so many, and so shameful
absurdities of ou^s should fall out in so short a time, and become to palpable
as Mr. Baily proclaims them. But the truth is, neither have we had those
advantages, (he speaks of:) but the contrary disadv^nta^es, nor yet do we
fear, that he will be able to find such absurdi^ies to have fallen out in our
way, much less so shameful.

For first, the way of the New English Churches is not in the dark, but
published to the view of the world, in the book so entitled (refuted by Mr.
Rutherford:) as also in the Apology of these Churches, in the Covenant, in the
Answer to 32. Questions; in another answer to 9. Questions; in the answer to
Mr. Herle, and to Mr. Rathbone. Some of our most populous Churches do no Church
Act, no not of discipline, but in the presence of the whole Town,
(non-members, as well as members) so many of them as are pleased to be present.
Ways of truth seek no corners; if any Church admonish a brother privately, it
is because his offense is not known to non-members.

Again, if in our discords, none of us have proclaimed our shame, whence has
Mr. Baily gathered all our shameful absurdities? The short story, (the
greatest storehouse of his testimonies) what is it, but a fruit of our
discords? Besides, if none that have fallen from us, have of purpose put pen to
Paper to inform the world of our ways, what mean the bleatings of Plain^
dealing, and Mr. Williams his Invectives against us, which yield a further
supply to Mr. Bailies testimonies?

Moreover, if none of us have been willing to reply to the Books written
against us, how come it to pass that Mr. Hooker has written a large answer to
Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Davenpor^ to Mr. Paget, Mr. Mader to Mr. Rathbone, Mr.
Shepard and Mr. Allen to Mr. Ball, Mr. Norton in Latin to Mr. Appollonii; my
self to Mr. Williams, both to his examination of my Letter, and to his bloody
Tenent? If any of these have miscarried by the way, or in England have met with
a suppression for an impression, it cannot be said, that none of us have been
willing to reply to the Books written against us, nor that we have been
wanting in endeavors, according as the Lord has vouchsafed us means and
opportunity.

If still there be other Books written against us, unto which no Reply is yet
made, it may be considered, our laborers (in that kind) are few, our hands
feeble, our times took up with the duties of our calling, helps to ease us are
wanting, Domestical Questions are not wanting, and many times Books are extant
against us some years before they come to our hands. And yet let not Mr. Baily
take our silence for a consent to what is written against us: or for a sign of
our fear to lay open the true state of our cause, or the nakedness of our
way, (as it seems to him:) but let him consider, that if many Books be
written by several hands, of several subjects against any of us, he whom it
concerns, cannot Reply to them all at once, but to one after another, as the
Lord gives help and opportunity.

SECT. 16. Of the first absurdity said to be found in our way of Independency.
But what may be those shameful absurdities, which in less then one week of
years, we have flowen out into more then (those he calls) Brownists in 50.
years of their trial. The fruits of our Church way, (says he) are first; the
holding out of all our Churches and Christian Congregation many thousands of
People, who in former time have been reputed in Old England very good
Christians.

And this (says he) seems a grievous absurdity, a great dishonor to God,
and cruelty against men to spoil so many thousand Christians, whom they dare
not deny to be truly religious of all the privileges of the Church, either to
themselves, or to their children, or put them into the condition of Pagans, etc.

Answ. 1. If all this were true, yet it is no greater an absurdity then that
wherein those whom he calls Brownists, have not only stumbled upon, but
professedly walked in: yea it may be, denying Church Communion to as many
Churches as we do to persons in this Country. And this Mr. Baylie has taxed
them for, above in page 27. of his Book, though here he forget it.

Answ. 2. It is not true, that we hold out any at all, English or Indian, out
of our Christian Congregations. All without exception are allowed to be
present, at our public Prayers and Psalms, at our reading of the Scriptures,
and the preaching and expounding of the same, and also at the admitting of
Members, and dispensing of seals and censures.

Answ. 3. It is not truly spoken, that we hold out of all our Churches many
thousands of People, who in former times have been reputed in Old England very
good Christians, and whom our selves dare not deny to be truly religious.

I dare be bold to speak it, we hold not out any one such: but if any such be
held out, we hold not off from them, but they from us: yea we seriously invite
them (publicly and privately) to join with us: unless such religious persons
lie under some scandal of corrupt life, or Doctrine.

How then will Mr. Baylie make good (that which he truly calls) his broad
assertion? yes, he undertaketh to make it good by three testimonies.

1. Says he, we have heard sundry to esteem the number of the English in
that Plantation to exceed 40000. men and women. But when Mr. Cotton is put to
it, he dares hardly avow the one half of these to be Members of any Church.

And to prove this, he quoteth (in P.) the answer to the 23. questions, page. 7.

Whereto the Reply is ready, 1. Mr. Baylie is mistaken, if he think the answer
to the 32. questions was penned by me. Those questions were sent by some
Ministers in Lancashire or Cheshire to one of their Countrymen, (a reverend
Brother, and fellow-Elder amongst us) Mr. Mader: who to satisfy their desires
returned them that answer, which (it seems) has since been printed. Which I
speak not, because I wave the answer, for when he wrote it, he wrote advisedly,
and as his whole ans^er is solid, and judicious; so is his answer, to the
question put to him, pertinent and full: but to Mr. Baylies Assertion, it
comes nothing near it. But Mr. Baylie should have done well, to have taken his
full answer to that question.

The New-English Plantations are scattered above two hundredth Miles in length
upon the Sea Coasts: and of what they did in those remote Plantations, he could
not then give present account. But (says Mr. Mader) in the Churches within the
Bay, where most of us are best acquainted, we may truly say, that for the
heads of Families those that are admitted, are far more in number then the
other, besides whom there are sundry children and servants, that are admitted
also. And for the reasons (says he) why many are not yet received to
Church Communion, they be sundry:

"1. Sundry are new come over, and so are not yet known.

2. Sundry when they come to be known are found scandalous.

3. Some godly persons forbear to join with us for a time, till they may try,
which Church and Ministry they can best close withal.

4. Those that are known to be godly (I may add, though but in judgment of
charity) they are all admitted to some Church or other, presently upon their
own desire, unless they have given some offense, which also is removed upon
their giving due satisfaction.

This testimony will will not reach (nothing near) Mr. Baylies assertion, That
we hold out of all Churches many thousands of people, who were well reputed of
in Old England, for very good Christians, and such as our selves dare not deny
to be truly religious.

2. His second testimony is from Mr. Lechford, who styleth his Book against the
Country, Plain dealing. And what says he? In his page 73. Here are (says he)
such confessions, and professions required both of men, and women, both in
private and public, before they be admitted, that three parts of the people of
the Country remain out of the Church, so that in short time, most of the
people will remain unbaptized.

Answ. The Book is unfitly called plain dealing, which (in respect of many
passages in it) might rather be called false and fraudulent. I forbear to speak
of the man himself, because soon after the publishing of that Book, himself was
called away out of the world to give account of his Book and whole life before
the highest Judge. He was indeed himself not received into the Fellowship of
the Church, for his professed Errors: as 1 That the Antichrist described in the
Revelation was not yet come, nor any part of that Prophecy yet fulfilled from
the 4. chapter to the end. 2. That the Apostolic function was not yet ceased:
but that there still ought to be such, who should by their transcendent
authority govern al Churches. To reclaim him from these Errors, he was
seriously dealt withal both in conference, and (according to his desire) in
writing. But when he saw, he could not defend the latter. Error, but by
building again the Bishops, against whom he had witnessed (as he said) in
soliciting the cause of Mr. Prynne, he rather then he would revoke his present
tenent, acknowledged he was then in an Error, when he took part with Mr.
Prynne, and Mr. Burton, and therefore he would now return to England again, to
reduce those famous witnesses from the Error of their way. And accordingly,
away he went: but see the wise hand of God disappointing his ends; When he came
to England the Bishops were falling, so that he lost his friends, and hopes
both in Old-England and New: yet put out his Book (such as it is) and soon
after dyed. By the way, let no man think, he was kept out of our Churches, for
maintaining the authority of Bishops. For we have in our Churches some well
respected Brethren, who do indifferently allow either Episcopal, or
Pre^byteriall, or Congregationall Government, so be it they govern according
to the rules of the Gospel. Neither do we disturb such, nor they us in our
communion with them. But to return to Mr. Lechfords plain dealing: that which
he testifies, neither is it true; neither if it were, does it reach Mr.
Baylies assertion.

It is not true, that three parts of the Country remain out of the Church, if
he mean three parts of four, no though he should take in those remote
English, who live a score of miles or more from any Church.

But were his speech more true then it is, yet it will not make good Mr.
Baylies assertion, unless those three parts of the Country, which (he says)
remain out of the Church, were reputed in old England for very good
Christians, nor durst our selves deny them to be truly religious, to which
this testimony alleged gives no evidence at all.

Mr. Baylies third testimony is from Mr. Williams, whom he calls one of us,
who makes such Protestants to be Heathens and publicans, who depart from the
Beast in a false constitution of National Churches, if the bodies of
Protestant Nations remain in an unregenerate estate.

Answ. I know not, why Mr. Baylie should call Mr. Williams one of us, who
renounceth our Churches, and is himself cast out both of Church Fellowship, and
civil cohabitation with us.

His testimony, which Mr. Baylie quoteth out of him, of the estate of all such
Protestants, as live in a National Church estate, as if Christ did account
them Heathens and Publicans.

I say no more to it but this, they may be so account^d by Mr. Williams, but
we do not believe they are so accounted of by Christ, but many thousands of
them to be precious Saints in the eyes of the Lord Jesus.

To these testimonies, Mr. Baylie interserteth his own testimony and others of
his judgment, It seems to us (says he) a grievous absurdity, a great
dishonor to God, and cruelty against men to spoil so many thousand Christians,
whom we dare not deny to be truly Religious, of all the Privileges of the
Church, etc.

Answ. 1. It is not enough, that we dare not deny men to be truly Religions:
but it were meet we should know them, at least, conceive good hope, they are
truly Religiou^, (at least in the judgment of charity) before we receive
them into the Church. And of such there are not many thousands, no nor many
scores, no nor any scores, whom we dare spoil of Church privileges, unless
their own offense, or choice spoil them.

Secondly, if men be not Religious, no not so much as in profession, why should
it be accounted a grievous absurdity, not to receive them into the Church? A
thing is absurd, which is (...) out of place. Are men who are not spiritual,
out of their place, when they are not placed in a spiritual society? If the
Churches be (as Christ describes them) golden Candlesticks ( Revel. 1.20.) is
Tin and Lead out of place, when it is not sodered into a Golden vessel? Sure
God himself thought otherwise, Isay 1.25. But is it not rather a grievous
absurdity, and far out of place, when such are admitted to the Lords Table,
who either discern not the Lords Body, or if they be admitted to drink his
Blood, will be ready when they are got into the Field to spill the innocent
blood of those Roundheads, whom they lately partaked withal at the Lords Table?

And as for the great dishonor to God, (which Mr. Baylie imputes to this way
of ours) Is it a dishonor to God, that such are withheld from the Lords Table,
by whom the name of God is dishonored either through their ignorance or
scandal?

Is it not rather a great dishonor to God, to set up Christ a visible head of
such members, by whom his name is evil spoken of? And what cruelty is it
against men, to keep such from eating and drinking the Lords Supper, who would
eat and drink it unworthily, and so eat and drink their own damnation? 1
Cor. 11.29. The Lord himself thought it no cruelty to debar our first
parents from the Tree of life, who if they had found free liberty to eat it,
would have blessed themselves in a false hope of living for ever? Genesis 3.22, 23.

SECT. 17. Of the second shameful absurdity said to be found in our way of
Independency.
Come we now to a second shameful absurdity, which he makes to be another
fruit of our Church Way.

That it has exceedingly hindered the conversion of the poor Pagans. The
principles and practice of Independents does cross this work and hope of it.
What have they to do with those that are without? Their Pastors preach not for
conversion: their Relation is to their flock, who are Church Members, converted
already to their hand by the labors of other men, before they can be admitted
into their Church. Of all that ever crossed the American Seas, they are noted
as most neglectfull of the work of Conversion. I have read of none of them,
that seem to have minded this matter.

Answ. This is indeed a shameful absurdity, if it be true: but a sinful and
shameful calumny, if it be false. As indeed false it is in every branch of it.
First, there is no principle or allowed practice of ours that does hinder (much
less exceedingly hinder) the work or hope of the conversion of the Natives:
though we profess we have nothing to do to censure Indians, and so to judge
them that are without; yet we think it a principal (though not the only) work
and duty of our Ministry to attend the work of conversion, both of carnal
English, and other Nations, whether Christian, or Pagan. The neglect of it, we
look at as an ungratious and uncharitable fancy. How shall men (ordinarily) be
converted to the faith without hearing? and how shall they hear without
preaching? and how shall they preach, unless they be sent? and who are now
sent, but Pastors and Teachers?

"But the Relation of our Pastors is to their Flock? What then? May there not
fall out to be Hypocrites in our Flock? and must we not preach for their
conversion? And are not the children of the Members of our Church, many of them
such, as when they grow up stand in need of converting grace? and must we not
preach for their conversion? Besides, when an Infidel or unbeleever comes
into the Church, do not all the Prophets that preach the Word, (and among
them, surely the Pastors and Teachers are not the least) do they not all apply
their speech to his conviction and conversion? 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. What though a
Pastor be a Feeder to his Flock already begotten unto God? Yet he may (and
ought to endeavor to) become a Father also in Christ, to such as are yet
unregenerate, wheth^r of his Flock, or out of his Flock. To turn many to
righteousness is prophesied of, to be the work of the (...) of the New
Testament, Dan. 12.3.^ But our Church Members are converted already to our
hands by the labors of other men, before they can be admitted into our Church.

So says Mr. Baylie indeed: but if he were here, he would so ^n hear many
of those who are admitted into our Churches, openly acknowledge, the first work
of saving grace to have been wrought in their hearts by the ministry of the
Word here, and sometime by the same, or like ministry in our Native Country.
And the children of the faithful borne, and baptized in our Churches, will
acknowledge no other Ministry, by whom they have believed, but that which they
have attended upon, here.

But (says Mr. Baylie) I have read of none of them that seem to have minded
the matter of conversion.

Answ. 1. What if he have not read, what we preach here of conversion? Does he
think it meet, we should print all the Sermons we preach? What if any of us
should say, I have not read of any Scottish Minister who have published any of
their labors in that argument, (save Mr. Rollock, and him in Latin, and that
happily in the Schools, and many have not seen him neither:) shall we therefore
think it credible, that so many holy faithful laborers in Christ's Vineyard
in that whole Nation, do not seem to mind the matter of conversion?

But whether he have read of any of our books of that Subject, or no, surely it
is not, because none of such are extant to be read. He may read when he
pleases Mr. Shepards two Treatises, one styled The sincere Convert, the other
The sound Believer, besides fundry Treatises of Mr. Hooker touching the Souls
Preparation to Christ, Effectual Calling, and Justification, etc. and when he
has read them, let him then tell the world, whether of all that have crossed
the American Seas (as he speaks) the Ministers of this way have been justly
noted to be most neglectfull of the work of conversion. Yea let me make bold in
Gods fear to pray Mr. Baylie, and those others, who have noted us as most
neglectfull of this work, to enquire and consider whether among all the
servants of Christ now living in any reformed Churches (put them all together)
they have published so many Treatises of the work of conversion, as the
Ministers of this way have done, in New England, and London, which I speak not
(the Lord is witness to my soul) out of carnal Arrogance to boast of our
labors, in so holy and weighty an Argument: but out of conscience to bear
witness to the way of Gods truth against such an unjust and unworthy scandal.
But when I speak of these Treatises of Conversion, I do not include all that
are written under the glorious and fallacious styles of Free Grace, and
Gospel Truth, which nevertheless do but indeed lay the Leaven of
Arminian-universall-free Grace, and Antinomian Impenitency: but I speak of
those Treatises which are pure from such Leaven, as keeping the pattern of
wholesome words and sound doctrine, dividing the Word of truth aright, in the
right use of the Law and Gospel, wherein though they sometime declare such
works of Grace to be preparations to conversion, which others do take to be
fruits of conversion: yet they all agree in this, that such works are found in
all that are under the powerful and effectual saving work of the Spirit, and
Word of Christ, and in none else, which is the light and life of the Saints in
Christ Jesus.

I will not here speak of the conversion of Weaquash, which (as I hear) is
published in a little Script, entitled, New-Englands First Fruits. Nor would I
have mentioned the endeavors of some of our fellow-Brethren here, to help
forward the work of conversion in Virginia, were it not that the blessing of
the Lord Jesus upon their labors does call for acknowledgment. Some honest
minded people in Virginia discerning their want of spiritual Ministry, sent
earnest Letters, and one or more messengers, to the Elders of these Churches
here for some of our Ministers to break the Bread of Life to them. The Elders
here seeking Counsel of God, and one of another, we borrowed two of the
Pastors of our Churches, (Mr. Knolles of Watertowne, and Mr. Thomson of
Braintree, the Churches being either of them supplied with two Ministers
apeece) and sent them forth solemnly in the Name of the Lord to that work; who
as they went along took with them one Mr. James, a Minister (though then out of
employment) from New Haven, to the fellowship of that work. And for their
better encouragement, our Governor here wrote a Letter to the Governor of
Virginia to acquaint him, and his Assistants, with the occasion and end of
their coming, and expressed withal his desire of their Christian
entertainment for a time, and peaceable return, if they found any
inconvenience by their coming. What entertainment they found from the major
part of the Government there, I forbear to speak. The bloody Massacre, which
soon after their dismission, the Indians in those parts executed upon the
English, cried aloud from heaven, that after a white Horse, God is wont to send
forth a red, Rev. 6.2, 3, 4. But nevertheless, God so far forth followed
their labors with his blessing in the work of conversion, that sundry of them
were effectually wrought upon by the power of the Lord Jesus; whereof some of
them came along with our Ministers at their return, and are received into our
Churches: others of them who could not so well dispose of their affairs there,
joined with one Mr. Harrison a Minister there, (who was also mightily stirred
up by our Ministers coming:) and they with him have since given up themselves
to more holy communion and conversation before the Lord.

Others of the Western Islands (as Barbadas, Antegua, Mevis) have desired the
like help from us: but the departure of some of our Ministers since, (one to
Heaven, others to England) have hitherto detained us from opportunity to afford
unto them the like succor for the present.

I will not speak, what opportunity of reaching forth a blessing to the Indians
in this kind, God has lately begun to open us a door of: in that diverse of
their Sachims, and Sagamores (as they call them, to wit, their Governors) have
submitted themselves to the government of the English, and have willingly
subjected themselves to the acceptance of the Ten Commandments, though some of
them, do most stick at the seventh Commandment, as it forbids Polygamy.
Nevertheless otherwise they willingly consent to abandon Adultery and
Fornication, and unnatural lusts.

But though the Indians have been slow to learn our language, especially in
matters of Religion (howsoever in Trading they soon understood us:) yet we
have often offered to bring up their Indian children in our Schools, that they
might learn to speak to their Countrymen in their own language. But because
that might prove long, one of our Elders (Mr. Eliot, the Teacher of the Church
of Rocksbury) has (with the consent of the Natives) preached to them first by
an Interpreter, but since having with much industry learned their language, he
now preaches to two Congregations of them in their own language weekly. One
week on the fourth day to one Congregation, who sit down near to Dorchester
Mill, and another week, on the sixth day, to another Congregation of them, who
sit down in Cambridge, near Watertown Mill. To ease and encourage him in his
work, the Ministers of neighbor Churches take off by turns his weekly Lecture
on the third day. The fruit hitherto has been, the Indians resort more and
more to these Assemblies, hear with reverence and attention, reform (and make
Laws amongst themselves, for reformation of) sundry abuses, ask sundry
questions for their instruction, and among the rest, an old Counselor of one
of their Sagamores enquired, if it might be possible that our God, and our
Christ should accept an old sinner such as himself? Mr. Eliot answered him,
yes, there was hope, because he never had the means of the knowledge of God
offered to him before. And our Savior Christ did sometimes call into his
Vineyard some to do him service, even in the last hour of the day, in the
last part of their lives. And the old Indian being demanded if he understood
this? He answered, yea, says he, I understand it, and believe it.

It is true, there may be doubt that for a time there will be no great hope of
any National conversion, till Antichrist be ruined, and the Jews converted;
because the Church (or Temple) of God, is said to be filled with smoke, till
the seven plagues (which are to be poured upon the Antichristian state) be
fulfilled: And till then, no man (that is, no considerable number of men out of
the Church, as Pagans be) shall be able to enter into the Church, Rev. 15.8.
yet nevertheless, that hinders not, but that some sprinklings, and gleanings
of them may be brought home to Christ, as now and then some Proselytes were
brought into the fellowship of the Church of Israel, when there was a greater
partition wall set up between Jews and Gentiles, then now there is between
Christians and Pagans. And the Lord shine upon them in mercy, in blessing the
means of his Grace to them in the Lord Jesus.

The proof that none of us seem to have minded the work of conversion, Mr.
Baylie alleges out of the Book entitled Plain dealing, which says, There
has not been sent forth any, by any Church, to learn the Natives-Language, or
to instruct them in our Religion first, because they say they have not to do
with them being without, except they come to hear and learn English.

An. 1. What if there have not bin any sent forth by any Church to learn the
Indians language? That will not argue our neglect of minding the work of their
conversion. For there be of the Indians that live amongst us, and daily resort
to us; and some of them learn our language; and some of us learn theirs. And
men that love the Lord Jesus do gladly take opportunity to instruct them in
our Religion, and to teach them both Law and Gospel. And of late, the Word (as
I have said) is publicly preached unto them in two several Indian
Congregations, though we never thought it fit to send any of our English to
live amongst them, to learn their language: for who should teach them?

Answ. 2. When the Authors of Plain Dealing says, We have not instructed them
in our Religion, upon this pretense, because we say, we have not to do with
them being without, except they come to hear and learn English.

I know not whether ever any gave him so weak an account or no: If any so did,
it was his rashness, or ignorance both of us, and the truth. But if the Author
speak it, as a Point of our Profession or practice, that we do neglect the
instruction of the Indians, and especially upon such a reasonlesse reason, I
will say no more to it but this, it seems there are two sorts of Plain
dealing: Plain honest dealing, and Plain false dealing, of which latter sort,
this speech is.

But Mr. Baylie acknowledges Mr. Williams his endeavors in this kind, but
does thereby the more aggravate our corrupt principles and practice, who have
neglected so great an opportunity as to prosecute his course. Only Mr.
Williams (says he) did assay,

what could be done with those desolate souls, and by little experience
quickly found a wonderful great facility to gain thousands of them to so much
and more Christianity both in profession and practice, then in the most of our
people does appear. But the unhappiness of these principles whereof we
speak, did keep him (as he professes) from making use of that great
opportunity, and large door, which the Lord there has opened to all who will
be zealous of propagating the Gospel.

Answ. 1. If Mr. Williams his speech of the wonderful great facility he had
of gaining so far upon the Indians, be not too too prodigally hyperbolicall
(as I much fear it is) I think his sin is so much the greater before the
Lord, that he did neglect to take the opportunity of preaching to them the
Word of the Lord, that they might have been brought on, not only to an
Antichristian conversion (such as he makes the conversion of the common sort
of Christians in Protestant Churches:) but to a sincere conversion unto Christ
Jesus. But I confess with Mr. Baylie, his own corrupt Principles, (his own I
say, not ours) it seems have detained him from putting forth his hand to the
Lords Plough in so large a Field. For if he look (as it seems) for new
Apostles to be sent immediately from Christ for such a work: or if he think,
no Church is, or will be extant upon the face of the earth, till Antichrist be
abolished out of the world, these and such like principles are enough, not
only to retard him from the planting of Churches amongst Indians, but also to
further him in supplanting all the Churches of Christ in Christendom.

Answ. 2. I said not without cause, that I feared Mr. Williams his testimony of
the facility of such a conversion of the Indians was too hyperbolicall. For I
received advertisement from Mr. James (one of the Ministers, who went to
Virginia upon the Lords work, of which I spoke before) that whilst he was
detained (by winds) in Maryland (a Popish Plantation between us and Virginia)
he saw, as I remember, (for his Letter is not present at hand with me) 40.
Indians baptized in new Shirts, which the Catholics had given them for their
encouragement unto Baptism. But he tarried there so long for a fair wind,
that before his departure, he saw the Indians (when their shirts were foul,
and they knew not how to wash them) come again to make a new motion, either
the Catholic English there must give them new Shirts, or else they would
renounce their Baptism. I doubt, the Indians about Mr. Williams are not of a
much better spirit. I might mention a fairer instance in these parts, yet such
as may argue what kind of facility there is in the Indians to conversion, so
much as to outward profession. At our first coming hither, John Sagamore was
the chiefest Sachim in these parts. He falling sick, our Pastor Mr. Wilson
hearing of it (and being of some acquaintance with him) went to visit him,
taking one of the Deacons of our Church with him, and withal, a little
Mithridate, and strong water. When he came to his lodging (which they call a
Wigwam) hearing a noise within, he looked over the Mat of the door to discern
what it meant, and saw many Indians gathered together, and some Powwaws amongst
them, who are their Priests, Physicians, and Witches. They by course spoke
earnestly to the sick Sagamore, and to his disease, (in a way of charming of it
and him) and one to another in a kind of Antiphonies. When they had done, all
kept silence, our Pastor went in with the Deacon, and found the man far
spent, his eyes set in his head, he speech leaving him, his mother (old
Squaw-Sachim) sitting weeping at his beds head, Well (says our Pastor) our
God save Sagamore John, Powwaw Cram (that is, kill) Sagamore John: And
thereupon he fell to prayer with his Deacon, and after Prayer, forced into the
sick man's mouth with a Spoon, a little Mithridate dissolved in the strong
water; soon after the Sagamore looked up, and three days after went abroad on
hunting. This providence so far prevailed with the Sagamore, that he promised
to look after the English man's God, to hear their Sermons, to wear English
apparel, etc. But his neighbor Indians Sagamores, and Powwaws hearing of
this, threatened to Cram him (that is, to kill him) if he did so degenerate from
his Country Gods, and Religion, he thereupon fell off, and took up his Indian
course of life again. Whatsoever facility may seem to offer it self of the
conversion of the Indians, it is not so easy a matter for them to hold out, no
not in a semblance of profession of the true Religion. Afterward God struck
John Sagamore again, (and as I remember with the small Pox:) but then when
they desired like succor from our Pastor, as before, he told them, now the
Lord was angry with Sagamore John, and it was doubtful, he would not so
easily be entreated. The Sagamore blamed himself and justified God, and
confessed, he should not have been discouraged by their threats from seeking
our God: For those Sagamores and Powwaws who did most terrify him, he had
seen God sweeping them away by death, before himself, in a short time after.
And therefore when he saw he must die (for he died of that sickness) he
left his son to the education of our Pastor, that he might keep closer to the
English, and to their God, then himself had done. But his son also dyed of
the same disease soon after. All which I relate, to show, that though a form
of Christian Religion may be professed amongst Christians with some facility:
yet it is not so easy a matter to gain these Pagan Indians so much as to a
form of our Religion, and to hold it, howsoever Mr. Williams did promise
himself greater possibilities.

Answ. 3. Mr. Baylie shall do well to consider, that Mr. Williams his speech
does not so much hold forth the facility of the Indians to any such conversion,
as might fit them for Church Estate, but rather the Hypocrisy and Formalitie
of the ordinary Church Members of National Churches; which he professes is so
far off from true conversion, that it is the subversion of the souls of many
Millions in Christendom, from one false worship to another.

Answ. 4. It is no unhappiness of any principle of ours, that has kept Mr.
Williams from making use of his great opportunity, and open door, to propagate
the Gospel amongst the Indians. For though their facility to such a carnal
conversion, as he describes, gave him no just warrant, to gather them into a
Church Estate: yet it was a just encouragement to provoke him (who understood
their Language) to have preached the Word of God unto them, which might have
been mighty through God (if sincerely dispensed) to have turned them from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God, and so have prepared
them, both for Church Fellowship here, and for heaven hereafter.

But if Mr. Baylie conceive that either Mr. Williams, or else we were to be
blamed, because we do not presently receive Indians into the Fellowship of our
Churches, seeing their facility to conform their outward man to us, and to so
much of our religion, as Mr. Williams mentions: he shall do well to
consider before hand, whether Jacobs children did well, to persuade the
Sichemites, (Genesis 34.) to receive circumcision, before they better understood
the Covenant of Abraham, (to which circumcision was a Seal) and had made some
better profession of taking hold of it.

SECT. 18. Of the third shameful absurdity said to be found in our way of
Independency.
Come we now to consider of the third shameful Absurdity, which Mr. Baylie
makes the fruit of our Independency, breaking forth in the practices and
profession of the most, who have been admitted as very fit, if not the fittest
Members of our Churches.

And these evil fruits he brancheth out into five sorts: "1. (Says he) in
the vileness of their Errors. "2. In the multitude of the erring persons. "3.
In the hypocrisy joined with their Errors. 4. In malice against their
Neighbors, and contempt of their superiors, Magistrates and Ministers for
opposition to their evil way. "5. In their singular obstinacy, stiffly
sticking unto their errors, etc.


Answ. 1. Suppose all this to be true: yet this is so far from discrediting
the way of Independency, or arguing the Tree to be bad by these bad fruits,
that it does rather justify the way to be of God, which so easily has either
healed, or removed, so many, so vile, so general, so subtle, so headstrong
corruptions, and them that maintained them. Non seclus, non scelerum varietas
aut atr^citas, is dedecus Politiae, sed scelerum impunitas. The Church of
Ephesus was not blamed by Christ, because false Apostles and Nicolaitans were
found amongst them: but commended, because she could not bear them, Rev.
2.2.6. Nor is Thyatira blamed, that Jezabell was found amongst them, but that
they suffered her, Rev. 2.20. What if so many, so hideous vile Errors were
found in our Churches? What if the number of erring persons were (as he
speaks) incredible? Multitudes of men and women every where infected? almost
no Society, nor Family in the Land free from the pest? Boston (which he is
pleased to style, the best and most famous of our Churches) so far corrupted,
that few were untainted? What if they accounted the late Governor their true
friend, and thought no less of Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Whelewright whom they
adored? What if they had drawn to their sides not only multitudes of the
people, but the ablest men for parts, in all Trades, especially the Soldiers?
What if all these evils were carried forth with presumptuous contumacy against
godly Magistrates, and the Orthodox Ministers? yea, what if to all the rest,
they added obstinacy against al wholesome means of redress and remedy?

Is it not therefore the more evident Demonstration of the gracious presence,
and mighty power of God, in the Discipline of our Churches, that did so
effectually, so speedily, so safely, so easily, purge out all this Leaven,
either out of the hearts of the people, out of their Families, and Churches, or
else out of the Country?

Whence the argument seems to me to arise unavoidably.

Those evils, which Independency does either heal, or remove, they are not the
fruits of Independency.

But all these grievous and dangerous evils, Independency did either heal or
remove.

Therefore these grievous and dangerous evils were not the fruits of
Independency.

Again, That government, which by the blessing of Christ, does safely,
speedily, and effectually purge out such grievous and dangerous evils, as
threaten the ruin of Church and State, that government is safely allowed, and
justly and wisely established in any civil State.

But Independency by the blessing of Christ does speedily, safely, and
effectually purge out such grievous and dangerous evils, as threaten the ruin
of Church and State: therefore Independency is safely allowed, and justly, and
wisely established in any civil State.

Ob. 1. But this purging and healing of these grievous and dangerous evils was
not the fruit of their Independent-Church-Government, but of their civil
Government. We have often marvelled, that the Eldership of Boston did never so
much, as call Ms. Hutchinson before them, to be rebuked for any of her errors,
though their general Assembly had confuted them, and condemned them: yet still
she was permitted to go on, till the zeal of the new Governor, and the
general Court did condemn her to perpetual banishment. Then, and not till
then, so far as we can perceive by the story, did the Church of Boston bring a
process against her. And when the process was brought to an end, Mr. Cotton
would by no means put it in execution; that burden was laid upon the back of
Mr. Wilson his Colleague, how ever not the fittest Instrument, being the person
to whom Ms. Huthinson had professed greatest opposition. And when the sentence
was pronounced against her, they tell us, that the great cause of it was none
of her Errors or Heresies, but her other practices, specially her gross lying.

Answ. 1. What ever assistance the civil Government gave to the purging and
healing of these evils, it was the fruit of Independent Church Government. For
whether the Neighbor Churches suspected our Church of Boston might be
partial, and indulgent to these erroneous persons: or whether they saw, we
wanted sufficient witnesses upon which we might proceed against them in a
Church way, they took a right course (according to the principles of the
Independent Government) to gather into a Synod with the consent of the civil
Magistrates: and in the Synod to agitate, convince and condemn the Errors, and
the offensive carriages then stirring. Whereat the Magistrates being present,
they saw just cause to proceed against the chief of those whom they conceived
to have bred any civil disturbance: and the Churches saw cause to proceed
against their Members, whom they found to be broachers or maintainers of such
heresies.

Answ. 2. It has been declared above, why the Eldership of Boston did not call
Ms. Hutchinson before them to rebuke her for her Errors, or to restrain her
from going on, though the general Assembly had confuted and condemned her
Errors and course.

For though the Errors were condemned, (and by the Elders of Boston, as well as
others:) yet the errors were not fastened personally upon her: nor had we any
two witnesses, that would affirm it to us, that she did broach or maintain
such errors or heresies, till after her sentence unto banishment by the
general Court; And then indeed, as she was more bold and open in declaring her
judgment before many witnesses: so the Elders of the Church of Boston called
her to account before the Church, and convinced her of her Errors, and with the
consent of the Church, laid her, and one or two more of her abet^ors under the
censure of an admonition even for those corrupt opinions, which were charged
upon her, and proved against her.

Ob. 1. Yea but Mr. Cotton would by no means put the censure in execution upon
her, that burden must be laid upon the back of Mr. Wilson, etc.

Answ. The censure of admonition, because it was for matter of Erroneous
doctrine, it was thought meet to be dispensed and administered by Mr. Cotton,
who was their Teacher: which also (by the the help of Christ) he did perform,
setting before her both the corrupt causes of her errors, and the bitter fruits
of them: and charging her solemnly before the Lord, and his Angels, and
Churches then assembled, to return from the Error of her way.

Afterward, when upon further serious debate and conference with her by Mr.
Davenport, and my self, she was convinced of all her errors in particular,
she being called again before the Church, did openly recant every error and
heresy, and professed her repentance for every miscarriage against Magistrates
and Elders: which far exceeded the expectation of the whole Congregation,
which then consisted of many Churches, and strangers. But when she had done,
she added withal, That she had never been of other judgment, howsoever her
expressions might seem to vary. This sounded so harshly, and falsely in the
ears of many witnesses, that many rose up to convince her of her falsehood and
lying, in so saying. Which when she did not hearken to, she was esteemed, by
the judgment of the Elders, and our whole Church, to be justly subject to
excommunication. Which though I did not think meet to be dispensed by my self
(because the offense was not in matter of Doctrine, but of practice, which more
properly belonged to the Pastors Office, or ruling Elders:) yet I declared to
the whole Congregation the righteousness of the censure, and satisfied the
Scruples of some Brethren, who doubted of it. But yet if the Church, or other
Elders had put that task upon me, I should no more have refused the dispensing
of the censure of excommunication upon her, then I did before of admonition.
Neither was her opposition against Mr. Wilson any just reason of exempting him
from that duty. For she saw, we all with one accord, concurred in that
sentence: it was no partial act of his, but the common vote both of the
Presbytery, and Fraternity. And what if she had professed her opposition
against us all? had that been a just excuse to exempt any of us from performing
a service due to God, and the Church, yea and to herself also?

Object. 2. But when the sentence was propounded against her, they tell us, the
great cause of it was none of her Errors, and Heresies, but for other
practices, especially her gross lying.

Answ. We could not justly pronounce the cause of her sentence to be her
errors and heresies, which she had openly recanted, and given her recantation
under her handwriting. Neither did any of us say, That such Heresies did not
deserve the censure of excommunication, if she had continued obstinate in them:
but we thought it needful to follow the rule of the Apostle, not to reject an
Heretic till after once or twice admonition, Tit. 3.10. under which if the
Heretic relent, the Church proceeding stays, unless some other offense set
it forward, as it did in her case.

SECT. 19. Tending to rectify some mistakes of Mr. Baylie in relating the
former absurdities.
But before I leave this close of Mr. Baylies third Chapter, touching the evil
fruits of Independency, let me advertise him of some few further mistakes in
his Narration of the same.

First, when he reckons in the front of vile errors, the inhabitation of the
person of the Spirit in all the godly, let him weigh what has been said above,
touching that point. And if he clear it to be an error, I willingly shall
acknowledge, he shall teach me that, which I yet know not. I profess my self
willing to learn of a meaner man, then Mr. Baylie.

Secondly, when he makes the number of the erring persons incredible, almost
no society, no family free from that pest, Boston it self so far infected,
that few there were untainted: let him be pleased to consider, whether his
testimony will make it good. His testimonies (recited in his Marks F F. G G.)
speak to the utmost of truth, but not so much as he avoucheth. The short Story
in Preface, page 7. says indeed, They had some of all sorts and qualities in
all places to patronize and defend them: and almost in every family some were
ready to defend them as the Apple of their own eye.

But this will not make it good, that almost in every family some were infected
with the pest of their errors. It is one thing to speak in the defense of
erroneous persons, another to speak in defense of errors. Multitudes there
were, that thought well of the persons, who knew nothing of their errors, but
heard only of their unbottoming sandy foundations of a spiritual estate,
which has been mentioned above, Chap. 3.

Which may also truly be said even of Boston likewise. The body of the Church,
the greatest part of them were like those members of the Church in Thyatira, of
whom it is said ( Rev. 2.24.) They knew not the depths of Satan. The truth
whereof may evidently appear by this, That when those errors of Mistress
Hutchinson were publicly charged upon her before the Church, and proved by
sufficient witnesses, the whole body of the Church, and all the Brethren with
one accord (save only her son) consented readily to her censure: which they
would not have done,

if the whole Church of Boston (some excepted) had become her converts, and
were infected with her opinions. Thirdly, when he says, they adored some of
their Ministers, and instanceth in Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Whelewright.

Adoration is too vast an Hyperbole to be made good by just testimonies. All
hyperbolicall praises, though they may far exceed the bounds of truth in
comparisons of men with men; yet they will not reach adoration, which is divine
worship. Neither will it be made good, That they magnified either Mr.
Whelewright, or me, for the defense of their errors. Yea they soon forsook Mr.
Whelewright (as well as he them) when they saw his judgment (as well as mine)
against Antinomianisme, and Familisme.

Fourthly, when he says, Mistress Hutchinson, and the late Governor, kept
almost every day, so private and long discourse with Mr. Cotton, that made them
conclude all was their own.

I must needs profess, that cannot be made good by any witness of truth,
Mistress Hutchinson seldom resorted to me: and when she did, she did seldom
or never enter into any private speech between the former Governor and my
self. And when she did come to me, it was seldom or never (that I can tell of)
that she tarried long. I rather think, she was loath to resort much to me, or,
to confer long with me, lest she might seem to learn somewhat from me. And
withal I know (by good proof) she was very careful to prevent any jealousy
in me, that she should harbor any private opinions, differing from the
course of my public Ministry. Which she could not well have avoided, if she
had kept almost every day so private and long discourse with me*

But what Testimony, or proof does Mr. Baylie allege for this our private and
long conference, almost every day? His mark [Y Y] refers us to the short
story, where it is said, They made full account the day had been theirs.

But did they make this account upon occasion of these our private, and long,
and frequent conferences every day? not a syllable of proof for this point. It
is not righteous dealing, large charges, and narrow proofs.

Fourthly, that which Mr. Baylie further relates from the testimony of Mr.
Williams, is as far from truth, as the former.

Mr. Williams (says Mr. Baylie) told me, that he was employed to buy from the
Savages, for their late Governor, and Mr. Cotton, with their Followers, a
portion of Land without the English Plantation whither they might retire and
live according to their mind, exempt from the jurisdiction of all others,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastic, Mr. Williams was in so great friendship with
the late Governor, when he told me so much, that I believe he would have been
loath to havespoken an untruth of him.

Answ. But this I dare be bold to say, if Mr. Williams told Mr. Baylie so much,
that he was employed by me to buy any Land from the Savages, for me and my
followers (as he calls them) he spoke an untruth of me, whatsoever he did of
the Governor. Yet because I would not speak nor think worse of Mr. of
Williams then necessity constrayneth, I cannot say but that he might speak as
he thought, and as he was told; for it may well be, that such as abused the
Governors name to him for such an end, might also more boldly abuse mine. But
I must profess, I neither wrote, nor spoke, nor sent to Mr. Williams for any
such errand. If ever I had removed, I intended Quinipyack, and not Aquethnick.
And I can hardly believe the Governor would send to him for any such end, who
I suppose never thought it likely, that himself should tarry longer in the
Country, then he tarried in the Bay.

Fifthly, when Mr. Baylie objecteth the profaneness of these erroneous
persons, and justifies it by the testimonies of Mr. Weld and my self, And
aggravateth the same by their profession of Piety (so far, that they avow
their standing loofe from all reformed Churches as unclean, because of their
mixture with the profane Multitude.)

Let him be pleased to consider; First, what was said above, Non scelus, sed
sceleris impunitas, is the guilt of a society, whether civil or sacred.

Secondly, what Mr. Weld meant by fouler sins then pride, or lying, found in
those persons, I cannot guess: nor have I heard of them: unless he meant the
adultery of one, who upon his own confession was cast out of the Church for
that crime.

As for the testimony of mine, which he quoteth from some words in the vialls,
wherein the sins of the people were reproved, let him not improve them
further then they will bear. Such reproofs do not always argue sins of our
Church members: or if they did, yet not, that those sins are openly known: or
if openly known, yet not, that they were tolerated. And yet all these must
concur, or else the vices found amongst professors, will not argue the
viciousness either of their doctrine or worship, or Church Government.

Luther complains, in Postill. super Evangel. Dom. adventus, Sunt nunc
homines magis vindictae cupidi, magis avari, magis ab omni misericordia remoti,
magis immodesti, and indisciplinati, multoque deteriores, quam fuerunt sub
papatu. And Chrysostom, (in opere imperfect. in Matthew. Hom. 49.) speaks of
Christians as becoming like the Heretics, or Pagans, or worse.

Yet I suppose he that should improve the words either of Chrysostom, to argue
the discipline of Christians, worse then that of the Pagans: or of Luther, to
argue the discipline of Protestants to be worse then that of Papists, he shall
doubtless stretch their words upon the Rack, far beyond the scope of their
meaning. The words I spoke, were in comparison between the godly Professors in
England, and ours here, and at such a time, when Episcopal persecution made
them draw the nearer to God, and to walk the more circumspectly before men.
But Sheep set at liberty from the fear of Wolves, will straggle further from
their Shepherd, then when they resent danger.

Thirdly, it is too gross and heavy an aggravation, which Mr. Baylie puts
upon us, if he mean it of us, That our profession of piety is so fair that
we stand aloose from all reformed Churches as unclean, because of their
mixture with the profane multitude.

For it is more then he can prove, or we do profess. Though in the Bishops
time, we did not forthwith receive all the members of the Church of England
into the fellowship of our Churches: yet (for ought I know) we are not likely
to stand aloose from Presbyteriall Churches faithfully administered, nor from
the testimony which they shall give of their members, that may have occasion to
Traffic hither. And the like do I conceive of other reformed Churches in
other Nations of Christendom. Presbyterian Churches faithfully administered,
are not wont to admit a mixed profane multitude to the Lords Table.

Sixthly, let me take off one instance more, which Mr. Baylie gives of one
abomination, which to him seems strange. That the Midwives to our most
zealous women, should not only have familiarity with the Devil, but also in
that service commit devilish Malefices: which so far as they tell us, were
not only past over without punishment, but never so much as enquired after.

Answ. This accusation is indeed of some weight, because it is of a grievous,
and devilish crime, and it tolerated. But how does it appear to him, that it
was tolerated? not only past over without punishment, but never so much as
enquired after?

Why, says he, so far as they tell us. So far as they tell us? is the
silence of a short story of this or that fact, a good argument, a non dici, ad
non esse? yea it is a good argument on the contrary, that there was inquiry
made after that Midwife, and diligent search into her, or else it would have
been recorded, as some close conveyance of the erroneous party. The truth is,
the woman, though she offered her self to the Elders of our Church, yet was not
received, upon discovery of some unsound principles in her judgment. Being
then no member, the Church had no power to deal with her. But when suspicion
grew of her familiarity with the Devil, especially upon that occasion, which
the short story relates, she was convented before the Magistrates, and
diligently examined about that, and other evils. But though no familiarity
with the Devil could be proved against her; yet because of some other offenses
in dealing with young women, she was forbidden to stay in the Country.

SECT. 20. Tending to consider what better fruits might have been expected from
Presbyterian discipline, for the removing of the like absurdities.
Having thus given account to Mr. Baylie of the inconsequence of all his
discourse from the errors of this country, to argue the unsoundnesse of our
Church Discipline, let me now entreat him to consider, what better fruits might
have been expected in the like case from Presbyteriall Government. I demand, if
Presbyterian Government had been estab^ished amongst us, should we not then
have received all these Heretics, and erroneous persons, into our Church? Yes
surely, for no member of the Commonwealth is excluded: well, therein our
Congregationall discipline brings forth no worse fruit, then their
Presbyterian.

I demand again, if these persons should afterward fall into error, or
Heresy, which could not be proved by two witnesses, what course would
Presbyterian government have taken? would it not have forborne process, till
sufficient testimony might be brought to convince them? If suspicion of their
unsound judgment had grown, would they not have examined them, and if they
denied it, and no sufficient testimony could be brought against them, would
not the Presbyters have let them alone? Hitherto we did the same.

I demand further, if any Presbytery in a Church, were suspected to be too
remiss in proceeding against such Delinquents, would not the Presbytery of the
neighbor Churches have taken the matter in hand, and so gathering into a
Synod, first convinced such errors, and then condemned them, and the
maintainers of them too, if they were found guilty of them, and persistent in
them? Thus far also the Presbytery of our neighbor Churches did proceed as
to gather into a Synod, and both convinced and condemned the errors. And though
they did not proceed to condemn or censure the maintainers of them; yet when
they had gotten proof thereof, they proceeded in their own congregations to the
censure of their own erroneous members (after all other means to recover them
used in vain:) And besides, they dealt with the Presbytery of our Church to
do the same. And we hearing their complaints and their proofs, we
respectively hearkened to them, and proceeded to the like censure in our Church,
as they had done in theirs; And in like sort traveled with our members for
their conviction, as they had done with theirs, even so far, that Mistress
Hutchinson was brought to a recantation, though her prevarication of it brought
her to a censure, yea the utmost censure, and that with general consent of our
whole Church, and satisfaction of others. It seems then, that our
Independency (as it is called) does no more breed, nor nourish, nor tolerate
errors, or Heresies, then Presbyterian discipline does. And if there should a
defect arise in any Church, there is the like remedy in the vigilance of other
Churches, and finally, obstinacy in all evils of notorious offense, whether in
judgment or practice, meets at length with the same or like censure, in
either government.

Let not therefore Mr. Baylie allow himself in saying as he does (in the close
of his third Chapter) That this new and singular way, the Lord has so
manifestly cursed with more bad fruits, and greater store of them, then ever
yet did appear upon the tree of Brownisme. For though it becomes not us to
make comparisons of fruits with other Churches (unless themselves did provoke
us to it:) nor does it concern us to deal with them about any offense, unless
we dwelt near them, and knew their estate:) yet this is enough to us, to clear
us unto Mr. Baylie, and to the world, against all his exceptions, That (through
the mercy of Christ) no evil fruit at all has sprung from our Church
Government. What offense soever, in judgment or practice, has been suspected
or found among us, it has not sprung from the government, but from personal
defects, either among the Brethren or Elders. And what has been suspected, or
found in either of them, has either been cleared, or healed, or removed by the
government. Blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus, whose throne is in Zion and
his furnace in Jerusalem, who delights to bless his own ordinances with
power and peace.

CHAP. IIII. Of the antiquity of Congregationall discipline, compared with
Classical.
SECTION I.
MR. Baylie speaks of our Congregationall, and (as he calls it) our
Independent way, as not having continued a week of years (that is, not 7.
years) when the errors brake forth in New England, Page 59. Sometimes he
makes us the same in realitie with the Brownists (Page 58) to whom he
attributes about 50. years continuance, Page 59. sometimes he makes us
followers of Mr. Robinson, who stepped in to support (as he speaks)
languishing Brownisme, when it was ^eady to fall, Page 17. and 54. All which
expressions tend to make the world believe, that our Congregationall way, or
(as he calls it) Independent, is but of yesterday, newly sprung up, unknown
and unheard of in the former Ages of the Church; which if it, were true, were
no small prejudice to the way we walk in. The way of God is the old way, Jer.
6.16. yea so old, as fetches his antiquity from the ancient of days, and from
the Lord Jesus, who is the way of Truth and of Life. Id verum, quod primum: id
primum quod ab initio. There is no false way, but is an aberration from the
first institution.

Give me therefore leave to profess freely without offense, what I truly
believe without scruple, that though the Acts of Church Government (in the
ordination of officers, and censure of offenders) by the Presbyters of
neighbor Churches, be very ancient: yet not more ancient then Huma^us
Episcopatus (as Beza calls it:) nor so ancient, as the way of our
Congregationall government of each Church within it self, by the space of 300.
years. I will not here speak of those Texts of Scripture ( Matthew. 18.15, 16,
17. 1 Cor. 5.) which convince us, that Congregationall discipline was
instituted by Christ, and his Apostles. I refer them to the sequel, wherein
our particular Tenants are discussed by Mr. Baylie, which will come in due
place (God willing) to be reviewed and examined. But,

In the first century, whilst the Apostles lived, we read of no act of
Church Power put forth by the Elders of Churches over absent Congregations, but
only in Act. 15.28. with Chap. 16.4. But let it be considered:

1. That this Synod was not Status Conventus, a set monthly, or yearly
Assembly, the ordinary standing Judicatory of the Church: nor assembled for
administration of ordinary Church Power (as ordination of Officers, or censure
of offenders) but called together upon urgent, and unwonted occasion, the
dissension of the Church of Antioch, which both craved, and needed direction in
such a case, Act. 15.1.2. And we easily grant (what we willingly practice in a
Congregationall way) that neither doctrine, nor discipline can well proceed
unto public Edification, when the Church is rent with dissension. The promise
of Christ's presence with his Church, is given to them met in his name, and
agreeing in his Name, Matthew. 18.18, 19. But when a Congregation wants
agreement and peace amongst themselves, it is then a way of God (according to
the pattern, Act. 15.2.) to consult with some other Church, or Churches,
either by themselves or their messengers met in a Synod. But then they send not
to them for power to administer any ordinance amongst themselves, but for light
to satisfy dissenters, and so to remove the stumbling block of the suspicion
of mal-administration of their power, out of the way.

But otherwise, when Churches want not peace nor light within themselves, to
exercise that power without distraction, which the Lord has given them, Christ
does not direct his Churches to gather into a Synod for removing of known
offenses either in Doctrine or manners: but only sends to the Pastors or
Presbyters of each Church, to reform within themselves, what is amongst them.
Rev. chap. 2. and chap. 3. A plain pattern to Churches, in case of public
offenses tolerated in neighbor Churches, not forthwith to gather into a Synod
(or Classical meeting) for redress thereof: but by Letters and messengers to
admonish one another of what is behovefull; unless upon such admonition, they
refuse to hearken to the wholesome counsel of their Brethren. And then the
dissension of this Church from others hindering the free passage of the Gospel
(as much as dissension amongst themselves does) it may give just and necessary
occasion of assembling a Synod of the Elders, and messengers of
Neighbor-Churches for the conviction of their sin with common consent, and if
(after long patience) they remain obstinate, to withdraw from them the right
hand of Fellowship in the communion of Churches.

2. The Synod assembled at Jerusalem, (Acts 15.) was not a convention or
consisttory of Elders apart from brethren: but such a number of Brethren were
admitted into their Assembly, as carried the name of a whole Church,
distinguished expressly from the Apostles, and Elders, Acts 15.22, 23. The same
who are called the Brethren, distinct from the Apostles and Elders, ver. 23.
are called also the whole Church, ver. 2^. And with them is the power
communicated, which the Apostles and Elders put forth in those Synodicall
Letters, ver. 22. to 29. If the Classis do admit the Brethren of the Church
where they meet, to sit with the Elders, in debating and determining the
matters of the Synod, even such a number of Brethren, as may denominate them a
whole church, as then they shall come nearer to the Primitive pattern, so they
may expect a freer passage of the presence and blessing of the Holy Ghost with
them.

3. That Synod having heard and argued the whole cause in controversy, they
give their judgment both of the doctrine taught at Antioch, and of the persons
that taught it, as troublesome to the Church, and subversive to their souls,
and unwarranted by themselves, ver. 24. Nevertheless, they neither
excommunicate them themselves, nor command the Church to excommunicate them:
but leave that to the Church to exercise their own power according to the rule
of the Word, in case any of their members should be found to persist
obstinately in such pernicious doctrine after conviction.

4. That Synod laid indeed a burden (or weighty charge) not only of a
doctrine to be believed, but of a duty in matter of practice to be performed
(for avoiding of offense:) and lay it they did with the greater power,
according to the greater measure of Grace and light received, both from Texts
of Scriptures clearly opened, and from direction of Apostles personally
present. But though we dare not allow alike equal power to ordinary Synods,
unless they had the like equal presence and assistance of infallible guides,
(such as the Apostles were:) yet our Congregational way does easily allow the
like power to the like orderly Synods so far forth, that when they have cleared
from the Scriptures any doubtful point of doctrine or practice, to be of
necessary observation, they will readily submit as to a counsel and command of
God, both from the Word, and the Word dispensed in the way of an Ordinance. In
such a case we acknowledge (with our best Divines) Potestatem in Synodis (...)
a power in Synods to direct and appoint, what spiritual prudence from the Word
shall determine. But it is one thing, to direct and charge Churches from the
Word of the Lord; what should be done by them: another thing to do their Acts
of power for them. The one guides them in the use and exercise of their power:
the other takes their power, or at least the exercise of it, out of their
hand, which is more then the pattern of Synods (in Acts 15.) does hold forth.

SECT. II.
In the second century of years, the Government of the Church was administered,
not in a Classical, but in a Congregationall way, as in the former century, of
which we need no better evidence, then the evident Testimony of the
Magdeburgenses, in the second century, chap. 7, tit. de consociatione
ecclesiarum, cat rum (say they) si quis probatos authors hujus seculi
perspiciat, videbit Forman Gubernationis propemodum (...) similem fuisse.
Singulae enim parem habebant postestatem, verbum Dei pure dicendi, Sacramenta
Administrandi, Excommunicandi Haereticos, and sceleratos, ministros eligendi,
vocandi, ordinandi, and justissimas ob causas iterum deponendi, conventus and
Synodos congregandi, etc. that is, If a man search the approved Authors of this
age, he shall see the Form of the Government, to be almost like to a Democracy:
For every single Church had equal power of preaching the Word, administering
Sacraments, excommunicating heretics and notorious offenders, absolving
penitents, choosing, calling, ordaining Ministers, and upon just and weighty
causes deposing them again: power also of gathering Conventions and Synods, etc.

What is Congregationall Government, and Independent from other Churches, and
Presbyters, if this be not? Though he mentions Conventions and Synods, yet he
speaks of them, not as having power to govern the Churches, but of the
Churches, as having power to gather them. But the Synods left the power of
choosing, calling, ordaining Ministers, of censuring heretics and offenders,
and of absolving Penitents to the single Churches, each one enjoying equal
power within themselves. The help which neighbor Churches yielded one to
another, was not Cum imperio, and subjectione, (as he speaks in the same
place) not with Dominion of some, and subjection of others, but Charitatis and
aedificationis studio, out of brotherly love and care and desire of mutual
edification. Which made him say, their Form of Government was like well-nigh,
or almost to a Democracy: like to a Democracy, in regard of mutual equality of
power in one Church toward another: and yet but almost like to a Democracy, in
regard each Church within it self had an Aristocracy of Presbytery for their
guidance and Government, though they did no act of Church Government without
concourse and censure of the Brethren.

The rash attempt of Victor (Bishop of Rome) in this age against the Churches
of Asia, to censure them for a different observation of Easter, it only
argues, that the Mystery of iniquity did more early, and earnestly work in
Rome, then in other Churches: but does not hold forth any received custom of
that age, the officers of one Church to proceed to the censure of their
Brethren in other Churches. For this attempt of Victor was generally contested
against by Irenaus, and other Bishops.

SECT. III.
In the third century of years, the Churches enjoyed (to use the words of the
Centurists, Cent. 3. cap. 7.) almost the like form of Government, according to
the course of the Former Age, though somewhat more enlarged by ambition.

For it appears, Novatus was excommunicate by a council at Rome under
Cornelius. And Samosatenus was excommunicate and deposed by a council at
Antioch. But yet where the Bishops did more attend to the rule of Scripture,
and former precedents, Congregationull Churches did still enjoy their wonted
liberty and power.

Their Bishops and other Officers were not chosen to their hands by a
consistory of Bishops (or Pastors) amongst themselves in the absence of the
people: but (as Cyprian tells us) amongst them, in Carthage, and almost
throughout all the Provinces, As they have received from the Apostles, so they
hold it, that for the orderly Celebration of Ordination, all the neighbor
Bishops, (or Pastors) of the same Province, where a Minister is to be Ordained,
they come to gether to that people, and the Bishop is chosen in the presence of
the people, to whom his life is best known. As (says he) was done amongst us
in the Ordination of our fellow-Minister Sabinus; his Office was put upon him
by the suffrage of the whole Brotherhood, and by the judgment of all the
Pastors both present, and such as by Letters gave testimony of him: and so
hands were imposed upon him. Cyprian Epistolarum l. 1. Epistola 4. And in the
same Epistle he says, The people fearing God, and obedient to the Ordinances
of Christ ought to separate from a wicked Ruler, Cum ipsa maxim potestatem
habeat vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos recusundi: Seeing the
people chiefly have the power of choosing worthy Ministers, and refusing the
unworthy. And as Election and Ordination of Ministers was transacted in the
presence and with the suffrage of the people; so was excommunication also: for
upon this ground, Cyprian argues and aggravateth the offense of the
Brotherhood in other Churches, who took upon them to question and wave that
censure, post Divinum Judicium, (he means, the judgment of Gods Ministers
the Elders) post populi suffragium, post Coepiscoporum consensum: after the
Divine judgment of their Elders, after the suffrage of the people, after the
consent of neighbor Ministers, Cyprian. Epistolarum l. 1. Epistola 3. where he
gives to each rank, their proper act in passing Church-censure: he assigns
to the Elders of the Church Judicium, the judgment: to the people, Suffragium,
suffrage or vote: to neighbor Ministers, Consensum, consent.

And that the people had the like concourse in the absolution and admission of
penitents, appears by Cyprian in the same Epistle,

Vix Pl^bi persuadeo (says he) immo extorqueo, ut tales patiantur Admitti:
(tales nempe, de quorum sincera Paenitentia vix Plebi constabat) and justior
factus est Fraternitatis Dolor, ex eo quod unus atque alius obnitente Plebe,
and contradicente, mea tamen facilitate suscepti, p^jores extiterunt quam prius
fuerant. With much ado I persuade people, and even wrest it from them, that
they would suffer such to be admitted, (of whose repentance they were
doubtful: and the grief of the brotherhood is so much the more just, because
one or two before having been received by my facility (the people gainsaying,
and striving against it) proved worse afterward then they were before.

Where though he spoke of the peoples gainsaying and striving against his
receiving of one or two: yet it evidently appears that in his ordinary and
usual course, he was not wont to receive any without the peoples consent. And
even then when they did gainsay and strive against his act at first, yet he was
not wont to proceed, till with importunate persuasions, and wrastlings with
them, he had prevailed with them to give way.

But of others he speaks ( Epistolarum lib. 3. Epistola 11.) Caeteros, says
he, cum ingenti populi suffragio recipimus: the rest were received with the
free and general suffrage of the people. And again, ( Epistola 16. of the
same book) he thus speaks ad plebem, Examinabuntur singula, praesentibus,
and judicantibus vobis.

And indeed (in the end of the tenth Epistle of his third Book) he professes
his resolution to perform no act of Church Government without consent of the
Elders and Deacons, and Brethren of the Church: A primordio Episcopatus mei,
statui, nihil sine consilio vestro, and sin^ consensu Plebis, mea privatim
sententia gerere.

All these are express and lively lineaments of the very body of
Congregationall discipline, the same (for substance) wherein we walk at this
day. And therefore let it not be slighted or despised, as a Novell invention,
of seven, or twenty, or fifty years standing.

CHAPT. V. Of the fruits of Congregationall discipline.
SECT. I. Of the fruits of it in the primitive times.
We have heard of the corrupt fruits, which Mr. Baylie charge (but
corruptly, and causelessly) upon Congregationall discipline: Let us now see,
whether better fruits have not been found to grow upon it, even such fruits as
do argue the discipline to be the plantation of the Lord Jesus.

1 Presupposing that which has been proved, that our Congregationall
discipline, is the same (for substance) wherein the Primitive Churches walked
for the first 300. years, (to wit, during all the time of the Primitive
Persecutions) I conceive (without arrogance) we may acknowledge the fruits of
their discipline to be the fruits of ours.

First, their exact strictness in examining and trying their Cate^humeni,
before they received them into Ecclesiam Fidelium, brought forth this savory
and spiritual fruit, the purity of Churches. Pagans themselves could not
charge them with any crime, but the name and profession of Christianity, see
Pliny Epistolarum lib. 10. Epistolam 97. Tertullian Apologetick Chap. 3. That
which he says of Cajus Sejus, was a general Elogy of their Church Members,
Bonus vir, malus tantum quod Christianus. A like fruit to that of Daniel
against whom his enemies could find no occasion of complaint of error or fault,
except it were for the profession of the Law of his God, Chap. 6.4, 5.

And as their strict examination received their members pure: so their strict
censure kept them pure. For in the Church, Iudicabatur magno cum pondere: --
And in their Feasts they were temperate and religiously fruitful in savory and
gracious conference, and so departed b^tter then they met, Vt qui non tam
Caenam caenaverint, quam disciplinam. Tertul. Apol. Cap. 39.

2 From this purity and vigilance of their discipline, in the admission of
their members, and in the administration of their censures, there sprung forth
many other gracious fruits, as their holy and constant and confident
confessions of the Name of Christ before judgment seats, the patient and
glorious Martyrdomes of innumerable Saints, to the conviction and astonishment
of a world of persecutors.

Whence also sprung at last, the conversion of a great part of the word unto
the truth, the advancement of a Christian Emperor, the rooting out of Paganish
Idolatry, and propagation of the profession of Christian Religion, not only
through the Roman Empire, but in many other Nations exempt from the power of
Roman Arms, yet not from the power of the Name of Christ, and of his Church.

Afterward, in the days of Constantine, when the external peace and liberty
of the Churches, encouraged all sorts of men (clean and unclean) to offer
themselves to the fellowship of the Church, and Congregationall discipline
began to be neglected through the usurped authority of the Bishops, and
Presbyters, the limits of the Church began to be as large as the Precincts of
the Parish: and the Church it self (which before was wont to be as a Garden
enclosed, Cant. 4.12.) did now become as a Wilderness lying open to all the
Beasts of the Field; who so would offer himself, might have free passage into
the bosom of the Church: and offer themselves they did, not from the savor of
spiritual gifts (as was wont to be done in Congregationall discipline:) but
from respect to the countenance of higher powers, and the privileges and
preferments flowing therefrom; Church members being far more readily received
to place of trust and honor, then men without. But this inundation of corrupt
members was prevented by the vigilance of Congregationall discipline, whilst it
stood in force, in the former centuries.

3. This was another good Fruit of the Congreationall discipline in those
primitive times, That whilst it took place in the Churches, there could be no
place, nor way open for the advancement of Antichrist, no nor for the
usurpation of Episcopal prelacy. For whilst every Church kept their Government
within their own Congregation, they knew not the heavy and Lordly yoke of
Cathedral Chu^ches, much less were they trodden down with impositions from
the Sea of Rome. It is true, Victor Bishop of Rome attempted a censure against
the Churches of Asia, but his Arrogance was speedily repressed by Ireneus, and
sundry others both in Europe and Asia. And when some scandalous persons in the
African Churches, did appeal in Cyprians time from those Churches unto Rome,
Cyprian, and his fellow Bishops (or Presbyters) in the African Churches, did
easily prevent the impeachment of their Church Government from remote Churches,
and kept still their Government within themselves.

SECT. 2. Of the Fruits of Congregationall discipline in our Churches in
New England.
2. FOr the fruits of Congregationall discipline, as it has been exercised
amongst us (though in much weakness) the Lord has not left us without
testimony from Heaven.

First, in making these Churches a little sanctuary (through his grace) to many
thousands of his servants, who fled over hither to avoid the unsupportable
pressures of their consciences by the Episcopal tyranny.

Secondly, in blessing the Ministry of our Preachers here with like fruits of
conversion (as in our native Country) of sundry elder and younger persons, who
came over hither not out of respect to conscience, or spiritual ends, but out
of respect to friends, or outward inlargements: but have here found that grace,
which they sought not for.

Thirdly, in discovering and suppressing those errors of Antinomians, and
Familists, which brake forth here amongst us, and might have proceeded to the
subversion of many souls, had not the blessing of Christ upon the vigilance of
Congregationall discipline, either prevented or removed, or healed the same.

Fourthly, it has been also a testimony from Heaven of Gods blessing upon our
way, that many thousands in England in all the Quarters of the kingdom, have
been awakened to consider of the cause of Church discipline, for which we have
suffered this hazardous and voluntary banishment into this remote Wilderness:
and have therefore by letters conferred with us about it, and been (through
mercy) so far enlightened, as to desire an utter subversion of Episcopacy, and
conformity, yea and the Honorable Houses of Parliament, the Lord has been
pleased to help them so far to consider of our sufferings, and of the causes
thereof, as to conclude a necessity of reformation of the Ecclesiastical
state, (amongst other causes, so) by reason of the necessity put upon so many
English subjects to depart from all our employments, and enjoyments in our
Native Country, for conscience sake.

SECT. 3. Of the Fruits of Congregationall discipline in England.
3 For the fruits of Congregationall discipline in England, they that walk in
that way amongst you, might speak far more particularly, and largely, then I
here can do at such a remote distance. But if Books, and Letters, and reports
do not too much abuse us with false intelligence, the great, and gracious, and
glorious victories, wher^by the Lord has wrought salvation for England in
these late wars, have been as so many testimonies of the blessing of God upon
our way. For the chiefest instruments, which God has delighted to use herein,
have been the Faith and fidelity, the courage, and constancy of Independents.
And when I say Independents, I mean not those corrupt Sects and Heresies,
which shroud themselves under the vast title of Independency, and in the mean
time cast off all Church Government, and Churches too; but such as profess the
Kingdom of Christ in the government of each holy Congregation of Saints within
themselves.

Far be it from me to undervalue the brotherly assistance of the Scottish
Churches and Commonwealth in working so great a deliverance for England. Yea I
account their concurrence a greater matter then assistance in this great work.
Their exemplary pi^ty and zeal, their courage, and confidence in rising up,
and standing out against the invasion of Episcopal tyranny, and superstition,
did doubtless quicken and encourage England to stand for the like liberty in
the like cause: and to put forth that zeal, which the Lord had kindled in the
hearts of many for Reformation. And this was more then an assistance, even a
guidance. Afterward the forwardness of the Scottish Nation to advance their
Armies into the English Fields for the help of England against the Common
Enemies of Church and State, was an Act of brotherly love never to be forgotten
without due and thankful acknowledgement, and encouragement. But yet let the
good pleasure of the Lord be acknowledged, who out of his abundant grace, has
granted the chiefest successes to the English designs by the Forces of the
Independents, which may not be denied without too much ingratitude both to God
and man. Let all the glory thereof be wholly and solely given to the Lord: but
yet let not the instruments be accounted unfruitful, by whom the Lord has
brought forth such blessed Fruits of victory, and liberty, both from civil
servitude, and superstitious thraldom, and withal so great an advancement of
Reformation both in Church and State.

The inundation of Sects and Heresies in London, and the retarding of
Reformation in England, which have both of them been objected as the bitter
fruits of the Congregationall way, have been cleared above, to spring from
other Roots, not from that way. See Chap. 3. Sect. 5. the end of it.

The second Part (being Doctrinal, and Controversal) Concerning Congregational
Churches and their Government.
The PRAEFACE.
THe Author of the Book entitled Vindiciae Clavium, thought good to conceal
his own Name, though in matters of Accusation (whereof the Book is full.) It
was the manner of the Romans (and that Roman manner was but just and equal) to
have the Accuser show himself face to face. Acts. 25.16. And indeed the equity
and equality of Brotherly love would have required him either to have declared
his own Name, or to have concealed mine as well as his own. A little love
amongst Brethren would sooner heal the dissentions of Brethren, then great
store of Books, breathing lust to contention. It is neither Presbyterians, nor
those of the Congregational way (whom they call Independents) that do hinder
either Reformation or Peace: but only the want of (...), the want of following
and holding forth the Truth (or that which we believe to be the Truth) in love,
on both sides: It is love that edifieth both souls and States.

But since the Author of Vindiciae is pleased to conceal his Name* I therefore
think it not amiss (for brevities sake, and to prevent a long Periphrasis of
the Author of Vindiciae Clavium) when I am occasioned to name him (which is
very often) only to take leave to call him Vindex, or (in English) sometime
the Assertor, sometime the Avenger; which both the Title and Purport of his
Book, do hold him forth to be, as acting the part of both.

The scope of his Book (so far as it concerns me) is chiefly to show forth my
weaknesses and contradictions, as his Title manifests. But if Christ may have
any glory by that, I shall willingly acknowledge (without his accusation, and
much more without his conviction) that I am made up of weaknesses and
contradictions. The best good in me is but weak at the best: and that which is
corrupt, is weakness it self. If there be Old and New man in me (as by the grace
of Christ I see what I am) verily I cannot but find a bundle, not only of
contradictions, but of contrafactions in my self. I believe, I doubt: I allow,
I condemn: I hope, I fear: I love, I hate: I rejoice, I grieve: I would, I
would not: I do, I undo: the same self, the same thing, at the same time.

Nevertheles all this will not argue that which the Avenger says; He has
heard, that I have often altered my Judgment since I went to New England: Nor
that the Author of the Keys does contradict the Author of the Way, which is
himself.

I have not had liberty to peruse the Way, since it was published: but I see by
the first words of it, that the Publishers had not the Copy which was taken
hence from me, but an imperfect Transcript. But I do believe what the
Publishers do report; That s^^ing aside some difference in Logical Terms,
there is no material difference between the Keys and the Way, either in
Doctrine ofDivinity, or in Church-practise.

Yes, (says the Avenger) I find, He does (in these) as flatly contradict
himself, as ever any man did. Instance in one place, (and leave the rest to the
following discourse.) In the Keys, (Page 4.) he says; The Keys were delivered
to Peter as an Apostle, as an Elder, and as a Believer. The sense of the words
(of Christ to Peter) will be most full, if all the several considerations be
taken jointly together. But in the Way, (Page 27.) He says, The Power of the
Keys is given to the Church, to Peter not as an Apostle, not as an Elder, but
as a professed Believer: Is not this a flat contradiction?

Answ. 1. The words are not mine, but the Assertors, which he reports me to
say in the Keys; The Keys were delivered to Peter, as an Apostle, as an Elder,
and as a Believer. I would be loath to be found to speak so il-Logically, as to
say, Socrates has a power of motion given to him, as a living Creature, as a
Man, as a Philosopher. It is a trivial rudiment in Schools, Whatsoever is
attributed to any as such, is given to all such universally, and to such
reciprocally, and only. If the Keys were delivered to Peter as an Apostle,
then to all the Apostles, and only to the Apostles. My words expressed by me
are plain enough, and (I thank God) not destitute of reason. It has proved a
busy question, how Peter is to be considered in receiving this Power of the
Keys, whether as an Apostle, or as an Elder (for an Elder also he was) or as a
Believer, professing his Faith before the Lord Jesus, and his fellow Brethren.

I added indeed, the sense of the words of Christ to Peter, (To thee will I
give the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven) will be most full, if all the several
considerations be taken jointly together.

Wherein as I expound mine own meaning in the words following (in that
Treatise of the Keys) So the Publishers of the Keys, do fitly express the same
in their Epistle [The Disposal (say they) "of this Power, may lie in a due
allotment into diverse hands according to their several concernments; rather
then in an entire and sole Trust committed to any one man, or any sort or rank
of Men, or Officers.] What says the Avenger to this? Herein (says he) Perhaps
we might agree with them, but then not with the Author, who places all the
power in one sort of men alone, that is, the Brethren without Officers, in the
Way, page 45. But the Assertor takes too much liberty, to affirm, I say that
in that place, which in the same passage I do expressly deny; My words are
express, They, (that is the Brethren) may not administer Sacraments in defect
of all Officers, because by the appointment of Christ, that pertains only to
such as are called by Office to preach the Gospel. Matthew. 28.19.20.

But (says the Avenger) in the Way (page 27.) He says The Power of the Keys
is given to the Church, to Peter, not as an Apostle, nor as an Elder, but as a
professed Believer, in the name of Believers. Is not this a flat contradiction?
No verily, the Solution is very easy and obvious, even to the Avenger himself,
if he would but have cast his eye upon the very next words in the Keys, whence
this (...) is fetched. The words run thus, The sense of the words will be most
full, if all the several considerations be taken jointly together. Take Peter
considered not only as an Apostle, but withal an Elder also, and a Believer
too, professing his Faith, all may well stand together. For there is a
different power given to all these, to an Apostle, to an Elder, to a Believer:
and Peter was all these, and received all the Power which was given by Christ
to any of these, or to all of these together. -- So that Augustine did not
mistake, when he said, Peter Received the Keys in the Name of the Church.

I cannot conceive what should move the Avenger so confidently to charge a flat
contradiction in these two passages, and that as flatly as ever man did
contradict himself: unles it were partly through tmis-report of my words in the
one place: whereof before) partly, hrough mis-apprehension what the force in
Logic is, of a quatenus tale: For he that knows that, he is not ignorant,
that if Peter had received the Power of the Keys, quatenus Apostolus, or
quatenus Presbyter, as an Apostle, or as an Elder; then only Apostles, or
only Elders had received all Church power, which all judicious Divines, and (I
doubt not) himself amongst them will utterly deny. But he that says Peter
received the power of the Keys, as standing in the room of all sorts of
Officers and Members of the Church, and so in the name of the whole Church, He
affirms that Peter received all Church power, which is found in all professed
Believers, whether Officers, or private Brethren: and of Officers, whether
Ordinary, as Elders; or Extraordinary, as Apostles, and Evangelists. And is
there any passage in the Keys which crosses or contradicts this? and that
flatly, and so flatly, as never any man more?

Let this serve for my first Answer to this Contradiction: let me also add
another.

Answ. 2. If there had been some difference between the Way and the Keys in
some expressions: yet (as the Praefacers related from a Letter of mine to a
friend of theirs:) it lay rather in Logical Terms, then in Doctrine of
Divinity, or Church-Practise: And such, amongst others, is this very point in
hand. If there seem to be any difference in the expression of the one Treatise,
or of the other, about this point, it is in the first Subject of the Power of
the Keys (which is a Logical Notion:) but the point is the same, both in
Doctrine of Divinity, and in Church-practise.

As for the imputation of Inconstancy, which the Avenger is pleased to put upon
me, He has heard that I have often altered my Judgment since I went to
New England: I should thank him if he would tell me either wherein I have
altered my Judgment, or from whom he so heard: Mean while, he may do well to
remember, That a Citizen of Zion (a pure member of a pure Church) takes not up
a Reproach against his Neighbor. Psalm. 15.3. John Baptist was surmised by some
to be a Reed shaken with the wind; but it was a windy Fancy.

3. And for a third Answer, It were no just matter of calumny if in some latter
Tractate I should retract, or express more commodiously, what I wrote in a
former less safely. Augustine (as much above me, as the Moon to a little Star,)
lost no whit of his Reputation in the Church, by writing two whole Books of
Retractations of his own Opinions and Expressions.

CHAP. I. Of the CHURCH, to which Christ committed the Power of the Keys.
Section I.
VIndex does here first enquire what I mean by this Church: ^hereof, though he
might fully have informed himself from the fifth point of the first Chapter of
the Keys (which himself had in hand:) yet in hope of some advantage, He chose
rather to fetch it from another Tract of mine, touching our Church Way: Which
though he say, it went up and down in the dark; yet its dark walking was no
intent of mine, but that it should find either timely impression, or (by advice
of friends) utter suppression. Now in that Tract I said, The Church to which
the Lord Jesus committed the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, ( Mat. 16.19.) is
Coetus Fidelium, commonly called a particular visible Church, meeting together
with common and joint consent into one Congregation, for public worship, and
mutual edification.

But ( says the Avenger) of all the rest this is the most improbable^ sense of
our Saviors words, If by the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth, he means that
Church of which he spoke before in verse. 18. But that was either the Catholic
Visible Church: or rather the Invisible Mystical Church; for that only is built
upon the Rock, and against that the gates of Hell shall never prevail: Whereas
Particular Churches may fail.

Answ. 1. It is not a more improbable sense of our Saviors words, to
understand the Kingdom of Heaven ( Matthew. 16.19.) of a Particular Visible
Church, rather then of the Catholic Visible Church. For I do not read that the
Scripture does any where acknowledge a Catholic Visible Church at all. The
Catholic Church is not Visible as a Church: and the Church that is Visible, is
not Catholic. Doctor Ames his Judgment seems to me more Orthodoxal, Ecclesia
non est tota simul Visibilis. Medull. l. 1. c. 32. number. 1. For though the whole
Church (or which is all one, the Catholic Church) may be Visible in her
singular Members; yet so they are not a Church. Or though it may be Visible in
the several Particular Congregations, yet none of them is Catholic. Or though
all of them together may be called a Catholic Church, or General Assembly, if
they were met together; Yet I suppose, Vindex would be loath to say, That Christ
gives the Power of the Keys (all Ecclesiastical Power) into their hands. Such
general Assemblies are rare and extraordinary; and extraordinary Assemblies are
not fit Judicatories to hear and censure ordinary offenses, or to administer
the ordinary Acts of Church Power.

Answ. 2. He therefore distrusting (as it seems) that to be the meaning of
our Saviors words (to understand the Kingdom of Heaven of the Catholic
Visible Church) He expounds it rather to be meant of the Invisible Mystical
Church. And indeed, true it is, that Peter and other Preachers of the Gospel
have received such a Power of the Keys, as by the Ministry of the Word, to
beget Faith in their Hearers, and so to open to them a door into the Invisible
Church: as also to convince unbelievers of their damnable Estate, and so
Ministerially to declare them shut out from the fellowship of the Invisible
Church. But there is also a Power of the Keys, to open a door unto professed
Believers into the Visible Church: and again to shut them out of the Visible
Church, when they grow scandalous. And therefore the Visible Church cannot be
excluded from one part of the meaning of the Kingdom of Heaven, whereof Peter
received the Keys.

Besides, certain it is, that when by the power of the Keys, a Believer is
received into the Invisible Church, he can never be shut again out of that
Church. But the Keys here given to Peter, have a Power to shut out of the
Kingdom of heaven, even the same Persons, unto whom they have opened the door
before. And therefore the Kingdom of Heaven (whereof Peter received the Keys)
is not meant only of the Invisible Church, but of the Visible Church also,

Answ. 3. The reasons which Vindex objecteth to the contrary, will not prevail
against this Truth, no more then the gates of hell against the Church.

Object. 1. It is the Invisible Church only which is built upon the Rock, and
against that, the gates of Hell shall never prevail: whereas Particular
Churches may fail.

Answ. It is not true, that the Invisible Church only is built upon a Rock;
for Particular Churches are built upon a Rock also. Built they are upon Divine
Institution, and Christ is laid for the foundation of them; or else they are
not Churches of Christ, which are described to be in God our Father, and in our
Lord Jesus Christ. 1 These. 1.1. The Apostle Paul laid Christ for the foundation
of the Visible Church of Corinth; 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. Christ is not the head of
that Church whereof he is not the foundation: and where he is the foundation,
he is also the Rock, on which they are built; for he is not a sandy foundation.

" Yea, but Particular Churches may fail.

What then? So may the true Disciples of Christ fail (in respect of bodily
subsistence) and yet the gates of Hell never prevail against them; For they
will be received into everlasting habitations. Luke 16.9.

Yea, but Particular Churches may fail and fall away from the Faith; all the
Churches of Asia are fallen from Christ to Mahomet: and sundry in Europe, from
Christ to Antichrist.

Yet those Churches that were founded upon Christ, and builded upon that Rock,
they neither failed, nor fell away. It was their Successors, and not they, that
failed, and fell in that sort. If the Posterity of an holy Particular Church do
degenerate, they were never founded upon Christ, but in an outward form. God
may remove the Candlestick (that is) his particular Church) out of that place
(say out of Corinth or Ephesus, Rev. 2.5.) yet he will ever have some or other
Particular Churches visible in one place or other; and so against that Church
state, the gates of hell shall never prevail. Dr Whitakers declares the
Judgment of Orthodox Protestants in this point; Nos dicimus, aliquam semper
fore in mundo Ecclesiam, quae Christo pareat, eamque visibilem, De Ecclesia,
Quest. 3. Cap. 2. Junius in his Animadverversions in Bellarm. Controv. 4. de
Council. and Eccles. Cap. 13. Art. 1. Concludimus inquit, ne visibilem quidem
Ecclesiam, posse Desicere, atque interire, adeo ut in se ipsa sit invisibilis,
etc. And Doctor Ames bears the like witness. Ecclesia nunquam plane desinit
esse visibilis. Medull. l. 1 cap. 31. And this they intend of some Particular
Visible Church or other. For a Catholic Visible Church they dispute against,
but maintain the Catholic Church to be invisible. Whitakers de Ecclesia Q. 2a.
1o, Dicimus Ecclesiam Catholicam invisibilem esse, etiam tum cum Particularis
quaeque Ecclesia vel maxim floret.

Object. 2. The Kingdom of Glory is one part of the meaning of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and it is not contradistinguished to a Particular Congregation, but to
the General Visible Church on Earth.

Answ. There is not any Particular Congregation on earth, but may be, upon just
occasion, contradistinguished from the Kingdom of Glory. It may truly be said,
whosoever is duly bound or loosed in any one Particular Church, is also bound
and loosed in the Kingdom of Glory. There is no semblance of difficulty herein.

Nevertheles, when (in the Keys page 2.) I spoke of the Power of the Keys
given to Peter to bind on earth, I did not mean it in any one single Particular
Church on earth alone, but generally and indefinitely, in every Particular
Church on earth. For every Apostle had transcendent power in every Particular
Church on earth: And every Particular Church on earth (being all of one common
Nature militant here on Earth, and different from the Tryumphant Church in
Heaven) may justly be contradistinguished from the Kingdom of Glory. But yet I
never dreamed of a General Visible Church on earth (as Vindex expounds me:)
unles he mean it, as Visible in Particular Congregations. And if he so mean, it
will better express the Truth, and my meaning, to say, That Peter received the
Keys to bind and loose (as in the invisible Church in some sort, so) in the
Particular Visible Church indefinitely; that is, in every Particular Visible
Church on earth. For a Particular Visible Church is of a common and general
nature, and comprehends in it every singular Particular Visible Church, as
that of Corinth, Ephesus, Philippi, and the rest.

Object. 3. That Church is meant (in Matthew. 16.19.)whereof Peter was one (
Way, Page 1.) But Peter was not a Member of such a Particular Congregation:
for there was none such extant, when Christ spoke these words to Peter.

Answ. I presume Vindex is not ignorant, that in rational discourses, and
propositions of Art, The Copulae does not Connotare Tempus, but only
Connectere the Subject, and the Praedicate: else he will open a way to
insoluble fallacies

As in that Sophisme, Nullus Infans fuit Juvenis:
Omnis Senex fuit Infans:
Ergo, Nullus Senex fuit Juvenis.


This Connotation of time in the Copula, breeds the Fallacy; Let Vindex
therefore be pleased to leave such arguings to Sophisters, or make use of them
when he will refresh his wit in Argument with young Scholars. But amongst
Brethren, what if I should say, Resurrection to glory is given to the Bodies of
the faithful, whereof Elect Infants are a part? Though the resurrection be not
yet come, nor Elect Infants yet come to be faithful? yet the Proposition is
true, because the Subject and Praedicate have true Connection in the nature of
the thing, though not in the present order of time. When Christ directed his
Disciples, and amongst them, Peter, in case of private offense, and obstinacy
therein, at length, to tell the Church, whether by Church be meant the
Particular Congregation, or the Presbytery; neither of them both were then
extant, when Christ spoke these words to Peter. But will that be a good
Argument to prove, That Christ did not direct the offended Brother either to
tell the Particular Church, or to tell the Presbytery, because neither of them
were then extant?

Object. 4. That Church whereof Peter received the Keys, was such, whereto
Peter or any offended Brother might tell an offense, and have it censured. But
that was never done in a Church of Saints, Believers without Officers; nor was
the Church of Corinth such a Church, but had Officers, who might
authoritatively censure the incestuous Person, etc.

Answ. This is another passage of Sophistry, but somewhat more open. -- For if
the Objection be cast into a true Syllogism, it will run thus: The Church of
which Peter received the Keys, was such to which Peter, and any offended
Brother might tell an offense, and have it censured. But the Church of Saints
and Believers without Officers, was not such to whom Peter, or any offended
Brother might tell an offense, and have it censured.

Thus the minor is justly denied: and therefore Vindex chooses rather to put
his minor in other terms;

The Church of Saints and Believers without Officers, was not such a Church, to
whom Peter or any offended Brother did tell an offense.

But now there is Quatuor Termini in his Syllogism: Might tell an offense, and
Did tell an offense, make two different Mediums. What if the Church of Corinth
when they censured the Incestuous Person, were not such a Church without
Officers? Or, what if no Church wanted Presbyters in the Apostles times? If it
were so, it was the greater bounty of Christ to them in those Primitive times,
when the gifts of the Spirit were poured out in more abundance. But yet if a
Church of Saints, or Believers without Officers, have power from Christ to
elect Officers, then have they power also much more to admit Members. And if
they have power to admit them without Officers, they have like power upon just
offense to exclude them out of their holy Communion without Officers. For it is
the same power to open and to shut, Instituere, and destituere.

Object. 5. The Church to which the Keys are given, are said to be such as do
all of them meet in one place for the administration of the Ordinances of
Christ: But the Ordinances of Christ are not to be found, much less administered
in a Church of Believers without Officers.

Answ. This latter Proposition is left naked and unguarded without proof. And I
confess, Ipse dixit may go for a warrant in Pythagorean Philosophy: and test
me ipso may go for a warrant in Royal Grants of Favor: but not in matters of
Faith, nor of Justice between King and Subject, much less in matters of
controversy amongst Brethren. The truth is, Though the Ordinances of Christ
may not all of them be administered in a Church of Believers without Officers,
and authoritative dispensing of the Word and Censures, and Ministration of
Sacraments: yet some Ordinances of Christ may be found and administered in a
Church of Believers without Officers. As it is an Ordinance of Christ, two or
three of them (much more all of them) to meet and pray together, and admonish
one another in Christ's Name, Matthew. 18.20. It is an Ordinance of Christ, to
elect Officers, (Deacons and Elders:) for this is the power and privilege of
the Church of Brethren. Though Titus was lest in Crete to ordain Elders in
every City (Tit. 1.5.) yet not to elect them: As Cyprian argues from sundry
passages of the Acts of the Apostles, and other Scriptures; and thereupon
infers, Plebs Dominicis Praeceptis obsequens, and Deum metuens -- ipsa
maxim potestatem habet, vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos
recusandi. Cyprian. Epistolarum. l. 1. Epistola. 4.

And if a Church of Believers may thus supply themselves with Officers when
they want them, and if Officers and Brethren have all ordinary Church power,
(and so all Ordinances of Christ, which are ordinarily administered, found
amongst them) then what hinders, but that a Church of Believers has in it, as
some Ordinances formally, so all radically and virtually, and the same
administered, and administrable amongst them?

Object. 6. When it is said (in the Way, page 1.) Christ committed the Keys
to the Church, that is, to a Particular Congregation, it must be meant either
Subjective, or Objective; If it be meant in this latter sense, That the Keys
are committed to the Church, as the Object of the exercise of the Keys, that
is, for the good and use of the Church, it is truly said, but nothing to the
purpose. In this sense, the Keys are given first and more immediately to the
Invisible Mystical Church ( all are yours, whether Paul, etc.) then to the
General Visible Church for their sakes; then to the Particular Congregation, as
a part and Member of that General Visible Church. But if it be meant in the
former sense (as it must be so meant, or else the Author of the Way does
equivocate with us from the beginning throughout the whole Book) then he
falls into the extreme of the Brownists, which he so labors to avoid. For
to take the Church (in Matthew. 16.) For a particular Congregation of Believers
without Officers, is a new, strange, and false Gloss, maintained by none but
Brownists, and such like Separatists.

Answ. When I said Christ committed the Keys to the Church, that is, to a
Particular Congregation, I meant it indeed Subjective, though not excluding
Objective. For I do not make the Particular Visible Church a differ^nt Church
from the Invisible. The distribution of the Church into Visible and Invisible,
is not into diverse kinds of Churches, nor into diverse kinds of Members of the
same Church, but into diverse Adjuncts of the same Members of the same Church:
who in respect of their Spiritual and Internal Estate (to wit, their Faith) are
Invisible: but in respect of their External condition (to wit, the Profession
of Faith) are Visible. The Particular Church (I speak of it indefinitely)
receives the power of the Keys both Subjective to it self, and Objective for
it self, though the saving benefit thereof redound only to the Elect amongst
them, who are also of them. Neither is this to fall into the extreme of (those
whom you call) Brownists, to take the Church for a Particular Congregation
without Officers.

For first, When I wrote that Proposition (in the first words of the Way) it
was not then in my mind to understand any other Particular Congregation to
which Christ had committed all ordinary Church Power, and the administration
thereof, but to a Congregation of Believers furnished with Officers. For I
spoke of such a Church whereof Peter was one; and he was an Officer. Though I
perceive M. Rutterford understood me otherwise, (as you also do:) and so from
thence raises his first controversy: Whether the Church of Believers
destitute of the Eldership, have the power of the Keys?

Which (to avoid misconstruction) I expressed more distinctly in the Tract of
the Keys. But yet, take it as he does, for a Church of Believers without
Officers; They have received some part of the Power of the Keys formally, as
the election of Officers, etc. and the whole ordinary Power of the Keys,
radically and virtually. The stock of the Vine (which grows in the bulk from
the root) has not immediate power to bring forth Grapes; but yet it has power
to produce branches, which do bring forth Grapes: So the Body of the Church of
Believers, though they have not immediate power of rule authoritatively to
dispense the Word, or to administer Sacraments at all: yet they have power to
produce such Officers as may perform the same.

Again secondly, Dr Whitakers was none of them whom you call Brownists, yet he
speaking of this Text (which you quote in this Paragraph, to prove that
Ministers are given to the Church objective, for their good, not subjective, so
as the Church to have power over them. 1 Cor. 3.22.23. He bears witness
against your gloss: Apostolus says he, non tantum ait Ministros institutos
esse propter utilitatem, Ecclesiae: sed sic illos esse Ecclesiae, ut Ecclesia
est Christi. At Ecclesia Christo subjicitur non propter Christi utilitatem
instituta est. Et Apostolus Ecclesiam esse Dei Templum, affirmat: Ministri in
Templo, non supra Templum. Whitak Controv. 4. Quaest. 1. Number. 11. in fine.
Neither was Parker one of those whom you call Brownists, or such like
Separatists, but wrote against them. But yet he understands the Church (
Matthew. 16.) of a particular Congregation of Believers, as distinct from
Officers: yea and proves it at large. Parker de Ecclesiastica Politia, l. 3.
cap. 1, 2, 3.

Object. 7. To conclude, the Church of which our Savior speaks, is called
here the Kingdom of Heaven (on Earth:) But a Particular Congregation of
Believers is never called the Kingdom of Heaven; being but a Member or
Corporation of that Kingdom. It were as imp^oper to call a Congregation,
Christ's Kingdom, as to call London the Kingdom of England.

Answ. 1. It is not material whether a Particular Congregation of Believers be
ever expressly called the Kingdom of Heaven or no; It is enough it is called a
Church, yea as it is distinguished from Church Officers. Those whom he calls
the whole Church distinguished from the Apostles and Elders ( Acts 15.22.) the
same he calls the Brethren, verse. 23. And if the Brethren may be called the
Church, they may justly also be called the Kingdom of Heaven, seeing the style
of the Kingdom of Heaven is usually given to the Church. You may more truly
observe, that the Presbytery is never called in Scripture the Kingdom of
Heaven: no, nor are they called the Church, unles it be in that one place
Matthew. 18.17.) which yet may sooner be presumed, then proved to be understood
of the Presbytery; I mean, a Consistory of Presbyters, distinct from the
Congregation of Believers.

Answ. 2. I dare not say that the Particular Visible Church is never called the
Kingdom of Heaven. For when Christ went out to hire laborers into his
Vineyard, it was into this or that Particular Church, respectively. And this
Vineyard thus destitute of Laborers or Officers, and distinguished from them,
is called the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 20.1.

Again, when the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to ten Virgins, five wise, and
five foolish, ( Matthew. 25.1, 2.) this is a description of the estate of each
Particular Church, respectively; without respect to their Officers. Besides,
when the Kingdom of God is said to be within us, ( Luke 17.21. And all the
faithful are said to be made Kings and Priests unto God ( Rev. 1.6.) Even a
Kingdom of Priests (1 Pet. 2.9.) can it then be termed an improper speech to
call a Particular Church of Believers, the Kingdom of Heaven?

Yes, they are but a Member, or Corporation of the Kingdom: and it were
improper to call London the Kingdom of England.

But every similar part of a similar Body does properly partake both in the
Name and Nature of the whole. Every part of water is water, and is both cold
and moist, as the whole water is. And such a part of such a Body, is a
Particular Visible Church. The Church of Corinth is said to be the Body of
Christ, and the members thereof, members in particular. And Christ has given
unto them all his Officers, as well as unto other Churches, 1 Cor. 11.27, 28.
But such is not the State of London. London is not a similar, but a dissimilar
part of England, and different from all the Corporations of England, different
in power, different in privileges: How then can a comparison of unequals, be
drawn to parallel a state of equals.

What the KEYS of the Kingdom of HEAVEN be. Section II.
IN opening what the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven be, it was not my intent to
enumerate them all distinctly and particularly in that first Chapter of the
description of the Keys, which was but a Preface and Introduction to the whole
Tractate. I thought it enough to give an instance only in general, there, in
two or three examples; reserving a more exact distribution of them to the
chapters following: and referring each sort of them to their several Subjects
in their proper place, lest I might clogg my self and the Reader with needles
repetitions. I therefore contented my self to say in general, The Keys are the
Ordinances of Christ, which he has instituted to be administered in his Church,
as the preaching of the Word, as also the administering of the Seals and
Censures.

I instanced in these, as most obvious, and of easiest apprehension to any
vulgar Reader. But in instancing these, I supposed no man would be of so narrow
apprehension, as not to conceive those things to be included, without which,
these cannot duly be performed. As, the word cannot be preached, nor the
Sacraments dispensed, without a vocation unto such spiritual Administrations.
Nor can it be doubted, that if there must be a vocation to administer these,
there must be also some, who have power from Christ to give such a vocation.

Albeit, If it had been of any weight for the expediting of any controversy
about the Keys (which I know none:) I might easily have given some definition
of the Keys; as to say, The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are spiritual
Powers given by Christ to his Church to dispense the Treasures of his Kingdom,
for the opening and shuting, binding and loosing the spiritual Estates of men
in the Church. By spiritual Powers, I mean spiritual callings, and spiritual
gifts fitting for them, enabling to some spiritual Acts: By the treasures of
the Kingdom I mean the Word, Seals, and Censures, and the spiritual blessings
laid up in them. But Callings, Gifts, and Treasures, are all of them
Ordinances. The other parts of the Definition, what be the Acts, and Ends,
Objects, and Subjects of this power, I opened formerly in the third, fourth,
and fifth Paragraphs of the first chapter of the Keys.

But upon what I expressed in this Paragraph, Vindex is pleased to animadvert
some things.

1. In this Paragraph (says he) as you do clearly lay down the state of the
Question: so do you strongly confute the scope of your whole Boook, which is to
give the People a share in the Government of the Church.

Answ. Vindex does clearly mistake my scope and meaning, to think I did lay
down the state of the Question in this Paragraph. For I think it is no Question
at all, That the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, are the Ordinances of Christ,
which he has instituted to be administered in his Church. Neither is it the
scope of my whole Book, to give the people a share in the Government of the
Church: Nay, it is not the scope of the greater part of the Book: Nay further,
there be that blame the Book for the other Extreme, That it places the
Government of the Church not at all in the hands of the People, but of the
Presbytery. So various are the apprehensions of Books by variety of Readers,
and by their sometime judicious, sometime cursory reading.

Least of all is there any color for this apprehension, that I do in this
Paragraph strongly confute the scope of my whole Book. Yes (says he) For if
the Keys be the Ordinances of Christ, they are given indeed for the Church of
Believers, that is, for their good and benefit, objective; but are never in all
the Scripture, nor in all Antiquity said to be given to the Church Subjective.

Answ. What Power I acknowledge given to the Church of Believers Subjective,
either in admission of Members, or election of Officers, or censure of
Offenders, I do allege Scriptures for it; which when Vindex takes in hand to
evade them, I shall return him (God willing) further answer, which in this
place were an unseasonable prevention: But when he affirms that such power as
I acknowledge given to the Church, is not to be read of in all Antiquity; it
makes me to suspect, that either he has not read All Antiquity, (which yet is
no crime, only he should not then have denied them all, to own this Power; for
it is not safe to avouch more then we know:) or if he have read them all, he
^ath forgotten what is recorded by the most ancient Antiquity for the space of
the first three hundred years, during all the time of the Primitive
persecutions. Of which I have given account to Mr Baily in answer to the
Historical part of his Disswasive, (chap. 4. Sect. 1, 2, 3.) whereto I refer
him.

But says Vindex, it sounds ill at first hearing, to say, that the People
have any power to exercise Ordinances, of Preaching, or administering the Seals
or Censures. The power of Preaching or administering Sacraments by the People,
as none but Separatists do usurp; so your self complain of it, Page 6. And why
you should allow them power in censures, there is very little reason.

Answ. If Preaching the Word, or Administering the Seals, were all the
Ordinances which Christ has instituted, and no more but they, Vindex says
true, it would sound ill at first hearing (and if he will, at second and third
hearing too) to say, The People have any power to exercise these Ordinances;
unless that kind of Preaching be understood, which D. Ames approves, l. 4. de
Casibus Conscientiae, cap. 25. in respons. 3. ad Quaest. 1.

But to allow the people a power in Censures, I marvel it should sound so ill
at first hearing, of such whose ears have been long wonted to hear of
Suspensions, and Excommunications; not only of private Christians, but even of
many Ministers, by Chancellors and Commissaries, who generally are no
Ministers, and it were to be wished, that the most of them, (yea, or the best
of them) were as good as Brethren. But yet I somewhat wonder, that he that in
this Paragraph could allege all Antiquity, should think it to sound ill at
first hearing, That the Brethren of the Church should have any hand in Church
Censures; who knows what reverend Testimony Ancient Tertullian gives of them
( Apologetici Capite 39.) Quum Probi, Cum Boni Coeunt, Cum Pii, Cum Casti
Congregantur, non Factio dicenda est, sed Curia. And what an hand Cyprian
gives to the People in Church censures, none that have read him can be
ignorant. What reason there is for their Power in Church Censures (whether
little, or much) we shall further consider (God willing) in its place: for here
you neither give reasons against it, nor refute our reasons for it.

2. A second thing which Vindex animadverts in the former Paragraph is,

that I call the Keys, Ordinances, which Christ has instituted to be
administered in his Church, the Church of Believers, a Particular Congregation.
But mark it (says he) not by a Church without Officers: but by the Officers
instituted in the Church.

Answ. He need not have bid me to mark that, which if himself had marked, He
could not but see, That I never acknowledged it to be in the power of the
people to administer all Ordinances, but to administer some Ordinances
themselves, and to elect and call such to them, as might administer all the
rest.

3. His third Animadversion is, That I say, the Keys are neither Sword nor
Scepter: for they convey not Sovereign power; but Stewardly and Ministerial:
which clearly (says he) excludes the People; for they have no Stewardly or
Ministerial Power over themselves.

Answ. As if the People were not Stewards of the Grace of God given to them!
The Apostle Peter makes account, That as every man has received the gift, so
he should minister the same, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. 1
Pet. 4.10. If the people have received any gift of Grace, they are either
Stewards of it, or Lords: Lords they are not, who must give account to the Lord
for the employment and improvement of their gifts: what are they else then but
Stewards? Yea, (you will say) but private men may bestow their Gifts privately.
But election of Officers is a public Gift, whatsoever else beside; and that
must be dispensed publicly; and that not as Lords, to elect whom they list,
but as Stewards and Ministers to Christ, to elect whom the Lord has chosen.

I said indeed (in that Paragraph) That Christ in giving the Keys, investeth
those to whom he gives them, with a power to, open and shut the Gates both of
the Church and Heaven; and that this power lies partly in their spiritual
calling (whether it be their Office, or their Place, and Order in the Church)
and partly in the concourse and cooperation of Christ, accompanying the right
dispensation of those Keys or Ordinances. But (says Vindex) I suppose the
word Calling, should be taken here of some special Calling or Office: which
again would exclude the people, as having no Office in the Church.

Answ. There is no reason why you should suppose, That Calling here should be
taken of some special Calling or Office; if special denotate a specification of
a Calling distinct from other Members of the Church: But if it only specify a
distinct calling, or state, or order different from such as are not members of
the Church: so it is true indeed, every Member of the Body has a special
Calling distinct from such Believers or others, as are not yet received into
Member like communion with this or that particular Church; Yea, and every
Member of this or that particular Church, has a calling to put forth some Acts
of Power in his own Church, which Members of another particular Church have not
power to put forth there, though they may put forth the same each one in his
own Church, respectively: Every Member of the Body of a Particular Church has
some Function, or Act^on, (or as the New Translation terms it) some office in
the Body. For that which is expressed in the Protasis of the Apostles
comparison, is employed in the reddition; Romans 12.4, 5. As we have many Members
in one Body, and all Members have not the same office: so we being many, are
one Body in Christ, etc. If all the Members of the Body have not the same
office, it implies, they have all of them some office or function, or action,
though not the same. But custom has obtained, that they only are accounted to
have a special calling or office in the Church, who are set apart for the
eminent administrations in the Church; as the Pastors, Teachers, Elders,
Deacons. And such a special calling, it is not requisite that the common
Brethren of the Church should have, to dispense that power of the Keys which
is committed to them. For Christ has neither called them to it, nor given them
gifts suitable for it.

But (says Vindex) when you say the Power of the Keys lies in their
spiritual calling (whether it be their Office or Place, and Order in the
Church:) you add this explication on purpose to steal in the interest of the
People in some share of the Keys.

Answ. It is not stealth, but Justice to give every man his own: Liberty, to
whom liberty; power, to whom power; honor, to whom honor belongs. The
Psalmist foretold it in a new song (all which new songs have special
accomplishment in the new Testament) That this honor have all his Saints, to
wit, in the Congregation of Saints to execute the spiritual censures (or
Judgments) written, Psalm. 149.9. And if the Lord have given them this honor,
it is rather stealth (yea sacrilege) to take it from them, then to allow it to
them.

But (says Vindex) if place, or Order in the Church, do give the People out of
Office, any Power in the Keys; that is, in the Ordinances; then may Women and
Children claim an Interest in those Keys, for they have a Place and Order in
the Church as well as men.

Answ. It is not every place or order in the Church, that gives power to
receive the ordinances administered by others, much less power, themselves to
dispense ordinances. Children have not power to receive the Lords Supper, much
less to administes it. And for Women, God has expressly forbidden them all
place of speech and power in the Church: 1 Cor. 14.34. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. unless
it be to join with the rest of the Church, in singing forth the public praises
of the Lord. Let every soul enjoy such privileges and liberties, as the Lord
has given him in his place and order: and neither affect nor attempt more. The
Female Sex, and Nonage, fall short of some power, which Christ has given to
the Brotherhood.

Of the Subject to whom the Power of the KEYS is given. Section III.
I Conceive it would be some loss of time and labor, to argue this Question
with Vindex alone: whose exceptions so far as they concern the point in
controversy, are but collections out of the writings of others, who have more
distinctly and elabourately disputed the cause. And therefore it will be
requisite, in this, and the like points in controversy, rather to consider
what has been written by learned and reverend M. Rutterford, and M. Baily, and
yet by the way, not to neglect what personal exceptions Vindex has taken at my
self.

In the Way of the Churches of New England, chap. 1. sect. 1. it was laid down
for the first Proposition: That the Church which Christ in the Gospel has
instituted, and to which he has committed the Keys of his Kingdom, The power
of binding and loosing, the Tables and Seals of the Covenant, the Officers and
Censures of his Church, the administration of all his public Worship and
Ordinances, is C^etus Fidelium, a company of Believers, m^^ting in one place
e^^^y Lords day, for the administration of the holy Ordinances of God to
public edification.

Upon this Proposition M. Rutterford (as he excels in acutenes and
Scholastical Argumentativenes) has raised four Questions, though some of them
more then I did intend to point at in the Proposition. Let us consider of them
in their order, not with a spirit of contention (which himself in his Epistle
to the Reader, heartily professes against) but with a spirit studious of Truth
and Peace.

The first Question he raises from that Proposition, is this: Whether a
company of Believers and Saints, builded by Faith upon the Rock Christ, and
united in a Church Covenant, be the only instituted Visible Church of the
New Testament, to the which Christ has given the Keys?

Himself understands the Proposition, as if it held forth the Affirmative.
But in very Truth, as the word [onely] is not in the Proposition: so it was far
from my intendment, to exclude an Organical Church (a Church furnished with all
her officers) from being an instituted Visible Church of the New Testament, as
well as Coetus Fidelium, a company of Christians without Officers. When the
Proposition speaks of Officers as given to the Church, it intends them not
as mere adjuncts given to a Subject, but as Integral parts given to the whole
Body of the Church, for completing the integrity and perfection of it. And so
much the very words of the Proposition do imply; for it speaks of such a
Church, to whom Christ has given the administration of all his public Worship
and Ordinances: which is not a power given to a Church of private Believers,
destitute of Officers. Howsoever they may be capable (more or less) of some
spiritual Administrations: yet doubtless they are not capable of all: and for
instance, not of the administration of Sacraments, without Officers.

Neither was it my intendment in that Proposition, to exclude lawful Synods
(gathered, and proceeding according to the pattern, Acts 15.) from all
participation in some part of the power of the Keys. For they have a power to
decide controversies from the Word, and to appoint a course for the preventing
and healing of offenses, and for agreement in the Truth according to the Word.
But these Synods are not the ordinary standing Judicatories of the Church:
neither do they convene, nor exercise their directive Power, but when the
particular Churches lie under variance or offense; or are not yet settled in a
way of Truth and Peace. But my intendment simply was, That each particular
Church when it is organized with all his Officers, and walks in a way of
Truth and Peace; There is no part of the power of the Keys, but a particular
Church has received it within it self, and may administer the same to the
edification of the whole body.

Neither let it be thought (in that first Proposition) That I intended to
invest a Church of Believers (without officers) with all the power of the
Keys, because I speak of the Election and ordination of officers afterward.
For so I speak also of the gathering and admission of Members: and yet it may
not be inferred, that I should intend a Church invested with all power, which
yet is destitute both of Members, and Officers. But it is a well known rule of
Method, to define or describe at first, Totum Integrale, with the proper
Adjuncts (or Passions) of it, and then to descend to set forth the several
Members, and integrall parts thereof, with their several operations in due
place.

So that this first question raised from this first Proposition is no question
at all; and therefore it will not be needful to examine the distinctions, or
conclusions raised up against it. For they do not contradict the true meaning
of the Proposition, unless it be some parts of the second conclusion, which
come in their place to be considered of in the sequel.

Touching the power of the Keys in the Church of Believers without Officers.
Sect. IIII.
THe second question, which M. Rutterford raised out of the first Proposition
formerly mentioned, is

Whether or not, Christ has committed the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to
the Church of Believers, which as yet wants all Officers, Pastors, Teachers,
etc.

But this question, so far as it c^ncerneth my Proposition, (to speak with
leave and due Reverence) is as ungrounded as the former. For the Proposition
speaks not of a Church that wants all Officers, but of a Church that having
received Officers from Christ, has power to Administer all the Public
worship, and Ordinances of Christ. This point and my plain meaning therein, is
more fully and distinctly opened in the small treatise of the Keys. But for
the present stating of the question, our judgment is expressed in two
Conclusions; which so far as they are controverted, are to be cleared.

First that the Church of Believers destitute of Officers, has received some
part of the Power of the Keys: as Power to receive Members, to elect Officers,
and to do such other Church Acts, as do not require Office-Rule, or
Office-Power.

Secondly, that the Church of Believers, though for the present destitute of
Officers, has in it a Radical or Virtual Power, whereby it may call forth such
Officers, as may Administer all those Acts of office Rule, or Power, which of
it self without them, it could not exercise.

Against these two Assertions, I do not find any thing in his distinctions or
conclusions, or Arguments which does prevail with me to depart from them, as
indeed he does not directly so much dispute against these conclusions which we
hold, as against that question (which himself by mistake gathered from the
Proposition) which we hold not.

Though I said the Keys were given to a Church of Believers, whereof Peter was
one,yet that was only to show, that Peter in his lowest spiritual relation in
the Church (as a Professed Believer) had his share in the power of the Keys: but
not that he had his share in the whole power of the Keys, as a Professed
Believer: but that he had other parts of the power of the Keys, as an Elder,
and as an Apostle immediately given Him by the Lord Jesus.

In his second Distinction ( page 7.) I do not understand the safety of that
speech; That Pastors and Teachers are Gifts, of which the Church is not
capable, as a Subject. For the Apostle says, Christ has given (amongst other
Officers) Pastors, and Teachers to his Church. Ephesians. 4.8.11. And if He have
given them to the Church, the Church is the recipient Subject of them. As if
the Eye be given to the Body, the Body is the recipient Subject of it. And
though the Church cannot exercise the Pastors, and Teachers place by
themselves; yet they may by their Pastors and Teachers. As the Body though it
cannot s^e by it self, yet it may by the eye, which is given to it of God for
that end: Neither is it a safe speech (as I conceive) to say, That the Church
is capable of these Gifts (Pastors and Teachers) as the object and end, because
the fruit and effect of these Gifts re^ou^deth to the good of the Church; if
that be meant as the only respect, in regard of which they are said to be
given to the Church. For Pastors and Teachers are given to the Church, as
Integral parts of the Church, as the Church is Totum Integrale. Now Integrall
parts are in^^insecall and essential to a Totum Integrale, and not
extrinsecall, as the object, and end be to a thing.

The Testimony which he alleges from Reverend Parker, and Baynes, and the
Parisian School, does indeed argue, that the fruit and effect of the gifts of
Pastor and Teacher does redound to the good of the Church (which no man
denies:) but M. Rutterford well knows, that Parker, and the Parisian School,
do grant further (even more then I argue for) that the Church is not only the
object and end, but the first subject also of all Church Power: which though M.
Baynes wave (in the place alleged by him:) and dispute thereupon both against
M. Parker and the Parisian School (under the name of Sorbonists;) yet he
clearly closes with M. Parker and us, in the conclusi^n; That the visible
Church instituted by Christ and his Apostles, to which the Keys are given, is
not a Diocesan, or Provincial, or National Assembly, but a particular
Congregation: Diocesans trial, Q. 1. But if M. Rutterford intend no more but
this, That the Church is not capable of exercise of the Pastors and Doctors
place, and therefore is not the first subject of their Office-power; I for my
part readily close with him therein, reserving due respect to others of
different judgment.

In his third Distinction, which he puts between a formal ordinary power,
and a virtual or extraordinary power, I do not well reach his meaning: For when
He comes to apply this distinction in his second Conclusion, He grants a
virtual Power, not Formal, in the Church of Believers to ordain Pastors, or to
do some such Act, as may supply the defect of ordination: As in a Church in an
Island, where the Pastors are all dead, or taken away otherwise; and yet he
makes not this an official, or an authoritative Power properly, but a virtual,
and extraordinary Power, not ordinary: like that which David had to eat the
show Bread. And in like case of extreme necessity, he allows a private man
endued with gifts and zeal to teach publicly. But I confess, I do not well
understand, how a man in case of necessity has any virtual power to do this or
that Act, but he has also a formal power to do such an Act in that case of
necessity. Such an Act I say, either the same in kind, or the same in Analogy.
When David did eat the Shewbread, he had a lawful not only virtuall, but
formal power, as an Israelite in necessity (to whom moral duties were to be
preferred before Ceremonial) to eat for the sustentation of life. When a free
People choose a King, and Crown him, though they be not endued with a formal,
but a virtuall Sovereign Power, to give Kingly authority which they have not;
yet they have formally a Power to yield up themselves unto subjection to such a
Person as they have chosen; and that does virtually and analogically set up him
in the Throne. For He that has formal Power to make one Relative, He has an
Analogicall Power, to set up his Correlative. They that can make themselves
Subjects, can make another to be their Sovereign.

But this I willingly admit which he says; That the ordination of Pastors by
the Church of Believers, is not an official, nor properly an Authoritative Act
of Power. For the election of a Pastor by the Brethren of the Church, is an
higher Act of power then their ordination is: As the Election of a King is an
Act of higher Power, then his Coronation. And yet the Election of a Pastor, is
not an Act of official, or Authoritative power: no more then the Election of a
King by a free People is an Act of official, or Authoritative Soveraingtie.

As for the publik^ Teaching of a private man endued with gifts and zeal, I
know not why it may not be allowed, not only in case of extreme necessity, but
in some cases of expediency, as when his gifts are to be proved, before he be
called into office.

In the third conclusion, M. Rutterford tells us, That as a Reasonable man is
the first, immediate, and principal subject of Aptitude to laugh, and the
mediate and secondary subjects are Peter and John, and such particular men: So
it is the order of Nature to give Church properties, and powers, first to the
Species and common Nature of the Church, and not to this or that particular
Church.

But this conclusion of his crosses nothing in that first Proposition of mine,
nor any other Tenent of ours. For that Proposition does not make this or that
particular Church (which is indeed a singular Church) the first subject of
Church Power: But a particular visible Church, which holds forth the Species
or common nature of each particular, or singular Church.

It is readily admitted what he says, That to be builded on a Rock, victory
over hell, and such like, are given principally and immediately to the
Catholic, and Invisible Church, as to the first and principal Subject.

But we cannot so easily admit that which he subjoyneth, that the Keys are
given to the Catholic Invisible Church, as the first and principal Subject
(though we grant they are given for their end and use:) But we rather believe
they are given to the particular Visible Church, wherein the power of the Keys
is only exercised and used. The Invisible Catholic Church does never convene
for the Administration of Church Power: And it were in vain to give power to
such a subject, which never is called to bring it forth into act.

In his Arguments, M. Rutterford does chiefly aim at this conclusion; To prove
that the Keys are not given to a Church of professed Believers, d^stitute of
Pastors and Teachers, etc. A conclusion which he is pleased to fram^ unto
himself, but had not occasion to collect it from any words in my Proposition;
which only affirms, that the Keye^ were given to such a particular Visible
Church, whereof Peter was one, and to whom Peter in case of offense might
complain, even to the Congregation. I might therefore omit this Question wholly,
but that he so handles it, as if there were no Church Power at all, but only
that which he calls official, and Authorita^ive power: and so he makes all
the Acts of the Brethren of the Church (who are no officers) as no Acts of
power at all, and consequently, no part left to the People in the power of the
Keys: which puteth upon me a necessity of clearing some expressions in his
Arguments.

1. His first Argument (page 9.) is,

The Church to which the Keys were given, is builded upon a Rock, is the House
of Wisdom, the house of God. But such is not a company of Professing Believers,
united by Church Covenant, and destitute of Pastors and Teachers. etc.

Answ. This latter Proposition is justly denied.

For M. Rutterford himself acknowledges a Church in an Island, where the
Pastors are taken away by death, or otherwise, page 8. And if such be a Church,
then truly it is built upon a Rock, the Rock of Divine Institution, and the
Rock of Christ believed on, and professed. Such a Church is also an House of
Wisdom, and an House of God: or else the Wisdom, and presence, and grace of God
given to the Church (yea to two or three of the Church) dies and perishes
with their Church Officers.

Object. The Church of Believers gathered without Pastors and Teachers, though
united in a Church Covenant, yet not being builded by Pastors and Teachers (who
are given to gather and to edify the Body) they are only the materials of
the House, But not the House.

Answ. 1. The Church is truly said to be builded by Pastors and Teachers, upon
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, when by their Doctrine they were
first brought on to believe, and by the same Doctrine taught to assemble into
Church Fellowship. It is true, the faith which they received by the edifying
Ministry of Pastors and Teachers, does not make them Members of the Visible
Church, but of the Invisible; and so fit materials only of the Visible
Church. But yet they being also taught to make profession of their faith before
the Lord, and his people, in covenanting or professing subjection to the Lord,
and one to another in the use of his Ordinances (so far as they are or shall be
committed to them) they thereby receive the form of a Visible Church upon them.
For as faith is the essential form of the Catholic Invisible Church: So is the
profession of faith, and the obedience of faith to Christ in his Ordinances
amongst themselves, the essential form of a Particular Visible Church, amongst
themselves I say. For profession of faith, and of the obedience of faith at
large, without re^pect of subjection to Ordinances in this or that Church,
makes a man no more a member of the Church at York, then of the Church at
Edinburgh. But when such a Society of Believers is combined together by
profession of faith, and obedience of faith to the Ordinances administered, or
administrable amongst themselves; they are now not only the materials of a
Visible Church, but have the true form of Church Estate, notwithstanding their
want of Pastors and Teachers. Otherwise Pastors themselves should be the form
of the Church, by which it is, and without which it cannot be a Church. As if
the Body of a man could not be an Human body, without eyes or arms: Or had
only the matter of a Man, (or some part of the matter) but not the form.

What though such (...) society of Believers be not a ministerial Church,
without Pastors and Teachers? yet it is not Pastors and Teachers, that gives
them the form of a Church, no not of a Ministerial or Organical Church, much
less of an Homogeneal. For Ministers (Pastors, or Teachers) themselves are
only materials (parts, and members) of a ministerial Church, not the form of
it. The form of such a Church, is the mutual profession (or stipulation) or
(that which amounts thereto) the Agreement and consent between ministers and
people to administer and submit unto, the holy ordinances of Christ amongst
themselves, according to the rule of the Gospel. Say not, a Church of Believers
without Ministers, wants the power of edifying the body of Christ, which is
required in a Visible Church, Ephesians. 4.11.

For every member of the Church has an edifying power, received from the head
Christ Jesus, to the effectual working of the increase of the body, unto the
edifying of it self in love. Ephesians. 4.16.

And though neither all, nor most of the Brethren of a Church have ordinarily
received a gift of public Prophesying, or Preaching: yet in defect of public
ministers, it is not an unheard of novelty; That God should enlarge private men
with public gifts, and that they that have received such gifts, should take
liberty to dispense them unto edification. For we read that when the Church at
Jerusalem were all of them scattered abroad, except the Apostles; yet they that
were scattered went every where preaching the Word. Acts 8.5. and 11.19, 20, 21.

Neither let it be said, That such a Church (or Society) of Believers is not
Wisdoms house, because it is not builded by Pastors and Teachers, who are given
to edify, and gather the Body. For though in a material house of wood or
stone, the builders do not only prepare the materials, but do also introduce
the form: yet in a spiritual house (such as a Church of Believers is) the form
is induced not by any formal Act of the Ministry of Pastors and Teachers
(though they may be instrumental, in giving a word of Direction:) but by the
voluntary stipulation or profession of subjection of this society of Believers
to the Lord Jesus in the use of his ordinances. The Church as it is the house
of God; so it is also the Spouse of Christ: Ministers are the friends of the
Bridegroom, and of the Bride. The ministers have done their work in preparing
the Bride for the Bridegroom; as also in ministering to her when she is married.
But in Betrothing her to Christ, the Bride in that work, must her self profess
her own acceptance of the Lord Jesus, and subjection to him: which she may do
effectually, whether ministers be present and Assistant or no. It is true,
ministers are ordinarily present and directive in this Work, and in that
respect are sometimes said to espouse them to Christ; 2 Cor. 11.2. but the
formal bond of their Spousage lies not in the presence or assistance of
ministers, but in their own professed yiedling up of themselves unto the Lord
in his Covenant. As in the c nsummation of marriage between man and wife; the
bond of the Espousage lies not in the presence, or assistance of ministers or
magistrates, but in the Husbands open profession of his acceptance of her, and
in her open profession of her acceptance of him, and subjection to him in the
duties of marriage.

His second Argument is taken from the Stewardship of them to whom the Keys
are committed.

To them (says he) are the Keys promised, who are the Stewards of the
mysteries of God. 1 Cor. 4.1. and servants of the house by Office, 2 Cor. 4.5.
and by office to open the doors, and behave themselves aright in Gods house, 1 Timothy 3.16. and to divide to those of the house their portion of meat in due
season, Mat. 24.45. and to cut out the Word. 2 Timothy, 2.15. But a Company of
Professing Believers, joined together in Church Covenant, and destitute of
Officers, are not stewards by office, nor servants over the house. etc.

The Assumption Mr Rutterford takes for granted, and so he well may; unless
office be taken in a large sense (as it i^ in Tully's Offices) for a duty,
which we owe to every one in his place respectively; and as he says (ad
Terent.) In Familia been instituta, dicimus omnes in officio esse opportere. In
which sense also the Translators take it in Romans 12.5. where they speak of all
the members of the Body (whether Natural Body or Ecclesiastical) as having all
of them received an office, though not all of them the same office, Romans 12.4.
And in the same sense, the Apostle Peter exhorts all the Saints of God to
administer the good gifts they have received, as good Stewards of the manifold
grace of Christ. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. In this sense ^very member of the Church may
be said to have an office, and a stewardly office in the Church.

But take office properly, for a calling invested with Power to perform special
Acts of public service to the Church; so indeed it implies a contradiction,
That the Church should be its own officer. For the very term of officer
implies subordination: and Mr Rutterford speaks properly; That they are
servants of the House by Office, whom he puts for the Officers of the House.
Now the Church cannot be her own servant.

But yet this gives the more just ground of denying the Major Proposition.
That to them only are the Keys promised, who are the stewards and servants of
the House by Office. The Matter familias in the House, has Keys of power over
her children, and servants, and yet is neither steward nor servant of the House.

It is true, the Keys are a symbol of power. And power is either Supreme, and
Sovereign; or Subordinate, and Subservient. Sovereign power in the Church
belongs to the Lord Jesus, who is therefore said to have the Key of David, to
open and none to shut; to shut, and none to open. Rev. 3.7.

And yet in proper speech, Christ, is no Church Officer, no officer in the
Church, (unless it be to God the Father) no more then the King can be said to
be an Officer in the Commonwealth. Officers are of an inferior rank, Deuteronomy.
16.18. But subordinate power is twofold: 1. (...), Officiaria Potestas,
stewardly Ministerial Office-Power. And secondly, Honoraria Potestas, an
honorable Power: such as a King going into a far Country may leave to his
Queen; whom though He leave her subject to the Laws and Officers of his Court
and Kingdom; yet he betrusteth her with this power, that in defect of officers,
she ^^all have power to choose new, according to the Law: and together with the
officers, joint power, either to admit servants into her family, or upon just
cause to remove any of them out of her Family. And that Christ (the King, and
Husband of his Church) being gone himself in bodily presence into a far
Country, has left this honorable power to his Church, as to choose their own
officers, to join in admission of Members, and censure of Offenders; I presume
Mr Rutterford will not gainsay. To give a touch of each; Plain it is, that when
Deacons were to be chosen into office, the Apostles referred the choice of them
to the multitude of Brethren, and they performed it. Acts 6.1, 2, 3.5. When
Saul essayed to join himself to the Church at Jerusalem, he was not received
till the Brethrens fear of his carnal estate was removed, and themselves
satisfied, that he was a Disciple; Acts. 9.26. Let no man except, Paul did not
essay to join himself as a a member to the Church at Jerusalem: for he was (as
being an Apostle) an Officer, (and therefore a member) in all Churches: For his
call to the Apostleship was at first unknown to them: and the Argument holds
so much the stronger, that if the Brethren must be satisfied in the
Discipleship of an Apostle, before he can be admitted to join with them; much
more may they require probable ground of the Discipleship of a Brother, before
he be admitted to join with them in Church Communion. And when the Incestuous
Corinthian was to be cast out of the Family of the Church; Paul refers the
Administration of that power to the joint proceeding of the Elders and Brethren
of that Church, leaving to either sort their concourse of several power
respectively.

Now then to apply this distinction of power to the Argument. All the places
alleged by Mr Rutterford, do indeed prove That the Keys were promised and
given to the Stewards and Officers, and Servants in the House of God: which we
willingly acknowledge. We acknowledge also that which he affirms, That a
company of professing Believers joined together in Church Covenant, and
destitute of Officers, are not stewards by Office, nor servants in the House of
God. But this we deny, that all the Keys, all kind of Power in the Church, is
promised and given to the officers of the Church, solely and solidly. All
Office-power indeed, is given to the Officers: Nor do we permit the Church of
Brethren to usurp any part of office-power unto themselves. But we see the
Scripture acknowledges other Power in the Church, besides office-power.

I shall not need to enlarge further answer to this second Argument. The
Testimonies which he alleges to prove his Proposition; they prove, that the
Keys signify Power, and Authority, and that Stewardly, or Office-Power, is
given to the Officers of the Church. But none of them prove, that all power is
Office-Power, or that the Keys hold forth no other power but office-power: or
that the Church of Believers has received no power at all. The Text in Isa.
22.2^. speaks not of a spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, but of a Civil
Power. The Text in Isa. 9.6. and Rev. 3.7. speaks not of a Ministerial, or
Office-Power, but of a Sovereign Power in Christ Jesus.

What Schindler speak^th of (...) as it crosses not us: so it concerns not
the Keys spoken of in Mat. 16. where the word in the Syriack is not, (...) but
(...) a word (as it seems) taken up from the Greek.

What those many other Authors say of the Keys in the places alleged by him,
do not at all weaken our defense: which makes me (I confess) the more to
wonder, that he should conclude that Troup of witnesses with this Period: That
he thinks while of late, never any Interpreter dreamed, that in this Text,
Matt. 16. That the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are given to all Believers,
but only to the stewards of the House.

M. Rutterford knows well, that Bucer expounding Mat. 16. says expressly De
Potestate clavium, Haec Potestas penes Ecclesiam omnem est; Authoritas modo
Ministerii penes Presbyteros and Episcopos, ut Romae olim Potestas populi fuit,
Authoritas Senatus, Ferus: ( not later then Bucer) upon Mat. 16. affirms;
Claves datas Ecclesiae, ut Dominae, and Sponsae: Petro, ut Ministro. Reverend
Baines, though in the first subject of the power of the Keys he do somewhat
dissent from us: yet he confesses in that third conclusion of his, upon
Question 3. page 83. of his Diocesans Trial: That he sets down that
Conclusion against the Divines of Conscience against our prime Divines, as
Luther and Melancton, and against the Sorbonists. But though all these might be
said to be of late, surely Augustine is not of late, whom I think best to
quote, as his Testimonies are at large alleged by Doctor Whitakers against
Bellarmine; the rather, that so we may take in the judicious Doctors Notes upon
them, Augustine, tractat. 50. in Johannem, Si in Petro, inquit, non esset,
Ecclesiae Sacramentum, non ei diceret Dominus, Tibi dabo claves Regni Coelorum.
Si hoc Petro tantum dictum est, non facit hoc Ecclesia: Si autem hoc in
Ecclesia sit; Petrus quando claves accepit, Ecclesiam sanctam significavit.

Again, De Agon. Christ. c. 30. He says, Petrum inter omnes Apostolas,
Ecclesiae Personam sustinuisse: and claves datas esse Ecclesiae, cum Petro
datae sunt.

On which, and some such like passages in Augustine, Doctor Whitaker gives
this Exposition: This is not says he, That the Church should receive the Keys
suo quodam modo, after a certain sort, but that in Peter they did receive them
properly, truly, and more principally, then Peter himself.

Let no man except, that by the Church he understood not the Brethren of the
Church, but only the Apostles, and their su^cessours the Presbyters.

For though it be true, that Office-power was given to them only, yet it is
clear; he acknowledges (as others do) a power likewise of the people in the
government of the Church. In stateing Church Government, He gives it thus for
a Conclusion. Si velimus Christum ipsum respicere, fuit semper Ecclesiae
Regimen Monarchicum: si Ecclesiae Presbyteros, qui in Doctrina and Disciplina
suas parts agebant, Aristocraticum: si totum Corpus. Ecclesiae, quatenus in
Electione Episcoporum and Presbyterorum, Suffragia serebat, Democraticum. Sic
partim Aristocraticum, partim Democraticum, partim etiam Monarchicum, est,
semperque fuit Ecclesiae Regimen. Whitaker. Controv. 4. Q. 1. c. 1. Number. 2.

Nor let any put off Whitakers or Augustine, with this evasion, that Peter is
said to have receiv^d the Keys in the Person of the Church, not because the
Church is any subject of that power, but because it is the end of that power:
all the power of the Keys being given to Peter, not for himself, but for the
good, and utility of the Church.

Such an evasion Chamier rejects with indignation, Hoccine vero (inquit) est
candide agere? hoccine Augustinum interpretari? Atqui Augustinus non quaerit,
quem in finem datae sint claves, sed quaerit cui. Hae vero Quaestiones quanto
separentur intervallo, quis non videt? Sed and exemplo facile docetur.
Vnicuique datur declaratio Spiritus ad utilitatem, inquit Paulus, 1 Cor. 12. id
est, in Bonum Ecclesiae, ut totus sermo ostendit. An dicat aliquis, eum cui
datur Declaratio Spiritus, Figuram gestare Ecclesiae, quum eam accipit? minime
vero: est enim non publicum sed privatum donum: publicum quidem ipsa utilitate,
sed privatum donatione, possessioneque. Cum igitur quaerit Augustinus, cui sint
datae claves, Petro soli, an toti Ecclesiae, importune inculcatur, datas esse
in Bonum Ecclesiae qui^ nihil obstaret, quo minus and datae essent in incommune
Bonum Ecclesiae, and tamen soli Petro. At Augustinus haec opponit, datae sunt
soli Petro, and datae sunt Ecclesiae, ut si soli Petro, non Ecclesiae: and si
Ecclesiae, non soli Petro. Si Petro inquit hoc tantum dictum est, non facit hoc
Ecclesia.

I forbear (for brevitie sake) to recite what he further disputes against
Horantius to the same purpose in the words following, De Oecumen. Pontifice. l.
11. cap. 10.

3 I come to consider of M. Rutterfords third Argument, which he propounds
thus:

To those (in Matthew. 16.) Does Christ give the Keys, to whom he gives warrant
for the actual exercise of the Keys? But this warrant is official Authority of
binding and loosing, Christ gives to Peter only, as representing Apostles,
Teachers, and Elders: and not to a Church of Believers converted covenant-wise,
and destitute of Officers, Ergo, etc.

Answ. The proposition is not always universally safe, if it be understood of
the Actual exercise of the Keys, (by them who receive them) in their own
person. For Christ himself, who received from the Father the power of all
Church Administrations: yet in the Days of his flesh, He in his own person
baptized no man: John 4.2. And after his Ascension, though the Sovereign power
of the Keys do still remain with him, yet he performs all the External
exercise of Church Power by his Ministers.

If it be said, that though Christ did not exercise all Church Power in his own
person, yet he had warrant so to do: It may justly be replied, Christ best
understood his own warrant, and he that did not exercise this or that Act of
the Church Power in his own person, surely he did not think it expedient to
exercise it in his own Person. And quicquid non expedit, quatenus non expedit,
non licet: That which is not expedient, so far forth as it is not expedient, is
not warrantable.

Besides it is a disputable case amongst Civil, and Canon-Lawyers, and by
Covarruvias judged for the Affirmative, that in some Cases, the Wife after her
Husbands death has a just Interest in some such Offices as she cannot
warrantably exercise in his own Person.

And he instanceth in Officio Decurionatus. Covarr. Tom. 2. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Number. 4.

Queen Elizabeth whilst she lived, had lawful power to punish her enemies by
slaughter in War; Her criminal Subjects by hanging: other offenders by
scourging: but it were an hard saying to affirm, that she had Warrant to
exercise all these Acts of Power in her own Person.

Answ. 2. I willingly grant that Peter (in Matthew. 16.) Received the Promise of
all Office-power, as representing the Officers of the Church, Apostles,
Teachers, and Elders: and with that Power, a Warrant of Official Exercise of
that Power.

But this I say withal, That Peter in receiving the Keys (or the Promise of
them) He received from Christ both sorts of subordinate Church Power, not only
Officiariam, but Honorariam Potestatem. And in receiving this latter, He
represented the Person of all professing Believers. For it were not reasonable
to think, that Peter receiving the Keys as a reward of the Profession of his
Faith, should receive no power at all to professing Believers as such, but all
Power only to professing Officers.

Ob. But if professing Believers, as such, had received any part of the Power
of the Keys, they had then received the Power of binding and loosing, which
they have not: For binding and loosing are the Acts of the Official-Power of
the Keys: Ergo, The Church of Believers being destitute of Officers, and
Governors has not received any part of the Power of the Keys.

Answ. The proof of the assumption of this Argument will not hold, unless
binding and loosing were the Adequate Acts of the Official-Power of the Keys.
But though binding and loosing, or (which is all one) opening and shutting, be
indeed the Adequate Acts of the Power of the Keys; yet not so of their
official-Power. The Lord Jesus has the Key of David, He binds and none
loses, He loses and none binds: ( Rev. 3.7.) and yet this his binding and
loosing are not the Acts of the Official, but of the Sovereign power of the
Keys. The Brethren of the Church at Jerusalem, who were scattered upon the
persecution that arose about Stephen: they preached the Word of Christ to Jews
and Grecians about Antioch, and by the good hand of the Lord upon them, a great
number believed, and turned to the Lord; Acts 11.19, 20, 21. These Brethren in
opening the Door of Faith to their Hearers, though they wanted Office, yet they
wanted not the Power of the Keys, to open the Kingdom of Heaven unto them.

The Brethren of the Church of Corinth concurred with their Officers, in
delivering the incestuous person to Satan, and afterward in the public pardon
of him, and release of his censure. In both which they put forth the Spiritual
Power of the Lord Jesus, which is, the Power of the Keys, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. with
2 Cor. 2.7. to 11. And yet they neither had the official-power of the Keys,
nor did they exercise it. It was also an Act of Church Power, which the Church
of Brethren at Jerusalem did put forth in joining in the Definitive sentence of
the Synod, and in sending forth Letters and Messengers to the Churches of
Antioch. Syria, and Cilicia, for the publishing and promulgating of the
Sentence. And yet the Brethren themselves neither had office-power in
themselves, nor did they exercise it.

Ob. But these Brethren in Corinth, and Jerusalem, though they had not
office-power in themselves, yet they had it amongst themselves in the Apostles,
and in the Elders then Assembled; And so with them they might join in some Act
of Church Power, which without them, they might not have been put forth at all:
or if they had, It had been of no power.

Answ. This were indeed to make the Church Power in Brethren a mere Cipher, yea
less then a Cipher. For a Cipher though it be of no number or account, unless
some Figure of the Decad be joined before it; yet if it be joined before it,
the Cipher will increase the number and account, and make it at least tenfold
more then it was before. But all the Brethren of the Church without officers,
are not only made as so many Ciphers, as those who of themselves can do no Act
of number or account at all: But also though an Officer, or a whole Presbytery
join with them, and go before them, yet the Act of the whole Church of
Brethren, makes the Act of no more account, no more value or validity, then it
was before; which seems to me an unworthy thing and unreasonable. For seeing
that the profession of the Faith in Christ was the original ground, (or at
least the occasion) of the grant of all Church Power unto Peter in the name of
the Church, how can it stand either with Faith or Reason, That a Church of
Believers professing the same Faith with Peter, shall receive no part of
Church Power at all, in respect of their profession of the Faith, but only in
respect of their Officers that preach the Faith? whereas Peter then spoke not
as a Preacher only, but as a Professor of the Faith. Faith when it sees a
Promise made to another in respect of this or that Qualification or Duty, It is
apt (by the help of the Spirit of Grace) to apply the same blessing, or some
part of it at least, unto it self in the same case.

Again, if it were so, that a Church of Believers destitute of officers, should
have received from Christ no part of the power of the Keys, then in case the
whole Presbyt^ry of a Church should be removed by Death, or Crime, o^
otherwise, the Church should cease to be a Church. For the Power of the Keys
comprehends the Latitude of all Church Power. And ut se res habet in esse,
sic in operari. Take away all power of Action, and operation from a Church, and
you take away the Church it self. And so you will make Ministers to be not only
the Integral parts of a Church, but the Essential parts also. Yea by this
means, The estate of the Church is in worse condition, then is the estate of
any civil Commonwealth. For take away all the Magistrates, and Governors of th
Commonwealth, yet still the Commonwealth subsisteth in it self; It cease
not to be a Commonwealth, nor is it left destitute of all Actions of a
Commonwealth. The Body of the People may solemnly assemble together, and choose
out of themselves new Magistrates: or if they want g^od choice among
themselves, they may supply themselves from their confederates. But the Church
of Christ (which of all Societies is the most Honorable, and most completely
supplied with Power to attain its own end, and is built upon the most sure
Foundation) If it be once deprived of her Officers and Rulers, it straightway
becomes Null, both in Essence and Action. Time was, when David speaking to the
Church said, Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God, Psalm. 87.3.
And one of those glorious things were, That her Foundations are in the Holy
Mountains, v. 1. And the Lord loves the Gates of Zion, more then all the
dwellings of Jacob, v. 2. But surely, if the Churches Being, did so easily
vanish with the loss of their Officers, This would turn their glory into
shame, above all other societies.

4. Procced we now to the fourth and last Argument, whereby M. Rutterford goes
about to prove, that the Church of Believers destitute of an Eldership, has no
power of the Keys.

If the power of the Keys lay in competition between a Church of Believers
destitute of its own Eldership, and a Church of Believers furnished with it (as
the question might seem to import) I should easily grant more ample power to a
Church with its Eldership, then to a Church without it; or if the competition
of the power of the Keys lay, whether in the Church without the Eldership, or
in the Eldership without the Church, (especially when the greater part of the
Eldership consists of the Elders of other Churches) though we give not much
power to a Church without an Eldership: yet we should give less to an
Eldership without the Church.

But the true state of the question is, whether a Congregational Church of
Believers furnished with Officers, and walking in the Truth and Peace of the
Gospel, have not received the power of Keys (the power of binding and loosing)
within themselves? or, whether this power be first given to a Classical, or
Provincial, or National Assembly of the Church Officers, or Presbyters: and
from them be derived to a Congregational Church of Believers with their
Officers?

But it may be also a second question touching a Congregational Church of
Believers, whether no power of the Keys (that is, no part of the power of the
Keys) be given to them without an Eldership.

This has M. Rutterford put for the question, and makes it the Title of every
leaf of Chap. 1. Sect. 2. The Church of Believers destitute of an Eldership
have No Power of the Keys.

Three of his Arguments in this question we have already perused: come we now
to his fourth.

His fourth Argument then is this: If Christ do not say in this place (Mat.
16.) nor in Mat. 18. That the Keys and the Acts of the Keys (to wit, binding
and loosing) are given to a Church of Believers without their Officers, then
neither of the places prove, that the Keys are given to such a Church.

" But Christ does not say it: Ergo, The Text cannot bear it.

Answ. 1. If this Text in Matthew. 16. Do prove that the Keys are given to a
Church of Believers with their Officers, It is as much as I infer from it.

Answ. 2. Yet two things there be in the words of the Text, which do infer,
that some part of the Power of the Keys is given to a Church of Believers
without their officers.

The first may be collected thus; If the Key^s be the power of edifying the
Church, and the Church be edified of Believers by the Public profession of
their Faith, Then Believers publicly professing the Faith, have some part of
the power of the Keys given to them.

But the Keys are the power of edifying the Church, and the Church is edified
of Believers, by the Public Profession of their Faith.

Therefore Believers Publicly professing the Faith, have some part of the
power of the Keys given to them.

What may here justly be denied, I see not. The major Proposition is evident of
it self. For no man can do any Act of spiritual efficacy, but he has received
from Christ some spiritual Power to do it.

And habenti dabitur, to him that edifieth the Church by any power received, to
him shall the more abundant power be given to do the same.

The minor Proposition is as clear: For the Keys are nothing else, but the
Instruments of edifying the Church. Though their immediate and proper work be
to open and shut (and Metaphorically, to bind and loose:) yet both these are
nothing else but Acts of edifying the Church. And that the Church is edified or
builded of Believers, Publicly professing their Faith: the Lord himself does
acknowledge in the words of the Text: when he says, Upon this Rock, (that is,
upon this Public Profession of Faith in me) I will build my Church. Peter by
this public profession of his Faith, did edify himself, and his
fellow-Disciples: and thereby obtained both a reward of his Profession, to
become the foundation of the Church: and a reward to himself, of receiving the
Keys; that is, a power both by gift, and office to edify the Church in a more
settled manner, and abundant measure, not only as a Believer, but as a chief
Elder, and Apostle.

The second thing in the Text, that may infer some part of the power of the
Keys to be given to a Church of Believers even without officers, may thus be
taken up.

If Peter had the Keys given him as a reward, not for doing an Act or Duty of
his office, but for doing an Act or Duty common to him with other Believers;
then Believers making the same public conf^ssion of Faith with him: As they do
partake with him in the Duty, so do they partake also (in some measure) in the
reward.

But Peter had the Keys given him as a reward, not for doing any Act or Duty
of his Office, but for doing an Act or Duty common to him with other ordinary
Believers.

Therefore other ordinary Believers making the same public confession of Faith
with him, they do partake with him in the Duty; so do they also partake in some
measure in the promised reward of the power of the Keys.

The former Proposition is not only the collection of many Divines both
ancient and modern, but it depends upon a principal ground of the work of our
ministry. For our Ministry takes it for a sure ground of the Application of
Scriptures; That what promise we find given to any upon occasion of this or
that qualification or condition, the same is intended by God, and easily
applied by us to all others, in whom the like condition or qualification is
found according to their measure.

The latter Proposition is so clear, as needs no proof, unless we shall make
the public confession of Faith in Christ, not to be the duty of ordinary
Believers, and Church Members, but only of Church Officers: or unless we
could find some other occasion, upon which Christ made this Gracious promise of
the Keys to Peter, beside the public confession of his Faith in Christ before-
the Lord, and his Brethren.

Ob. 1. When Christ gave the Promise of the Keys, he speaks not to the
Church, but turns his speech to Peter, v. 19. saying, I will give to thee (
Peter, not to the Church) the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven. Surely none
needs to teach our Lord to speak: This change of the Persons to whom the
Keys are promised, wants not a reason, etc.

Answ. As we need not, so we do not go about, to teach the Lord to speak. Here
is no changing of Persons, nor turning of speech, in giving the promise of the
Keys. Christ began his speech to Peter, and he continues his speech to Peter,
from v. 17. to 19. All upon occasion of Peter's confession. In v. 17. Christ
gives to Peter a promise of blessedness from the cause of his confession. In
v. 18 He gives a promise of reward to his confession; That upon it, as upon a
rocky foundation, He will build his Church in impregnable stability. In v. 19.
He gives a promise of reward unto himself upon occas^^n of his gracious
public confession, even a pr^mise of the Keys of the Church. And the promise
is more fitly given to Peter in the Name of the Church, then to the Church by
Name; because it was not the Church by Name that made that confession, but
Peter in the Name of the Church.

Ob. 2. If the Promise were given to Peter in the Name of Believers, how will
that stand with the judgment of the way, who will not allow every company of
Believers, because they are Believers to be an Instituted visible Church; (to
whom the Keys are given) but they must be a company of Believers professing
Covenant-wise, Faith in Christ and Church Communion. But then the Keys are not
given to Believers because they are Believers, and the Spouse of Christ, but
because they are such Professors, and so combined in Church Covenant.

Answ. The Author of the Way does no where say, That the Keys are given to a
company of Believers, only because they are Believers; but because they are
Believers making public confession of their faith before the Lord, and their
Brethren. For Peter himself received not the Keys merely as a Believer, but as
a Believer publicly professing his Faith before Christ, and his fellow
Disciples in Christ's School. If other Writers speak otherwise, (that the Keys
were given to Peter a Believer in the name of Believers) they must be
understood to speak of Believers, not as keeping their Faith to themselves, but
as making profession of their Faith publikly; so as they come to be received
into the society of the visible Church. Faith gives a man fellowship in the
Invisible Church, and in all the inward spiritual blessings of the Church. But
it is profession of Faith, that gives a man fellowship in the visible Church.
It is not a society of Believers, as such, that makes them a Church: for a
society of Christian Merchants may meet together in a ship to transport
themselves to Hamburrough, or Lubeck but they are not thereby a Church, nor
have received Church Power. But if they do publicly profess their Faith, and
their obedience of Faith to the Lord Jesus in the public ordinances of his
worship, which he has committed to his Church, and they are capable of; then
indeed they are a professed visible Church of Christ, and a Body united to him,
and one to another by such profession, and do also partake in the power of the
Keys according to their measure.

Ob. 3. I ask, whether true or false profession be the nearest intervening
cause of these, to whom the Keys are given?

Answ. True or false profession may be attended, either in respect of the
Doctrine of Faith in Christ professed, or in respect of the Grace of Faith
professing it. If the profession of the Doctrine of Faith be true, though the
Grace of Faith in the Professor of it be uncertain, and it may be hypocritical
(and so false:) yet we dare not deny the nature and power of a Church to such.
As the Church judges not of hidden crimes, so neither do the Faithful judge
of the Churches by their hidden hypocrisy, but by their open scandals in
Doctrine, or life. God would have his people live without anxious perplexity,
(as in point of marriage, 1 Cor. 7.32. so) in every society. It were an
inextricable perplexity, to suspend the Essence or validity of Churches or
Church Administrations, upon the hidden sincerity of Churches, and of
Church Officers, or Members. It is true, that Church Estate and
Church Priviledges, and Church Power are given to Believers, making public
profession of their holy Faith: to them are the Keys given, and for them. And
yet for their sakes God does vouchsafe both the Name, and Style, and Power of a
Church to such as make the like profession of the Faith with them, though not
with the like sincerity. The Church of Sardis had a name to live, yet was dead,
Rev. 3.2. Nevertheless, the Lord reckons it amongst the golden Candlesticks,
and walks amongst them, Rev. 2.1. It appears there were a few Names amongst
them, that were sincere: Rev. 3.4. And Dr Ames makes it most probable, That
there is no Particular Church, wherein the profession of the true faith does
take place, but that in the same are found some true Believers. Medull.
Theolog. l. 1. c. 32. number. 10.

Object. 1. If a false Profession be sufficient to make Persons a true Visible
Church; then 1. The Keys are not given to Believevers, because they are
Believers, and united to Christ as his Body and Spouse.

Answ. The Keys are given to Believers, because they are Believers, making
public confession of their faith. To hypocrites they are given, not for their
hypocrisy, but for the truth of that faith which they do profess in common
with sincere Believers: and for the sake of those true Believers who do
communicate with them, and for whose sake the whole Body is united to Christ,
and his Spouse, though adulterous in heart.

Object. 2. Then the Author of the Way says amiss, That the Church instituted
by Christ, is a company of Believers, faithful and godly men; for a company of
hypocrites are not such.

Answ. The Author of the Way speaks of the Church as it ought to be, and as
it is in outward visible profession. Hypocrites in outward profession and
appearance, go for faithful and godly, and such in truth they ought to be, as
well as in appearance.

Object. 3. Our Brethren prove the Keys to be a part of the liberty of redeemed
Ones; but counterfeit Professors are not redeemed Ones: nor have they that
liberty purchased to them in Christ.

Answ. It is true, the Keys are a part of the liberty of redeemed ones. For the
Keys hold forth an Ecclesiastical power, and all power in heaven and earth was
given to Christ upon his resurrection from the dead, Mat. 28.18. And though
counterfeit professors be not the redeemed ones of Christ (prope^ly so called:)
yet for the sake of the redeemed ones, counterfeit Professors have that liberty
purchased to them by Christ, as to partake in the power of the Keys. Otherwise
what can be said of hypocritical elders, of whom M. Rutterford doubt^th not,
they have received the power of the Keys: and yet though their persons be not
the redeemed ones of Christ, yet they have this liberty, or service rather
purchased to them by Christ, as to be serviceable t^ the Church in the
administration of the power of the Keys. The spiritual gifts (though common)
whereby Apostates are said to be sanctified, were purchased to them by the
blood of Christ. Heb. 10.29. And yet the power whereby hypocrites or Apostates
lord it over the r^deemed ones of God, is but a service. Romans 9.12.

Object. 4. It shall follow, that our Brethren widely mistake a supposed
difference, which they devise betwixt the Jewish and Christian Church; to wit,
that to make men members of the Jewish Ehurch, external holiness was sufficient,
as to be born Jews, to be circumcised, etc. but that the Visible Church of the
Gentiles after Christ, must be the Bride of Christ, and by true faith united to
him. Whereas the members of a Visible Christian Church, are and may be
hypocrites, though not known to be such, as were the members of the Jewish
Church.

Answ. Who it is that M. Rutterford means, to have put this difference
between the members of the Jewish and Christian Church, I do not know: but thus
far I own it, 1. That the Church of the Jews was National in their solemn
assemblies, as well as Congregational in their Synagogues: and that accordingly
they had National Congregations in Jerusalem, national sacrifices, and National
high Priests, besides national government: but the visible instituted Churches
of Christ in the new Testament, are Congregational: 1 Cor. 14.23. 2. That we do
not read of the children of Israel, who were circumcised in their infancy, to
have been afterward debarred from the Passover upon point of moral
profaneness: they having many sacrifices to expiate (...) ceremonially, which
Christian Churches have not, but only poenitential acknowledgment after
censure. In which respect, I suppose (under correction) there was more
toleration of sundry moral crimes in the Church Fellowship of the Jews, then
ought to be born in Christian Churches. But otherwise I easily acknowledge,
that in Christian Churches, as well as in Jewish, many hypocrites creep in, and
are long tolerated therein (it may be all their days) and yet without
impeachment of the truth and essence of the estate of Churches whereof they are
members, and without infringement of the power of their Church administrations
(when dispensed otherwise according to rule) notwithstanding the hypocrisy of
sundry members, yea, and of officers also.

To this place it belongs (I mean to the clearing of this Text, Mat. 16.) to
consider of the reasons whereby M. Rutterford goes about to prove, That Christ
spoke to Peter, as to one ropresenting the Apostles, and not as to one
representing all Believers.

I suppose he understands Apostles in a large sense, for all messeng^rs sent
of Christ for the ministry of the Gospel in the Church. Otherwise, if he should
mean, Christ spoke to Peter, as to one representing the Apostles properly so
called (the 12. Apostles) then the Elders of Churches could claim no interest
in the power of the Keys from Christ's words to Peter.

Nor do I maintain from this place, that Christ spoke to Peter as representing
all Believers; but as r^presenting Believers making public profession of the
Name of Christ before the Lord and their Brethren. Against this his Arguments
be.

Arg. 1. Binding and loosing are denied of our Boethren to belong to many that
make Peter's confession [Thou art the Son of the living God] as to believing
Women and Children.

Answ. 1. Women and children, though they being Believers, may make Peter's
confession, yet they make not public confession before the Lord and his
people, as Peter did. Now it is to Believers making public confession of their
faith in Christ, to whom the promise of the Keys is made.

Answ. 2. Women are expressly forbidden public speech in the Church (and
therefore public profession.) 1 Cor. 14.34. And children are not able to make
public profession; And therefore both of them are justly exempted from the
power of the Keys.

If it be obj^cted, that it is a new and uncouth exposition of the Text, to
interpr^t Petere confession, of the confession which members make of their
faith, when they enter into the fellowship of the Church: n^r were Christ and
his Apostles at that time in hand with any such work.

I answer, Though Peter's confession of his faith at that time was not made for
such an end, for his admission into the household or Church of Christ: yet it is
enough, That Christ rewards that confession of his, with such a promise of
all Believers into his Church by such a door. It is true, the same confession
may be made upon other occasions: but yet this appears to be one occasion and
use of this confession, to receive professed Believers into the fellowship of the
Church, and the ordinances thereof; seeing we r^ad that Philip made it a
necessary praecedential act unto the Eunuch to make the like conf^ssion before
he would receive him unto Baptism, which was the seal of his admission, as
into Christ, so into the fellowship of his Church. And accordingly it has been
anciently observed in the Primitive Churches, not to receive Competentes, or
Catechumen^ into the fellowship of the Church, and unto Baptism, before they
had made public confession of their faith before the Lord and his Church:
Which is a thing I doubt not, well known to M. Rutterford, to no man more; that
I might seem to do him wrong to allege testimonies for it.

Arg. 2. If Christ had spoken to Peter here of building a ministerial Church
upon his confession, and gifting it with the Power of the Keys, then the
Visible Church should be made as stable and firm from defection, as the Church
of elect Believers, against whom the gates of Hell cannot prevail. Now this is
most untrue, since Visible Churches do fall away (as the seven Churches in
Asia, the Church of Corinth, Ephes^^, etc.) and likewise this would warrant the
Papists to make use of this place, as they do, to prove the Invincible
stability of the Church and their impossibility of Apostasy, etc.

Answ. 1. Though this or that Visible Church do fall away, yet Christ has ever
had some or other Visible Church upon the face of the earth, in one Country or
other. Else the gates of hell had more prevailed against the Visible Christian
Church, then ever this could do against the Visible Jewish Synagogue.

Answ. 2. This or that Visible Church that did fall away, was not a society of
such professed believers as were built upon a rock; but rather the sinful
generation that rose up after them, who did degenerate from their Parents faith
and Profession, and so fell into the gulf of Apostacy, whether Turkish or
Antichristian.

Answ. 3. Though the gates of hell have sometimes prevailed against this or that
particular Visible Church, holding fast the profession of their faith without
wavering: yet they have not prevailed to their destruction, but to their
dispersion only; which tends to the multiplication and enlargement of
Particular Churches. The persecution raised by the gates of hell against the
Primitive Church at Jerusalem about Stephen, it prevailed indeed to the
dispersion of the whole Church (save the Apostles) Acts 8.1. but that
dispersion was as seed scattered out of the garner into the field, which
brings forth a more plentiful harvest. And so did their dispersion propagate
Churches both in Samaria and Antioch.

Answ. 4. Nor will this stability of Visible Churches promised by Christ,
strengthen the Popish plea of the stability of their Church at Rome. For it is
neither that promise of Christ, Mat. 16. nor any other that does promise
stability to any one particular Church in this City or Town: nor does any
exposition of ours, reach forth such a thing. The woman may be in the
wilderness, and fed by witnesses, (the Church may be in obscure places, and fed
by faithful witnesses) when yet neither her self, nor her witnesses dwell in
Babylon.

FINIS

