The Troublesome LIFE AND REIGN OF King Henry the Third.

Wherein five Distempers and Maladies are set forth.

Viz. 1. By the Pope and Church-mens extortions. 2. By the places of best trust
bestowed upon unworthy Members. 3. By Patents and Monopolies for private
Favorites. 4. By needless expenses and pawning of jewels. 5. By factious
Lords and ambitious Peers.


Suitable to these unhappie times of ours; and continued with them till the King
tied his Actions to the rules of his great and good Council, and not to
passionate and single advice.

Imprinted at London for George Lindsey. 1642.

A Short VIEW OF THE LIFE AND REIGN OF King HENRY the Third.
Weary in the lingering calamities of civil arms, and affrighted at the
sudden downfall of a licentious Sovereign, all men stood at gaze, expecting
the event of their long desires, peace; and the issue of their new hopes,
benefit. For in every shift of Princes, there are few either so mean, or
modest, that pleasure not themselves with some probable object of preferment.

To satisfy all, a child ascends the Throne, Hist. Maj* M. Paris.
mild and gracious, but easy of nature, whose innocence and natural
goodness led him along the various dangers of his fathers reign. Ra. de
Wendover.
Happy was he in his uncle the Earl of Pembroke, the guide of his infancy;
and no less for thirty years, whilst De Burgo the last servant of his
fathers against the French, both in Normandy and England, with Bigot Earl of
Norfolk, and others of like gravitie and experience did manage the affairs.
Five and no more were the distempers then in state, but such as are incident in
all, the Commons greedy of liberty, as the Nobility of rule; and but one
violent, raised by some old and constant followers of his fathers, ^ulio de
Bren, Hist. Maj. M. Paris.
De Fortbus, and others, men that could only thrive by the wars, misliking
those days of sloth (for so they termed that calm of King Henry's reign) and
rather because the justice of quietness urged from them to the lawful owners,
such lands and castles as the fury of war had unjustly given them: for finding
in the uprightness of the King, that protection could not be made a wrong
doer, Hist. Sancti Albani.
they fell out into the rebellion which ended their lives and competitions,
professing their swords that had set the Crown upon the Sovereign, should now
secure those small pittances, when Majesty and Law could not.

Dangerous are too great benefits to Subjects of their Princes, when it makes
the mind capable only of merit nothing of duty.

No other disquiet did the State after this feel, but such as are incident to
all: Malice to authority, goodness and greatness may secure themselves from
guilt, but not from envy: for highest in trust in public affairs are still
shot at by the aspiring of those that see themselves less in employment than
they deem in merit. Those vapors did ever and easily vanish, so long as the
helm was guided by wise and temperate spirits, and the King tied his actions
to the rules of good counsel, and not to young, passionate, and single advice.

Thirty years now passed, and all the old guides of his youth dead, but De
Burgo, Christ. de Dunst.
a man in whom nothing of worth was wanting, but moderation, whose length of
days giving him the advantage of sole power, his own ambition and age gave
him desire and art to keep out others. This bred to him the fatal envy of
most, which the proud title of Earl, and offices then bestowed on him much
increased. Sin by this had wrought, as in it self, so in the affection of the
people, a revolution; the affection of their fathers forgotten, and the surfeit
of long peace having led them perchance into some abuses. From thence the
Commons (to whom every days presence seem worst) commend the foregone ages
they never remembered, and condemn the present, though they knew neither the
disease thereof, nor the remedy. To this idle and usual humor falls in some
noble spirits, warm and overweening, who being as truly ignorant as the rest,
Christ: Lichfield.
first, by fulling the wisdom of the present and greatest Rulers, making each
casual hap their error, seem to decypher every blemish in government, and
then by holding certain imaginary and fantastical forms of Commonweal
flatter their own beleefes and abilities, that they could mould any state to
those general rules, which in particular applications will prove them gross
and idle absurdities, confirmed in their own worths by Sommery and Spencer,
Gual: Coven:
they take it a fit time to work themselves, into action and authority, now a
thing they long desired and thought unwilling to seem to sue for.

Doubtless the surest of their aims was yet to become quiet instruments in
serving the State, if they had been held worthy; but the King, taught by the
new Earl, Consilia senum have as juvenum esse; and that such wits, for so they
would be styled, Novandis quam gerendis aptiores, fitter in being fietie to
disorder, than to settle affairs, either delayed or denied their desires. For
wise Princes will ever choose their Instrument, negotiis and non supra,
creatures out of free election, that are only otherwise without freeness or
power.

Among this unequal medley there were of Nobility, Pembroke, Gloucester. Hist.
major M. Paris.
Hartfield, Darlings of the multitude, some for the merits of their fathers,
whose memories they held sacred, as pillars of public liberty, and
oppresiours of encroaching Monarchy. Others of the Gentry, Fitz-Geffery,
Bardolfe, Gruby, Mansell, and Fitz-Iohn, spirits of as much acrimony, and
arrogant spleen, as the places from whence they were elected, Camp, Court, or
Country could afford any. These by force would effect what by cunning the
others did affect, but all impatient to see their ends thus frustrate, and that
so long as the King followed the directions of the Earl of Kent, they had
small hopes of their desires, they made often meetings, and as one says of
them, Hist. minor M: Paris.
Clam nocturnis colloquiis, ant flexa in vesperum diem. At last, Sommery and
Spencer, two that were far in opinion with the rest, Gentlemen that by foreign
education and employment, were better qualified than usually men of those
times, and that set upon their own deserts, the best places when the stream
should turn, which some of them did unworthily obtain (for he died in actual
rebellion Iusticiarius Angliae against his Majesty) advised that the surest
means to remove that great and good obstacle, the Earl of Kent out of the way
of their advancement, was by sifting into his actions, and siding with his
enemy, Peter Bishop of Winchester, an evil man, but gracious with the King,
aiming that the worthiest driven out by the worst, they should ever be able to
match him with his own vices, which will be more visible, as he is more
potent, and so remove him at pleasure, or else give over the King to such
ministers, as losing him the hearts of the people, might smooth him a way to
their bad desires: Honores quos quieta rep. despenant pertu bata consequi se
posse arbitrantur.

This counsel, heard and approved, and put in execution, the corrupt and
ambitious Bishop is easily ensnared to their part, by money and opinion of
greater power. Articles are in all have forged and urged against the Earl, as
sale of the Crown lands, waste of the Kings treasure; and lastly, that which
those doubtful times held capital, giving allowance to any thing that might
breed a rupture between the Subjects and the Sovereign, as he had done in
making way with the King to annihilate patents granted in his nonage, and
enforced his Subjects to pay, as the Record says, Non juxta singulorum
facultatem sed quic quid justiciarius est imabat; Well he cleared himself of
all but the last, and did worthily perish by it: For acts that fill Princes
coffers, are commonly the ruin of first Inventors, bad times corrupt good
counsels, and make the ministers yield to the lust of Princes, but this King
cannot therefore pass blameless, that would so easily banish all former
merits of so good a servant, for that himself was therein chief in fault; but
Princes natures are more voluable, and more sooner cloyed than others, more
transitory their favors, and as their minds are large, so they easily
overlook their first elections, having no further necessity in the fastness
of their affections, than their own satisfaction.

The Bishop now alone manageth the State, Cro. de Leich.
chooses his chief instrument, Peter ae Rivallis, a man like himself,
displaceth the Natives, and draws Poytovins and Britons into offices of best
trust and benefit, and the King into evil opinion of his people: for nothing
is more against the nature of the English, than to have strangers rule over
them. Of this man's time, Wendover an Author then living says, Iudicia
committuntur injustis leges ex legibus, pax discordan^ibus justicia injuriosis.
Thus the plot of the tumultuous Barons we^^ clear, and had not the discreet
Bishop calmed all with dutiful persuasions, and enforming the King, the
support of this bold man's power (whose carriage before lost his father
Normandy, his treasure, and the love of his people, and in that the Crown)
would as by his teaching the son, to reject in passion the just petition of his
loyal Subjects, as of late the Earl Marshall the due of his office, draw all
the State into discontent, by his bad office and corrupt manners; and
doubtless, the rebellious Lords had ended this distemper (as their designs)
in a civil war.

Denials from Princes must be supplied with gracious usage, that though they
cure not the sore, yet they may abate the sense of it: best it is that all
favors come directly from themselves, denials and things of bitterness from
their ministers.

Thus are the strangers all displaced and banished, Claus an. 37. H. 3. (...).
26.
Rivallis extortions ransackt by many strick Commissions, and the Bishop
himself sent disgraced to his See, finds now, nullam quaesitam scelere
potentiam diuturnam, and that in Princes favors there is no distance between
mediocritie and precipitation; so dangerous are the ways of Majesty, and men
still foolish to strive to run. The Faction still frustrate of their malicious
ends, begin to sow upon their late grounds of the peoples discontent, quaerelas
and ambiguos de principe sermones turbulentia vulgi: and took it up a fashion,
to endeare and glorify themselves with the senseless multitude, by depraving
the Kings discretion and government, whose nature too gentle for such insolent
spirits, was forced (as Trivet says) to seek as he presently did, advice and
love among strangers, seeing no desert could purchase it at home, all bore
themselves like Tutours and Controllers, few like Subjects and Counselors.

God we see holds the hearts of Princes, 10. Tailor Mon. de Berry.
and sends them such Counselors as the quality of the subjects meriteth; for
Mounford a Frenchman became the next object of the Kings delight, a Gentleman
of choice blood, education, and feature. On this man's content the heady
affection of the Sovereign did so much dote, that at his first entry of
grace, in envy of the Nobility, he made him Earl of Leicester; and in no
less offense of the Clergy, by violating the rights of holy Church. gave him
his vowed veiled sister to wife, more of art than useful. Some have deemed
this act of the Kings, making the tie of his dependancie the strength of his
assurance, so both at his will.

Mountford made wanton with the dalliance of Majesty, forgets moderation;
Aaron Fe de Bulgrave.
for seldom moderation in youth attends great and sudden fortunes: he
draws all affairs public into his hands, all favors must pass from him,
preferments by him, all suits addressed to him, the King but as a Cipher set to
add to his figure the more of number.

Great was the Sovereigns error, when the hope of servants must recognite it
self to the servant, which ought immediately to come from the goodness and
good election of himself, though Princes may take above others some reposefull
friend with whom they may participate their nearest passions; yet ought they so
to temper the affairs of his favor, that they corrupt not the affairs of
their Principality.

The great and gravest men began to grieve, when the unworthy, without honor
or merit, dealt thus alone in that which should pass their hands, and to over
leap their years, to the greatest honors and offices; and therefore ran along
with the rising grace of the Kings half brethren (though strangers) hoping to
divide so the possession of grace, which they saw impossible to break.

Leicester confident of his Majesty's love, Cro. de Reading
and impatient either to bear Rival in favor, or partner in rule, opposes
them all; but finds in his ebb of favor, the fortunes of others; for this
King could as easily transfer over his love, as settle his affection: great we
see must be the art and cunning of that man, that keeps him afloat the stream
of Sovereign favor, sithence the change of Princes wills (which for the most
part are full of fancies, and so unsatiate) are hardly arrested, who so would
this, must only intend the honor and safety of his Master, and dispoyled of
all other respects, transform himself to his inward inclination, work
necessity of employment, by undergoing the offices of most secrecy, either of
public service, or Princes pleasures; beat down he must Competitors of worth
by the hand of others, conceal his own greatness in public, with a fained
humility, and what in potencie or government he affects, to let rather seem
the work of others, than any appetite of his own.

Now were the raines of rule fitly taken by this advantage, H. Knight Mon. Lest.
put alone into the hands of the Kings half brethren, Adam, Guide, Gadtrey,
and William; himself, as before, ex magna fortuna tantam licentiam usurpans;
for to act his own part he was ever ready drawn, when he had such worthy
servants, as would often for his honor urge it.

These Ministers (as Walling fora terms them) tanta elati jactantia, Li. de
Wallingford.
quod nec supertorem sibi intelligunt, nec parem melitis, and molitis
adulationibus, animum regis pro libito voluntatis orationis tramite
deliniaentes, do alone their list; they fill up the places of justice and
trust with their Contrymen, put out the English, exact of whom and who they
please, wast the treasure and Crownlands on themselves and followers, set
prices on all offices, and ruin the Law within the rule of their own breasts;
the usual reply of their serservants to the plaints of the Kings Subjects
being: Guil. de ^^shan.
Quis tibi rectum faciet quod Dominus meus vult, Dominus Rex vult. These
strangers seemed in their lawless carriage not to have been omitted, but to
have entered the Land by Conquest: the great they enforced, not to obey, but
serve; and the mean to live so, so as they might justly say, They had nothing,
yet lest the King should hear the groans of his people, and greediness of his
Ministers which good and able men would tell him, Li. Monast. de Ramsey.
they bar all aves, suspicion being the best preserver of their own defects,
aims at those who have more of virtue than themselves, as fearing them most.

Thus is the capacity of government in a King, when it falls to be a prey to
such lawless Minions, the ground of infinite corruption in all the members of
the State: all take warrant generally from Princes weakness of licentious
liberty, and greatness makes profit particularly by it: and therefore gives
way to increase ill, to increase their gains.

A famine accompanyeth these corruptions, and that so violent, as the King is
enforced to direct writs to all Shires, Ad pauperes mortu^s sepeliend^s famis
inedia dificientes: Famine proceeds, and secutus est gladius tam terribilit,
^^ nemo inermis secure possit per provincias per vagace. For all the villages
of the Kingdom were left a prey to a lawless multitude, who, per divisas
parts i^^nerantes velut per consensum abiorum, as the Record said, did imply
that the factious Lords suspected that the King had given some heart to this
commotion. Ambitious Peers bring ever fuel to popular fires, nor was the
Church without a busy part in this tragic work; Guil. de Rishanger.
for Walter Bishop of Winchester, and Robert of Lincoln, to Mountford and his
faction, pracordialiter adhaerebant, and were far engaged; in such designs
Churchmen are never wanting, and the distaffe of present government, as well
in Church as in Commonweal, will ever be a knot of strength for such unquiet
spirits, who always frame to themselves some other form than the present, as
well in Religion as in temporal estates, being that which with the giddy
multitude wins the best opinion, and did at this time fitly suit the peoples
humors, so much distasting the new Courts of the Clergy, their pomp, their
greediness, and the Popes extortions.

A fair pretext it was to the factious Bishops, to use their bitter pens and
speeches so far against some religious Orders, ceremonies, and state of the
Church, that one of them incurred the sentence of excommunication at Rome, M.
Paris.
and treason at home: for he enjoined the Earl of Leicester, in remissione
peccatorum, ut causam illam (meaning the rebellion) usque ad mentem assumerat
ass rens pacem ecclesiae Anglicanae sine gladio materiali nunquam firmare
posse: it was not the best doctrine this man could plant by liberty and war,
when the first Church rose by patience and prayer: true piety binds a subject
to desire a good Sovereign with a bended knee, rather in time to desire
abatement than to resist Authority: Churchmen therefore ought not always to
lead us in the rules of loyalty, but knowledge of our own duty in difficult
points of Religion, where an humble ignorance is a secure knowledge we may
rely on them. To suppress these troubles, and supply the Kings necessities, a
Parliament was called, much to the liking of these Lords, who as little meant
to supply the King as he did desire to acquit the State, their ends at this
time being only to open at home the poverty of their Master, to lessen his
reputation abroad, and to brave out their own passions freely, which these
times of liberty permits, here they began to tell him, he had wronged the
Public in taking to his private election the Justice Chancellor and
Treasurer, it should be only by the common counsel of the Realm, commending
the Bishop of Chichester for denying the delivery of the great Seal, but in
Parliament, where he received it.

They blame him there to have bestowed the best Places of trust and benefit on
Strangers, Io. de Wallinge.
and to leave the English unrewarded to have undone the trade of merchandise by
bringing in mults and heavy customs, and to hurt the common liberty by non
obstantes in his Patents to make good monopolies for private favorites that he
had taken from his subjects, Qui quid habuerunt in osculentis and poculentis
rusticorum entm bigas equos viva, victualia ad libitum caepit, that is, Judges
were sent in Circuit under the pretext of Justice to fleece the People, Causis
fictis quaecunque poterant deripuerunt. And that Sir Robert de Purslan had
wrong from the borderers of his Forests, Cro. sis. Albani.
under pretense of incroachment or Assarts great sums of money, and therefore
they wonder he should demand relief from his so pilled and poled Commons that
by these former extremities, Gual. de Coventry.
Et per auxilia prius data ita dipanperentur ut parum aut nihil habeant in
bonis: advising him withal, that since his needless expenses postquam rex
regnt coepit esse, were summed up to be by them above 800000. l. it were
fitting to pull from his favorites, who had gleaned the treasure of the
Kingdom and shared the old Lands of the Crown, some one of whom the Lords
described, to be Miles literatus, or Clericus militaris, that had in short
space from the inheritance of avarice grown to the possession of an Earldom;
and Mansel another inferior Clerk, that rose to dispend in annual revenues
4000. m. whereas more moderate fees would have become a penman no better
qualified than with the ordinary fruits of a writing-school, yet told if a
moderate supply would suit with his occasions, they were content to perform so
far relief in obedience as the desert of his carriage should merit toward
them: Reg. Reff.
and so as the Record says, Dies data fuit in tres septimanus, ut interius rex
excelsus suos corrigeret, and magnatet ejus obtemperarent voluntati at which
day upon new grant of the great Charter admittance to his Counsel (some
persons elected by the Commons) and promise to rely upon the Natives, and not
on strangers, for advice hereafter they spare him such a pittance, as must
force him again to their devotion for a new supply.

Thus the Parliaments that were ever before a medicine to heal up any rupture
in the Princes fortunes are now grown worse than the malady, since malignant
humors began to rule more than well composed tempers. The King by this
experience of the intents of his rebellious subjects, finding the want of
treasure was the way whereby they enthralled his Majesty, begins to play the
good husband, closes his hand of waste, and resolved himself (too late) to
stand alone.

Experience is pernicious to the private, and dangerous to the good of State
when it never learnes to do but with undoing, and never sees order but when
disorder shows it; yet still alas, such was his flexibility, when he came to
be pressed by his French minions, that he could not hold his hands any longer
from their vast desires and endless wastes, so that an Author then living
says it became a byword, Our inheritance is converted to strangers and our
houses to aliens. Gual. de Rishang.
Followers to a King excessive in gifts, are excessive in demands, and cut them
not out by reason but by examples, favors past are not accounted, we love no
bounty but what is mere future, the more that a Prince weakeneth himself in
giving the poorer he is in friends, for such prodigality in the Sovereign ever
ends in the spoil and rapine of the Subject. Yet before the King could again
submit himself as he had the last Parliament to so many brave and strict
inquirers of his disloyal subjects, he means to pass through all the shifts
that extremity of need which greatness could lay before him.

He begins first with the sale of Lands, and then of Jewels, pawneth
Glascony, and after his Imperial Crown, and when he had neither credit to
borrow (having so often failed the trust he had made) nor morgage of his own,
he then lays to pawn the Jewels of Saint Edwards shrine, and in the end not
having means to defray the debts of Court, was enforced to break up house, and
as Paris says, Guil. de Rishang.
with his Queen and Children, cum abatibus and prtoribus humilia satis hospitia
quaerunt and prandia.

This low ebb that again the Kings improvidence had brought him unto gave
great assurance to the rebellious Lords that they should now at last have the
Sovereign Power left a prey to their ambitious designs; and to bring it
faster on, they desire nothing more than to see the Kings extremity constrain a
Parliament, for at such times Princes are ever less than they should, Subjects
more.

To hasten on the time, and apt the means, there are some certain seditious
humors that the Kings necessity must repair it self upon the fortune, and
liberty of the People, that having nothing of his own, he might and meant to
take of others, for Kings may not want as long as Subjects have means to
supply.

This took effect just to their minds, and wrought a little moving in the
State, which doublesse had flamed higher if the King had not assuaged it by
Proclamation wherein he declared, Quod quidem malevoli sinistra praedicantes
illi falso suggesserunt illum vel eos indebite gravari, ac jura and libertates
regni subvertere, ut per suggestiones dolesas and omnino falsas eorum corda a
sua dilectione and fidelitate averterent. But desires then, that Hujusmodi
animorum suorum purturbatoribus ne fidem adhiberent. For that he was ever ready
to defend them from the oppressions of the great Lords, Et omnia iura and
consectudines eorum debitas bonas and consuetas in omnibus and per omnia
plemius observare: and that they may rest off, that Secure de voluntate
liberaliteras suas fecit patentes.

But seeing still that Majesty and Right subsist not without means and power,
and himself had of neither so much as would stop the present breach in his own
wants or his Subjects loyalties he flies to the bosom of his People for
relief and counsel at Oxford they met in Parliament, where his necessities met
with so many undutifull demands, that he was forced to render up unto
rebellious wills, his regal power; here the Commons knowing that cum eligere
inciperent, they were loco libertatis, stood with the King to have the managing
of the State, put to the care of 24. whereof 12. by their election, whereto
they look strictly, the other by him, who in all things else was left a cipher,
and in this, either by fear or advice filled up his number with Mountford,
Gloucester, and Spencer, which beside the weakening of his own part, won to these
his late opposites and opinion of great interest, they had got into his favor.
He has now neither left him election of public Officer nor private
attendance, his half brethren and their followers he must despoil of all
fortunes and exile by proscription under his own hand, commanding the process
Pro transfectatione fratrum suorum, to be dire^^ed to the Earl of Hartford and
Surrey, and not to pass either money, arms, or ornaments Nisi informa quam
dicti comites inquirerent, and after departure enjoined the men of Bristow that
they should not permit any stranger Sive popenquos regis applicare in portu,
but so to behave themselves therein that as well the King quam magnaies sui cos
merito commendare debeant.

Thus we see how easily men's estates do change in a moment, and how hard it is
to make good use of things ill gotten; and thus changing solid power into the
rules of power, and these by popular elections, made the State believe that by
this form of limited policy they had utterly suppressed the mind of mankind,
for ever dreaming upon the imaginary humors of licentious sovereignty.

But it fell out nothing so, for now every man began to estimate his own worth,
and to hammer his head upon all designs, that might enlarge his power and
command, then began the great men to pull from the body of the country and
regal sovereignty, such royal suitors as neighboured any of their own seats,
whereunto they enforced the service, and as the Record says, Ad sectas
indebitas and servitutes intolerabiles subditos regis compulerunt. Thus raising
indeed Mannours to become great Honors, and rending asunder the Regal Justice
made themselves of so many subjects while they lived in duty, Cro. sti. Albani.
totidem tyrannos, as the book of Saint Albans says, when they had left their
loyalty Magnas duxerunt magnates regni super subditos regis servitutes and
oppressiones, which they bore patiently, for excess of misery having no ease
but custom, made men willing to lay the foundation of servitude by the length
of sufferance, which found no other ease nor end until the quiet of this Kings
Reign.

Mountford, Io. de Woollen.
Gloucester, and Spencer, the heads of this rebellious plot, having by the late
provision drawn to the hands of their 24. Tribunes of the People, the entire
mannaging of the State, and finding this power too much dispersed, to work the
end of their desires forced again the King at London to call a Parliament,
where they delivered over the Authority of the 24. unto themselves, and created
a Triumvirat, Non constituendo reip. causa: (as they first pretended for their
own ends) but to make a speedier way to one of them as it fatally did to become
dictator perpetuus.

Ambition is never so high but she thinks still to mount, that station that
lately seemed the top is but a step to her now, and what before was great in
desiring seems little now in power.

These three elect new Counselors, Ord. in Inter rec: Civ. Lord.
and appoint quod tres ad minus alternatim semper in curia sint, to dispose of
the custody of Castles, and de alus omnibus regni negotiis. The chief Justice
Chancellor and Treasurer with all Officers, maiores and minores, they reserve
themselves the choice, and bind the King to this hard bargain, upon such
strange security, that he is contented under the great Seal, and Oath, to
loosen to them the knot of legal duty, whenever he assumed to himself his
regal Dignity. Liceat omnibus de regus nostro contra nos insurgere and ad
gravamen nostrum opem and operam dare ac si nobis in nulla tenerentur.

This progedy of fortune in whom she had set a pitiful example of her
inconstancy, finding no part of his Sovereignty left, but the bare title, and
that at their leaves beggeth succor of Urban the fourth against his disloyal
Subjects: the Pope by Bull cancelleth his Oath and Contract, and armeth him
with Excommunications against all those that turn not with speed to their due
and old obedience; sithence, promises made by men that cannot say they are at
liberty are light, and force has no power to make just interest. These Lords
on the other side that had imped their wings with the Eagles feathers, and like
no gain, but what was raised out of the ashes of Monarchy made head against
their Sovereign, and to mate him the better called in some I rench forces.

Thus the Commonwealth turned again her sword into her own bowels, and invited
her ancient enemies to the funeral of her liberty, so that it was not a wonder
she did not at this time pass under a foraigne servitude, and though those men
were more sensible of their disgrace, than others miseries, yet found they no
better pretext for private interest than that of the public, and therefore at
the entry into this war, they cried liberty, although when they came nere to an
end, they never spoke once of it. At Lewis the Armies met where the King
endeavored a reconciliation, but in vain, for persuasions are ever
unprofitable, when Justice is inferior to force, the sword decided the
difference, and gave the two Kings and their eldest sons prisoners.

The person as well as the regal power being thus in the hands of Mountford,
and Gloucester, found neither bond of security, nor expectation of liberty, but
what the emulous competition of greatness, which now began to break out
betwixt these mighty Rivals gave hope of, for Leifter meaning (by incroaching
by his partner to himself, the person of the King and his followers the best
portion of the Spoil, and to draw more fruit from this advantage, than it
should in fellowship yield, dissolved the knot of their amity.

Equal Authority with the same power is overfatall we see to great actions,
for to fit minds to so equal a temper, that they should not have some motions
of dissenting is impossible.

Mountford having thus broke all faith with his confederate, and duty to his
Sovereign, leaves the path of moderation and wisdom to come to the King by
that of pride and distrust.

To him he tells that his aims and ends had no other object ever, but order
of the State and ease of the People, that he did not in this carry affection
against duty, but well knew how to rein his desires to his just power, and so
no less to his Majesty's content if he would be ruled, which was to command
the Castles and Forts of his now opposites Gloucester and the rest into his hands,
it was hard to this King thus to take a Law from his inferior. But necessity in
sovereign affairs does often force away al formability, and therefore those
poor Princes who now at the victors discretion seemed to have been only raised
to show the inconstancy of fortune and vanity of man, suited himself with
incomparable wisdom to the necessity of the time: neither did humility now
wrong Majesty, when there was no other means to contain spirits so insolent,
but dissembling.

He therefore summoneth in his own person the Forts of his fastest friends to
yield to his greatest enemies,

These he entreats in show to his lodging, but in effect his prison, and saw
himself forced to arm against his friends, and to receive new Law from him to
whom he lately thought to give it. Thus Leister is become the darling of the
common rout, who easily change to every new master, but the better durst not
sail along his fortune, by the light of his glory. Crystal that fairly
glistereth does easily break, and as the assent of usurped Royalty is slippery,
so the top is shaking, and the fall fearful; to hold this man then happy, at
the entry of his false felicity, was but to give the name of the image to the
metal that was not yet moulten. For by this the imprisoned Prince was escaped,
and fast assured of Gloucester, by the knot of his great mind and discontent, and
both with the torn remainder of the royal Army, united, and by speedy march
arrived (unlookt for) nere Eversham, to the armed troops of the secure Rebels,
whom they instantly assail, for it was no fit season to give time, when no time
did assure so much as experience did promise.

Spencer and other Lords of the faction made toward the Prince with the best
speed of march, but could not break out, being hurried along the storm of the
giddy multitude. Public affection depends on the conduct of fortune private on
our carriage, we must beware therefore of running down steep hills with weighty
bodies: they once in motion, subferuntur pondere, steps are then voluntary.
Leister at that instant with the King, and out of the tempest might have
escaped if his carriage and hope had not made him more resolute by misfortune,
so that he could neither forsake his followers nor his ambition. Thus making
adversity the exercise of his virtue, ran and fell. Private cogitations make
more or less of fortune, but thoughts we see once raised to the height of
rule, are no more in our own power, having no mean to step upon between the
highest of all and precipitation.

The King by this happy accident freed and obeyed, began to search the ground
of his former miseries, and why that virtue and fortune that had settled and
maintained so long under his ancestors, the glory of his Empire had cast him in
his time off, and conspired with her enemies to her almost ruin, as if the
genius of the State had quite forsaken her.

Here he finds his wastfull hands had been too quick both over the persons
and estates of his People, the griping avarice of his civil Magistrates, and
lawless liberty of his martial followers, To. Pat. 53. H. 3.
the neglect of grace, and breach of his word, to have left the Nobility at
home and necessity, his reputation abroad, Crosti. Albani
making merchandise of peace and war as his last refuge; so leaving his old
allies became enforced to betake himself to persons doubtful, or injured, and
that by giving over himself to a sensual security, and referring all to base,
greedy, and unworthy ministers, whose counsel was ever more subtle than
substantial: he had thrown down those pillars of sovereignty and safety, Io.
de Tax^ter.
reputation abroad, and reverence at home.

He therefore now makes sweetness and clemency the entrance of regained rule,
for the faults of most of the Rebels he forgot* A gracious kind of pardoning,
not to take knowledge of offenses, others he forgave that they might but live
to the glory of his goodness, for the fewer killed the more remain to adorn
his trophe. Tyrants shed blood for pleasure, Kings for necessity; yet least his
justice and power might so much suffer in his grace and mercy. Some few he
punished by small fines, some by banishment as the guiltless, yet unpittied
sons of the arch-traitor. Treason so hateful is to the head, that it draws
(we see) the carriage of the innocent children into a lasting suspect, and what
is suspicion in others is guilt in them.

Upon the constant followers of his broken fortunes he gives, Claus. an. 52.
H. 3. m. 29.
but with more wary hand than before the forfeitures of his enemies. Immoderate
liberality he had found but a weak means to win love, for it left more in the
gathering than it gained in the getting* and his bounty bestowed without
respect was taken without grace, discredited the receiver, detracted from the
judgment of himself, blunted the appetites of such as carried their hopes out
of virtue and service.

Thus at last he learned that reward and reprehension justly laid do balance
government, and that it much imports a Prince if the hand be equal that
holds the scale. In himself he reformed the natural errors of his youth
for Princes manners, though a mute Law have more of life and vigor than those
of letters, and though he did sometimes touch upon the verge of vice he forbore
to enter the circle. Cro. de Dunst.
The Courts wherein at this time the faults of good men did not only by
approbation but imitation receive true comfort and authority, for their crimes
were now become examples and customs he purged severely, since from thence
proceeds the regular or irregular conditions of the common state. Expense of
house service he measured by the just rule of his proper revenues, and was
heard often to say that his errors of wast had been the issue of the Subjects
blood. The insolency of his Soldiers made lawless by the late liberty of
civil arms he spends in foreign expeditions, having seen that the quiet
spirits underwent all the former calamities, and the others were never
satisfied but in the miseries of innocents, and would if they had no other
enemy abroad seek out one at home, as they had done before.

The rigor and corruption of these judicial Officers, he examineth and
redresseth by strict commission for the seem of their security became a murmur
of his own cruelty.

The seats of judgment and council he fills up with men nobly borne, for
such attract with least offense the generous spirits to respect and reverence,
the inabilities he measures not by the favor of private information as before
but general, for every man may in particular deceive and be deceived, but no
one can all, nor all one. And to discover his own capacity now and show what
part he means to leave hereafter in all deliberate expeditions, he sits
himself in council daily, and disposes the affairs of most weight in his
own person.

Counselors be they never so wise or worthy, are but as accessaries, not
principal in sustentation of the State, their Office must be subjection not
fellowship in consultation of moment, ability to advise, not authority to
resolve: for as to live the Prince must have a particular soul, so to rule his
proper and interne Council, without the one he cannot demurre truly, without
the other he can never securely be a Prince; for it offends as well the
minister of merit as the people, to force obedience to one incapable of his own
greatness and unworthy of his fortune.

This wondrous change to the general State so helpelesse lately to recover
their former liberty that they sought now for nothing, but the mildest
servitude brought them home again to his devotion and their duty.

He that will lay (we see) the foundation of greatness upon popular love must
give them ease and justice, for they measure the bond of their true obedience
by the good always received.

This peace ever after attended his age and house, and he happily lived to
fashion his successor, and to make him partner of his experience and
authority, whose down hard education trained him from that intemperance which
makes man inferior to beasts, and framed him to affect glory and virtue which
made him superior to men. So that all the actions of his future Reign were
exact grounds of discipline and policy, who as he was the first of his name
since the Conquest, so was he the first that settled Laws and State, deserving
to wear the style of Englands Iustir, and the proud title to have freed the
Crown from the subjection and wardship of his Peers, showing himself in all
his actions ever after capable to command, not the Realm only, but the whole
world. Thus do the wrong of our enemies more than our own discretions, make us
sometimes both wise and fortunate.

FINIS.

