CHRIST THE Fountain of LIFE: OR, Sundry Choice SERMONS on part of the fifth
Chapter of the first Epistle of St. JOHN.

PREACHED By that Learned judicious Divine, and faithful Minister of Jesus
Christ, Mr. JOHN COTTON B.D now Preacher at Boston in New England.

Christus Vita, Via est Scriptura Christi.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson, and are to be sold by George Calvert at
the sign of the half Moon in Watling street, near Paul's Stump.

MDCLI.

The Contents.
CReatures broken Cisters without Christ Page 2 Men cannot redeem themselves
ibid First part of the worship of Christ, viz. in the mind and judgment. p. 6
To prize Christ is to worship him. p. 7 Christians worship Christ in their
minds. p. 8 Moses honors the reproaches of Christ. ib Naturally men desire to
know the worth of blessings. p. 9 He that has Christ is inquisitive to know
all the virtue that is in Christ. ib Two parts of the worship of Christ is in
the will and affections. ib Deep measure of worshipping of Christ. p. 10 Christ
when more truly worshipped. p. 11 Sweetest frame of spirit. ib Third part of
worshipping of Christ. p. 12 Universal obedience. ib If we cannot enjoy the
liberty of the Ordinances but with sin against our souls, in this case, the
Ordinances of God are to be neglected, and omitted. p. 22 The life of
Christianity is not a life of wisdom and graces, but of faith. p. 29 A third
way of having Christ is by Covenant. p. 31 Extent of the Covenant on Gods part.
p. 33 God a Fountain of goodness to his servants. ib Extent of the Covenant
on our part. p. 34 Covenant threefold. ib Covenant of Salt. p. 35 A fourth way
of having of Christ. p. 39 Christ received as into a temple three ways. p. 40
Second way of receiving of Christ. p. 44 The third way of receiving Christ. ib
How to know whether you have truly embraced Christ. p. 45 First thing
considered in having Christ as a Son. p. 46 True love to Christ wherein it is.
p. 53 Christ united to us, and we to him by a threefold spirit. p. 59 A
threefold conformity between Christ and his. p. 60 The first conformity,
wherein it consists. ib The second conformity. p. 61. The third conformity p.
63 The second work of the Spirits liberty. p. 65 Liberty from fear of sin.
ib Natural property of a Son. p. 66 Liberty from power of sin. p. 67
Freedom from sins service. p. 68 A Servants care in perseverance of Christian
duties brings privilege of peace to his soul. p. 69 The third sign, he that
has the Son has him for his Prince, page 74 To have Christ for a Savior
requires two things. p. 75 Christ a Savior from sin as well as from distress.
p. 79 An hard matter to be willing to be saved by Christ. p. 80 Christ saves
as a Prince. p. 81 Christ our Prince in two things. p. 82 Rebellious thoughts.
p. 83 Christians differenced by their thoughts. ib Good thoughts continue for
ever. p. 85 Sum of all laid down. p. 88 Three sorts of signs of Spiritual
life. p. 92 First cause of Spiritual life. ib John the first, and the
thirteenth opened. p. 93 The second cause of Spiritual life, p. 94 That the
Promises belong to every true Christian. p. 95 Ground of the point p. 96 A
third cause of Spiritual life. p. 98 Signs of Spiritual life from the
effects of it. p. 101 Life of Justification. ib Inward peace flows from pardon
of sin. ib That every sinner as soon as his sin is pardoned, has an
unconceiveable peace in his soul. p. 102 Second effect of the life of
Justification. ib Property of Spiritual life. p. 105 Love of God a sign of
Spiritual life. ib Life of Sanctification. p. 109 Joy and grief in the soul
sanctified at once. p. 110 Joy and fear. p. 111 Joy in affliction. p. 113
Patience without forbearance. ib Meekness and strictness at once. p. 114
Modesty mixed with magnanimity. p. 115 Psalm the 24. the 7. verse opened. p.
116 Psalm 149. verse 6. expounded. p. 118 The seventh combination of graces.
p. 119 Diligence in worldly business, and yet dead to the world. ib Love of
Enemies. p. 102 Effects of Sanctification signs of spiritual life. p. 127
First effect, motion. ib Lightness of spirit. p. 128 What is required to a
Spiritual duty. p. 129 Of common gifts. p. 130 Causes of deadness of heart.
p. 132 Remedies against deadness. p. 133 Second sign of spiritual life. ib
John 6.35. explained. p. 134 First, a soul longs after Christ in the
Ordinance. ib Strength and sweetness in the Ordinance. p. 135 Third particular
applying of the Word. p. 136 Fourth, conformity to the Word in every thing. ib
Growth in grace. p. 138 Repentance the best purge. p. 140 Fourth effect of the
life of Sanctification. ib Fifth sign, life propagates it like. p. 142 Three
properties of life; first warmth. p. 144 Knowledge warm. p. 145 John 5.32.
expounded. ib 2. Where there is life there is breath. p. 146 3. Spiritual
warmth digesteth Gods Ordinances. p. 148 4. Spiritual warmth heateth others. ib
Power of sin. p. 153 Plyablenesse of spirit. p. 158 James 3.17. expounded. ib
So much sweetness, so much life. p. 159 Danger of being out of Christ. p. 161
Jer. 13. last, opened. p. 162 Esa 44.11. explained. p. 165 Procure Christ for
our selves, and others. p. 172 Motives to get Christ. p. 172 Means of having
Christ. p. 174 What help John's Epistles yields to believers. p. 179 The bane of
Congregations that have no means of preaching. p. 184 Note the miserable case
of Congregations that have but bare reading, p. 186. Carnal men have benefit by
the Word. p. 187 Three reasons or signs of grace. p. 189 Knowledge what. p.
190 Rome an Harlot. ib Mighty power in the Scriptures preached. p. 199 Reading
the Word. p. 200 Examination of things heard. ib Repetition of the word
blessed. p. 201 Meditation on the Word. p. 202 Property of a faithful
Minister. p. 203 Faith profitable to all things. p. 205 Infidel practice of
Papists. ib Mighty power in meditating upon the Word. p. 206 Kings must read
the Word of God daily p. 207 To pray according to Gods will in two things; 1.
Ask things lawful. 2. ask in Christ's name. 1. To ask in Christ's name
requires humility. p. 211, 212 First, second, third, fourth, acts of humility.
p. 212, 213 First, second, third, fourth, acts of faith in prayer. p. 213, 214
First to pray in the spirit is to pray feelingly; 2. Fervently, 3.
Perseverance. p. 218, 219 Advocate what. p. 228 Partial eye, Censorious eye,
Malicious eye, wanton eye, p 243, 244, 245 Mantle of wisdom. p. 248 Mantle of
of faithfulness. ib Mantle of compassion. p. 249
CHRIST the FOUNTAIN of LIFE. SERMON I.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


THese words contain the Third part of the record that God bare of his Son, to
whom this eternal life is communicated, and that is to all such, as to whom
the Son is communicated; amplified by the contrary, He that has not the Son,
has not life.

Doctrine According to, or upon our having, or not having of Christ, depends
our having or not having of life.

The note is of special weight in our Christian experience, and therefore let
us take so much the more care in opening of it; He that finds me (which is
all one with, he that has me) he has life, Prove. 8.34. but he that is
estranged from me, he loves death, ver. 36. So that, find Christ, and find
life. Find him not, but be estranged from him, and find death* So Ephesians. 2.12.
In times past ye were without Christ being aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God
in the world, and Ephesians. 4.18.19. There he speaks of some that were alienated
from the life of God; but in ver. 20. Ye have not so learned Christ, if so be
you have been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus.

For further clearing of this point, let me show you first the Reasons upon
which it depends, and then the uses of it.

Creatures broken Sisterns without Christ.
Reason 1. For the first; The first reason arises from the insufficiency of all
the body of the creature to give us life without Christ, Heb. 10.1.4. It is not
possible that the blood of bulls, and goats should cleanse the conscience from
sin; They are not a valuable recompense to God for the transgressions we have
done by our transgressions; we had deserved death, for which the death of the
beasts cannot make recompense.

Men cannot redeem themselves
And besides, should we dye for our sins our selves, our death would not free
us from the punishment, for we are not able to overcome death, but should for
ever sink under it: If there had been a Law that could have given us life,
then we might have lived by it, but there is no such Law as can give us
spiritual life. David speaks in the name of Christ, Psalm. 22.29. It is the
speech of our Savior, or of David in his name, No Man can keep alive his own
soul. It is beyond the power of the creature to keep alive his own soul, no
not so much as natural life, Psalm. 49.7.9. No man can give a ransom for the
soul of his brother; no man is able to ransom, or redeem his own life or
another; yea (which is much) Adam in innocence, was taught to look for the
preservation of his inocent nature out of himself, for to that end did God give
him the tree of life, Genesis 2.9 the tree of life grows not in Adam, but in the
Garden* Now he that was to eat of the tree, called the tree of life, he was
taught from thence, that the maintenance and continuance of that life which he
then lived (a life of grace and glory) was not to be expected from his own
strength, but from something without himself: The tree of life was a type of
the Lord Jesus Christ, the second person in Trinity, 1 John 3.4. Now if Adam
could not keep alive his own soul but by that tree, how much less Adam fallen
and corrupted, being now become unable to keep that Law which in innocence he
might have kept?

But more clearly see the grounds of this insufficiency in the creature to
help it self.

The first is taken from the preciousnesse of the price of our redemption. The
costlinesse of it, the matter of our justification is the price of our
redemption, and without justification, no spiritual life at all. Now the price
of our redemption is our justification, the form of that justification is Gods
accepting of it, and imputing it to us; but the matter of it is the price of
our redemption, and that is the root of all our spiritual life, the price of
our redemption given to God is accepted of him, and by him given to us, Psalm.
49.8. Precious is the redemption of souls; it is far beyond the power of the
creature, that which may be fit matter to give to God by way of satisfaction
for a soul that is very precious, and this was only the obedience of Christ
to the death, he by suffering death for us, and rising from the dead, declared
himself mightily to be the Son of God, and he by his obedience to the death,
offered to God the price of our redemption; He gave himself a ransom for
many. And this shows that it had been impossible for any under the Son of
God, to have given a sufficient price for our redemption; neither man nor
Angels could do it: but he in giving a sufficient price for us, did thereby
mightily declare himself to be the Son of God, he only by his death, is the
matter of our justification, and his rising is our life: the Father himself,
it could not stand with his justice to give a price for our redemption, he
being the person offended; but the Son taking upon him our nature, that
nature which had offended God, he by this means made atonement, between the
Father and us, and in making atonement declared himself mightily to be the
Son of God, none but he alone was able to tender to God such a recompense as
might be a satisfaction for our sins.

2. And as this is ground why there is no sufficiency in the creature to give
us the life of our justification; so it is also taken from the root of our
sanctification and consolation, for they spring both from one fountain, and
that is the Spirit of Gods grace, John 16.7. he is the comforter, that is our
sanctifier, and this springs in us to everlasting life, Joh. 4.14 Now he that
can give a spirit of sanctification, and consolation, is only the Lord Jesus
Christ, unless he go away, and send the Comforter to us, he never comes. If
you would know who it is that can give this water of life, you shall read, Joh.
4.10. that it is only the Lord Jesus; he it is only that goes to the Father,
and sends his Spirit of grace into our hearts, unless he go to heaven, and
send it down from heaven to us, it is not given: So that he being the root of
the Spirit of consolation, and of sanctification, all this life of consolation
and sanctification springing from the Spirit as from a fountain, and Christ
being he that sets open this fountain, Zac. 1.13. Therefore it is that there is
an insufficiency in the creature to shed abroad such a thing as this into our
hearts, Act. 2 33. when he was to give a reason of the spirit of Tongues, he
fetches it fom the resurrection of Christ, that he by his ascending into
heaven, did shed abroad this word which you now see and hear; so that by his
death he gave to God, not only the price of our redemption, but prevailed with
the Father to bestow upon him the Spirit to give where, and to whom he will.

3 And for a third ground, why eternal life cannot be given by any but by
Christ, is taken from the invincible difficulty of the passage to eternal
life, from the hand of death and the grave, there is no redemption: What man is
he that can deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Psalm. 49. And if the
soul be severed from the body: no man can quicken his own soul, that is
beyond the power and reach of the creature, death is the passage to eternal
life, and this passage is of invincible difficulty, for a man to dye, and then
to translate himself from death to life, is far beyond the capacity of the
creature, and therefore says our Savior, I am the resurrection and the life,
Joh. 11.25. and he speaks of it formally and properly; as if he should say,
being risen from the dead my self, I rise my self, and therefore raise up
others also; so that if you look at the invincible difficulty of it, you shall
see, that it only is the Lord Jesus, that can give eternal life, it is a
sign of an hypocrite, when with Simon Magus we think this gift may be bought
with money.

Reas. 2 It is taken from the good pleasure of the Father, whom it has pleased
that in Christ all fullness of life should dwell, Col. 1.19. And when he which
is our life shall appear, we shall appear with him, 1 Cor. 1.30. And
therefore since God has concluded, and shut up all the springs of life in
Christ, and out of Christ there is nothing but death, the good pleasure of the
Father has determined this point, that he having given us this eternal life
in his Son, there is no deriving life from any fountain, but only from the Son.

Use. If upon our having, or not having of Christ, depends our having, or not
having of life; then from hence you see an evident ground of trial of every
one of our estates, whether we be alive or dead; would any man know whether he
have, or not have life; consider then whether you have, or not have Christ.

And from hence you may discern three grounds of trial to discern whether we
have Christ or no.

First, consider what it is to have a Christ.

Secondly, what it is to have the Son.

Thirdly, what signs there be of life; and hereby we shall have direction,
whether we have Christ or no, and by this, we may inform our selves aright in
this particular.

This point contains in it the pith and marrow of Christianity, so far as any
comfort of it may redound to us.

First, then let us consider what signs the Holy Ghost has given us of our
having of Christ.

We are said to have Christ four ways in Scripture.

First, by the honor, or service, or worship of him.

Secondly, in some sense we are said to have Christ by purchase.

Thirdly, by way of Covenant.

Fourthly, by way of free acceptance, when God offers him.

First, a man is said to have God, or to have Christ, that worships him, and
the very worshipping of him, is the having of him; so you read, Exodus 20.3.
Thou shall have no other gods but me; it is the express words of the
Commandment: And by having of God there, he means thus much, Thou shall
worship no other gods but me; worship me, and thou have me; worship any other,
and thou have another god, and not me. So have the Lord Jesus Christ by
worshipping of him; and you have him fully, Psalm. 45.10, 11. He is the Lord thy
God, and worship thou him; implying, that as God has set over his Son to us,
to be our Lord, so we must receive, accept, and worship him; this is that which
Moses and the people of Israel sung, He is my God, and is become my salvation,
Exodus 15.2 He is my God, and he is my Fathers God, and therefore I will exalt
him. So that to set up and exalt God in our hearts and lives, and to worship
him, is all one; this sets up the Lord, to worship him, is to be our God.

Now a little better to understand this point, that you may conceive what this
worship of Christ is; you are to conceive that worship is performed to Christ,
in mind, in heart, in life, both in our obedience that we perform, in our
life, in suffering, and patience which we yield to God in our lives, by all
this we worship Christ, and so have him.

1 Part of the worship of Christ, viz. in the mind and judgment
First, in our minds, we then indeed worship Christ, when we have him in high
estimation. The worship, and honor that we owe to Christ, is to have him in
high esteem, Cant. 5 10. She, the Spouse there may well call him her beloved,
Christ is my Christ, when he is to me the chiefest of ten thousand, Psalm. 89.6.
Who among the sons of the mighty can be likened to the Lord. And Exodus 15.11.
Who is a God like unto thee: When the soul of a man does esteem of Christ
above all other things in the world, when there is nothing that the soul so
prizes as the Lord Jesus Christ, then the soul has him; and herin lies the
difference between spiritual and earthly things, you have an high esteem of an
earthly thing, and yet have it not; a man may highly prize a good bargain, and
yet have it not: but no man sets an high price upon Christ, but he that has
him; spiritual things we wholly neglect, until we have them, and when we have
them, then there oisn-thing with us comparable to them, until a man have his
portion in the word of God, it is but a thing of small value to him, and so the
Spirit of Gods grace, and the blood of Christ until a man have it; it is but a
light vain thing to him; yea till he have the Lord Jesus himself, no
spiritual thing is of any value with him; but so soon as ever the heart
begins to prize Jesus Christ, as the chiefest of all the blessings that ever
God bestowed upon the sons of men; and if the soul think, To prize Christ,
is to worship him.
that had he but his part in Christ, he were the happiest man in the world; in
thus prizing him, he worships him; and in worshipping him, he has him.

Now you must conceive that all worship stands in advancing another, with the
debasing of our selves; we humble our selves, that we may advance another. Now
if our debasement to them be such as is not compatible to a creature, as when
we subject our heart and spirits to them; this is divine honor: Now that soul
that exalts the Lord Jesus Christ as the highest in his own esteem, he debases
himself to the dust in his spirit before him, John 1.27. It is the speech of
John Baptist (speaking of the Lord Jesus Christ) He that comes after me, is
preferred before me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to loose. This is a
true worshipping of Christ, when in comparison of Christ he thinks himself
unworthy to loose his shoe latchet. No mortal man but he may be worthy to
loose any man's shoe latchet, if he be but worthy to live; but this is the
honor and worship of Christ, that when thy soul looks upon Christ, he is so
highly to be preferred before him, as that he thinks himself not worthy to
untie his shoe.

Now when a man is framed to these thoughts in his mind, as that he looks at
Christ as the chiefest of all the blessings of God, as the greatest mercy that
ever could befall a poor soul; and in respect of Christ, he looks at himself
as an unworthy creature, most unworthy of Christ, most unworthy to come in his
presence, and much more unworthy to be made partaker of so glorious a match as
the Lord Jesus is, or to have his part in his body and blood, the very worship
of Christ, in truth, the having of Christ; if we have such a singular esteem of
him, we may be sure we could never have thus prized him, but that he first
prized us.

Christians worship Christ in their minds
For further opening this worship of Christ in our minds, because it is of
singular importance, and may help and stay a poor Christian, when his heart
may be most dead, and all other things fail him, yet this high esteem of Christ
in his mind is never wanting to an honest hearted Christian, but he ever has
occasion to look at Christ as most glorious, and at himself in comparison of
Christ, as unworthy to loose his shoe latchet.

Moses honors the reproaches of Christ.
Let us therefore consider a little further of it; you may the read the like
gracious disposition in Moses; he so prizes Christ, that every thing belonging
to Christ seems honorable to him, he esteemed the very reproaches of Christ,
above all the treasures of Egypt, and those are less, then a shoe latchet,
Hebr. 11.26. in untying a shoe latchet, there is neither shame nor pain: but
for a man to be reproached for Christ, if any thing be base and dishonorable,
sure it is that: For a man that was taken to be the son of Pharoahs daughter,
and for him not to be ashamed of the people of God: nor of being reproached
with them; yea, so far from being ashamed, as to think it greater riches, then
the treasures of Egypt, he was sure gone far in his esteem of Christ: that man
truly worships Christ, that honors the reproaches of Christ above al other
things.

But yet there is something more in it then this, in this worship of Christ in
our minds: We honor, or worship Christ in our minds, when we make him the
chiefest, and esteem nothing more worthy to be known, then to know the Lord
Jesus Christ, John 17.3. This is life eternal to know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: Now when the soul esteems nothing more
worth the knowing then Jesus Christ, this is an honoring of him, 1 Cor. 2.2. I
determined not to know any thing among you, save Christ and him crucified, and
Phil. 3 7, 8, 9, 10. He looks at all things as loss, and dross, and dung
that he might be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, but might
know the power and virtue of his resurrection; This is that which the Apostle
did prize in his Judgment as more honorable, and comfortable, then any thing
under the Sun, and this was an evident sign that Paul had Christ; for this is
an ordinary experiment in nature, no man has any blessing, Naturally men
desire to know the worth of blessings.
but he would know the worth of it; if a man have a Farm or a yoke of Oxen, he
will prove them, Luke 14.19. a man will know aforehand if he can, but when he
has it then he will prove it, and truly so is it with every one that has the
Lord Jesus, he is desirous to prove Christ, he would know by experience, what
the virtue and power of his death is, how it pardons his sin, and mortifies his
corruptions, and he would know the power of his resurrection: strengthening and
quickening grace in him, and the power of Christ's ascension, He that has Christ
is inquisitive to know all the virtue that is in Christ.
assending into the presence of his Father, and sitting at the right hand of
God to rule all Creatures in heaven and in earth, for the Churches good, and
subduing our enemies, and bringing us to glory in the end. A man that has
Jesus Christ, he is inquisitive to know all the virtue that is in Christ, and
he thinks in his mind, there is nothing better worth the knowings, then to know
and feel the virtue and power of Christ Jesus in his heart: And this is the
first part of the worship of Christ, though we be yet doubtful whether we have
Christ or no; Yet it is an evidence to the soul, that thou have him; because
thou do worship him, and so highly prize him in thy mind, and if thou
could but know him, and thy part in him, this is the chiefest comfort thou
can pitch thy mind upon; certainly he is thy beloved, since he is to thee
the chiefest of ten thousand.

Secondly, a man worships Christ, Two parts of the worship of Christ is in the
will and affections.
not only by an act of his mind, but a man has Christ likewise when he has
him in the deep affection of his heart, when he deeply affects him in his
heart, as his chiefest good. The former was an act of the Judgment and
understanding; this belongs to the heart, will, and affections. Plal. 73.25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, or in earth in comparison of thee, and Psalm.
42.1^ my soul pants or breathes after thee my God. He was then a banished man
from the congregation, and it was a weary sad time to him, his soul panted like
a chased Dear, for the rivers of water, his soul was athirst for God! Oh when
shall I come, and appear before him? this is such a longing desire, when a man
wants Christ; As that it is called, hunger and thirst, Matthew. 5. such a desire
as cannot be satisfied, but with meeting with that which the soul does hunger
and thirst for; give an hungry man a house full of gold, and he is hungry
still, but give him meat and then you satisfy him; So in this case, the soul
that hungers after Christ, give him profit and pleasure, and you give him
nothing, but his soul is fit to perish for want of Christ, Deep measure of
worshipping of Christ.
this is a deep worship we put upon Christ; and in so affecting of him, we have
him; when the soul has the Lord Jesus, the highest and chiefest cause of
rejoicing it has, is, only its having of Christ Gal. 6.14. if he have his part
in Christ, that is his Crown and his Portion, he counts it a goodly portion,
his lot is fallen into a pleasant place; if we have him for our portion, we have
enough, therein the soul is fully satisfied, and if we have lost him, we
chiefly mourn for that, our chiefest care is to get him; and we mourn most
bitterly for want of him, Zach. 12.10. and we make it our desire cheifely to
have him, and then we truly have him when we so set him up in our hearts, we
may affect many earthly blessings and want them, as gold and silver, and
friends, and health, and yet want them all, but no man desires Christ thus, but
he has him. I mean if he desire him as his chiefest good, the having of any
blessing does not so rejoice his heart, nor the want of it so afflict him, such
a soul has Christ.

Object. But the church in Cant. 3.1. she wanted Christ, and yet earnestly
desired him, therefore a soul may have a strong desire to Christ, and yet be
without him, how can she be said not to find Christ, and yet to have him?

Ans. She could neither have loved him nor have sought him, nor have so known
the worth of him, if he had not loved her first, and if she in some measure had
not had him: But when she says, she found him not, the meaning is, not in that
feeling and comfort, not in that measure she sought for, not in that life and
power, her soul desired, she sought him by night in a dark time, but though she
wanted the comfort of Christ in his ordinances, as she then desired, yet she
had Christ, and had true fellowship with him, else she could never have so
loved him, for she says she sought him whom her soul loved; Christ when more
truly worworshiped.
and this is indeed so much the more truer worship of him when it is so hearty;
in our Judgments we prize him as the chiefest blessing in heaven and in earth,
and in our hearts we so affect him, and cleave unto him, so now on the
contrary, let the same heart look into it self, and in comparision of Christ,
he not only in his Judgment basely esteems of himself, but in our affections
we look at our selves as loathsome in comparison of Christ, This you shall
find to be true, the more the heart does inwardly love Christ, the less we do
love our selves, so when God revealed himself to Job he cried out, I am vilde
Job. 40.4. and then he abhors himself, and repents in dust and ashes. There is
no soul that has any high esteem of God, or any strong affection to him; but
the more highly and deeply he affects him, the more he disaffects himself and
loathes himself, as unmeet to come into the presence of the Lord, when as
Isaiah saw the glory of the Lord sitting upon the cherubins, he cried out woe
is me I am undone, for I am a man of unclean lips, etc. Esa. 6.5.6. Sweetest
frame of Spirit.
this shall you ever find to be the frame of the spirit of a christian, the
more deeply he affects Christ, the more inwardly he loathes himself, he looks at
himself as fit rather to be swallowed up of Judgment then capable of any
mercy, not only greive for his sin against Christ or not only the more fear his
sin, Note.
or the more be ashamed of his sin, by how much the more he sees the glory of
Christ, but he so much the more loathes himself, as one clean out of heart, he
abhors himself as an unclean and abominable thing, that if he could go out of
himself, and be severed from his own soul, he would never own himself more,
and therefore Christ puts self denial for a principal part of his worship,
Luke 9.23. this very denial of our selves is a worship of Christ, hereby we so
affect Christ, that we are quite out of conceit and love of our selves. And so
loath our selves for our sins, as they make us unmeet to be joined to so
glorious an head as christ, and then indeed we have him.

3 3. Part of the worshipping of Christ.
A third part of this worship of him is in our life: And in our life we worship
Him, by obedience in doing his will, and by patience in suffering his will, or
any thing comfortably for his sake.

Universal obedience.
Hearty obedience is a true and sincere, and real sign of this worship of
Christ, and true sincere obedience to him is a true having of him.

This is, first when a man has such respect to all the Commandments of God,
as that there is none of them but he greatly delights in it, Psalm. 119.6. then
shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments: He looks
at them all with such respect, as the Commandments of a great God, he respects
them all as Gods Commandments: When as a man is willing to take up every
Commandment of Christ, he submits to them all every one.

And which is more, as he has respect to all Gods Commandments, so he has,
respect to all Gods Commandments in all his ways, there is a double
universality of obedience, and they both hold forth this truth; it brings into
subjection every thought and Imagination to the will of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.9.
now this is a mavelous subjection, that a man is not to dare to allow
himself in so much as a thought, unless it be in a way of obedience to the
will and Word of God, unless a thought be suitable to the will of Christ, and
allowable to the word of Christ, he dare not accept it, when a man has such a
professed subjection to Christ, that as he respects every Commandment of God,
so he would not be at his own choice, in so much as in any one thought, and
this is such solid and complete worship of Christ as that a greater honor
cannot be don to him, Math. 4.10, him only shall thou serve, he will not allow
himself in one evil thought, much less will he allow himself to speak evil
words, or least of all, to do this or that evil in the sight of God, so that
this is the worship of him, when we subject all the passages of our heart and
life to his will, we serve the Lord and not man, Col. 3.23.24. we do not any
thing in our callings, but we do it in obedience to Christ, and according to
the rules of Christ, and for the glory of Christ, and this is the service we do
to Christ, not a passage in our whole life, but we desire to have respect to
all Gods Commandments, and this is a right and true having of him.

And as it is thus for our obedience in doing his will, so is it for our
patience in suffering his will, there is a glorious worship given to Christ in
patience, when as if so be it be the will of God to call us to suffer, we lay
our hands upon our mouths and sit down and quiet our selves in this, that it
is the will of Christ it should be so, and being for the glory of his name, in
the defense of his truth, and from his own hand, it deares us not, we sit
down quietly under the hand of Christ as knowing whose hand it is that is upon
us, it is a worship of Christ and we debase our selves to worship him, when we
acknowledge that it is no matter what becomes of us so the will of God be done,
this is true worship of Christ, 1 Samuel 3.18. it was a good Testimony of Elies
sincerity, when he heard of the woeful Judgment that God would inflict upon his
household; when Samuel had made an end of expressing the whole Judgment, says
he, it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good in his own eyes; wherein
he fitly expresses the point in hand; It is the Lord let him therefore do what
he will, we have the Lord for our Lord, and he is a Lord to us, when we give
him leave to rule us, the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be his name, Job. 1.20.21. this shows the subjection of Jobs will to
God. If he see it good to take all away as he sometime saw it good, to give it
all, this patient submission of the heart to God, is an undoubted argument,
that we have the Lord for our God, had we not him for our God, the heart of man
would so grudge at this and that evil which befalls us, and would bitterly
fall upon Instruments, and weary heaven and earth with our moanes and cries.
But I held my peace and said nothing, for thou Lord have done it, Psalm. 39.19.
a sign we have him for our Lord when in all his providence, we acknowledge
his good hand in it, and he is our Lord if we can so sit down and not murmr
nor grudge against him, according to that you read Lam. 3.29 the church
complaining of her misery, he tells you the frame of her spirit, in such a
temper the soul now sits alone and keeps silence. He has learned to bear Gods
yoke, he is yoaked to the will of God; to his Commandments, to his
providence, and he puts his mouth in the dust if there may be any hope, he is
content to lie down under the hand of God, grudges not at it, but in
quietness and silence of heart bears Gods yoke, and God is then the God of our
Salvation, when we keep silence before him, Psalm. 62.1. this is a solemn
worship of God when in the midst of trouble, we can quietly sit down, when the
soul can say, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, Mica 7.8, 9. when we see
the Lords hand in all the punishments and Judgments that befall us, and we bear
it willingly, this is solemnly to worship him, and to be wrought upon as clay
in the hand of the Potter, and in thus doing we have him; And if the case
should be, that we should come to suffer for the name of Christ, it is so far
off from being matter of murmuring to a Christian man, as that he suffers not
only patiently, but joyfully, and if any man suffer for the name of Christ as a
Christian, let him glorify God on that behalf, for the spirit of Glory and of
God shall rest upon him, 1 Pet. 4.14.16. When a man thus worships God,
patiently submitting himself to him, and gives up himself in his way, to be
quieted by him, this is a true worshipping of Christ, and whoever thus worships
him, has him, though we cannot yet tell whether we have faith or no, whether
repentance or no, whether any true love to God or no, yet if we can find this
in us, that in our hearts we thus worship the Lord Jesus, so highly prize him
as the chiefest of ten thousand etc. In so doing we worship Christ and in
worshipping him we have him, but on the other side, if we so look at Christ as
we can prefer ten thousand other things before him, and can sit down quietly
without him, if we look at Christ as a refuse commodity, no worth the
cheapening, and we look at our selves as the great Omegaes of the world, and
we would not have our names blemished with seeking after Christ, but have
greater business then that to look after, and we will be our own carvers; if
so, then we do not worship Christ, and then we have him not, and so no
redemption by him.

SERMON II.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


BEcause in Scripture phrase, there are more ways of having Christ requisite
for the knowledge of every soul, I thought it therefore not amiss to open
those other ways by which in Scripture we are said to have Christ.

Secondly, as therefore we have him first by worshipping of him, so secondly we
have him by purchase; this way of having Christ is expressed to us partly in
the parable of the Merchant man, Matthew. 13.46. Who when he had found a pearl
of precious price, he sold all that he had and bought it, that is one way of
having Christ, to purchase him, to buy him: you have the like also held out in
Esa. 55.1.2. every one that is a thirst, come and buy without money or without
price, wherein the Holy Ghost calls upon us to receive the Lord Jesus Christ
as revealed in his ordinances, and he makes a solemn proclamation to all, to
come to these waters and buy without money. Without money, why without money? or
how without money? It is true, should a man offer his house full of Treasure for
Christ, it would be despised Cant. 8.7. and when Simon Magus offered to buy the
gifts of the Holy Ghost for money, it was rejected with a curse Act. 9.8, 9, 10,
and if the gift of the Holy Ghost cannot be bought for money, how can the Lord
Jesus Christ be bought for money?

And yet thus much I say, that many times without laying out of money, he cannot
be had, without parting with money we cannot get him, the case so stands that
sometimes, the holding fast a man's money lets go the Lord Jesus Christ, you have
a famous example in the young man, Matthew. 19.21. to 24. Where our Savior
shows how hard a thing it is for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, because it is hard for a rich man to part with all that he has, when
God calls for it at his hands, so that without money sometimes Christ cannot be
had; And yet for money he cannot be had, it was upon the point of money, that the
Lord Jesus parted with the Pharisees, Luke 16.11.12. If you be unfaithful with
the mammon of iniquity, who will trust you with true treasure; if you use not
outward things well, who will give you saving grace in Jesus Christ? so that
sometimes for want of spending of money in a right way, many a man looses the
Lord Jesus; so that though Christ cannot be had for money, yet sometimes
without expense of money he cannot be had.

For opening of this point there are three Cases in which money must be laid
out, or else Christ cannot be had, and in refusing to lay out money, we refuse
life in him.

1 Case.
First, when the Lord by some special command requires it, as was the case of
the young man in the Gospel, there was a special commandment given to him,
not given to every man, nor to every rich man, nor scarce any man in ordinary
course now adays, yet then given to him; and now to stick for money, and
rather lose eternal life then his goods, in such a case as this, he loses his
life in Christ; and upon the same point, or the like, broke Ananias and
Saphira, it was the common resolution of the Church of God in that Age to sell
all that they had, and to give to the poor, and to live after the same rate
that other men did, a like proportion to every man; and to distribute
faithfully to every man as every man had need, and as the Apostle saw cause;
and when they come and keep back part of the price for which their possessions
was sold, you see how bitter a curse from the presence of the Lord fell upon
them, they were cut off from the Congregation of Gods people, and it is much to
be feared, cut off from the Lord Jesus Christ, and from all hope of eternal
life, and to stand as a terrible example to the whole Church of God, to show
what a dangerous thing it is to stand upon terms with Christ, and not to part
with money for him; they could not have fellowship with the people of God,
unless they parted with all they had, and live upon the common distribution;
but this case is not always.

But secondly, there is another time, namely, when in case of persecution the
market of Christ goes at so high a rate, that a man cannot have Christ with any
comfort in his soul, or peace to his Conscience, or purity of heart or life,
unless he hazard all his estate, or a good part of it: In buying and selling
of a precious commodity, a good Chapman will have it what ever it cost him: So
Christ is sometimes at an higher, and sometimes at a lower rate, but whatever
he costs him, he will have him; it is spoken in commendation of the Hebrews,
that they suffered joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34. to show
you, that sometimes it comes to that pass, that unless a man be content to
part with all his goods, he cannot have the recompense of reward, the Lord
Jesus Christ to his soul; and therefore the Servants of God have been content
to loose all that they had, and willing to resign up all for the maintaining
the integrity of their spirits, and the purity of their hearts and lives in the
presence of God, and then let all go, they can suffer the spoil of all
joyfully.

3 It is in case that by Gods providence you be cast to live in such
Congregations, where you cannot have the Ordinances of God but at a great
charge, as it is the case of many places, that unless they be at charge for
the Ministry of the Gospel it cannot be had; then we must communicate freely
that way, then be not deceived, God is not mocked, for what a man sowes that
shall he also reap, Gal. 6.6, 7, 8 Where the Apostle does encourage men at such
a time as this, when the Gospel, cannot be had but at great charge, then lay
out liberally for the Gospel of Christ, and he calls it, A sowing to the
Spirit; as a man that lays out his money for an earthly commodity, for a good
bargain, he reapes corruption; so he that sowes of the Spirit, shall of the
Spirit reap life everlasting. When a man lays out his money unto Spiritual
ends, to obtain the free passage of the Ordinances of Christ, to enjoy the
liberty of the Gospel, he thereby sowes to the Spirit, and shall of the Spirit
reap life everlasting; for this is the blessing promised unto it, such as so
sow, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting; so that when a man out of a
good and honest heart, and an hungering desire after Gods Ordinances, shall be
willing to be at charge for them, he has this promise made to him, and it
shall be fulfilled, He shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. But yet, when
a man has laid out his money for this end, if he then think his money is
worthy of Christ, he gets him not; but this is the first way of having Christ
by way of Purchase, a seasonable laying out our money for him as God requires
it.

Secondly, Christ is to be purchased, not so much by money, as chiefly this
purchase must be made by parting with all those many and strong Lusts, and
Corruptions, and sinful rebellions of heart, by which we keep off Christ from
coming into our hearts; this is that which the Prophet Esaias directs us to,
Esa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, etc. where he tells us what we must give for Christ, for sin is
neither money nor moneys worth; but he makes a good bargain that parts with
his sins, though he should get no Christ for his parting with them. He speaks
of the first and principal part of the life of a Christian man, the life of
his Justification that springs from pardon of sin; let a man forsake those
sins and lusts that he has been most carried captive with; let a wicked man
forgo his thoughts and ways, both his secret and open sins, and let him then
turn to God, and he will abundantly pardon; then God will receive him
graciously, to the justification of life. This is the thing that we must do,
this was the point upon which sundry of them that have been hopeful for
Religion, have broken off from Christ, and Christ from them; they have forsook
him, and he left them; Jehu stuck upon this very point, he would go a great
way, but when it comes (as he thinks) to hazard his title to the Crown, then
he will set up the golden Calves; when he saw that all must be parted with,
rather then he would forgo that, without which he could not maintain his
Kingdom, he would rather loose Christ, then venture the loss of that, 2 King.
10.29.31. He regarded not to walk in all the Commandments of the Lord, and
then as he cut short with God in reformation, and did not fulfill to walk
after the Lord, therefore God cut Jehu short of all the hopes of grace that
ever he might have attained, to verse. 32. so that if we cut at a scanting with
God, and will part with some lusts and corruptions, but not with others, then
will God cut you short of all your hopes of eternal life: and it was upon the
same terms that Herod fell short of Christ, Mar. 6.10. Luke 3.18. he had done
many things according to John's Ministry, but when God would cut him short of
Herodias his darling Lust, that nothing might lie between God and him, but
might now become fit for Christ, because he would not cut himself short of
Herodias, and cut short his reformation there, then this was added to all his
other sins, he shut up John in prison, and afterward cut off his head also; so
that when there is any sin, whether honor or pleasure, or any comfort in
this life, that men will not be content to cut themselves short of, it is the
way to utter ruin; God will not be abundantly ready to pardon such. And so was
it with Daemas, when the love of money did so prevail with his heart, after he
had been much esteemed of the Apostles, and mentioned honorably in their
Writings, yet in the end it is said of him, He has forsaken me, and loved this
present world, 2 Timothy 4.10. Love of the world had so prevailed with him, that
he fell off from Paul, and from the Lord, whose Servant Paul was, and from
fellowship in the Gospel, and so did not find Christ; this rule is universally
to be followed, and the care of it not to be neglected in any case, that our
sins are to be put out of our hearts and hands, as ever we look to find
Christ, and life in him; notable is that expression recorded in Judge. 10.10. to
16. the people come and cry to the Lord, to deliver them out of the hands of
their enemies; but they had got to themselves other gods, and now he would
deliver them no more; When the people heard that, that God would not deliver
them, and could find no acceptance from him, so long as they continued in such
a sin; they thereupon go and put away all their Idols, and leaves not one to
be seen among them; and when God sees that they had put them away, the text
says, that his soul was grieved for their misery, and his bowels rolled
within him for them, and he delivered them: So that when men are willing to
fore-go their honorable sins, their sweet and delightful sins, their
profitable sins, and those wherewith they have been most captivated; and he
knows one may as well pull their hearts out of their bellies, as some sins
out of them; but when he sees men are willing to fore-go their most darling
delightful sins, willing to break off all impediments that stand between God
and them, the Soul of God is grieved in such a case, and it pitties him now
that such a soul should be without him; and then it will not be long ere God
stirs them up means of deliverance, and he himself will reveal himself
unto them. Notable is that speech, Hos. 14.3.8. when they take words to
themselves, and promise to leave all their evil ways, whereby they sin
against God, they make this request to God, That he would take away their
iniquities from them; and least God should answer them, but be you doing
something in the mean* time; they profess, that for their own parts they
will set about the doing of their iniquities away, and they say; Ashur shall
not save us, and we will have no more to do with them; wherein he shows you,
that God looks not that only his people shall pray him to take away their
iniquities, for we may pray so long enough, and not find it done; but when we
desire God to do it, and set our hearts and hands to it, and now with heart
and hand say, Ashur shall not save us, nor will we say any more to the works
of our hands, Ye are our gods; then says God in verse. 4. I will heal their
backslidings, and will love them freely, etc. God is then abundantly ready to
pardon, when men forsake their own ways and thoughts, and throw away the sins
that hang about them, God will say of such a people, I will heal them, and
love them freely, mine anger is turned away from them. And you may presume,
when Gods anger is turned away, it is by and through Christ, or else there is
no healing; and therefore in verse. 8. Ephraim says, What have I to do any
more with Idols; the heart of a Christian, or of a Nation, shall openly
acknowledge, that they will have no more fellowship with these abominations; and
then faith God, I have heard him, and observed him. God hears us, and
understands what we say, and observes us well, and offers to be a covert to us
from the storm, when we begin solemnly to abandon such evils, then he hears
us, and answers us according to the desire of our hearts; you have many a soul
that cries to God, Take away our iniquity, and many Petitions we put up to God
to that purpose; and that sometimes with many bitter moanes, but God hears it
not; we pour out our plaints in vain, and he regards it not; but when we come
to God, and desire him not only to take them from us, but begin to consider our
own ways and iniquities, and to put them from us, out of our hearts and
hands, and we will no more take such bad ways, as heretofore we have done; we
will no more ride upon horses, nor run to foreign Princes for succor; then
God hears, and grants graciously whatever his poor people beg at his hands,
and answers it according to all the desire of their hearts, then the Lord
prese^^^ gives us the Lord Jesus Christ, and life and healing in him; and this
is the second way of having Christ by purchase.

Thirdly, God sometimes requires that we should part with all his holy
Ordinances in some cases; part with all confidence in them, and from staying
our hearts upon them; we may soon loose Christ, and loose his protection, and
his fatherly compassion toward us, if in the use of the blessed Ordinances of
God, we be not willing so far to sit loose from them, as not to look for
life in the Word, or Sacraments, or communion with Gods Servants, but to look
for it all in Christ, not that God would have us cast his Ordinances behind our
backs, but therein to seek him yea, to seek his face evermore, and not to be
barred from them, he would have a child of God to count it his greatest
misery, Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 42.3, 4. Though God would have us to make account,
That one day in Gods Courts is better then a thousand elsewhere, Psalm. 84.10.
yet God still has regard to this, that he would not have us to trust in the
temple of the Lord, because so to do, is to trust in lying words, Jer. 7.3, 4.
Hold close to the Ordinances, and by no means part with them if you can have
them in any purity, and peace to your consciences, but rather part with Princes
Palaces then with them, but while you enjoy them, trust not in them, nor think
not to stand upon this, that you are blessed in regard of them; but look at
them all as loss, and dross, and dung, that you may win Christ. Look not so
wishly at the Privileges of the Ordinances, trust not in the outward letter of
them, Phil. 3.6, 7, 8. This is that which keeps off many a poor soul from
coming on to grace; he lives in no open gross sin, and in the midst of the
Ordinances of God, Christ is preached amongst them; and therefore they
conclude, that at the last day Christ will receive them, and yet this will then
deceive them, Matthew. 7.22, 23. Some iniquity rested still in their hands, for
which he will bid them depart from him, as workers of iniquity; they it may be,
had some of them been themselves Ministers, and had done much good in the name
of Christ, and called upon him, Lord, Lord, and yet but Hypocrites; which
shows you, that it is not the liberty of Gods Ordinances, and the dispensation
of them that can secure us; and therefore trust not in them, trust not in this,
that you are diligent Hearers, or that you can pray powerfully; trust not in
this, though you were Preachers of the Word of God, but trust on him only for
life, and salvation, and he will never deceive you.

And as at all times we are to sit loose from the Ordinances in respect of our
trust, and confidence, so sometimes we must be content to forgo the Ordinances
of God for Christ's sake; Note this.
if we cannot enjoy the liberty of the Ordinances, but with sin against our
souls, in this case the Ordinances of God are to be neglected, and omitted, if
he cannot have them with innocence and purity to his soul, he must let them
go. All the good Priests that were wont to minister before the Lord in the
Synagogue, throughout the ten Tribes, when they could not enjoy their places,
but must worship the Calves, (though the Calves were very like the Cherubims)
when they could not do their service to God, but they must serve such Images
as God had not set up there, thereupon all the honest and true-hearted Priests
left their places, and would no more minister there, rather then be compelled
to minister at Dan and Bethel, 2 Chronicles. 11.14. Jeroboam cast them out because
they would not do so, and they were content to be cast out, and sold their
Livings, and went up to Jerusalem; To show you, that sometimes when Christ
cannot be had, but we must forgo the very Ordinances of God, because we cannot
have the Ordinances without impure mixtures of humane invention; then let them
go, rather then defile our own hearts and hands with sin against God. And
so, Cant. 1.7.8. Tell me where thou dwell, and feedest thy flocks at noone;
after the separation was made between Israel and Judah, when the Mother Church
of Israel was angry with the Church of Judah, and cast her off; tell me where
thou lie and feedest thy flocks, etc. How should I go to the golden Calves
at Dan and Bethel? and worship there where God had never put his Name to be
worshipped? why, Christ answers them; If thou know not, O thou the fairest
among women, (as all such Christians are the fairest among women) If thou
know not where I rest, go forth by the footsteps of the flocks, and by the
Shepherds tents, and feed there. Have they not removed their tents to
Jerusalem? why go after them, and feed with them; and this was fulfilled, 2 Chronicles. 11.16. The people left all, and went up to feed themselves there, by
the tents of the Shepherds. This is another part of our purchase of Christ
(which God forbid it should be our case) but if it should come to that pass,
rather forgo the ordinances of God, which were of his own setting and
planting, as were the Ministry in the Synagogues; and they were to be divided
all the Kingdom over; and the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and we
should seek the law at his mouth, Mal. 2.7.8. and therefore that being an holy
ordinance of God, they would by no means part with the free passage of any one
of Gods ordinances, which sometimes they did enjoy: but when they could not
enjoy them in the purity thereof, but must be cast off from being Priests,
unless they will do all, then they were content to be cast out from all
fellowship with the church, and leave their estates and fore-go all, rather
then enjoy the liberty of some other with sinful defilement. And though it
might be thought their own, over much, over readiness to cast off themselves,
yet notwithstanding the holy Ghost excuses it, they did not cast off
themselves, but the text says, Ieroboham cast them out, if they will not
minister upon such terms, then it is he that casts them out, and that was the
sin chiefly, whereby he made Israel to sin; and therefore when you come to the
Ordinances, and though you find Christ there, yet trust not upon them unless
you trust upon Christ, and seek him to give you a meeting there; you have
trusted but upon lying words, you went out full, and come empty home; you hear
much, and profit little; and all that you learn you put into a broken bag,
into cracked memories, and all because you did so trust upon the means; and
truly in this case this shall you often find to be true, you come full of
hopeful expectation to the Congregation, but return very empty home, or full
of bitterness in your souls, and all was, because you trusted in lying words,
in words that could not profit; you trusted in the parts of Christians, in the
Sacraments, Word, and Prayer; but what is Paul, and what is Apollo, one of them
may plant, another may water, but neither of both can give the increase, 1 Cor.
3.5, 6. He that plants, and he that waters is nothing; therefore chiefly have
respect to Christ, look not at Paul, nor at Apollo, nor at any, though you had
men equal with them for gifts, had you such, yet if you put trust and
confidence in them, you will loose all the blessings that you desire and hope to
find in them; and therefore so come to the Ordinances, as that you trust not
in the means; pray to Christ, to bless the Ordinances to you, and entreat him
to cleanse your hearts and hands from those evils that are in his sight, and
come trusting on him, not on any strength in the means, but on his blessing
upon the means, and then he will be found of you, if you thus seek him in
truth; but if they cannot be had but with danger to you, to lose the peace of
your consciences, Note this.
then be content to fit loose to the Word and Sacraments, and from Christian
communication: Then in this case give this price also for Christ, for we come
not to the Ordinances for the Ordinances sake, but for Christ sake to find him
there, but rather then willingly put forth our hands to any sin rather loose
the Ordinances then loose Christ.

Fourthly, there is yet something more then all this, a further price to pay,
if we mean to purchase Christ; And that is, that we part with all our good
parts, and all the good common gifts of grace, which are found sometimes in
good nature, and sometimes in the children of the Church, we must part with
them all that we may win Christ 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man among you seem to be
wise in this world, let him become a fool that he may be wise: who ever would
be a wise man, (as a wise man he cannot be, if he have not his part in Christ)
he must lay aside his serious and sad deliberation, and communication with
flesh and blood, and all things in the way of God, that he thinks will be
prejudicial, if any man be so wise, as to see this and that danger in a
Christian course, let him become a fool; else he shall never become a
Christian: if a man will be content to forsake all for Christ, he must first be
a fool, and be content to be counted a fool, and hear every carnal man to
count him a fool. And I speak not only of carnal and civil wisdom, that,
that only is to be denied in this case, but common graces, which many times
choakes all the hypocrites in the bosom of the Church; they are commonly
choked upon this point, upon these things they trust, and do therefore verily
believe, that this and that interest, God has in them, and they in God;
because they have received such and such gifts from him, and this is the case
formerly mentioned, Matthew. 7.22, 23. they pleaded their spiritual gifts,
though common gifts, and such as may be found in workers of iniquity, they
prayed to God, a common gift; and they prophesied in his name, they had
prophetical gifts; some measure of the spirit of ministry, and they were able
to cast out devils in Christ's name; now when as men do trust upon these, and
settle themselves upon such a change, truly, hereby they loose that power in
Christ which else they might have had. Its a wonder to see what a change
prophetical gifts will work in a man, 1 Samuel 10.10, 12. he, there Saul had a
spirit of prophecy came upon him, and the people wondered at it, it works a
strange change in a man, and so in the next chap. the 19 and 23 ver. he
prophesied til he came at such a place, so that you shall see a man that is
trained up in any good order, though sometimes given to loose company; when
once God begins to pour into him any spiritual gift, to inlighten his mind,
and to enlarge his affection, that he begins to have some love to, and some
joy in the Word, and some sorrow in hearing of the Word, and some comfort in
meditation: Its wonder to see what a change this will work in the spirit; he
forthwith begins to abandon his loose courses, and sets himself to a more
strict course, then he begins to see his acquisite learning is but a small
matter to edification; he prizes his spiritual gifts, and he is able now to
do much; and when a man's heart is thus changed by prophetical gifts, it
works in a man such confidence in his soul, that he thinks all the
Congregation shall perish before he can perish, and if Ministers, may be thus
deceived by common gifts and graces, how much more may their poor hearers be
deceived, when they by hearing the Word find such comfort, and illumination,
and inlargements, that they thereby find a great change wrought in them; and
yet if ministers may be so much deceived, in presuming vainly of their good
estate, which was not so, then much more common Christians: Should any man
presume at Foelix his trembling, Act. 24.25. At Jehues zeal, 2 King. 10.16. At
Ahabs humiliation, 1 King. 21.28, 29. At Herod's joy in hearing, you know what
became of all these, those be graces of God, though but common graces, and if
the Prophets were deceived, may not these be deceived also, that have neither
Christ nor any part in him; and therefore a man that would be sure not to go
without Christ, nor without life in him; he must not trust in any spiritual
gift he has received, though his mind be enlightened, sometimes to fear,
sometimes to joy, to humiliation, to enlargement, to zealous reformation, yet
rest in none of these, for these you may have and yet want Christ, and life in
him; common graces may and will deceive you, a man may have all these, and yet
not prize Christ, at his chiefest good; he may have all these, and yet not
worship him: Notwithstanding all these, there may be some iniquity in their
hands for which cause God will not show mercy to them: See and observe, if in
the midst of all these you do not work some iniquity; they were workers of
iniquity always at the best, Matthew. 7.23. you may be workers of iniquity,
notwithstanding all these; and therefore consider if there be not some vein of
pride, and hypocrisy, and covetousness, that cleaves fast to your hearts,
which you allow your selves in, which if you do, these very gifts will be
your ship-wracke, your anchor will break, and your ship will be carried away,
and you fall down in destruction; but see that your hearts be clean, and see
that there be not an ill thought or way that you allow your selves in, and if
so, then your heart will lay hold upon God, and you will prize Christ, and then
it is a sign those gifts you have are not in hypocrisy; for in an hypocrite,
they are always found with some sin, which if a man do not wilfully shut
his eyes against he may see, for our Savior speaks of such a sin in them,
as the rest of the people of God may know them to be counterfeits, from verse
15 to 23. You shall know them by this, do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles? have not they their ill haunts, but put away these from
you, if you mean to have Christ.

Fifthly, If we would have Christ, and life in him, we may have him in
Justification, but not in growth of Sanctification, if you part not with
confidence in the saving graces of Gods Spirit, you must not look to be
justified by them, for if you do you will discover them not to be sanctified
graces, nor the fruits of them, the fruits of saving grace; Christ shall profit
you nothing, if you look to be saved by the righteousness of the Law, Gal.
5.3, 4. If therefore we think that for these graces sake God accepts us, truly
we loose the things that we have wrought, and for all that we have received, we
have no part nor portion in the Lord Jesus Christ, neither Abraham nor David
has whereon to (...), Rom 4.4.18. But blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes no sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile. Therein stands our
blessedness, when the Lord imputes not sin to us, but if we look to be
justified either by the gifts of grace we have received, or by the works and
acts of grace that we have performed, we shall certainly fall short; Paul knew
nothing wherein he had dealt unfaithfully, and yet was he not thereby
justified, 1 Cor. 4.4. but he that justifies me is the Lord; and therefore if
you trust upon a gift, and thereby to be justified and accepted, you declare
your graces to be but common, and such as are but found among Hypocrites, and
in this, the Papists have cause to groan under the burden that lies upon
their religion, they by looking for salvation, and acceptance by common graces,
do plainly show, that Christ profits them nothing.

And further, as you are not to trust upon them for justification, so neither
are you to trust upon them for the life of your sanctification, for though they
be truly parts of sanctification, faith, hope, love, patience, humility, and
every other grace of God which flows from our fellowship with the death of
Christ, because these are parts of our sanctification, you may look at them as
precious tallents received from God, yet if you trust in these, in preaching,
or praying, or edefying your selves, or families, or neighbors, and that in
the strength of these you shall do valiantly, and bring mighty things to
pass, and be a fruitful Christian, you have truth of grace, sound hearted
saving grace, and you doubt not but God will carry you an end in a comfortable
Christian course; if so, you will find this to be true, that you will want
Christ in the quickening and enlarging, and thriving power of the life of your
sanctification, it cannot be but that where saving grace is, there is Christ;
but you may have Christ and yet have but a dead Christ of him, he may be so
dead in your spirit, that you shall cry out, O what a dead heart, and a dead
spirit have I, and yet I doubt not but Christ is in my heart; true, it may be
thou have received him, but Christ can tell how to lie dead, and to work but
little there where saving grace is laid up; and therefore the life of Christ
is not a life of grace, but a life of faith. I live not by all my zeal and
humility, and gifts of grace, for I might have all these, and make but dead
work of them all; How then? By the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. It is
one of the chiefest points that concerns our Christian practice, and therefore
I pray you consider it; Note this.
the life of Christianity is not a life of wisdom and graces, but of faith: if
you would have Christ live in you, and live so that he may show his life in
you, you must then live by faith; that is, not only look for your
justification by faith in Christ, but look for your sanctification and
consolation from Christ by faith, that if you go about any duty, go not about
it in the strength of grace received, preach not, or pray not in the strength
of your knowledge, and love, and zeal, and humility, but go about them all in
faith in Jesus Christ, that is by coming to him, and being inwardly sensible,
that unless he put new life into us, and make new work in our souls, we may
have but a dead business of it, all the graces of Gods Spirit in us but dead;
and herein it is wonder to see sometimes, how Gods servants are straightened, all
for want of the life of faith in their souls; if God cut short with us, it is
because we do not live in Christ, but in the spirit of grace, and think to
walk by the strength of grace received, we loose by it, and spend of the stock
of grace; and therefore remember that speech, Esa. 40.30, 31. They that wait
on the Lord shall renew their strength, to show you your duty; it is a borrowed
speech from young men going out to war, they go out in the name of the Lord
of Hosts, as David went out against Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. If we wait upon the
Lord, and be sensible of our own Insufficiency, and unworthiness of doing any
Christian duty, and not depend upon our own sufficiency, then we shall find
God lifting us up far beyond all our own apprehensions; and gifts: God will
put a new life into us, and in this case even the weakest gifts of Gods
servants are sometimes much enlarged, and the same Christians gifts far more
enlarged at some time, above what they are at another, only by waiting upon the
Lord, and that puts life into our duties; therefore if you would find Christ
to be the life of your sanctification, then you must put away all confidence in
saving graces, they are not able to make you bring forth any one lively fruit
of Sanctification, I mean in your own estimation; and you will have little
comfort in it. There is in this case much difference between one Christian and
another, and between the same Christian and himself, at one time and another,
according to his waiting on the Lord for the renewall of his strength,
therefore trust not in any grace, if you do, you will want it when you stand in
most need of it.

SERMON III.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


WE now come to speak of the third way of having Christ, A third way of having
Christ is by Covenant.
and that is by way of Covenant, Esa. 49.8. I will give thee for a Covenant of
the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages,
Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant
with me by Sacrifice; so that would you know to whom God is a God, and to whom
it may be said, He is my God? Any of us that have made a Covenant with God by
Sacrifice; no man has him unless by way of covenant, for all these ways,
though diverse in explication, yet all co-incident to this having of Christ. And
such as have made a covenant with God by Sacrifice, they are his people; of
them it is said, I am thy God, verse. 7. according to the tenor of the
Covenant, Genesis 17.7. Behold, I make a Covenant with thee this day, to be a God
unto thee, and to thy seed. God becomes a God to me, and to my seed by way of
covenant; so Deuteronomy. 29.10. to 13. both your Children of understanding, and your
little ones of no understanding, you are all here before God this day, to enter
into a Covenant with him, to keep his Commandments for ever; you and yours
enter into a Covenant with God, and this is the way of having him for our God,
Deuteronomy. 26.17.18 This day thou have avouched the Lord to be thy God, and he has
avouched thee to be his people; Junius translates the word. Thou have required
by way of Covenant, and he has promised that he will be thy God: in the
original it is, he has made thee to speak, thou have made God to speak
this, as men that make promises one to another, so that when people give up
themselves to be the Lords, and offer themselves up to him, and when God
requires it of us, we yield our selves to him, and desire God to be a God to
us, then he is our God, and we are his people by way of Covenant, 2 Cor. 8.5.
They gave themselves first to the Lord, and then unto us by the will of God,
when we have bestowed our selves upon God, he is not wanting to receive us, to
be his people.

Now for further opening of this, It was said this Covenant was made with God
by way of sacrifice, Psalm. 50.5.7. that was according to the sacrifice which
the people of God did solemnly offer before God, of which you read, Exodus 24.3.
to the end of the eighth ver. Moses told the people the words of the Lord, and
the people answered with one voice and said, All the words which the Lord has
said, we will hear it, and do it; They promise themselves to be an obedient
people to God, what ever he commands them, that will they hear, and that will
they do.

And on the other side, Moses took the blood of the sacrifice, and sprinkled
it upon the people, and by this means they did pass into Covenant with God.
It implies thus much, when we come to make a Covenant with God, we profess our
selves as guilty of death, and therefore look up to Christ, desiring that his
death might be imputed to us, and we thereupon offer our selves, souls and
bodies to be obedient to God to the death; only we require this back again
of God, that as we give up our selves a sacrifice to him, so that the Lord
Jesus Christ might be imputed unto us; and the blood of Christ, and the life of
Christ might be communicated to us; his life of righteousness, and holiness,
and of eternal glory, all that life that is in Christ might become ours, this
does God require of them, and this is to make a Covenant with God by way of
sacrifice; for the Burnt-offering, verse. 5. was a Type of Christ, the
Meat Offering was a Type of the peoples giving up themselves to God, and this
is to make a Covenant by sacrifice: we confess we deserve death, but for time
to come, we desire to give up our selves, to do and suffer his will, only we
desire that the blood of Christ might be sprinkled upon our souls, and that we
might live in his sight.

Now those that have thus made a Covenant with God, he calls them his people,
and Saints. Thus you see what it is, and wherein this Covenant stands,
sometimes some branch of this is expressed in other Covenants: God promises to
Abraham, that he will be a God to him; that is, he will not only be a good
Father to him, nor only a good Master, or Tutour, nor only a good King, nor a
good Physician; but what soever is good, that is in God, and it is but a drop,
but a spark of the wellspring of life in him, all the goodness that is
dispersed in the creature, flows from him; there is goodness in a good
Father, or Magistrate, or Minister, or Friend, but when God undertakes to be a
God to us, he promises to be to us whatsoever is good in the creature; a good
Father, a good Friend, a good Physician, whatever is good for soul and body,
he will be all in all to us, and that partly in his own person, and partly,
in so ordering matters, Extent of the Covenant on Gods part
that all those things wherein his goodness is communicated, he will so
dispose them, that we shall see a goodness of God in them all; we shall see
the presence and goodness of God in all the blessings we partake in this
world, he will be whatsoever is needful for us in every kind, and though any
means should fail, yet God will not fail us: this do we desire of God, God a
fountain of goodness to his.
when we desire him to be our God, God is an heap and fountain of goodness,
and he undertakes so to be us.

Now as we expect this from God, that he would be a God to us, so we desire
also and offer our selves back again to God, to be obedient to his will, and to
wait upon him for all that which he has promised us, to expect it, and to
wait for it; And when we undertake to be obedient to him; not that we promise
it in our own names, and for our own parts, but in the behalf of every soul
that belongs to us, as we desire a blessing upon all that belongs to us, so we
offer up our selves to God, and our wives, and children, Extent of the Covenant
on our part.
and servants, and kindred, and acquaintance, and all that are under our reach,
either by way of subordination, or co-ordination, so far as in our power we
may reach, either by Commandment or counsel, we do as much as in us lies
promise to God, that we and our households will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. he
and his household, that is, his children and servants, and all that are bought
with money, they will all serve the Lord, this they offer to God as a Father in
a family; he and his, so much as he is able, will prevail with them, to keep
Gods Commandments, and God will be a God to them all; a Father, and Master, a
Magistrate and Minister, Husband, Friend, and Physician and all, and whatsoever
is good, thus you see how God comes to be ours by way of Covenant.

For further clearing of this point there is a threefold Covenant, Covenant
three fold
wherein God does bind himself to his people, and we back again to him,
according as there is among the reasonable creatures.

1 The first is, Between Prince and People, so the high Priest made a Covenant,
between him, and between all the people, and between the King, that they should
be the Lords people, and such a Covenant there is usually in all well governed
Commonwealths, unless the King comes in by way of Conquest and Tyranny, but
in well settled Commonwealths, there is a Covenant and Oath between Prince and
People.

2 There is a Covenant between Man and Wife, of which it is said Prove. 2.17.
Which forsakes the Guide of her Youth, and forgets the Covenant of her God.
These are all called the Covenant of God, he is a party in the Covenant ever.

3 Another, is an Oath or a Covenant of God to pass between Friend, and
Friend; such was the Covenant between Jonathan and David, 1 Samuel 20.16.

Now there is a certain Covenant between God and his people in all these; that
look what a King requires of his People, or the people of a King, the very same
does God require of his people, and the people of God, that offers himself to
be a God to his people; that is, a Governor, a Provider for, and a protector of
his people, to fight their Battles for them, and to guide and rule them in
peace and justice; and the people undertake to be obedient to his Laws, to
whatever he declares to be the counsel of his will.

Again, there is a Covenant of Marriage between God and his people, Ier. 3.14.
so as the Wife promises to be to her Husband alone, Hos. 3.3, 4. so the Church
of God promises, that she will be for God alone, and God will be for us alone;
and we embrace the seed of his Word and grace in our hearts, and bring forth
fruit to God alone.

And there is also a Covenant of Friendship between God and us, A covenant of
Salt, 2 Chronicles. 13.5. A covenant of Salt is to be fed with the same salt, as it
were, to eat many a bushel of salt together, that is a covenant of friendship;
Did not thou give the Land to the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever? 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Covenant of Salt.
therein he fitly expresses the nature of a covenant of salt, by friendship
for ever; salt eaten together expresses familiarity, and durablenesse, now God
expresses himself thus, to enter into a covenant with his people; he takes
Abraham as a friend for ever, and Abraham takes God as his friend for ever; and
this league of friendship implies not only preservation of affection, but it
requires a kind of secret communication one to another, and a doing one for
another. God he grants our Petitions for us as a friend, and we do his
Commandments as a friend out of the integrity of our hearts; John 15.14. Ye
are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you; I know that Abraham will
command his household to fear me, Genesis 18.19. and therefore in verse. 17. and
18. he says, How shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I am about to do?
and it was concerning a secret counsel of God, now when God undertakes to be
our friend, he undertakes to communicate sundry of his Counsels to us, his
secrets are to them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. Many secret passages shall
their hearts be made privy to, that others shall never be acquainted with; he
will acquaint us with his secret purpose about a people, sometimes in Prayer,
sometimes in Humiliation, sometimes one way, and sometimes another, so as you
may see he walks toward us in a covenant of friendship; and so he will play a
friends part, he will counsel us for the best, he will tell us, this, and that,
is the best course for us to take, Psalm. 25.12. Him shall he teach: He will come
and tell us what he would have us to do, Psalm. 32.8. Sometimes by his Word,
and sometimes by his Providence; and when we look up to him as to a friend,
he will do a friends part: And on the other side, for our part we shall never
take any business in hand, but we shall sadly and seriously communicate all
our affairs with God, and think our selves bound to do it, not dare to rush
upon any thing but upon consultation first with the Lord, and acquainting him
with such and such things; We know not what to do, but our eyes are unto thee,
2 Chronicles. 20.12. So we offer up our selves to be ready at his commandment, to
do whatsoever he shall counsel us to do; let him but make our way plain
before us, and we will hear him in whatsoever he requires of us, be it what it
will be, if God lay it before us, we will do it, Psalm. 119. verse. 1. of the
fifth Part. Teach me thy statutes, and I will keep it even to the end. Observe
then, whether we have Christ for our Christ by way of covenant, did there ever
pass such a conveyance between Christ and you, to God the Father, about him
and your souls, that if God should look upon you, and consider your case,
your just and due desert is everlasting destruction; and therefore you account
your selves unworthy of an mercy from God, but yet notwithstanding if he will be
but pleased to accept the death of Christ for you, and to be-sprinkle you with
the blessings of his grace, you will give up your selves to an acceptable
service of him all your days, and will be ready to do his will, and that he
shall be to you as a King, and Governor. Have you ever passed over to him your
preservation, and protection, and provision? And look what affection is
between Husband and Wife, has there been the like affection in your souls
toward the Lord Jesus Christ? Have you a strong and hearty desire to meet him
in the bed of loves, when ever you come to the Congregation, and desire you to
have the seeds of his grace shed abroad in your hearts, and bring forth the
fruits of grace to him, and desire that you may be for him, and for none other,
and you desire to acquaint him with all your counsels and secrets, and desire
to do nothing but as he shall counsel and direct you? And have you therefore
been willing to give up your selves, you and yours to be ruled by Christ; and
is it the grief of your souls if any of your Children, and Servants shall not
stoop to God, and if you use the best means to draw them on to goodness?
truly then you have Christ for your Christ, because you have him by way of
covenant: When God gives us hearts thus to agree with him, he always prevents
us, he is ever before us, then Christ thou have, and in him thou have life; but
if on the contrary, we never come before God in acknowledgement that death was
our portion, and desired the blood of Christ to be applied to us, not in an
overture of speech, but when it comes to the point, what will you do? Will you
accept him as your friend, and as your Husband, and will you expect all good
things from him, and you will not dare to venture upon any course or way further
then the light and sincerity of the Word gives liberty? And if you never came
to this, nor was it ever your care whether your Household served God or no,
though they sin against God, and swear and lie, yet all this is nothing to
you, but it is all one with you, then there wants a covenant between God and
you, and then if you have him not by covenant, you have him not at all; he that
has him any way, has him every way, though it be not so clearly seen every
way; if you have him, then you have friends and enemies in common; if it be not
so with you, that you observe not the counsels of God, but you will be at a
loose end, and do what you think good in your own eyes, then there is no
covenant between God and you, and then you have not Christ, and then no life,
much less in abundance.

Object. But you say, Who is there that so looks to himself, his Wife, and
Children, and Servants, so to his own heart and others, as that they are so
wholly conformable to Gods will in all that he counsels and commands, and who
so expects such blessings, but that they take from God many things in ill part,
and often times sit down murmuring and discontent.

Answ. Even they that make a Covenant with God, they often break Covenant with
him; and so often as you entertain any thought in your mind, wherein you have
not consulted with God, and do any thing further then you have warrant from
God, so often have you broken Covenant; so often as there is any passage in our
lives, for which we had not warrant from the mouth of God, and wrought it by
the strength of his grace, and eye of his providence, so far have we broke
Covenant with him; but yet notwithstanding this breach of Covenant, here stands
their help, and this is their comfort, that God has given Christ for a
Covenant, Esa. 49.8. so that he will make good our breach of Covenant on his
own part, and Heb. 7.22. he becomes a Surety for our parts, God needs no
Surety for his part, but we need one; so that if we have Christ for our
Surety, then this is required of us, that knowing we have broken Covenant with
God, we ought to blush, and to be ashamed of it, Ezra 9.6. to 12. and Dan. 9.5.
to 20. they confess they have broken Covenant with God, and thereupon they sit
down blushing, and weeping, and rending their garments, that they should enter
into such a solemn Covenant with God, and hope to receive so many mercies from
him, and yet so unfaithfully to break Covenant with him, when we see that we
have transgressed and forgotten the Covenant of God, and break the counsels
of God, we or ours: It is for us in such a case to do as those people did in
Ezra and Nehemiah, who broke Covenant with God; to go and blush before him,
that we should deal so unworthily with that God, that has made such a
perpetual Covenant of faith with us, that will be all that is good to us, and
has not been wanting to do all for us: and we notwithstanding, who
undertook, solemnly that we and our children, and servants should walk after
God, and we would teach them to do what is good in Gods sight, and yet we do
not take care that they do so; and for other of our friends, whom we might be
helpefull to, we wholly neglect them; we ought to shame our selves for this
breach of Covenant, else we cannot say, that we make a true Covenant with God,
and charge our selves for being so false unto God, and then some good may come
of it. When the people had broken Covenant with God, and God was very angry,
and would have no more to do with them, Exo. 32. But chapter 33. the people put off
their best clothes and came before him, and humbled themselves in his
presence, and put off their best clothes, and entreated God to be reconciled
unto them, and then he again renewes his Covenant with them. To show you how
God is wont to express himself to his people, when we have broken Covenant
with him, God will say, he will not look at us any more, he will never protect
us more, he will neither meddle nor make with us, but will expose us to all
evil; now if hereupon we return and bewail our breach of Covenant with God,
how little good we have done, and how little serviceable we are, he is then
wont to let us see, that his Covenant was never so far broken, but he can tell
how to be good to us, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, And this is a third way
of having of Christ.

A Fourth way, is a way of free acceptance, we have Christ by receiving him,
that is the last way, Fourthway of having of Christ.
whereby Christ is said to be conveyed to us, John 1.12. to as many as received
him, to them he gave power to be called the sons of God, that is the life of a
Christian to become a Son of God, and God is the Father not of the dead but
of the living, so that here is a receiving of Christ by faith, whereby we
become the sons of God, so that if you would know, whether you have Christ or
no, whether or no do you receive him? Receive him by faith, and that goes
through all the former, but some thing different. Amongst Interpreters this
receiving of Christ is many ways taken: Some say it is to receive him as a
King and a Savior, and it is not in vain, but under correction: It does not
fitly interpret the notion of the Word; But the substance of the thing
delivered by the Holy Ghost, if I do not mistake it, the phrase expresses
thus much; As many as receive him into their hearts as into a House or Temple,
and it will hold according to the comparison used by the holy ghost; he came
unto his own, into the Temple, or House of God, and thither he came as into his
own proper place, he came unto his own; you are to conceive, he speaks not
only of Christ's coming among them in the tabernacle of flesh and blood, for of
that in verse. 1. but the whole Chapter is an History, and declaration of
Christ, partly before the world was; and in their giving light to all in the
Creation, and after the fall, when the world was grown dark, then he was the
true light, that enlightened every one that was in the world; now he was in the
world, and the world was made by him, but the world knew him not. And he came
to his own people in his Ordinances, and they apprehended him not; but as many
as received him of old, to them he gave power to be called the Sons of God.

But for further opening of this Phrase, read Joh. 19.27. He took her home to
his own house; it is in the original the same word with that in John, 1.11.
in to his own home; he came unto his own home or house, unto his own Temple
and people, and they received him not, but neglected his Ordinances, neglected
to seek Christ in the Temple; but as many as did there seek him, and look
toward him, he gave them power to be called the sons of God; so that to
receive Christ according to the meaning of this place, is, to receive him into
our hearts as into his proper house; and he comes there as a Master, and these
receive him as into a Temple, then we have him by receiving him into an house
or home; now you are the Temples of the living God, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell
in you, and you shall receive me.

Christ received as into a temple three ways.
Now, how do we receive Christ into our hearts as into a Temple? There be
three things by which we receive Christ as into a Temple:

First, when we do prepare a way for Christ to come in to us, as it is said of
John, he prepared the way for Christ, that so he might suddenly come into his
Temple, Mal. 3.1. and Isaiah speaking of the same Messenger, he says, Every
mountain shall be brought low, and every valley filled up; crooked ways be
made strait, and rough ways made smooth, Isa. 40.3, 4. and this is the
preparation we must make for Christ to come into us; you have sometime heard
this fully spoken to; that is, when the high mountains of our great spirits,
and lofty looks, are brought so low, that we are content to be nothing in our
own eyes, that we have all we have in Christ, and are able to bring nothing to
him, and are willing that he should take all from us, whatever he would have us
to part with; and when we are willing to be whatsoever he would have us to be,
and that he should do with us what is good in his own eyes; then these high
mountains being brought low, we are made fit for Christ to come into us, we
must have no crooked ways of our own; if we have any imagination of our own
left in us, that we will part with such and such Lusts, but yet are loath to be
disposed of in all things as God will have us, then there is no room for God,
he will not climb for it; but if we smooth the way for him, then he will come
into our hearts.

But besides this, there is to be filled up every low valley, and that holds
forth two things; Every Valley shall be filled, that is, first, every base heart
shall lift up it self to the high things of God, for he speaks of valleys
first, as if there were such a low dejectedness in the Creature, as made it
unfit for Christ; God requires that every base heart should be exalted, to the
minding of high and heavenly things, lifted up far above these low things
that cannot reach the ways of God, these Gates must stand open, and be lifted
up, that the King of glory may come in, Psalm. 24.7. to 10. and he means the
gates of our hearts, and he calls them, the gates of eternity, they are our
hearts and souls; stand not poring upon earthly things here below, but lift up
your heads higher, look for a God, and for a Kingdom; stand not pedling about
these earthly things, as if you had nothing else to look after; your hearts
lie too low for Christ to come into, but if you would lie level with him, then
lift up your mind to heavenly things; let the bent of your heart be for pardon
of sin, and for everlasting life, be of a level frame of spirit to the
Kingdom of Heaven, and then Christ will come into you.

And as it implies, that the heart must not be too low for Christ through
baseness of spirit, and an earthly mind, so it may be too low through
despair, and through excessive sorrow for sin, he may be cast so low down
in dejection of spirit, that his heart lies too low for Christ, not able to lay
hold on Gods favor to him in Christ; thinks the Promises belongs not to him,
it is well and happy for them that can lay hold upon them, but for his part
there is none of these Promises reach him; Did ye ever know any in my case
find mercy? now the heart lies something too low, this man's heart is not base,
he looks at Christ as the most honorable thing in the world, he sets his heart
upon the blood of Christ, and would be glad with all his heart that he had his
part in it, but he is dejected, and lies too low, fit to despair, and
therefore in this case a Christian must be thus far exalted, as to be made
level with Christ, to believe there is hope in Israel touching his estate;
Christ has had mercy upon many in such a case, and he will do so to us, if we
seek him in the way of his Ordinances, and if therefore we resolve to seek
him, and put our mouths in the dust, expecting salvation to be revealed by
him, and follow him in his Ordinances, and never have fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, and will still continue to seek him, then we
begin to be something level with Christ; But you say, There is such a
crookedness in my heart, and un-evennesse, that Christ cannot come in; truly
that must be made strait. Princes are not wont to go down back lanes, but
down plain ways; so Christ, as he would have his way neither too high, nor
too low, so he would not go round about, but would have the way to lie plain
before him; the judgment, and heart, and affection, lie in such sort of
evennesse as simply to aim at the glory of God in his way, and therein to be
ruled by the Word of God, and then is the heart of a man in a good frame; if
there be nothing in a man's heart, but he is willing to be guided in it, by
the straight rule of Gods Word, and he aims directly at the glory of God, and
the coming of his Kingdom, and the doing of his will, then is all a man's
crooked ways laid aside, and the heart lies so level, that Christ will
suddenly come into his Temple, these crooked windings of a spirit of hypocrisy
are made straight, when he is brought low, yet he may have much hypocrisy in
him, pretend to be more then he is, he may be doing good dutys more to be seen
of men, then that God should observe him; therefore when God has brought us to
this, that we are desirous of grace, rather in truth then in outward show, or
if in show, but that we might do others good thereby, and singly aim at Gods
glory in it, and desire and endeavor to walk by the straight rule of the Word
of God, then are our hearts cleansed in some measure, from the crooked windings
of hypocrisy, which might hinder the free passage of Christ into the soul.

And yet there is another winding in a man's heart, though in some truth the
duties be done, yet there is many times an aptness in us to cover and to wind
about our own sins, and to make them less then they be, and this is a wicked
course, Psalm. 125.4, 5. and therefore God would have us deal most plainly with
him, that in the singleness of our hearts, when it may stand with the glory of
God, and the confusion of our own faces, we will not be wanting to lay open our
hearts before him, these be such windings as will not profit us, when we deal
plainly and confess what we have done, and come to be thus open hearted to
God, then is Christ ready to come suddenly into his Temple, when we have
brought down our high spirits, and raised up our too low, base and dejected
spirit; and laid all level before him, then there remains no more, but for
Christ to come suddenly into his Temple.

But yet besides all this, when all this is don, yet there may be still a great
measure of a rough, and harsh, and sharp, and fiery spirit in him, which
Christ will have removed before he comes to dwell there, before that, he will
have this harshnesse, and bitterness laid down* that they shall be smooth and
level before him, the frame of the heart shall be as meek as a Lamb: The Lamb
of God will not lie in a den of Lions, and if we break out into harsh and
unsavory distempers afterward, we shall damp the life of God in us, the life of
Christ will be dead in us: and therefore if you desire to entertain Christ into
your hearts; then lay aside al harshnesse, and bitterness, and roughness, and
al guile of crookedness, 1 Pet. 2.12. then you shall have life in the Word, and
find Christ to be yours. This is the first thing whereby we receive Christ.

Second way of receiving of Christ.
Secondly, Suppose he be come, there is thus much more required to have him, and
to keep him there, we must look there be no unholy thing remaining there, all
vain and common things must be removed, no prophain matter must stay there, 2
Cor. 6.16. touch no unclean thing. And if Christ be come unto you, you must not
only remove all sinful and unclean matter, but also all common matter, and
now every thing must be dedicated to God, and you must go about your callings
as becomes Christians, and you and all yours must be dedicated to God; your
silver and your gold must be dedicated, and only spent upon such uses, as God
calls for, and therefore look at every thing so, as God may have glory by it,
and let him not be dishonored in any thing by you, all that you are, and
have, must be dedicated to God; mind, and judgment, and conscience, and heart,
and affection, love and hatred; your whole man, and all your labors, and all
you can reach, lies as a consecrated thing, else God will not dwell livelily in
you, unless you have a care to keep every thing clean, you shall find this
to be true, Christ loves to lie clean, and Religion loves to lie clean, and
if he see hasty sluttishnesse in us, he will be gone and will not tarry there,
he would not have natural uncleannes to appear among you, but let al such be
covered, and let no such defilement be seen among you, he would have all kept
in an holy reverent frame, such as might become the presence of God.

The third way.
Thirdly, The receiving of Christ into our hearts as into a Temple implies to
keep the charge of his Ordinances and holy things, to offer to him all our
sacrifices, and to look that all be performed in such a manner as himself
requires, God charge it as a sin upon his people, Ezekiel 44.8 ye have not
kept the charge of my holy things, but ye have set keepers of my Ordinances in
my Sanctuary for your selves, God will not dwell among them, when they set up
the uncircumcised to offer up their Sacrifices, God will have every man to take
charge over his own Temple; have a care of your selves, put not off your care
to others, you may not put off the charge of Gods holy things, every man has a
charge to look to the things of God; not only to see that al unclean things be
removed, and all common things dedicated, but to see that every morning and
evening, Sacrifice be duly performed, and all things done in a right manner,
else you will find little life in Christ, and if he see this care in you, then
Christ will come into his Temple and dwell there, and you shall have life in
Christ, and that in abundance, you cannot have God for your God, but you must
have a place, readily prepared for him, and keep it in fitness, and
comeliness for him, trim it up for an habitation for him, this God requires
of every soul that will have God for his God. In a word therefore, do but
consider, whether your hearts have thus embraced Christ or no; is your base
hearts exalted to look after heavenly things, Note this.
and are your proud hearts brought low to the obedience of Christ, do you find
your ways of hypocrisy made plain before God, and is your rough passions made
smooth before God, then you have Christ, whether you see him, or feel him or
no; and do you find that when you have Christ, you dedicate your selves to him,
and suffer no unclean thing in your selves or yours, and do you keep the
Ordinances pure, and offer up your morning and evening sacrifice your selves?
then you have received Christ, and it is your faith by which you do thus
receive him; but if it be not thus with you, then say you have not received
Christ, or if you have, you are to be humbled for your great neglect, and want
of keeping of him.

SERMON IV.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


THere yet remains two things for signs of having Christ, for in all this
point of our Christian faith, there is no word but of more then ordinary and
common use; And therefore when he says, he that has the Son has life, some
signs may be gathered from the word, having him, and some from having him as a
SON; and some from this word Life, by which we may know, whether we have the
Son and life in him.

We now come to speak of the second sort of signs, He that has the Son has
life, then if we would have life in Christ, we must have him as a SON.

The thing then to be opened is, What it is to have Christ, as the Son of the
most high God, and that will give further light to the Text, and to the
consciences of them that would see the ground of their hopes settled upon a
foundation, He that has the Son has life.

There be three things employed in having Christ as a Son.

First it implies, that such as have Christ in truth, and so having him, First
thing considered in having Christ as a Son.
have life by him; they do not rest in having any of the benefits of Christ,
though they be spiritual, but they cheifely affect to have himself, not so
much his benefits as himself; he does not say, he that has such and such
spiritual gifts has the Son; no, though you have never so many gifts, and
they such as do accompany salvation, but that which he principally commends to
us is himself; you shall read of a company of Professors that had Christ, and
affected to have him so far as they, might have Loaves from him, Joh. 6.26,
27. but our blessed Savior bids them in seeking Christ, seek not for loaves
that perish, but labor for the meat which endures to eternal life; and that
is only the Lord Jesus Christ himself: Labor not for any loaves, whatsoever you
might find in your pursuit after Christ. It was this by which Peter did
discover the hypocrisy of Simon Magus, he desired the gift of the Holy Ghost,
but for Christ himself, his heart was not set upon him, but he only desired
that in which lay most profit; for had it been in his power, that upon the
laying on of his hands upon any, Tongues might have been given, and Sicknesses
healed, he might have grown mighty in the world by that trade, Act 8.18, 19.
And Balaam he was somewhat more upright in his desire then Simon Magus was, one
would think that he had sought after Christ, for he wished not for any
temporal thing in this world, only that he might have a comfortable end, he
would feather his nest with Immortality, and invest himself with the Robes of
incorruption, and such kind of other glory, as the Saints in light do partake
of, but it was no more his desire then the other, to desire Christ for
himself, but only a blessed end, that he might be translated into immortality
and glory, and so might be kept from fellowship with those Devils, and evil
Spirits he had been acquainted with all his life long, that he might not have
fellowship with them when he departed hence; but did not desire Christ for
himself, and therefore whatever gift he had, as he had a notable spirit of
Prophecy, as the Spirit then came upon him, speaking of the mavelous
blessings reserved for Gods people, yet notwithstanding he never sought Christ
in any of them, and therefore though he might have some glimpse of the Vision
of God, yet of Christ he had none; whereas there is no true Christian that does
most esteem the having of Christ, but does not only seek Christ without
respect of Loaves, or Money, or of a quiet Conscience in time of death, but
even in the very time of this life, when he seeks after the Ordinances of God
in this life, there to live according to God, and to find pardon of sin and
peace of conscience, and subduing of his lusts, and strength of grace, and
power of godliness, yet even in seeking the very Ordinances of God (out of
which these are not to be found) yet in seeking of these, he does not so much
seek these, or any blessing they do afford, as the finding Christ in them;
the story is notable, and famous in, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26, 27. When David fled from
Jerusalem, the Priests and Levites carried the Arc after him, and when David
saw them overtake him with the Arc of Gods presence, in the enjoyment whereof
stood the life of his life, the assurance of the pardon of his sin, the
assurance and presence of Gods favor, strengthening of his spirit in grace,
and subduing his lusts) yet says he, Carry it back again to Jerusalem, if I
shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back again, and
show me both it and his habitation; but if he thus say, I have no delight in
thee, behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good to him. He would not
wrong himself, nor do the Church of God so much prejudice as to wrong God,
and his Sacrifice, they were not to offer sacrifice elsewhere; nor could they
find any solemn presence of God any where but there, there were they all to
meet, and it was the place where God had put his name; and he considering that,
he could not have the Arc with him, but Gods Name should be dishonored, and
the Church of God would find much prejudice with the loss of God's Ark; and
therefore rather then God should be dishonored, and the people discouraged and
prejudiced by the want of it, he would send it back again, and is content to
loose outward blessings; his care was not so much about outward things, his
chiefest care was, if he might have had his wish, that he might all his time
dwell in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 23.4. and oh that he might be but a
doore-keeper in this house, rather then to rest in the tabernacle of
wickedness; but yet when he could not have this great blessing, but with
dishonor to God, and prejudice to the Church of God, he rather lays down the
comfort that he might have from Gods Ordinances, and the help he might have
from them, and those helps were very great; as pardon of sin, and peace of
conscience, growth in grace, subduing of lusts, and establishment of his heart
in assurance of his election, and vocation; yet he is content to let them all
go that he might have what he has without sin to himself, and dishonor to
God, or wrong to the Church; and this is a notable sign of a man's integrity and
uprightness of heart, he would not have any thing whereby God might have
dishonor; he would not have the Ordinances with the Churches loss, but rather
sit out, and shift for himself as well as he could, and would adventure the
loss of them all rather then he will stand to contend for them with the loss
of Christ himself: And this kind of frame of spirit was in Moses, he
intreates God that he would not destroy the Israelites in the Wilderness,
least his name should be dishonored, but rather blot his name out of the Book
of Life then cut them all off, Exodus 32.32. Such is the uprightness of the
frame of the heart of a Child of God, that he desires not Spiritual blessings
singly for himself, not for the peace of his own Conscience, nor for the
subduing of his lusts, nor for the strengthening of his grace, further then may
stand with the glory of God; and above all things else he seeks the honor of
God, the coming of his Kingdom, and the doing of his will; and if these
concur not in his way, he would rather loose them, then dishonor Christ by
having of them; he has a singleness of heart in seeking spiritual blessings;
he seeks them not for his own ends, as you see in David's desire, Psalm. 63.1,
2, 3. My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, to see thy power,
and thy glory, as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary; because thy loving
kindness is better then life, therefore my lips shall praise thee. He desires
not there the enjoyment of the presence of God, or the subduing of his lusts,
that he might live at more ease, and have more comfort (though that be a
lawful end) but he would see the power of Christ more magnified in him; he
would see a mighty increase of the grace of God in him, not that he might be
more excellent then his neighbors, more eminent in gifts, and so be better
then others, or so esteemed; but he desires that all his lusts may be swallowed
up, and that the life of Christ might more mightily overruled, and over-sway
him, and dwell mightily in him, that he might not live after his own will, nor
to himself, nor would he live by the graces of the Spirit in him, but the life
that he would live, is by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. that Christ
and his life in him might work all his works in him and for him; and in that
at any time he desires death, it is not that he might be freed from evil and
misery, but that he might be dissolved, and be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. Though
the other be a lawful desire, but chiefly his desire is, that he might see
Christ, whom from his first conversion he has most loved, and in whom he has
lived all his life, and now to be wholly possessed of him, and wholly acted and
swayed by him, not that he might have his heart filled with joy, but that he
might be with Christ, not only as chiefest of ten thousand persons, but as the
chiefest of ten thousands benefits of God, that should God give us pardon of
sin, his Word and Sacrament, and victory over all our lusts, strength of
every grace of God, and everlasting life, and therewith fellowship with all the
blessed Saints and Angels, yet to us Christ is the chiefest of them all, none
greater then the gift of Christ; and this is the sincerity of a Christians
soul, he desires more any benefit for Christ's sake, then Christ for any of his
benefits sake; for he whose heart is set upon Christ, more then upon the pardon
of sin, or salvation, that soul has Christ, and life in him; he that has
Christ in his eye and heart above all blessings, he indeed is a true Christian,
and has Christ.

Reas. Christ must so be had, and we must so receive him as God gives him; now
God gives us first Christ in all his Ordinances, and then in Christ all other
things, all benefits in and through Christ, Act. 8.35. We preach to you Jesus;
we offer you him, all lusts laid aside, all sinful corruptions put away,
whatever separates between God and us, that being done away: We now offer you
Christ, and in Christ plentious redemption; but if we be without Christ, we are
without true life.

As in the Sacrament, first you have the body and blood of Christ set before
you, Matthew. 26.26. and then sealed up, and confirmed to you in the Sacrament,
and together with that justification, and further degrees of the sanctifying
spirit, and further pledges of everlasting life, and glory; No benefit, but its
conveyed through him; Christ first, and then the benefit. It is true, Herod
received joy, but Foelix trembling, and Jehu zeal, but none of these received
Christ; they received the husk, but wanted Christ; they had the shell, but not
the marrow and kernel within; they received the benefit, but Christ they did
not receive, and for want of him they had no life at all. Simon Magus he
believed, Acts 8.13. but he had no lively faith, because he would receive the
benefit, but Christ he minded not to receive: Unless the heart be knit to
Christ, and the soul more seek Christ then pardon of sin, or subduing of
lusts, he has no life in truth, he that has the Son, he has life; not so, he
that has the gifts and benefits of the son: But Christ first, and in having
Christ we have all.

Christ must be received as God gives him, we must acknowledge there is no life
in any grace, but in Christ, Hos. 14.8. On me is your fruit found, and without
me can you do nothing John 15.5. Now then carry this truth home with you, and
gather from hence a true estimate of your own estates, whether you may judge of
your selves as living or dead Christians, Upon our having or not having of
Christ depends our having or not having of life. How will you know, whether you
have life or no, you say you have Christ, how know you that? Whether is your
hearts more set upon Christ, then the gifts of Christ; Whether do you labor
more for gifts, or for Christ himself. And if you find this, that in the
truth of your hearts, you come not to the Ordinances, but to find your beloved
there, not out of unclean and wanton spirits, but to seek him whom your soul
most desires; whose favor and countenance you would rather behold, then to
hear the voice of a pleasant singer, and you are not satisfied with any thing
unless you find him; then shall you find life in so coming to the Ordinances
Can. 3.1, 2, 3. By night in my bed I sought him whom my soul loved, etc. The
bed was the Temple, wherein God did reveal himself in his Ordinances, and
disperse himself to his people in the bed of his love. She came to the
Temple, not to seek any of the Priests and Levites there; She goes indeed to
the Watchmen, and makes her moan and complaint to them, that she could not
find Christ in his Ordinances, and she durst not rest upon their opinions; but
says, have you not seen him whom my soul loves? can you tell me any news, or
give me any intelligence of my beloved Savior? Thus she inquires of the
Watchmen: And from them she goes to the Daughters of Jerusalem, to her
Christian friends and charge them to tell him, that she is sick of love. Now
if thus to desire him, is to find Christ, then there is no more to be doubted
of in such a case as this; But the heart thus seeking him in his Ordinances,
and the affections gone after him there, more then after any of his benefits,
then in truth we have the Son, he could not have our hearts, if we first had
not him; And therefore it is a strong evidence we have him, because our hearts
are set upon him. We search for nothing so much as for him; This is part of the
meaning of that place in Psalm. 73.25 Whom have I in heaven but thee, or in
earth in comparison of thee? he desires nothing more then him, neither peace of
conscience, nor joy in the Holy ghost, nor any thing so chiefly, and
principally as God; but if we have a longing affection after pardon of sin,
and peace of conscience, and assurance of salvation, after subduing of lusts
and growth in grace; these be blessed desires, and usually upright, and
sincere, but there may be hypocrisy even in these very desires, and in using
the means to attain these; for sometimes by this means we seek Christ, and
him in his Ordinances, not so much for himself, as for the benefits we have by
him, which is a spirit of harlotry; As in a woman that it may be has a strong
affection to match with such a man; but it is, but that he might pay her
debts, and that she might be well provided for, for the world, and that he
might be avail, and a protector to her, these be lawful ends to aim at; but
if it be only and chiefly for these ends, it is not true conjugal affection,
for if another man could do this for her as well as he, she could make choice
of another as well as of him, and she desires him, not for his, but for her own
ends; And just so it is alike in this case, If a man desire the Lord Jesus
Christ to this end, that he may have his sin pardoned, and be furnished with
grace, though these be spiritual ends, yet so much as we prize the benefit
above Christ, so much are we halting in the truth of our affection to him. If a
woman in true conjugall affection, look at no more but at the very bare man,
True love to Christ wherein it is.
if there be true love in her toward him, she is content to have him, though
she have nothing else but his person; so if our hearts be truly set upon Christ
we are content to have him, though we should never see good day with him;
though we should never see peace of conscience with him, though no comfort of
grace in him, yet would the soul say, that is truly affected to Christ, give
me Christ, and I have enough, who, or what is there besides Christ? What is
there? Why, there is variety of excellent graces: But whom have I in earth but
thee? As if ye should put all other things in comparison against, or with
Christ, they are nothing to him, then surely you have Christ.

But how much will this discord from the fellowship of Christ, the Sons and
Daughters of men, who when they see the costlinesse of the ways of Christ,
they will neither seek after Christ nor his benefits: But as for pardon of
sin, as it passes all understanding, so it passes their desires; And for
peace of conscience, they hope they have a good conscience; or if not, they do
not search to know it; and as for the graces of the spirit, and subduing of
lusts, they have a good hope, and believe as well as the best: And for the
Kingdom of glory, they hope if God grant them mercy they shall come to heaven
at the last: These men are far from having the Lord Jesus, and life in him;
they are so far off from seeking the Son, as that they do not so much as seek
those mercies and benefits which in Christ are conveyed to their souls, they
neither have him nor none of his. They say to the Almighty depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy law, Job 21.14. of such God says, They would
have none of me, Psalm. 81.11. not only have him, but none of him; that is,
nothing that was his, not any saving benefit of his; the world we would have,
but none of those choice and heavenly blessings of Christ; no pardon of sin, no
peace of conscience, no care of Christianity, or faithful Ministry, no fear
of God, nor keeping of his Commandments; dear hearts for us, how shall we
ever conceive that ever we should have life in Christ, when we do not so much
as desire the very benefits of Christ? which yet a man may desire and loose all
too, and when a man has not so much as an affection to the things of Christ it
is very dangerous.

But secondly, when a man is in this case, that there is a desire in a man
after the benefits of Christ, more then after Christ himself; all this while
you want that sincerity upon which Christ will give us a comfortable meeting,
and speak peace to our souls; we are not yet come to that condition, as in
which he will say; My wel-beloved, thou art all fair, and there is no spot in
thee, he yet sees not a true conjugall affection in us toward him; so as that
though we should never find grace nor glory by him, yet he is the chief
desire of our souls. Suppose a woman should see a man that has a desire after
her, but he chiefly aims at her estate, to provide for himself, and looks no
further, wonder not if she should say to him; You seek not me, but mine, she
may well rid her hands of him in such a case; and truly so is the case here
between us and the Lord Jesus, so long as he finds that we come to him, and
seek, and pray, and wrestle, and what would we have? Oh, pardon of sin, and
peace of conscience, and power of grace, to be but as other Christians are;
that we could pray, and believe as they do, and find such comfort as they
have, and this is the thing that the soul is chiefly set upon; now all this
while that we come thus to Christ, we must not think that Christ is to blame,
if he tarry a little longer then we expect, for we may seek him and not find
him, because we seek not so much him as his benefits, and the rich treasures
of grace, and mercy, and peace, that are laid up in him without measure; the
greatest part of the world do not love their souls, nor the Lord Jesus so
well, as to love him for his grace and goodness sake; but yet among better men,
there is a world of self love, many a man would have his sin pardoned,
because he would have his conscience at quiet; we may thank our selves for
such affections as these, not but that such affections may spring from the
grace of God, for men by nature never dream of such things as these be, but
yet though such affections may spring from the grace of God, yet you shall ever
find such souls to detain the grace of God in unrighteousness, and out of
self love, use them all to their own ends; and look not that God may be
glorified in and by them, nor that his will be done; but oh, that the soul
might have peace, and that sin might be pardoned, and there it rests: When
our desires is chiefly set upon spiritual gifts, if we loose much comfort and
fellowship with Christ, that else we might have had, we must not marvel at it,
for our desires are set not chiefly upon Christ, but upon the things of Christ;
our desire is not after the person, but after the goods and benefits of Christ.
Observe the Apostles expression, Romans 8.32. He has given us his own Son; he
does not say, he that has given us peace and pardon of sin, will not he give
all other things also? Or, will not he give us Christ? He reasons not from
Christ's benefits, to Christ, but thus he reasons; He that has given us his
own Son, will with his Son, and after his Son, give us all other things.
At the second hand comes in all these benefits of pardon of sin, and strength
of grace, and power against our lusts, etc. these things come in as attendants
upon the former; and therefore if God give us first to look at Christ, that in
him we have life of justification, and sanctification, and consolation,
eternal glory, peace, and grace, and all; then we have him, and life in him,
else we may have the outward comforts, but stand long enough at Christ's
Bedchamber door, before he let us in. Let it therefore be a word of direction
and exhortation, to every soul that desires to have that truth of life, and
peace, and grace wrought in his heart that will never dye; have you respect
chiefly to the Lord Jesus Christ, and long and seek more after him, then after
all Spiritual blessings, and much more above all worldly blessings. If you
shall therefore refuse Christ, because you think he is but a melancholy
person, you will never have him, if you stand upon such terms, if you will not
have him unless he be thus and thus qualified; then let him alone, never talk
of him, rest not in looking after any of his benefits, it is a good thing to
look for such benefits as accompany Christ; but rest not there, content not
your selves in such wrastlings, never think you are of a right spirit, and
that you have a lively life, and such as by which you shall maintain constant
fellowship with God, unless you find your hearts longing after Christ; My
soul is a thirst for the living God, Psalm. 42.1, 2. Let your hearts be chiefly
set upon him for his own sake, you can tell what it is to set your affections
more upon a person then upon their estate; and you must know, that your
affections are more set upon Christ, then upon any benefit he has, unless you
find Christ more then his gifts, you shall find little peace in your way; you
must see that all, even the worst of his things are beautiful and comely, and
is more to be desired then Gold, is sweeter then the Honey, or the Honey-combe;
he that thus has the Son he has life, the Son of God; God and Man, as he
is our Son, and our Savior; let the desire of your soul be unto him, and your
affections run out after him; be you for him, and then he will be for you, Hos.
3.2, 3, 4. Stand not so much upon this, what Christ will be for you, but be sure
that you be for him; let friends and all go, and be sure you be only for him:
Though Christ love us first, yet he will make us no assurance of his love to us,
till he see us love him; and if we choose him first, before and above all his
benefits, then we shall have him; make him then your assurance, and your
Kingdom shall not be shaken; think not that he will make you a feoffement
before you be married to him, but we must be content to come to him, and take
him as he is, and stand upon no conditions with him; You must not look for
assurance of Christ's benefits till you have himself, and if you choose him,
then you shall have assurance to your souls, that he has chosen you first;
you cannot ask more then he will give; but first you must have himself, he
will give you a kingdom, but you must first be a little flock, all is yours,
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Thus choose him above all his benefits,
and you shall have him, and life in him.

SERMON V.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


FRom the second part of the words, He that has the Son, there are three
sorts of Heads of notes drawn. One is already handled; to wit, That such as
have the Son, they have not so much, nor do so much stand upon, nor so much
desire the benefits of the Son, as the Son himself; This is the Spiritual
life of a Christian, while some men labor more for Spiritual gifts then for
Christ himself; the true Christian is only for him, and let his gifts go; we
now come to the second head of notes from the word SON. A man is said to have
the Son, when he has the spirit of the Son.

A man is said to have Christ when he has the Spirit, and therefore you may
read, 2 Cor. 3.17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, and the
Lord is that Spirit, viz. He had spoken before of a Spirit of righteousness,
and of the Spirit of grace dispensed in the Ministry of the Gospel; now the
Lord is the Spirit not only so called because he is the Giver of that Spirit
and Grace, but also as there is a secret fellowship between Christ and the
Spirit, so that, have one and you have both, have not the Spirit of Christ, and
you have none of Christ, Romans 8.9. If a man have not the Spirit of Christ he is
none of his. And notable to this purpose is that in Gal. 4.6. Because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts; and verse
^. He redeemed them which were under the Law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons. Implying, that to whomsoever Christ came for into the World
to save and redeem, all those have fellowship with the Son, and into all their
hearts he has shed abroad the spirit of the Son. So that look how Christ is
and was in this world, so are we in the world, he that has the Son, has
the spirit of the Son.

Now that I may the better open this point unto you (because it is of special
use for our direction in a Christian course.)

There is a Threefold spirit of a Son, A threefold spirit
dispensing himself three ways, and bestowing a threefold gift upon us, which
gives us the Lord Jesus Christ to be ours, and us to him, to be his.

First, A spirit that does knit us to the Lord Jesus Christ, and him to us.

Secondly, A spirit of liberty.

Thirdly, A spirit of prayer.

These three the Holy Ghost takes special notice of in this case.

First, The spirit of God, wheresoever it is shed abroad in any member of
Christ, it does make us one with the Lord Jesus, it unites us into one
fellowship of nature, a likeness in affection and disposition, and a likeness
in all the graces of God, as John 17.21. our Savior prays the Father, that
all those whom he had given him might be one with him, as thou and I art one:
thou in me by thy spirit, and I in thee, by the same spirit; and this spirit is
such as makes not only me, one with thee, but them also, one with me; and
they also in like sort, one with another; it makes us and Christ us it were
one: Hence it is, that as soon as we receive him, we of his fulness receive
grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. There is a conformity between Christ and us; one
and the same Image stamped upon us both, Romans 8.29. a like in grace, a like in
affection, and in continuance of affection, a like in every thing.

For a little further clearing of the point. The same spirit of Christ being
shed abroad into the heart of every one that has Christ, does work a
threefold conformity or likeness between Christ and us.

First, A threefold conformity between Christ and his.
A likeness in Nature.

Secondly, A likeness in Offices,

Thirdly, In Estate, both of humiliation and exaltation. And all this is done
by the mighty power of the spirit of Christ.

First, For the Nature of Christ, by the precious promises of God which are
made unto us, The first Conformity.
and which the Holy Ghost does apply to us, We are made partakers of the divine
nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. There is a likeness and a participation of the divine
nature, and we are made partakers of the like grace in Christ Jesus, and that
grace for grace: Look what grace any where, you see in Christ, the resemblance
of it is stamped upon every child of God, by the spirit of Christ: Hence it
comes to pass, that (which is worth your observation) those who have Christ,
they do reason from the nature of Christ to justify, the temper of their own
spirits, and the course of their own lives, as is the Apostle Paul's own
Argument, in 2 Corin. 1.17, 18, 19. Some of the false Apostles took up an
Argument against the Apostle Paul, to prove his levity, and inconstancy, and
forgetfulness; and how does he free himself, did I use lightness? no says
he, our words toward you, was not yea, and nay; and thus he reasons from
Christ's nature, The Son of God who was preached among you, was not yea and
nay, but yea and amen: Now he which establishes us with you, is Christ, etc.
So that look as Christ is yea and amen, the faithful and true witness of
God, what he speaks he confirms, and fulfills in due season. Now says he,
when Christ was preached among you, it was not an uncertain Christ, carried
about with lightness, and unsettlednesse; but what is once gone out of his
lips, It is yea and amen. Therefore make account, that God that has poured the
same spirit upon us, has established us together with you. To show you that by
reason of the participation of the spirit of grace, there is such a spirit in
us, as that you may argue all these; the nature of Christ, the nature of the
Gospel, and the nature of the frame of grace in the hearts of Gods people, to
be all alike; they do mutually show the face one of another, in the frame and
carriage one of another: That as Christ is yea and amen, so is the Gospel, and
such are they that believe the Gospel, and are established by the Gospel in
Christ Jesus, v. 21.2. And he has sealed us, and given us the spirit in our
hearts, the same spirit of Christ that breathed in the Gospel, and in the
Preachers of the Gospel, and the believers of it, is yea and amen in them all;
a spirit of truth, and innocence, and gravity, and purity, whatsoever is the
spirit of the one, is the spirit of them all: So that this is an evident sign,
that we have Christ, when we have the spirit of Christ; when you may reason
alike the one from the other, though in us it be the weaker, by reason of a
spirit of corruption found in us, and not in Christ: Yet this is an evident
argument of the stabillity and gravity of our hearts, which though in regand of
weakness, we might think the Apostle might have been excepted against, yet
because there is no weakness in a child of God, but if he have Christ, his
heart is in the same condition with Christ, and with the Gospel also: therefore
he may comfortably argue a likeness between them; what he speaks, that he
thinks in his heart, and it is the desire of his soul that it may be effected:
And though he may be hindered, yet his heart is still the same, and he was by no
means to be taxed of any lightness, because he did not perform his word,
the fault was not his levity; his spirit was the same, but some occasion fell
out otherwise by the providence of God: And so it is with every child of God,
if he have Christ; the spirit of a Christian, is ever the same; if there should
be any inclination to lying; and inconstancy, the frame of the spirit is
altered, but the true bent and frame of a Christian, is to be one with Christ,
as Christ is one with him.

2 Now as there is a likeness and conformity, The second conformity.
and unity in nature, between Christ and a child of God, so there is also in
us, a conformity to Christ in his Offices, The meaning is, Whosoever has the
Son, he has the offices which the Son has. As he was both King, Priest and
Prophet to God his Father, so are we, Rev. 1.6. As Kings, to rule over all our
lusts, and to rule all those whom God commends to our Government according unto
God: As Kings, to get victory and to conquer over the World, and to
over-wrastle any difficulty as we meet with: As Kings, anointed with the
spirit of a King, of a royal spirit, though not invested with fullness of
glory till the last day, yet of an heroyicke noble spirit, can easily overlook
all earthly drudgery, and resist any enemy we meet with.

And Priests also we are, so as we are able to offer up sacrifices of prayer,
and thanksgiving to God, A broken and an humble heart is a Sacrifice, much set
by of God, Psalm. 51.17. and Phil. 2.17. offered upon the sacrifice, and
service of your faith, We are now enabled to go to God, and to offer up praises
to him, which are as insence before him, and in offering up any other sacrifice
of an holy life, we are Priests unto God the Father.

And so are we also Prophets, Acts 2.17. he poures out his spirit in a rich
and plentiful measure; he poures out his spirit upon all flesh; whence it
comes to pass, that the servants of God understand many secrets of Gods
counsel, Psalm. 25.14. and whence also it comes to pass, that many a godly
man by the same spirit discernes many secret hidden mysteries, and meanings of
the Holy Ghost in Scripture, more then ever he could by any reading or
instruction; and many times discernes some special work of the spirit of God,
which inables them to foresee some special blessings, most useful for their
spiritual estate, and so leads them on to many good things which they did
little think of, and so makes them of Prophetical spirits, and bows them to
teach others also, to lead on others of their neighbors in the ways of God.

And now I say that as these be the Offices of the Lord Jesus Christ, so there
is no child of God that has the Son, but he has all these in him, he is now
a man of a royal, and Priestly, and Prophetical spirit.

And you are hereby (I mean by the spirit) not only called to these Offices,
but enabled to discharge them: For that is the difference, between a Christian
in heart, and a Christian in appearance, fall short of ability to perform
these Offices.

And as there is this conformity to the Nature and Offices of Christ in them
that have the Son; So Thirdly, The third conformity.
there is a conformity in their Estates, you know Christ waded through an
Estate of humiliation, and exaltation: These be the main Principles of
Religion; that look as it was with Christ's estate, it was sometime, the time
wherein he was humbled in this world, all the course of his life was a time of
humiliation, and that unto the very death, or else his state of exaltation in
heaven: that then when he was most mortified, then was he most glorified,
triumphing openly and mightily, showing forth himself to be the Son of God,
even then when in man's sight, he was separated from God, and banished from the
Church, so as that al men cried, away with him, crucify him, and al his own
Disciples forsook him, and not a soul acknowledged him, but one poor thief
upon the cross with him; yet even then was he so gloriously magnified, as that
well might the Apostle say, he triumphed openly upon the cross, having therein
made a spoil of Principallities and Powers, Col. 2.15. Now this very estate is
the estate of every child of God; and so far as he has the Son, so far
does he express this estate in his whole conversation, (for an estate of
humiliation) great and many be the afflictions of the righteous, Psalm. 34.18,
19. there is their debasement in the world; but the Lord delivers them out of
all, there is their exaltation mixed together; many ways humbled, and exalted
deliverances, Psalm. 149.4,5. The Lord will beautify the meek with salvation;
that is, he will beautify them by their manifold deliverances. Nay, besides
deliverances, you shall find this to be the beautiful frame of the spirits of
Gods people in their estates. Take it in their outward condition in the World,
an estate of means, and affliction; if he be a man of a fair outward estate,
and of good means in the world, yet you shall see a mavelous spirit of
self-denial in him, so as that in the midst of many worldly comforts, he
fits loose from them, and lives besides them; these are not the things that he
has set his heart upon, as our Savior said to his disciples, concerning the
stones of the Temple, so as that though God had don much for them, and given
them many comforts, yet there is a more hidden matter in their hearts, better
then these things can reach unto, they are not a Christians crown and glory,
but he is crucified to them, and they unto him, Gal. 6.14.

And if so be, that God give him any great or eminent gifts of Spiritual
grace, it is strange to see how they are clad in him, with a garment of Christ
crucified, over shadowed in self denial; as they said of Paul, mean in
outward view, and speech of little or no value, 2 Cor. 13.3. and yet even in
this very meanness which any of them labor under, in regard of want of outward
things, and all their meanness and lowness of carriage, and self-denial of
all the outward blessings and contentments they have received, yet you shall
see a mighty power of Christ, triumphing in the baseness, and mortifiednesse
of a Christian soul, so as that the Apostle fitly and sutably expresses their
estate; Though he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives by the power
of God; for we also are weak in him, but we shall also live with him by the
power of God. So that as it was with Christ in his estate, so it is with us in
our estate, weak in him; meaning, that as Christ in his outward Man seemed to
be weak, and contemptible, so we (as it is in the Original) are weak with
him, but we shall live with him by the power of God; so that suppose Christ be
indeed weak in outward view, so as he that looks once, would not look twice
at him, yet when he seems to be most weak and base, then is he most powerful
and glorious, and so the very death of Christ, wherein he is most exposed to
such infirmities as follow man's nature, yet then he performs the greatest
work of our Redemption, satisfies the Fathers wrath for us, procures us pardon
of sin, and redeemes us from the bondage of Hell, and purchases for us a
spirit of grace, and power; and truly there is a certain kind of conformity
even in this very point, between the Lord Jesus and every servant of Christ; as
he is weak, so are we; as he dies, so do we; as he is in his greatest
debasements, and advancements, so it is with us. And hence it is that ye read
these Phrases in Scripture, We are dead with Christ, Col. 2.20. and risen with
Christ, Col. 3.1. and crucified with Christ, Romans 6.6. Now these be strange
Phrases, that Christ who is dead one thousand six hundred years ago, and
risen again so long since; what is this which the Apostle says, we are thus
dead, and crucified, and risen with Christ? What is the intendment of his
discourse? The true meaning is, that by the same spirit of Christ which was
shed abroad into his heart above measure, we are so knit unto Christ, as that
we are not only of the like nature with him, but of like estate with Christ;
that as he was in this world, so are we while we are in the world, weak as he,
yea glorious as he; and as he rose again out of all contempt, and reproach,
and persecution, so do we rise again (out of all our many and great
afflictions) mightily by the same power of the same Spirit of the Lord Jesus;
so that this is a point that inwardly flows from this having of Christ; he
that has the Son has the spirit of the Son, whereby he is made one with
Christ in Nature, in Offices, and in his estate; and this is evident in the
experience of Gods servants, and by testimony of the Holy Ghost in Scripture.
And therefore examine we our selves in this particular, if we have the Son, we
have the spirit of the Son.

The second work of the Spirit is, that it is not only a spirit of union, but
it is also a spirit of liberty; The second work of the Spirits liberty
for of all the kinds of temper in a Son, there is nothing more expresses
the frame of a Son (next to his likeness, and union with the Father) then
liberty does; Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17.
And if the Son have made you free, then are you free indeed, Joh. 8.36. It is
a real liberty if the Son shall give you liberty, and he speaks of such a
liberty as appertains to Sons, and not to Servants that may be turned out of
doors; but the Son abides in the house for ever.

And it is a strange kind of liberty which the children of God are advanced to
by the spirit of the Son; it is a phrase of much importance, A spirit of
liberty.

First, liberty from the fear of sin, Liberty from fear of sin.
and the fear of Hell, from fear of the Grave, and of all the enemies of our
Salvation; a freedom from fear of any of them. A Servant if he offend, is
afraid of extremity from his Master, but the Son walks with more liberty,
Romans 8.15. We have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba
Father. We look at God as a Father, and we walk before him not in fear, but
in liberty; and therefore we are free from the fear of death, to which, some
are all their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15. Now this is a spirit
of liberty, to have the heart set free from all fears, it is the sum of all
security, he has redeemed us, That we might serve him without fear all the
days of our lives, Luke 1.74, 75.78. We are free from fear of Death, and
Hell, and of the World, and we do not fear what flesh can do unto us, Psalm.
3.5, 6. his meaning is, That the fears of men should not break his sleep, but
he would walk in a child-like confidence before God and man, and he would lie
him down quietly, and sleep securely, though ten thousand had compassed him
round about; and the like you read, Psalm. 56.3. What time I am afraid I will
trust in thee. And verse. 11. In God will I put my trust, I will not be afraid
what man can do unto me. It is an usual phrase with David, and the usual
frame of the spirits of Gods people, and this kind of holy tranquillity of
heart, and liberty to walk with even nesse and comfort of soul, against all
the fears of this and another world; this kind of inward liberty from all
fear, Natural property of a son.
is the natural property of a Son; a son never greatly fears ill measures
from his Father, all his care is, to approve himself to his Fathers will, and
then he knows his Fathers care is more for his own provision and protection
then his own can be; and if at any time he fall short of doing his Fathers
will, he makes his peace with his father upon as good terms as he can, and
there he rests; but this is his fathers will, and you need not possess him of
that, and if he be a son he will look for protection from his father. A
child of God knows, his heavenly Father will support him, and he fears not
what sin, and Hell, and the Grave, and Death can do unto him; he fears not
persecution, nor sword, nor famine, the Lord is with him, and he fears none of
them; I am persuaded (says Paul) that in all these, we are more then
conquerours, Romans 8.37, 38. this is the liberty of the spirit of a son.

Now as there is by the Spirit in the heart of the Child of God, liberty from
all fear of sin, Liberty from power of sin.
so he has liberty from all the power and dominion of sin; he is not subject
to the dominion and bondage of sin, sin has not that power over him as to
carry him captive to it; but he walks at liberty, Psalm. 119. and therefore at
liberty, because he is not under the law, but under grace, Romans 6.14. And
notable is that speech in Chap. 8.2. The law of the spirit of life which is in
Christ Jesus, has freed me from the law of sin, and of death: The spirit of
life, viz. That spirit of life which has a legal power in it, a power like a
law, and has a ruling power over me as the law has; and in both these
respects called, A Law of God; A kind of spiritual life, because there is a
lively spirit in him: And this law of the Spiritual life of Grace has freed
me, set me at liberty from the law and trade of sin, and of death; sin and
death set him a course and trade, which this Law of the Spirit of life has set
him free from, so as that he is but a bungler in sin now; not now learned in
the law of sin, as sometimes he has been; but the Law of the Spirit of life
has freed him from the skill of sin, and from the command of sin; the law
of sin has had a sovereign power over him, but now he is freed from the act
and trade of sin, and now he walks at liberty, even from the dominion, and
usurpation of sin; time has been when nothing would withhold him, and he
could have followed evil company, and unlawful games, they were as lawful to
him as to any, and he had no power to resist them; but now the Law of the
Spirit of life has helped him against them all, this is another part of the
spirit of liberty, a liberty from the bondage and dominion of sin, and it is
a mavelous comfortable liberty indeed; many a vallourous spirited man, has
so little fear of death, that he rushes upon the Pikes as the Horse into the
Battle, as if it were their meat and drink; but yet he wants this liberty, he
is not at liberty from fear of danger by the redemption of the Lord Jesus
Christ, but as Aristotle says, valiant, because ignorant of the danger.

And besides, such a natural man, though he be of a magnanimous spirit in
respect of fear of danger, yet such a man is often captivated of many base
lusts, and sinful courses, and is not able to resist ill counsel, nor ill
company; whereas a godly man is free from all these; free from the bondage, and
dominion of sin, and all the law of sin he looks at it as a cobweb-law,
which he may easily break through, and accordingly does so, and overcomes all
his former sinful lusts.

Freedom from sins Service.
Thirdly, There is another frame of this spirit of liberty, as it is the Spirit
of the Son, it frees us from the service of men, 1 Cor. 7.23. Not that it
forbids civil subjection: not so to make men free, but if God have called you
a servant, live as a servant, 1 Cor. 7.12. to 20. but use your liberty the
rather if you can, but if you must needs be a servant, then know, that he that
is a servant, is the Lords free man, but be not ye the servants of men, that
is, though you owe and do your bodily service to men, yet toward God walk at
liberty; and if thy labor be great, and thy reward little, yet do thy
service, and look for more wages at the hand of Christ ( Col. 3.23.) then from
men; in serving men serve Christ; and therefore go about your Masters service,
not with eye service, but in singleness of heart serving the Lord, and not
men; in serving of men, they do faithful and diligent service to the Lord, and
therefore they do it willingly and not grudgingly, but in much quietness of
spirit, and are more free for Christian duties, and have more quiet time for
seeking God then ever after, 1 Cor. 7.22. He that is married cares for the
things of the world, And it is true, he that is most free, is but a servant to
Christ, but a free servant though: But he that is a servant is the Lords
freeman, the meaning is, not only to do the work of his own service with a
free spirit, but he is not only a free man when he is most bound, but then he
goes about the service of God with much more liberty of spirit, then when he is
his own man.

It is often times wonder to see servants, being called, what care they will have
of Christian duties, what time they will steal to call upon God, and to examine
themselves, Note this
and what a grief it is to them to see this and that duty neglected in the
family; and they are very free to God: But afterward, when they come to be
Free men, and are for themselves, that they may now have as much liberty as
they will, pray when they will, and take what time they will, to instruct those
that are about them, which time they wanted when they were servants, and which
they then mourned under: And yet whereas then they would serve God with much
freedom and liberty of spirit, were then free from the law of sin, and free
for any duty: There is now a secret kind of bondage come upon them, their
hearts is more imbondaged, and ensnared, and imcombred, and entangled; and so
duties come not to be performed, either with that constancy, and care, or not
with that enlargement of heart, as they were, when they were servants; And
therefore that is the reason why the Apostle bids them, not be over-ready to
challenge freedom.

But this shows you that there is a mavelous liberty, even in those that are
servants, they are free from the service of men in their hearts and
consciences; and then most at liberty to serve God, when they are most bound to
serve men: yet in their hearts and consciences they are free from their
service; they are not bound in conscience to do any thing but what is the will
of God, and this is a mavelous great freedom, that a man is not bound to
become a slave to other men's will, and to do as other men do, he is not bound to
do any thing that is unlawful, and this is a spirit of liberty, that makes
even a servant to have a spirit of freedom; he is a Freeman, his heart is
free to Gods Service, and this is from nothing else but from this spirit of a
son, a spirit of liberty.

Now on the contrary side, as by this spirit of liberty, a Child of God is
free from the fear of sin, so he has a certain kind of privilege of
peace in his soul, and of freeness and readiness to every Christian duty;
and also he has a certain privilege of dominion over all the Creatures. It
is the nature, and proper definition of liberty, Freedom from evil, and
liberty unto the enjoyment of some good things; it sets me free from sin, and
gives me liberty and peace of conscience from the same Spirit of the Lord
Jesus; it sets me at liberty to run the way of Gods Commandments, Psalm.
119.32. And Gods people are a willing people, Psalm. 110.3. This is indeed a
spirit of liberty, it inlarges me to dominion over men; no Creature in heaven
or in earth, but a Christian is able to rule him to his own advantage; a
Christian servant will turn his Masters government to his advantage, and so all
his enemies tyranny; he will be sure to be better by them all, and he will grow
and thrive in his spirit by all the dangers and evils that can befall him in
this world; I know not in what better to instance then in that of Genesis 25.23.
The Oracle of God said to Rebecca, the elder shall serve the younger. And this
is a thing in much dispute among Divines, wherein this was ever made good, and
say, That Esau was never a servant to Jacob, for you shall find in the 32. and
33. Chapters of Genesis, that Jacob uses this word, My Lord Esau, and beseeches
his Lordship to go before, and his servant would follow after; and so it stood
in their outward condition. And Divines say, Though the promise be true of the
persons both separate from the Womb, yet the service was not so. But we need
not straighten our selves for the explication of it, for Esaus Lording and
domineering over Jacob, was as serviceable to Jacobs spirit, as if he had laid
aside his state, and come and served Jacob, and kept his Sheep; the bitterness
of Esau against him, did him more real service, then all the service of all
Jacobs servants could reach him. Whence was it that Jacob went a Pilgrimage
from his Fathers house? and that in a strange Country God so prospered him,
that whereas he went out but with his staff in his hand, he returned back
again with two bands, or two droves? And whence was it that Jacob made such a
solemn Vow to God, and kept it in so much faithfulness, that if God would
keep him in that journey, God should be his God for ever. Did not all this
come from the rage, and wrath of Esau toward him? Esau did him that good
service, and when he came back again, and heard news, that Esau came out with
four hundred men against him, and thought to come to spoil them all; what a
mavelous service was this to Jacob, as you may read, Chap. 32. from 9. to the
end; Esau by this means set him on wrestling with God by prayer, and therefore
wrastles with God all that night, and so wrastles, that God changes his name
upon it; Thou shall not be called Jacob, a wrastler, but Israel a Prevailer;
thou have prevailed with God, and thou shall prevail with men. And now he is
past the worst with his Brother, and when he meets him, expresses much natural
affection, and is mavelous glad to see him, and offers to help him to drive
his flocks, to show you, that the very emulation, and envy, and cruelty, and
ragings of the enemies of Gods Servants, even when they are most incensed
against them, and most tread them down, and insult over them, then they do
them the greatest service that is possible to be done, through the mighty power
of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, that turns all into contraries; that
even when men do most domineere over them, then they do them the best
service. Look as it was with the Tyrants of Syria and Egypt, that made waste
of Gods people. It is a notable speech, that in Dan. 11.35, 36. It is to purge
them, and to cleanse them, and make them white. A Scullion in the Kitchen, when
he scoures his Pewter, when he first takes it in hand, you would think he
would quite spoil it, but he but scoures and cleares it up, and makes it more
bright then it was before; the end of all is, but to take away the filth, and
to make it clear and bright. And so an Huswife that takes her linning, she
Sopes it, and bedawbs it, and it may be defiles it with dung, so as it neither
looks nor smells well, and when she has done; she rubs it, and buckes it, and
wrings it, and in the end all this is but to make it clean and white; and
truly so it is here, when as Tyrants most of all insult over Gods people, and
scour them and lay them in Lee, or Dung, so as the very name of them stinks,
yet what is this but to purge them, and to make them white, and it is a great
service they do to the people of God in so doing, and this is a great measure
of liberty, that a Child of God can tell how to make an advantage of all the
afflictions he meets with in this world, these things do but serve his turn,
and afterward he will say, he could have missed none of them; so that this is a
second work of the spirit of the Son, it is a spirit of liberty.

Only take this word for a Conclusion, And that is thus much; Examine now, and
try whether you have the Son or no, which you may know by your having or not
having the spirit of the Son. Say then, have you the spirit of the Son? viz.
have you that spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, that makes you to be of one and
the same nature with him, of the same Offices, and same Estate with him, can
you find this in truth, and that with comfort and honesty you may reason; this
is the frame of my spirit, such is the Spirit of Christ. And such is the spirit
of the godly, and if in any thing you fail, your spirit is against it; do you
find that you are in some measure invested with a royal spirit, that you can
overcome your selves, and the temptations of this world; and are you able to
offer up spiritual sacrifice to God, of prayer and praises? And do you find
a spirit of Prophecy shed abroad into you, that makes you sensible of, and
privy to the secret paths of God? Do you find that Christ was most glorious
when he was most humbled? and so are you; and when you enjoy outward blessings,
your hearts are not puffed up with them; these are not the goodly stones that
your hearts and eyes are set upon, but you have greater matters then these to
mind; then I say, it is the very Spirit of Christ that makes you to dye with
Christ, as well as Christ to dye for you; he may dye for many men, but he only
dies with those that are brought on to the fellowship of his grace; if a Spirit
of Christ so knit you together, that he is yours, and you are his, then you
have the Son, because you have the spirit of the Son, because you are
sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts; but now
if there be no proportion, no conformity to Christ in holiness and
righteousness, not patient and meek as he is, And though we be not such, yet
we allow our selves, in not being such, and are ever and anon starting aside
from him: And if we have not his Offices, nor rule over our lusts, nor over the
world; and we can neither pray nor prophecy, and show forth no spiritual life
in our lives, cannot deny our selves that we may show forth the hidden man of
the heart, then consider, that for the present we have not yet Christ, because
we have not the spirit of Christ. And also, if we be not yet free from the fear
of death; And take no care to be free from the dominion, and power of sin,
but sin has still a power over us like a law, and are not yet free from the
service of men, but as our Masters and Governors, say, so it must be; if we
yet know not how to rule men for our own advantage, we have not yet received
the spirit of Christ; we cannot tell how to serve our Masters with liberty of
spirit, we know not how to make advantage of them.

SERMON VI.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


IT now remains that we come to show, what it is to have the Son by a spirit
of prayer, but of this we shall have further occasion to speak in the 14, 15,
and 16 verses, and therefore we shall leave it now, and speak to it then.

You may remember we said, there was three notes to discern whether we had the
Son no.

The first was, if we desired not Christ for his benefits, but chiefly for
himself.

The second was, If we have received the spirit of the Son.

We now come to speak of a third sign, a point more easy to be gathered then
the former, but though most common, yet not to be neglected; but being well
applied, will be of special use to the edification, and salvation of the
hearers, for every truth in his place, is divine and precious.

The third sign, He that has the Son has him for his Prince*
And therefore the next note is this; He that has the Son, he has him not only
for a Savior, but for his Lord and the Prince. A point which upon sundry
occasions has been touched, but now to speak of it more fully.

There is no man that has the Son, but as he has him for his Savior so he
has him for his Prince, Acts 3.3^. Him has God exalted with his right hand,
whom they slew, a Prince and a Savior; so that he that has Christ, has him,
not only as a Savior, but as a Prince; to whomsoever he is a Savior, to them
he is also become a Prince, it were a wonderful dishonor to him to save them
whom he does not rule; to save them from the power of the grave, and to leave
them still in their sins, and unbroken off from their evil ways, it were
much dishonor to him: It is a dishonor to parents to have children, and to
have them untaught and unmannerly: And God has given the life blood of his
own Son to purchase us unto himself, and therefore he would not only save
us, but rule us, or else we shall never have him for our Savior. So that here
is two points to be opened.

He that has the Son, has him for his Savior.

He that has the Son, has him also for his Lord.

It is an usual saying, every man would have Christ for a Savior, but rare
are those, that will have him for their Ruler and Governor. But though the
saying be true in respect of the common conceit of men, yet in truth I say,
they are but rare Christians that will have him for a Savior, so far off are
they from desiring him as their Lord.

For two things there be that go to the having of Christ for a Savior. To
have Christ for a Savior requires two things.


First, He that will have Christ for a Savior, must look up to him for
salvation in all his ways, and distresses, we have other Saviors, but not
him, if we look for salvation elsewhere, Esa. 40.22. Look unto me all ye ends
of the earth, and be ye saved, there is no God nor Savior besides me, and
therefore look to me, and be ye saved. So that if a man will have God for his
Savior, he must look to him from one end of the earth to the other, we are at
the utmost corner of the earth, and if we will be saved we must look up to the
Lord Jesus Christ for salvation, as David looked toward the Temple at
Jerusalem for salvation, so they who look toward the Lord Jesus for salvation,
may be saved in what place soever they are, wait for salvation, from him, and
long for salvation by him, and look not to any means, but so far as they are
guided and ordered by him, and in whatsoever distresses you are, whether in
conscience or in distress, through bodily sickness, or pennury, or
imprisonment, yet look to me, and be ye saved.

You may read the like in Esa. 8.17. I will wait upon the Lord that hides his
face from the House of Israel, and will look for him. The Prophet at that time
saw the Church and Commonwealth of Israel much distempered, and in much
distress, both in regard of sin and misery; Now for him to look for, or
expect such Princes as might reform it in the Commonwealth; or such Priests as
might reform things amiss in the Church, it had been a vain thing, for they
were all bent to backsliding, till the wrath of God burst out, and took hold
upon them, but though there was no hope in any of the Princes, nor Priests, yet
I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the House of Jacob, and
will look for him. Though God suffer all things to go to wrack and ruin, yet I
will wait for him, and look for salvation from him, and by him; so that
suppose God should hide his face from any soul of us, that we lie in darkness
and in the shadow of death, or if that we should see our selves in distress
of the outward man, or see Church or Commonwealth in many sinful distempers;
it is not now for a man to look about him, hither or thither for help and
succor, but to the holy one of Israel: And this is indeed to have him for a
Savior: he that has him for a Savior waits for him in all distresses. So
Esa. 17.7 the time will come when God will gather his people unto him, as the
gleanings of berryes, when they shall be left like the shaking of an Olive
tree, two or three berryes in the top of the uppermost bough; four or five in
the outmost fruitful branches says the Lord. Now, at that time shall a man
look to his maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the holy one of Israel.
Which shows you, that those who are Gods gleaned ones from the World, that are
brought on to fellowship with Christ in the Election and Salvation; these are
they who look to their Maker, and their eyes are unto him, the holy one of
Israel. And so God is said to be, not because he is so in himself, but
because, he makes Israel his holy one, and therefore his eyes has respect unto
him, you know in the cast of an eye, we show respect; when the creature looks
after this and that in the World, and fastens and sets his eye upon any thing
there, he has no respect to the holy one of Israel, but to the Creature only;
but when the Creature being conscious of his own insufficiency to help it
self, by any means it self can use, but has respect to the holy God that
makes Israel holy, and is acknowledged of Israel to be holy; this is indeed to
have God for our Savior, and so he is to all such as are gathered together
unto him.

This is livelily expressed in the example of good Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. he
sought the Lord, and in the audience of the people he made a solemn prayer to
God, and concludes with this, in the latter end of the twelfth verse; We know
not what to say or to do, but our eyes are unto thee. Now this having our eyes
upon him in time of distress, whether of War, or Pestilence, or famine, or
anguish of conscience, or poverty, and yet we have our eyes toward the Holy
one of Israel; we know not what to do, and our power will not reach us any
help without Gods blessing, no not in outward things, but our eyes are unto
him; this argues, that surely Iehoshaphat had the Lord for his Savior, because
he had such respect unto him. Notable is that expression, Psalm. 121.1. I will
lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help; it comes even
from the Lord. The Lord dwelt upon mount Zion, and mount Moriab; there he
manifested himself in his Ordinances, and therefore he put not his confidence
in the valleys and pits of the City, but in him that dwells in the hills, and
looks for salvation from thence, as he expounds himself in the next words; My
help comes even from the Lord: So then, if so be that we do indeed look up
unto the Lord for salvation, and for help and preservation, and deliverance,
and restoring of any comfort we have been deprived of; sometimes justly, and
sometimes unjustly; whatsoever our condition be, if in all our distresses we
can look up unto him, and our hearts wait for salvation wholly from him. This
argues, that we have him for our Savior, because we have such respect unto
him, and elsewhere we look not, though we may use lawful means, yet our eyes
are not upon the means, but we look a great deal further, and no further
expect deliverance from any means then we see the Holy one of Israel the God of
our salvation, expressing and revealing himself in the means. And to add
this one instance more of Jonah, Chap. 4. one that went away from God, and was
unwilling to be directed by God, and therefore he was overwhelmed in the Sea,
because he would not be ruled, and bowed to the will of the Lord Jesus, and
therefore God sent forth the most unruly Creature that God has, set aside the
Devils in Hell, and it may be they have a hand in it too, in raising the
horrible tempest that raged against them; and when Jonah was cast out, the most
unruly Creature, a Whale, meets with this unruly Prophet of God, and swallowed
him up, that he thought himself in the belly of Hell. Now when God had in some
measure broken his heart, and in the Whales belly begins to consider how
unrulily he had dealt with God, and said, Chap. 4. he said, I am cast out of
thy sight, yet will I look again toward thy holy temple; Implying, that
though he had been most unruly, and of a good man, the most of all you read of;
yet when he saw God for his unrulinesse meet him with such affictions, yet when
he said, he was cast out of his sight: yet, I will look again toward thy holy
temple. How could he tell which way the Temple stood when he was in the Whales
belly? yet his heart was toward the Temple, which was a type of Christ; he in
his heart had respect to the place where the Temple stood, and therein he
showed his respect to Christ, and so having respect unto him, he had him as his
Savior, most unruly Jonah; yet he having respect to Christ as his Savior, he
is delivered and saved; so that you see, he that has Christ as a Son, he
has him as a Savior; aad those that have him for a Savior, they wait on
him, and only look for salvation from him.

There is a second duty for every man to perform, that has Christ for his
Savior, and that is, he does not only look for salvation from him, when he
stands in need of it, as we daily do; for, Salvation is deliverance out of
danger, and preservation in a good estate, and he looks for all salvation from
him, Psalm. 3. last. Salvation belongs to God, and though many means may be
used, yet it is the Lord and his mercy, and blessing, that saves and delivers,
and nothing else, and Gods servants they know it.

But there is a second duty in having Christ for a Savior; and that is, in
looking up to Christ, and cleaving to him, and not only desiring salvation from
him, from all our distresses, Christ a Savior from sin as well as from
distress.
but salvation also from all our sins; and he that has Christ for a Savior,
he from would be saved from all his sins, as well as from all his miseries,
Act. 5.31. God has appointed him a Prince, and a Savior, to give repentance
to Israel, and forgiveness of sins; there is therefore this salvation to be
had in Christ, not only deliverance out of the hands of dangers, but from the
hands of all our sins and rebellions, and to be saved from them, by turning
from them, and repenting of them; and we desire not only forgiveness of them,
but salvation from them, to be saved from our stubborn spirits, and saved out
of our covetousness, and wantonness, and worldliness, and carnal vanity of
heart and life that we are subject to; to be saved from the vain fashions, and
in all these we look for salvation from Christ; we desire to be saved not only
from all our distresses, but especially from the sinful distempers of our
souls. It is a notable Psalm, the 130.1. If thou Lord should mark iniquity,
who should stand? but there is forgiveness with thee that thou may be
feared. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word do I hope;
My soul waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the morning. Let
Israel wait for the Lord, for with him is mercy and plenteous redemption, and
he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities, ver. 7, 8. and he is therefore
called, Jesus, Matthew. 1.21. And notable is that expression, Hos. 14.2. Take
away all our iniquities, and receive us graciously, so will we give thee
thanks. Thus they desire salvation from all their iniquities, and not so much
salvation in the pardon of all their iniquities, for there is more in it then
forgiveness of sin, but a turning them from them; they desire both
pardoning, and healing, and God so understood them, as appears by verse. 4. God
answers them, That he would pardon them, and heal them; he will remove them all
away from them, not an hoof be left behind, but all taken away. There is a
generation of men that are mavelous unwilling to yield to this, so that you
see it is an ordinary thing for men to say, they have Christ for a Savior, but
it is a rare thing to be so indeed; you know how affectionate our Saviors
speech is, Matthew, 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thee under my wing of salvation, but y u would not be gathered? The
body of the Church of God, though some was gathered, yet others of them would
not be gathered; and if it was thus with Jerusalem, it is no wonder if you read
the like of Babylon, Ier. 51.9. We would have healed Babel, but she would not
be healed. God sent his Church, and kept it there seventy years among them,
that some of them at least might embrace the salvation of God, but she would
not be healed; we have used the best means we could to heal her, but it will
not be, she will not be healed of us, and therefore let us be going home again.
God would not send his Church among them for nothing, but he looks for some
fruits among them, but since either none were gathered, or so few, as that they
were not a considerable number, therefore God will send his people home again,
when they say, Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast their cords from us;
then God will take no further pains, Psalm. 2.3. It is a notable place that in
Ier. 2.25. God calls upon his people most affectionately that they would be
healed, but they snuff up their iniquities as the wind, and like unto wild
Ass colts, would be at liberty, and take pleasure in their running at random;
and God said, Withold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from
thirsting after such vanities, An hard matter to be willing to be saved by
Christ.
but thou say desperately, There is no hope, I have loved strangers, and
after them will I go. What a mavelous speech is this in Gods own Servants,
when God would withold them from running for salvation elsewhere, and from
such other sins as they thirsted after; no, there is no hope but the course
they had taken they would take, and no means should save or draw them from
their haunts; so that you see it is no easy matter for a man to be willing to
be saved by Christ, and though many would be saved by him, yet few there be
that would look for all salvation from Christ, and are not willing to be saved
from all their sins, but are willing to keep some sins still alive in their
souls; Are they not ready in their hearts to say as they said, Matthew. 8.29.
Art thou come to torment us before the time? It was when Christ came to save
two men from the possession of a Legion of Devils, the men spoke it, though the
Devils acted it in them; so when Christ comes to bring salvation, it is a
torment to our souls; the two witnesses vexed men, and they came but to save
men; it is a torment to men to have sin pulled out of their souls, as you
read, Act. 16.19. When the Apostles had cast out of the maid the spirit of
Divination, when their Masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone, they
were in a rage, and caused them to be stoned, and left them for dead; now when
men take it ill that they should be saved, or are loath that their children, or
servants should be saved, take it ill that they dare no more lie and swear,
and cousen, and buy and sell on the Sabbath day, and such and such a gain is
thereby lost, and this they cannot endure; it is a dangerous sign of an ill
heart, and therefore however it is an usual saying, that every man will have
Christ for a Savior; and yet if in truth we consider it, I assure you in
plain English, we will not be saved; that is our resolution when it comes to
the point.

It is an use of Trial that we are upon in this Discourse, and therefore to
proceed to the next part of the point; those that have Christ for a Savior,
they have him aso for a Prince, Act. 5.31. God has appointed him for a Prince,
Christ saves as a Prince.
and a Savior; If you will have him for a Savior, you must have him for a
Prince; resign up your selves, you and yours, to be guided and governed by the
Lord Jesus, though you have never so many strong oppositions, yet it must be
so, Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Child is given, unto us a Son is borne; How shall I
know that Christ is borne for me, and this Son is given to me? Why by this; The
government shall be upon his shoulders; if the Son be given thee, then thou
art wholly governed by him; and if thou be so, then he is borne and given to
thee, and thou shall call his name Wonderful. If you can behold a wonderful
glorious Majesty in Christ, and he to whom he is given, they shall acknowledge
him their Counselor, the Prince of their peace; and to whom soever he is
given, the government of him is upon their shoulders; know therefore whether he
be your governor or no.

Christ our Prince in two things
And two things there be in having Christ for our Prince, to open them plainly
to you.

First, when you resign up your selves, to be wholly ruled by him in all your
paths, so as that you lean not to your selves not so much as in one thought,
but all your thoughts stand in subjection to his will, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. The
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to cast down
every high imagination, and to bring into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. God leaves us not one thought free, nor are we willing to
have our thoughts free, Prove. 12.15. The thoughts of the righteous are right;
that is, they come from a right rule, the Word of God, and aim at a right end,
the glory of God; not a man that has his part in the Lord Jesus but his
thoughts are right.

Object. You say, But who has his thoughts so rectified and set upon the Lord
Jesus; but he has many vain, and covetous, and proud, and stubborn thoughts?
Who can say, I have kept my heart clean? who can say, that every thought in
him is subdued to the obedience of Christ?

Answ. It is true that you object, for Jer. 4.14. It is a complaint, and an
earnest speech; O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from thy wickedness that thou
may be saved, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? So that
you see a man that would have salvation by Christ, he must be content to
subject all his thoughts to Christ, and not leave one vain thought to lodge
within him. It is true, Satan may cause them to flutter in his mind, Simile.
but he must give them no entertainment; it is one thing to have a sturdy
Beggar that comes to the door, to rush into my house before I be aware, and
enforce; and another thing to bid him welcome, and to bid him stay and lodge
there all night, and to make provision for him; so it may be there is many a
proud rebellious thought rushes in, and calls for this and that, and will be
served in this and that, and every faculty, and part, Rebellious thoughts.
and member must bestirre it self to satisfy such a thought, and all must be
as this thought will, and sometimes scars all the house, puts the whole man to
agitation to consider what to do, to give it content; yet they who have Christ
for their Savior, they will look to him for salvation from such sturdy
thoughts as these be, they will not suffer them to lodge there, but get them
out again, and are not at quiet, but the whole man is disturbed till they be
dislodged, and cast out again; so they who have the Lord Jesus for their
Savior, they must not give lodging to a vain thought, much less to a
malicious, and proud, and desolate thought, or any other wicked thought
whatsoever. It is true indeed, there is no Christian man but he will have vain
thoughts come in upon him, but you shall observe this difference.

First, a man that has not Christ for his Prince, Christians differenced by
their thoughts.
he has not one good thought comes in his mind, or if it do, he does not
give it lodging there; all, or every imagination of his heart is evil, and that
continually; the Original is (Omne figmentum) the whole frame of a man's heart;
the bent and scope of his thoughts, the whole suggestion of them first and
last, not a good thought comes in him. Many a man will say, it is very fitting,
and meet it should be so, that one day we should turn home to God, but not to
give entertainment to him at this time, but let him come another time, and then
he shall have lodging; and so we deal with all good thoughts, that God
suggests into our hearts; we like good thoughts well, and sometimes we are
loath to give them offense, but yet are not willing to give them entertainment,
but are more willing to be shut of them, and to turn them out of doors; but a
godly man, if a good motion come into him, it is most welcome to his soul, and
he entertaines it with the gladness of his spirit; he sees it is of God his
heavenly Father, and he lodges it in his heart, and conscience, and affection,
and rejoices in it, and desires after it, and cherishes it, and is loath to
part with such thoughts when he is gotten into such a good frame.

Now I say therefore, this is a difference; a carnal man never gives
entertainment to a good thought, nor do his thoughts ever aim at good ends,
they never go higher then himself, and therefore never could good thought
find lodging in him; out again it is thrust, sometimes somewhat courteously,
sometimes discourteously, but however there it must not lodge, there is a world
of matter to quench and damp it, and to use means to be shut of it; but it is
not so with a true Christian, he entertaines Christ as his Prince, and he will
have every thought in him to be set upon him; if a wicked thought come into a
carnal man's heart it is natural to him, it takes place, and is suffered to
lodge there, anger rests with him all night, and he suffers the Sun to go
down upon his wrath, Ephesians 4.26, 27. The Devil lodges there, and there
he may rest, and he never takes pains to be cleansed of those evil thoughts,
and he cares not how long they are there. But if a godly man have a wicked
thought come upon him, he stirs up all the faculties of his soul, and the
graces of the Spirit against it, and does what he can to expel and banish it,
and if he cannot prevail, then he will call for aid from his Prince, from
Heaven, and will acquaint his dear Christian friends with it, and say; I am
troubled with such thoughts of malice, and pride, and vanity, that I know not
in the world what to do, they lie down with me, and they rise up with me, and
therefore entreat their help; and as they look to Christian friends, so will
they especially call to the Prince of their salvation, to save them from their
vain thoughts, and much more from these wicked speeches, from these things
they are most careful to be delivered; and therefore they stand not devising
Plots against their Prince, but he will tell him, that such wicked rebellious
thoughts devise mischief against him, and therefore he craves help against
them; so did David in the like case, Psalm. 139.33. Search me, and know my
heart, and see if there be any way of wickedness in me. As if he had sent to
heaven for a privy search, he would not have any one thought within him, but he
would that God should know it, and therefore desires, that God would try and
search, and know his thoughts; he was not like them of whom you read, Esa.
29.15. That dig deep to hide their counsels from the Lord: but a child of
God, would have God to be well acquainted with his thoughts; see if there be
any way of wickedness in me, any wicked thought or vain affection in my heart,
I have labored to find, and to cast them out what I can, but there may be many
more that I know not, but search and try thou me, and lead me in the way that I
shall go.

Good thoughts are of everlasting use, Good thoughts continue ever.
and of everlasting durance, and they will continue to everlasting life, Gods
ways are everlasting ways, lead me in the way everlasting, thus a man has
every thought brought into subjection, though evil thoughts may come rushing
in, yet he will not give them entertainment but complains of them to Christ,
and such a man has the Lord Jesus for his Prince; for he is not a Prince that
only Governs the outward man, as earthly Princes do, who can take no hold of
what we think, but God takes notice of our thoughts.

And you may apply what I say of thoughts, to words and actions, and so make
use of it to all.

There be many men, that never think good thought, but lets wicked thoughts
rest in them, can be wanton and unclean, etc. what ever it be that makes a
thorow-fare in the heart, let it there lodge, let it come and go as it will,
and that is part of the meaning of the high-way-side ground, it keeps, and is,
a thorow-fare to all beasts, to all sorts of Travailers, to Thieves and
Robbers, takes no notice of them, lets them come and go and stay as they list,
then we have not Christ for our Governor, we do not put the Government of our
thoughts, and actions upon his shoulders, and are not in subjection to him, but
casts his cords from us, Psalm. 2.3. and say we will not have this man to
reign over us, Lu. 19.22. what, is not our thoughts free? and are not our
tongues our own? Psalm. 12.4. David takes them for Atheists that say, their
tongues are their own; He prays that God would keep his lips, Psalm. 119.
only Gods people would have all that is in them bowed to the obedience of Gods
will: Some men there be that will not have God to rule over them, so mavelous
is the prophainnesse of our hearts while we are carnal, that we that should be
servants to God, we are not ashamed to make him a Servant to us, we were never
subjet to any man, nor do we mean so to be Pharoah-like. Who is the Lord? I
know not who he is. Notable is that you read, Esa. 43.34 besides that, I had no
service from you, thou have made me to serve, with, or under thy sins; see the
desperate spirits of the hearts of the sinful sons of men, they draw in God to
serve them, and he complains, that he is pressed under their sins, as a Cart is
pressed under sheaves: men load the patience of God, and lay upon him, one
bundell of wickedness after another; they lay so much wickedness upon him,
till the patience of God will bear no longer, as long as ever he will bear,
and suffer us to live in this world, we will load him with sheaves upon
sheaves, load the very majesty of God, and his long sufferance, and make use of
his Providence many times to serve our own lusts, we will do that which is
wicked in Godssight, because we can do it, and because God has given us means
to do it; we can maintain our pride and covetousness, and God gives us these
gifts, and these liberties, and we will make God to serve with them, and here
is a double service put upon God.

First we load his patience, and forbearance, by our continuance in sin; but
besides that, we abuse the very gifts of God, as our wealth, and good parts of
nature, and our common graces: And (by your leave) the very saving graces of
Gods spirit, we will not stick to abuse them against God; And is not this much
rebellion, that we should make God to serve such a wearisome service, he is
provoked every day, and weary to suffer us in a sinful course one day to an
end; but when day after day, and year after year we lay load upon Gods
patience: and if he will suffer us long so he may; and if we do set God at
liberty from his drudgery, it must be at the last gasp, and he shall be our
Ruler then, if he will. Wonder not therefore if sometime God say, Rebellion is
as the sin of witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23. And that is in a double respect.

First, As you see a Witch gives her soul to the Devil, that she may have her
mind fulfilled for her life time; so a Rebel deals with the devil, to have
his own lusts fulfilled, he makes a Covenant with Hell and with the Devil, he
is at an agreement, he knows he does wickedly, but to serve his own turn,
he is content to do it.

But secondly, As a Witch will have the Devil to wait upon her, so at last she
will wait upon the Devil, so it is in this case: The Devil must serve a Witch
all her life time, and she will serve the Devil at her death: Far more
monstrous, is this wickedness in this kind, we will have God to serve us all
our life time, and when death comes, we will do God this favor, we will
serve him then: As a Witch deals with the Devil, so do we with God, he shall
supply our occasions, and we will make use of his bounty to serve our selves,
but at last gasp God shall rule us, to do him all the service we can, and
give him all good words* there is great and plenteous mercy to be found in him,
and now we will do him all the honor we can. And will God be thus served,
think you? do you think to put him off, as Witches put off the Devil, will
he (think you) take your service then? Consider of it, This is to make God our
Prince, when we give up our selves to serve him.

There is a second thing, wherein the having of Christ for a Prince does stand:
And it requires, that you do all your service to him, as to a Prince, it
should all be Princely service, such as becomes a Prince, Mal. 1.8. When you
bring that which is torn or lame, offer it to your Prince, and see if he will
accept it. Implying, that God is a Prince, and if a Prince, then where is his
Princely service, if you will serve him, serve him of the best of that you have:
God looks for no more but what you have; but when you come and offer him a lame
and peremptory Sacrifice, and be loath to come off with the fat and strength of
your affections, and are loath to crucify your dearest lusts, then you deal
not with God, as with a Prince, you offer him such a Sacrifice as is loathsome
to him: God curses such Deceivers who have in their flock a male, and sacrifice
unto the Lord a corrupt thing. For I am a great King says the Lord of Hoasts;
to pretend him to be a Prince, and yet to serve him like a Peasant, this God
curses; God accepts Abells Sacrifice, because he brought the fattest and best
of the flock to sacrifice, Genesis 4. When we bring the strength of our hearts,
the fat of our strength, this God accepts, and then we offer to him as to a
Prince.

Notable was that speech of David, 2 Samuel 24.24. I will not offer to God, a
Sacrifice of that which will cost me nothing. A man offered royally to the
King; I give them all freely to thee; As a King, he gave to the King: If a man
give to a King, he must give of the best he has, behold all are thine. And as
if David should say; If you will be so bountiful to me, shall not I much more
that am a King, give like a King, to the King of Kings? We must give our best
strength, the best we have of any thing to God. I and my household will serve
the Lord, Josh. 24.15, All is little enough to give to God; make it a point of
our service in our best duties, this God looks for, we should do it the best
we can; If we would have him for a Prince, and as to a Prince, we should freely
part with all.

And therefore to conclude this point, know, that this point is the principal
sum of the Gospel, and this duty is of great necessity; And let us therefore
sum it up together, Sum of all
and lay it to our own hearts: You would know whether you have life or no; if
you have life, you have Christ. How will you know that? Ask then your hearts
this question; Has God exalted Christ to be a Prince, and a Savior to you?
Consider, if you have Christ for a Savior and a Prince, And if you so have
him, then you have the Son; and if you have the Son, you have life: And
therefore meditate upon this seriously, do you find your hearts looking to
Christ for salvation, in whatsoever distresses you are in? Some will say I am
in distress, and anguish of soul, comfortless in my spirit and troubled with
fear of Gods wrath, and sense of the torment of Hell. Another man says, I am in
distress through bodily weakness, and sickness; another says, I am in
distress through great poverty; another in debts; another is in distress
through the great untowardnesse of Wife, and Children, and Servants, these be
deep and great distresses; yet consider, Christ is a Savior, from all
distresses, God has not limited his salvation to this, and that, but it
reaches all the evils we are subject to; then whether does thy heart look, and
upon whom do thou wait for salvation? If thy heart tell thee, that in the
midst of all these desertions thou look for salvation from the Lord Jesus,
and thine eyes are unto him, and thou do find thy spirit willing to wait
for salvation from him; then thou have him for thy Savior, and he will save and
redeem thee from them all, and it is an evident argument we have him for a
Savior.

But if in our dangers and distresses we look to this and that means, and to
this and that friend, and sometimes put our selves to flight from Pestilence,
and Famine (though in some cases we lawfully may) if thou do only consider
lawful means, and usest them according to Gods will, and for Gods honor, then
thou waitest upon God for salvation, else not; If thou look to him which
hides his face from the house of Israel; if God hide his face from Church and
Commonwealth, and yet our eyes are toward him, and we know not what to do,
for our Consciences, and Liberty, and Estates, and health, and peace, etc. But
our eyes are unto Christ, such a look at Christ is a saving and healing look;
and as they were saved and healed by looking at the brazen Serpent, Numb. 21.9.
so truly the Son of Man is exalted, that whosoever looks for salvation from
him should receive it, though they be not yet come to the full persuasion that
the Lord is their God, as they shall in time come to; but if they look with a
wist sad look at him, and rest not satisfied till salvation come, this makes
him their Savior; Look unto me, and be ye saved. But if we look to friends,
and means, and our own hands, and doings, then no hope of salvation from him.

There is this difference between the Cony and the Hare, the Cony is a thing
not strong, yet reckoned among the wise people; when they hear the noise of a
Dog, they run to their rock and shroud themselves, and so are safe; whereas
the wild Hare has no help but her heels, she runs through Fields and
pastures, runs every way, but has no protection, but her heels, and is of all
Creatures most destitute: So if we run to the Lord Jesus for deliverance from
all our evils, he will spread a wing of preservation over us; but if we run to
any Creature we can have no rest, nor peace, and then it argues we have no
Christ, because no Savior; and no Savior, because we look not to him. And if
you look to him to save you from your miseries, and not from your sins, you
have him not as a Savior; you would be excused in this and that, spare me but
here only; Faelix would be spared in his Dalilah, but if you would be spared,
in any sin excused for, nor parting with any iniquity, then you have not
Christ for your Savior; remember what our Savior said to the man, Joh. 5.6.
Would thou be made whole? He said, Yea Lord, and he was healed. So this is
the point, Will thou be made whole? If God so far turn the stream of our
hearts, that unfainedly we would be made whole, not a member in our bodies but
we would have it healed; we would not have an unclean lust in our souls, but
we would be perfectly made whole; would we be saved from all our sins? then we
have him for our Savior; and there is not a sin in us but we shall be healed
of it, and this is life, to look to Christ for universal salvation.

And so consider, have you Christ for a Prince? Are your hearts willing to
subject every thought unto him? you say, you are somewhat unwilling to it, but
does not the Apostle say; Every thought must be brought into subjection to the
Gospel of Christ, into captivity; and were it not better to be free, and
voluntary. It is true, Gods people know that when they were first brought on to
God, they were carried captive, and drawn, Ioh. 6.44. but afterward they
find the service of Christ to be perfect freedom, and therefore how look
thou at thy thoughts, for I principally take notice of them. Art thou not
willing that a vain thought should lodge within thee? thoughts of pride, and
of revenge come into thy heart, but what entertainment do thou give them?
Does Satan when he comes find thy house fit for his purpose? If thou give
these Guests such entertainment, then thou have not Christ for thy Prince, but
if they come like stubborn Rebels into thy house, and they disturb thee, and
thou call to thy friends to help thee, and thou cryest out to thy Prince in
Heaven for a privy search to be made, to find them out, and would not have
any one wicked thought to rest in thy heart, then thou have Christ for thy
Prince, but if thou give them willing entertainment, and lodgest them next
thy heart, and fattest and feedest thy self in such thoughts of wrath, and
lust, and huggs them in thy bosom, then thy heart stands in rebellion against
God; if these rebellious lusts be thy friendly companions, then God is not at
peace with thee; but if thou be burdened with them, as Soldiers come into
the houses of men that live in the Palatinate, and they are forced to
entertain them, but if thou would cast them out, then thou have Christ for
thy Prince; but if you refuse his government, and your thoughts are your own,
and you will have God to serve your turn, and you burden his patience with one
wicked course after another, and you make use of Gods patience to the sinful
provocation of his wrath; and you deal with God as Witches do with the Devil,
he shall serve you now, and you will serve him when you dye. Consider what
sacrifice you offer to God, any thing is good enough for God, and the ways of
his grace is a burden to you, then you have him not for your Prince. Now in
the name and fear of God, consider what has been said, every one take his
portion, and the Lord give you a good understanding in all things.

SERMON VII.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


WE now come to a third head of Signs, by which it may appear whether we have
Christ or no, and that is from the third word in the Text (which is Life) for
it is an Argument of like strength and value, to argue the one from the other.
He that has the Son has life, and he that has life, he has the Son; and
therefore now at this time to open to you some signs, or marks by which it
may appear to us whether we have life, or no; that Spiritual Life here spoken
of: to wit, the life of righteousness in our Justification, and of
Sanctification, of comfort and consolation, and of eternal glory.

And the signs of Life are of three sorts; Three sorts of signs of Spiritual
life.
either you may discern the life of Gods Grace by the causes of it, or by the
effects of it; or by the qualities and properties of it, as we call them.

First; 1 Sign.
for the Causes, the Holy Ghost usually sets forth the causes of our Spiritual
life, and if we find these causes to have been the work of that life, which we
conceive our souls to be endued with, we may from thence argue the truth of
our Spiritual life, and from thence the truth of our fellowship with Christ.

For the first; First cause of Spiritual life.
The first cause of our Spiritual life, is the holy and gracious will of God,
Iam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us; It is that therefore to this life by
which we are begotten, for all generation is unto life, it is of his own will
that we are begotten to this life.

And the Apostle John sets it forth, Joh. 1.13. opend.
by the removeall and denial of all other causes, John 1.13. We are borne not
of flesh nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of God: Not of bloods. Not
of godly parents; for men may have godly Parents, and yet themselves
degenerate, and therefore it is not to be ascribed to parentage, it is not from
the parentage, but from the Covenant, and from Gods will in the Covenant, that
begets a child of God, nor is it of the will of the flesh; that is, of corrupt
nature, nor of the will of man, nor of the best pains that they can take,
though they take much pains for us, yet all may be in vain, so as that
unless God set in with Christian friends, and with the blood and Covenant of
our Ancestors, we shall not be brought on to live a spiritual life in Gods
sight. It is that which God himself speaks of in Ezekiel. 16.6. When we were
yet in our blood, yet God said to us live. When we were in our blood, like an
infant, gaspeing for natural life, and ready to perish, even then when none
could help us, then God said to us live, and then we lived in his sight. And
therefore in a word, you may take this for an evident sign of the true life of
grace, where ever you find the work of grace wrought in any soul, you shall
find the heart speaking of it, as the work of Gods own hand. Take you a man
in the estate of nature, and he will say, God be thanked he had always a good
mind, and his parents would never say no less of him, but he was always a
toward and hopeful child he thanks God; and thus a man will speak that is
only well nurtured, he will say, it is a work that was ever in him, and he
ever thought so of himself: But now take another man, that is indeed borne to
a new life, and has this life in him that springs from Christ, he will tell
you as Paul was wont to say, Gal. 1.15, 16. When it pleased God to separate me
from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace. There you shall as in a
pattern discern what the manner of the expression of a living soul is, he does
not say it was wrought when he had a good mind to hear such a man, or to take
such a course, so it may be will flesh and blood say, but when you come to an
heart that indeed lives in God sight, he expresses himself thus: but when it
pleased God it was done. I for my part ran clean another way, I never had a
desire after God, I had indeed a kind of form and show, and could comply my
self to my Governors and Neighbors; that I might be flattered and encouraged
by them, and I should never have taken better course of my self; but when it
pleased God to call me by his grace, there is the life of a Christian, he
fetches his life from the highest heavens; It pleased God to call me by his
grace, and to reveal his Son in me; when it pleased him to show me the
estate of my soul, and the sinful rebellion of my heart and when he revealed
Christ, not so much to me, as in me, he was revealed to him, in Act. 9. in the
first vision and work upon him; but when he revealed Christ in me, then he
went that way the Holy ghost led him. Thus you shall easily discern it plainly;
though it be hidden in the pleasure of God, yet it will show it self evidently
in the expression of a Christian man, when he comes to speak of the life of
his spiritual estate, they never attribute it to good inclination, nor to the
good instructions of others, but they say, when it pleased God, thus and thus
to reveal himself in me, when he showed me my self, when God laid about to
find which way to hemme me in, then it pleased God to do it, and since then I
have lived.

A second cause of my spiritual life is, The second cause of spiritual life.
The Word of God; the word of Promise, for so the Apostle tells you; Not all
that are of Abraham, are the seed and children of Abraham; but the children of
the Promise, are counted for the spiritual seed: That seed which is elected of
God, and chosen to everlasting life, that is the seed of Promise: That is, such
as are begotten of some promise of God or other, Every Isaac is a Son of the
promise. And least you should think it peculiar to Isaac alone, the Apostle
opens it sweetly, in Gal. 4.28. As a thing common with Isaac to all the people
of God; it is a like Privilege given to the Galathians, and to all others that
were born of God: We brethren are children of the Promise; it was not peculiar
to Isaac alone to be borne of the Promise, and yet of the Promise he was
borne, in a kind of peculiar manner; for before he was born, God gave Isaac to
Sarah by promise, and by virtue of that promise was he borne, even a natural
life: Now so far indeed it was a special peculiar Prerogative to Isaac and
Jacob: but the Apostle would from thence gather; that the spiritual birth of us
all, is by a word of promise; All of us, one and other is born, by a word of
Providence, but if we speak of our spiritual birth, then we brethren are
children of the Promise. So that you shall observe this to be an holy truth of
God; That every child of God, is borne of the promise of God: So that then have
thou a new birth, and do thou live a new life. Tell me then, what promise was
it that did beget thee to God, that begat thee to this new life? What Word of
God was it, by which thou wast begotten? it is a general speech, that in To.
10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and by the doctrine of faith preached, Gal.
3.5. that is, the Gospel of faith; so that this is the point: There is some
promise which being reported to the soul in the ministry of the Word, is laid
hold upon by the hearts of Gods people, the same Word of promise, working that
faith in the heart, by which the soul cleaves to such a promise. Then do but
consider, if thou be borne of God, what cause was there of thy birth? wast
thou born of that Word of God, or of thine own conceit, or of the good opinion
of Christians? or is there some Word of God, which thou have placed thy
confidence in, and upon which thou have been reformed; and since that day to
this, God has turned thy heart and way to another course, and given thee to
live in his sight? It is true, it may be many a good soul cannot readily tell
you, Note this.
what promise did first bring them on to God; but though thou can not always
tell, yet a word of promise it was; and ordinarily, a word of Promise which the
word preached did apply to thy soul, and caused thy heart to reach forth and
to lay hold upon it; but though thou be not always able to reckon up the
first Promises, yet this I say: And mark it, there is no Christian soul, but
has some promises of God on which his heart is stayed upon, and by which his
life is nourished, which argues it was bred of those promises, of which it is
now fed, though a man be not always able to tell what promise it was;
sometimes a word of reproof or of counsel, may sink deep into a man, when God
sets it well on; and may make a deep impression in the heart of a man; And may
so turn about the course of their lives, as that thereby they may reform all
common and outward, and known soul sins, which before was ever cause and
matter of reproof, but that is not so safe a work of Christ, not such a
strong evidence of our spiritual life, when such a word of reproof or
counsel has set us in such a course, and we have thereupon refrained gaming
and breaking of the Sabbath, and vain fashions; this is well, but it is not so
safe a sign of our new birth; for this may befall even an hypocrite, he may be
so convinced by a word of grace, and wise counsel, as may strongly turn the
stream of his course another way; and yet be without any life and power of
godliness, only the word of promise is able to work grace, and life in the
heart of a man.

For the Ground of the Point is this, Ground of the point.
we cannot have a spirit of life wrought in us by the works of the Law, nor by
the words of the Law. Gal. 3.5. He that ministereth to you in the spirit, and
works miracles, does he it by the works of the Law? As if he should say,
did ye ever receive the grace of Christ, by the works of the Law? or by the
counsel of the Law, or by the commandments of the Law? or by the reproves
reached forth from the Law; he excludes it as impossible, and as no ways able
to do it, verse. 21. And therefore he does ever lead us unto some word of the
Gospel, to some promise of grace for the ground of all our spiritual life; as
if ever we would be able to say, we are begotten to a new Inheritance, we must
be able, and are able to say, we have some word of Promise, which has wrought
this in our souls, which has bowed us to look to Christ, and to cleave to
him for strength, and increase, and grows in grace.

For it is true indeed, The Works of the Law may indeed cut us off from some
bad ways, but when it has don so, it leaves us there; leaves us in an estate
wherein we would not give offense, and would not displease men, that are grave
and wise; And this we may reach unto without respect to the glory of God, or
any inward regard of his holy fear, but when as we are quickened to live by
virtue of some Promise, then the love of God constrains us to live to
obedience and good ends, then our respects can reach heavenly and spiritual
ends.

And therefore observe this as of necessary use for any man; that as he would
be loath to be deceived in a counterfeit piece of money; so much more let him
be careful in the main points of his everlasting estate: on this depends our
having or not having of life. And therefore it behooves us to be sure that we
be not disappointed in this great mystery of godliness, and consider seriously
upon what your hopes and confidence was bred, and whence it was grounded.

Quest. You will say; But is it not ordinary that the Word of the Law does
humble and cast down the heart and spirit before God, and cut them off from
all confidence in the flesh, before they come to lay hold of the promise of
grace in Christ?

Answ. True, it is so indeed, That ordinarily, some word of the Law, some word
of conviction prevails with the heart, and makes him in sense of sin, say to
his Christian friends, what shall I do to be saved? this is true, but yet this
is not it, that makes him a new man in Gods sight, it may reach to the
reformation of his outward man, and to the alteration of sundry of his former
courses, which no means else could have reclaimed; but yet this makes him not
live a spiritual life, until he be not only humbled by the Law, but in some
measure brought on, to look after the promise of grace in Christ, and to long
after them, and to say, and desire, oh that I had but my part in this or that
promise, what a mercy of God would that be to me, could I but lay hold upon
them, but thereupon the soul of a Christian, does stand poring and plodding,
and wistly gazeing upon them, till in the end the very sight of a promise, has
so seasoned us with a spirit of faith, that we begin not only to long after
that promise, but to cleave to it, and in time come to receive it into our
hearts, and come to embrace it, to rejoice in it, to acknowledge it, and find
our happiness, and life, and comfort to be wrapped up in it.

A third cause of our spiritual life, A third cause of Spiritual life.
Is the Spirit of grace that which is borne of the spirit is spirit, whatever
is borne of the flesh and no more, is but carnal, but that which is borne of
the spirit, is spirit, Joh. 3.6. there is a shedding abroad, the spirit of Gods
grace in the heart of man, that makes him of another spirit, he is not the same
man, that he was before his spirit was changed, his inclination and disposition
is changed.

For Spirit is nothing else but the inclination, and disposition, the habit of
it; the spirit of wisdom, is an habit or inclination to Wisdom; the Spirit of
grace, is an habit of Grace; the Spirit of prayer, is an inclination or an
habit of Prayer: they are several words, but all mean the same thing: Be
renewed in the spirit of your minds, that is, be renewed in the inclination
and disposition of your mind, Epb. 4.23. And not only be renewed in the mind,
or judgment, or understanding of a man; but there must be a renewall of the
whole soul of a man, the disposition and inclination of the whole must be
changed and altered. Caleb and Joshua was of another spirit, they could judge
of things otherwise then other men could do, other men not renewed in the
spirit of their mind, have no alteration; but the truly regenerate they see a
great change, they never saw the danger of their sins before, nor ever before
judged themselves for their sins, but now their spirit, and soul, and
affection is changed, and now a spirit of fear, and love, and care, and every
affection is altered; now a man is turned quite off from earthly things, so
far as they hinder him in the enjoyment of his Spiritual life, and now we
are set upon the things of God, so as that he that is borne of God to a
Spiritual life, is become a new Creature, and old things are past away, 2 Cor.
5.17. He has a new mind, and a new heart, new affections, new Language, and
new employments that he was never wont to do before; now he can read Gods
Word, and confer with Gods people about the things of God, and can instruct
others, and fashion himself to a new mould, and all upon the renewall of the
spirit of his mind; so that if you see that God has put another spirit into
you then ever you had before, so as not only this, or that part, but the whole
man is changed, and put into another frame, that though there be still a taste
of the Old man, yet the frame both of the body and soul is of another mould,
and all things are become new in some measure; then you live a new life indeed,
else it is not a perfect change, though this and that alteration be wrought in
you. By these causes you may clearly discern whether God has given you a new
life or no; consider it therefore I beseech you, how do you now find your
hearts apt to speak, when you speak of that estate you are in? Are you in your
Closets wont to say, That time was when you have been thus and thus led, in the
vanity of your mind, and the hardness of your heart, and custom of sin,
but when it pleased God, who called you by his grace, when it pleased God, then
it took place; you had been in good company before, and had used many means,
but never any thing would work; but when it pleased God, then it wrought, and
from that day to this it has been so and so with me. It is a good sign to
you, if withal you can recall, that such or such a word of promise it pleased
God to pitch your souls upon, you have long looked and waited for salvation,
but in the end it pleased God to wrap up your souls in life by such a promise;
and if you can call to mind that such a promise your souls did cleave unto,
then are you indeed borne to a Spiritual life, because you are right bred,
bred of a Promise, and of the holy will and pleasure of God; but if you find
your selves to be of another frame, and you are bowed to walk with God, and to
reform your course of life by outward bounds, this is not so safe; but if your
whole man universally be bowed to a godly holy frame, and all things are become
new; new friends, new affections, new desires, if you find such an universal
change, then you are right bred Christians, and indeed no Christians are right
bred but such Christians; but if you make a great stir about the great
Reformation that is wrought in you, and it is from the good inclination, and
disposition you have always had; you ever had a good mind, and in the end
(you thank God) you have reformed such and such evils as you have been blamed
for; time was when you could have freely played at Cards and Dice, but since
then you see the vanity of it, Note this.
and you take better courses, and do now consort your selves with well ordered
and stayed company, you had always a good mind to be better, but you could
not do it suddenly, and so in the conclusion your reformation is but a good
inclination or disposition of your mind; and if you see that much good has
been wrought upon you by the counsel of such and such friends, and by the good
example of such and such wise and discreet friends; and if you find that there
is some strange change in your carriage, your course of life is much altered,
you are not so light and wanton as you were; but you take a far more grave,
and wise, and stayed course, and to much better purpose both for Church and
Commonwealth wherein you live; now I say, if you shall go on, and look for
that Spiritual life, which only springs from Christ Jesus, and will lead on to
eternal glory, and therefore rests not in any reformation of your selves, till
you find there be such an inward and whole change wrought in you, which the
heart is wont to speak of to the praise of Gods grace, it was Gods will, else
it could never have been wrought, and you could not speak of it till now; and
you never rest satisfied in such a change, as a word of reproof or counsel,
that has wrought such a change or reformation in you, that stayed in the
outward man, or in some affections, till you found your hearts to sanctify the
name of Gods grace in the acknowledgement of the word of Promise, and of the
Spirit of grace, making you new, that you may be able to say, that in very
deed you have Christ, and with Christ life, and that life which will never
decay, but will hold to all eternity.

And therefore now to speak something of the signs of the life of our
Justification.

Therefore a second sort of signs, Signs of spiritual life from the effects
of it.
is taken from the effects of Spiritual life, you see what is the causes of
it, as the good pleasure of God, the word of promise, and the Spirit of grace,
these be the first sort of signs.

Now a second sort of signs is from the effects and fruits of life, and herein
take notice of some fruits of your life of Justification; Life of Justification.
it is a principal part of our Spiritual life to have our sins forgiven,
Blessed is the man whose iniquity is pardoned, and to whom the Lord imputes no
sin, Psalm. 32.1, 2. And therefore it is, that forgiveness of sin is called
justification; then God accounts us righteous, and this is called,
Justification of life, Romans 5.18. because in the pardon of our sins is our
life; As when a Malefactor by the Law is condemned, he is by the Law a dead
man; and if his Pardon come, his pardon is his life, and it is so indeed: So is
it in this case, the pardon of our sins is the very life of our souls, and if
God give us to find that life, there is no fear of the life of our
Sanctification, or Consolation, etc.

The first effect then that flows from the pardon of our sins, is some inward
peace of Conscience, Inward peace flows from pardon of sins.
some inward refreshment and satisfaction yielded to the heart, that it could
never attain to before, for sin may be pardoned in the sight of God, and yet
that pardon is not manifested and declared to my soul, until God vouchsafe me
some measure of peace, and a manifestation of the free pardon of my sins, I can
have little rest; it is a notable saying, Romans 5.1 Being justified by faith we
have peace with God, through Jesus Christ. A man justified, is one that has
his sins pardoned, for what was it that all our life time before made us afraid
of Gods displeasure, and we had much disquietnesse about our estates; Oh, the
sin of our souls that we had committed all our life long, the sin
committed many a day ago, that now lay heavy upon our souls, and the want of
pardon lay as heavy as our sins; but now if God come and say, Thy sins are
pardoned, then follows a sweet tranquillity of peace in the soul. A matter
that Philosophers have talked of, to quiet the mind, to lull men asleep, and
with applying remedies, did stupisie for a while, and take off the heavy
burden, or the sense of the burden, rather then the burden it self; but so
soon as ever God pardons sin, there is shed abroad a spirit of peace in our
souls, and sometimes in that unspeakable measure, as that it passes the
understanding of a man to conceive, Note this
Phil. 4.7. But I do not so conceive, that every Christian as soon as ever
his sin is first pardoned, has such an unconceiveable peace in his soul;
but he finds a great deal of ease sometimes, as if you had thrown a Millstone
from off his body; notable is that expression in Esa. 32.17. The work of
righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness, and
assurance for ever. He speaks of that righteousness, whereby we stand
righteous before God, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness to our
souls. The work of righteousness shall be peace; from this work and effect
you may gather what the causes of it is: blessed are such, it is quietness and
assurance for ever. Not that there is an everlasting sense of that peace, for
the sense of it is sometimes obscured for want of watchfulness, and want of
experience in the ways of godliness; and sometimes through the buffetings of
Satan, or desertions from the hand of God, and so many times our peace may be
over-clouded, and the sense of it taken away, but the work of righteousness
is peace; if sin be pardoned, peace will follow upon it, and the fruit of
this righteousness is quietness, and assurance for ever; the heart is now
peaceable, quiet, and assured that God has wrought this and that grace in me,
which will abide in me for ever.

2 2. Effect.
That you may be further instructed in this point, see a second effect of this
life of justification, of the life of righteousness, which is of special use
for the right discerning of our Spiritual life, and that is this; Look as in
all natural life, no man has received life, but is careful to preserve it;
Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give to save his life; and if
his life be struck at, he will have his hand cut off rather then have his head
wounded; he will expose himself or any member to any danger, rather then loose
his life. And so if God vouchsafe pardon of sin, and peace of conscience; you
will find this an evident sign of pardon and peace together, and an evident
effect of them both; a serious care, and a constant endeavor to maintain and
keep that peace, that as you see God has been very gracious in speaking peace
to you, so you would preserve that peace above all the blessings in the world,
that whatsoever you loose else, though you loose friends, and goods, and lands,
and trades, health, and liberty, you would not loose your peace, though you
hazard the loss of them all to preserve and maintain your peace; that peace
when it was given you, was so unspeakable and glorious, that life it self was
not to be compared to this mercy which God has vouchsafed us, when he gave us
peace, Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better then life.

A man that has found something that is better then his life, he will loose
his life rather then it, and much more any thing else; and therefore if you see
God incline your hearts to be tender and chary of your peace, then God has
bestowed peace and pardon upon you; and it is evident; because you are so loath
to break it. A man that never received this peace, he makes no conscience of
sin, unless it blemish him in the eye of the World; he makes no great matter
of conscience to run into any sin, because the old score is yet undischarged:
Christ is not wont to discharge that score which we make no conscience to run
into again.

And if they do, he can tell how to make them feel the smart of playing such
Prodigalls, but when God has blotted all our sins out of his sight, that there
is no more mention of sin between God and our souls, that the heart of a
Christian will be mavelous chary and solicitous, that it sin no more
against God; he that has his sin pardoned, and knows what it has cost,
both on Gods part and on his own, he is very careful of running into sin any
more, and is very careful to walk more holily for ever hereafter, notable is
that example, Genesis 39.9. When Joseph was tempted to a pleasing sin, oh (says
he) How shall I commit this great wickedness, and so sin against God, how
should he now break his peace with God, and run upon a new score with God:
It is certain, he had sinned before, and he had found pardon of it. And how
should he now sin any more against God: this is the constant care of every
Christian man, he is fearful of every sin.

I grant you, it is true, that sometimes, even those that have their sins
pardoned, and the writing of transgression by which they had engaged themselves
to everlasting torments has been cancelled, yet even they have afterward
turned the grace of God into wantonness, through sinful lusts. As David and
Peter etc. through some corruption or other; but you shall also find this to be
true, that as they have been over-taken and overwhelmed with such corruptions
as those be, so they have held forth as much repentance, and affliction in this
case; that if you had taken many lives from them, you could not have greived
them so much as in this case they are put to. The blotting out of the sense of
this pardon, has been more bitter to them then death it self: And if it be
not so, that Christian men in such a case do not more shame themselves before
God, and loath themselves for all the evils they have done in Gods sight; they
will either lie down seared and benumbed, and their spiritual life will
evaporate away, and then it will argue, it was never true, and sincere; and if
it were true; it will lie so close and hidden, that you may plainly see what a
slaughter Satan has made, and what heavy load he has put upon such as are
careless to maintain that peace with God, which he has vouchsafed them. And
therefore if God give us hearts to keep our peace, it is an evident sign God
is at peace with us.

If we fly from sin, as from the grave or hell, then surely those sins are
pardoned which we do abhor. And that peace and reconsiliation is procured
which we desire.

That is the nature of Spiritual life, Property of spiritual life.
it desires to maintain it self, and to expel all that is contrary to it, if
the body have taken any noisome and hurtful thing; it will vomit and cast it
out, and will not let it rest there in quiet, if it be an enemy to our life it
will strive against it, if there be any spiritual life in us, it cannot let
sin rest in us; it will strive against it, and never rest till it be shut of
it, any way, some way or other, out it must, though he shame himself for it by
an open confession; and though it many ways trouble him, yet out it must, it
is an enemy to his life, and out he must cast it; and therefore if God give us
hearts to be fearful of sin, and careful to maintain our peace, it is an
evident sign of the truth of our Spiritual life; and this is a sign of life,
for he feels not his peace because it is clouded in him; he discernes no life
in him, and he fears what he had was but a delusion. Why, how stands thy care
to preserve thy peace, and to avoid the danger of the loss of it? If God give
thee an heart desirous and careful to maintain thy peace, though it be not so
lively as sometimes it was, yet it is certainly true and good.

A third sign and effect of the life of righteousness, Love of God a sign of
spiritual life.
is that which our Savior gives, Luke 7.47. Her sins are forgiven her, which
are many, for she loved much. So then, this is a third sign that our sins are
pardoned, and of the life of our justification, our love of God. Love of God,
proportionable and suitable, according to the greatness of the sins that have
been forgiven and pardoned to us; this is a good evidence of the life of our
justification, this is not a dead and a livelesse pardon. A Prince may pardon a
Malefactor of his former offense, but he can put no new principle into him; but
Gods Pardons does convey life into the soul, and it has this work in it;
when the soul sees that all its sins are done away, and those sins many and
great, as many and great sins are forgiven him; so is his love great and
manifold, and this is of the same nature of the love there spoken of; she was a
wicked women, and very notorious for uncleanness, for so said the people,
verse. 38, 39. Surely if this man were a Prophet, he would know what manner of
woman this was, for she is a sinner. And when they say, A sinner, they mean
not such a sinner as other men and women ordinarily be, but such a sinner as
was a notorious wicked woman, and therefore a shame for him that professed
himself to be a Prophet to come so near her; she begins to wash, and to kiss
his feet, and to wipe them with the hair of her head, and to anoint him with
precious ointment. Now says Christ, to Simon the Pharisee (and he was none of
the worst of them neither) for Christ seems to imply, that he had some sins
forgiven him; I have something to say unto thee, Simon, there was a Creditor
had two Debtors, the one owed five hundred pence, the other fifty, and when
they had nothing to pay, he franckly forgave them both; tell me therefore,
which of them will love him most? Why, says he, I suppose him to whom he
forgave most; And Jesus said, thou have rightly judged, since I entered into thy
house thou gave me no water for my feet, etc. wherefore I say unto thee, her
sins which are many are forgiven her, for she loved much. She showed
wonderful much love, she sat behind him weeping, when she though she had not
been so much seen, not presuming to come into his presence: Now therefore her
sins which are many, are forgiven her. You may see it plainly, because she
loves so much; and thou that have showed less love, thou have less forgiven
thee, but they that have many sins forgiven them, they have much; And therefore
if a man's sins be forgiven him, and God give him peace in the pardon of them,
according to the measure and multitude of his sins, such is the measure and
variety of his love, the greatness of his love to God; and as God has
forgiven him many sins, so he gives God manifold measures of love, he loves
God greatly, the very feet of God; the lowest and poorest members of the Body
of Christ. He is content to stoop to the meanest office of love to Christ, or
to any of his servants; any thing wherein love may be showed to Christ, or his
Members, he is content to stoop to it: According to what is thy forgiveness,
such is thy love.

And because no man has so little forgiven him, but if any thing be forgiven
him at all, he knows that little is so much, and so great, as would indeed have
plunged him into the neathermost Hell; and therefore no true Christian is
conceited of the smalnesse of his sins, but he thinks it a very great matter
to have any one sin forgiven him; but he knows if God had cast him out of
his sight for any one of them, just had his Judgments been, and if at any time
his love decay, he renewes it by repentance of that sin, for which before God
had vouchsafed him pardon. And thus you see a six-fold sign of our spiritual
life, three from the causes, and three from the effects; and the latter, the
three effects chiefly concern the life of our Justification.

And therefore do but apply it home to your souls, Application,
because the whole discourse is but an application, and an use of the point;
but I pray you consider what you have heard, and lay it to heart, and draw
near now into the closet of your spirits, that you may discern what God has
done for you. Did you yet ever see any peace of Conscience? you say, I never
had a troubled unquiet Conscience all my days; but to you I only say thus
much, your peace has neither a good root, nor will it bring forth any good
fruit, not well rooted; for I pray you, whence came it? did it come from any
word of Gods Promise, or any work of the Spirit of grace, or from thy Self
love, or is it not as benumbed peace? and if so, then it is not well rooted.

And truly it has and will have as bad fruits, for if thou say, thy sins are
pardoned, then what care have thou to keep that peace, and to preserve it? Does
not a sin befall thee, but it is an annoyance to thy spiritual life, and thou
can not rest till thou be shut of it, and cannot be satisfied till thou
be wholly discharged of it; it is well, but if thou find that thou can
live quietly in known sins, and thy soul is never troubled about them, this
is then but a barren and false-hearted peace, and will deceive thee, and in the
midst of this peace thou may sink into Hell, unless God heal this
distempered peace in thee; and if God have given thee such a peace, what love
do thou then return to God? Where is that great and manifold love thou gives
to God? If this love be wanting, and thy care to preserve it be wanting; If thy
peace be groundless and fruitless, then spiritual life is wanting, but if
God have been pleased, and thine own heart can find it so, and bear witness to
thy soul, that God has pardoned thy sins, then that peace which is in thy
soul will refresh thee; Have thou ever found such a peace in thy soul, as has
been unspeakable and full of glory, and thou have been sweetly quieted when
many troubles have been about thee, and have thou found comfort from hence in
any of the Ordinances of God? And do thou find, that though that peace then
gotten be in a great measure lost and decayed, yet thou have as great a care as
may be to preserve it, and to maintain it, and to renew, and to recover it
again by repentance, and art careful to preserve thy self spotless before the
world* And do thou find that according as God has been merciful to thee, so
thy love is great and manifold, thou can never love God so much as he has
done thee; thou can never answer the thousand part of his love and mercy
showed to thee? And then no service of God, or office so mean that he calls
thee to, but to the utmost of thy endeavor art willing to spend and be spent
for God, then it is an evident argument that justification is conveyed to thy
soul; for God has given thee peace, and has given thee an heart to love him
back again.

SERMON VIII.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


THe causes of this life you have heard, and some of the effects of it also.
The life of Justification you heard has these three effects or fruits in the
heart; Peace, Quietness, and Assurance for ever. Care to keep our conscience
pacified in some measure, careful to maintain that peace we have had so much
ado to get. And also love of God according to the abundance of sin, that has
been pardoned to us.

We are now speaking of the effects of life, and now to speak of the effects
of the life of our sanctification. Life of Sanctification
He that has the Son has life, not only in the pardon of his sin, but he
has likewise the graces of Gods spirit, which are the life of sanctification,

A frame of grace wrought in the soul, which is the life of holiness.

Now because Sanctification is found, partly in the heart, and partly in the
life. Let me now show you some such effects of spiritual life, as are found in
the heart of a Christian: And breathe forth themselves in his life, by those
habits and gifts which are principally within.

And the sum of what I shall now say is thus much. There are certain variety
of the graces of God in themselves so different and opposite. As that in nature
they are seldom compatible to one person, at one and the same time, or least
of all to be found in one and the same business, And yet are found where ever
the heart of a man is sanctified by the Spirit of grace; where you have the
life of sanctification in a Christian, you shall find variety of graces in
them, some of them of such diversity and opposition one to another, that in
nature the like temper is not to be found in one person at the same time, and
in the same business. They are certain kind of conjugations, or companions of
grace so fitted, and joined together in the heart of a man, as that nature is
not able to compact such sanctified affections, unto such uses upon any
occasion; much less able to bring them forth upon any occasion, they are so
different in themselves; to name some of them in particular.

First, if you look at the grace of God as it works in the heart, Joy and
grief in the soul sanctified at once.
and exercises it self in the conversion of a sinner, you shall find, that
when the soul discernes any life of grace in its heart, that sin is now
pardoned, and God is pleased to frame it anew, and to give it a new life; at
that time the heart is taken up with these two contrary effects; it is both
enlarged with no small measure of joy, that ever God should redeem him from
such a desperate condition as his soul lay in, and yet withal full of grief of
heart, that ever he should have so much displeased that God, that has done so
much for him; and so plain, as that you shall evidently discern the voice of
your own joy, from the voice of your own grief. I know not better how to
instance in it, then to fetch a resemblance from the return of the Children of
Israel, from captivity to Jerusalem, read Psalm. 126.2, 3, 4. When God turned
the captivity of his people, this was their affection; then was their mouth
filled with laughter, and their tongue with singing, etc. Now the same people
that so rejoice to see themselves redeemed by the Arm of the Lord, when they
do rejoice to see themselves set at liberty from the captivity, they do at
the same time as sadly grieve and weep, to consider the unkindnesse they have
put upon God, and their unworthiness of such a mercy from him, as you may
read, Jer. 50. 4, 5. speaking of the same people, and of the same time, their
return from the captivity; and he tells you, They shall come, going and weeping
shall they go, and seek the Lord God, and ask the way to Zion, with their
faces thitherward; If the Psalmist speaks of it, he says, they were out of,
and beyond themselves for joy, as in a comfortable dream; the news seemed to
be too good to be true, and they rejoiced with exceeding great joy, and if the
Prophet Jeremy speak of the very same people, and the same time, and the very
same action; he tells you, They go to Jerusalem, weeping, they go to seek the
Lord, and ask the way to Zion; they rejoice at the greatness of the mercy,
and weep in sense of their unworthiness of it. And truly this kind of
combination shall you find stirring in every soul that is converted to God,
when the pardon of its sin is sealed to its heart; it breeds a certain kind of
inward joy, and comfort in the Lord, that has thus graciously pardoned their
iniquity, and yet more abundantly mourning for the evils, it has so displeased
God with; nor is there any mourning so deeply wounds the soul, as that which
arises from the sight of Christ crucified, then the soul mournes full
bitterly, Zach. 12.10. He will mourn exceedingly, to think that he should
deal so unworthily against that God, that has all this while had such
wonderful thoughts of peace toward him. This is the first combination of
graces that is found in the soul after sin is pardoned, and the heart
restored to a new life, for we spoke before of prizing Christ in our
judgments, by certain preparative graces, but now we speak of that kind of
life of sanctification, which puts forth it self after some sense of our
justification; this life of the mixture of joy and mourning, bears witness to
our life of sanctification.

Secondly, in the worshipping of God in those duties of the life of
sanctification, 2. Joy and fear.
you shall find another combination of mixed affections, the like of which are
not, and cannot be found in nature; and that is joy and fear, according to
Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. A Christian
man when he is in a good frame, and the life of grace most stirs in his
spirit, he never comes to an holy duty but with some holy fear, and trembling
before God, before whom he then stands, and yet there is no duties he goes
about with more comfort and joy then those, when his heart is not dead. It is
true, a dead hearted Christian comes to good duties like a Bear to a stake,
while they are in such a temper; if they can shun duties they will, but take the
heart of a Christian when it is alive, and then they are a willing people,
Psalm. 110.3. they come with some inward gladness of heart, it is the joy of
their spirits to hear of an opportunity when they may hear the Word, and
pray, or perform any duty acceptable to God: but how? when their hearts are
most joyful, and they go about duties most willingly, yet then most awfully;
for take you a Christian when he comes unwillingly, his heart is not much
affected with fear and trembling, but then he is most awful when his heart is
in the best frame toward holy duties; these two affections never meet in other
things, when a man goes about any business gladly, he is not afraid of it; or
if he be in fear, he goes not about it joyfully; the Sun trembles not at his
course, but rejoices to run his race; the Horse rejoices at the Battle, he
never trembles at the matter; or when any man goes about any work with joy, he
never trembles at it: but a Christian man, when he goes about any spiritual
duty, though he have much joy and comfort in it, and is glad of the occasion,
yet he is most fearful; as Psalm. 130.4. the very consideration of the
greatness of Gods mercies makes a soul fearful of the presence of God; so
the more rich God in grace and mercy is to us, either pardoning sin, or
sanctifying the heart, or quickening us to any duty, the more fearful is the
soul in such a condition. And hence is that you read, Exodus 15.11. the Lord is
said to be fearful in praises; when the heart is most enlarged to praise God
with comfort, then does it most fear God, so that here is another combination
of graces that are not commonly found together in other businesses of ordinary
affairs, but where the heart is spiritual, they meet together in the same
thing.

Thirdly, Take you a godly man in affliction, Joy in affliction.
and when he is most able to bear them, and yet when afflictions is most heavy,
if he find his heart able to grapple under them, yet then you shall find much
joy and sadness of heart mixed together, it was a sign of the election of the
Thessalonians because they received the word in much affliction, and with joy
of the Holy ghost. When they found much affliction either by the word, or in
the outward man, though much affliction, yet inwardly joyous, Heb. 12.11, No
affliction is joyous for the present, yet it brings forth the quiet fruits of
righteousness. By how much the more affliction, makes their spirits sad, yet
so much the more is the heart enlarged with joy and comfort in the Holy ghost,
Romans 5.3. We rejoice in tribulations, tribulation is such a kind of affliction,
as is a threshing us like corn out of the chafe, drives us out of all the
comforts of this life, and that is not in nature, to rejoice in any measure,
when the heart is in grief and discouragement, it ever wants something to raise
it up.

Fourthly, There is this mixture of affection, in our carriage toward men,
which argues the life of holiness in us; Patience without forbearance.
In our converseing with men, you shall have the same heart full of much
patience, but without all forbearance. And those are such as are not found in
nature, nor in an hypocrite, yet in a Christian heart you shall find them
together the more patient a man is toward others, yet the less able is he to
bear with evil, read Revel. 2.2. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy
patience, and how thou can not bear them which are evil: A man would think
it were a very strange expression.

A man of known and prooved patience, and yet cannot bear: For what is
patience, but bearing and forbearing? yet says God, I know thy patience, and
that thou can not bear them that are evil; implying that such a soul, if
it were a matter to be put upon himself, any affliction or trial put upon
himself, then I know thy patience in bearing of it, but if it come to a matter
of evil, not of punishment, but of sin, then I know thou cannest not bear it.

Take you any patient man, that only has a moral virtue of patience; and if
he have so much patience as that he can bear with crosses, and afflictions, he
can as well also bear with evils committed against God: but this is the
nature of spiritual patience, it is mixed with zeal, so as that the more
patient a man is, in regard of injuries done to himself, the less patient he
is in respect of injuries done to God.

Fifthly, You shall have gentleness and meekness sometimes mixed in a man,
with much austerity and strictness, which is very much they should meet in one
man, Meeknes and strictness at once.
at one and the same time: The wisdom that is from above is gentle and meek,
and easy to be entreated.

It was said of Moses, He was the meekest man upon earth, Numb. 12.3. Take
Moses in his own case, and his carriage toward men, as they had respect to
himself, and then he was a meek man, soon persuaded, yet the same Moses, when
he saw the matter concerned the Cause of God, he is so stiff and unmovable,
as that he will not yield one jot, he will not leave an hoof behind, of all that
appertained to the children of Israel, Exodus 10.26. He would not only have
men, and women, and children go forth to serve the Lord, but their cattle and
their stuff; He will not yield a little here, no not for the Kings pleasure
sake. A man would much wonder that such a man, so meek and gentle, and so easy
to be persuaded in his own cause, that yet when it comes to a matter of
importance, and concerns God, he will not there yield, he is now inflexible,
nothing can persuade him to give way to it, this is a combination of graces,
that are not wont to be found in men thus mixed together, but it is found in
the people of God, that live a sanctified, and holy life. I know not better
what to instance in, then in the liquid Air; of all other things the most
easiest to be peirced through; of it self it gives way to every creature, not
the lest fly, or least stone cast into it, but it gives way to it of it self,
yet if God say it shall be as a Firmament, between the waters above, and the
waters below, it then stands like a wall of brass, and yields not; it will not
suffer the water in the clouds to fall down, but if it do fall to water the
earth, it shall strain through the air as through a sieve, the clouds
sometimes are so full that one would think they would burst through the air,
and fall upon the earth, but God having set the air to be a Firmament, or
expulson between the waters above, and the waters below, though of it self a
very liquid thing, yet it stands like to a wall of brass; and truly so is it
with a Christian spirit, though of himself he is as liquid as the air, you
may easily pass through him, and go an end with him easily; he is easy to be
entreated, very gentle, but take him now in any thing wherein God has bid him
keep his stand in his course, and there he stands like a wall of brass, that
were never such high and great matters put upon him, ready to bear him down,
he will not shrink, nor give any way at all; this is another mixture of
affections which are found in Christian men, that do enjoy this life of
holiness.

In the sixth place you shall have modesty mixed with much magnanimity, Modesty
mixed with magnanimity.
which is rarely found in men, endued only with Morrall or Civil gifts, but in
nature the more modest, the less magnanimous. But a Christian, the more modest
he is, the more magnanimous; look at Paul, and touching the righteousness
which is of the Law, he is endued with many carnal privileges according to
the Law, but now all these are but loss, and dross, and dung, that he might
win Christ; all his good parts of nature, and all his, common gifts of grace,
yet all of them but dross, and dung; this was the modest spirit of Paul, a man
who sometimes says of himself, He was not inferior to the very chief
Apostles, 2 Cor. 12.11. yet again says he, I am nothing, there is his
magnanimity. When he is opposed, and vilified by the false Apostles; what has
Paul forgot his modesty, now, that he knows not how to submit himself, nor to
compare himself with his equals? No, but though chief of the Apostles, yet am
I nothing. He looks at every thing he had as nothing; This I am, but yet I am
nothing. He sometimes calls himself, the least of all the Apostles, 1 Cor.
15.9, 10 and yet other whiles, not inferior to the very chief of them.
Sometimes he calls himself, the least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3.8. and yet
sometimes, not inferior to the very chief Apostles; and this he had learned,
he had been instructed thus to deny himself; he desired, that he might know
nothing but Christ, and him crucified. See the noble spirit of this
self-denial servant of God; sometimes, whey the Magistrates had done him
wrong, see then how he stands upon his privileges, he complains, they had
beaten him, a Roman, being uncondemned, Act. 16.9. and when they heard this,
they would have sent him away privately; nay, let them come and fetch him out.
See now, a man of a great and magnanimous spirit, though a man as fit to put up
wrongs as any man, yet when he sees the glory of God is interested in his
person, and his calling, or his cause is called in question, then he knows how
to stand upon his worth; and if in such a case he sustain open wrong, then he
will plead the liberty of a Subject; whereas at another time, he would have
done more to a far less man then a Magistrate; He is become all things to
all men, that he might save some every way; so gentle, that you may turn him
about your hand any way, but else he will stand upon his worth, and not
inferior to the very chief Apostles; those that are greatest and chiefest,
such, who seemed to be pillars, he is not inferior to any of them, the
greatest of them all; equal to the best of them, if not before them all, and
yet labored more then they all, 1 Cor. 15. last. to show you the mavelous
modesty of the spirit of grace, a work incompattible to nature, but is found
only in a spirit of holiness, and there only they are combined together in the
same person, at the same time, and in the same business, with the same breath
he can tell you; He is not inferior to the very chief Apostles, and yet, I am
nothing. Notable is that expression of David to this purpose, My eyes are not
lofty, nor my heart haughty, but I have behaved may self as a weaned child,
Psalm. 131.1, 2, Now you would think if a man were such a weaned humble
creature, he could not tell how to speak, nor to take any great things in
hand; but when he comes to speak to that, Psalm. 24.7. opened.
you shall mark the frame of his spirit, Psalm. 24.7.9. Stand open ye
everlasting doors, and be ye lift up ye everlasting gates, that the King of
glory may come in. When he looks at earthly things, yea the best of them, his
heart is so weaned from them, that he knows not how to have an high thought,
weaned even from a Kingdom, as a child from the breast, and yet the same
soul that is thus weaned, and thus mean in his own eyes, when he comes to
spiritual matters, it is wonder to see the height of his spirit; these things
are too low, and too shallow for him; he knows not how to close with, nor to
content himself with such poor things as these be, Crowns, and Scepters, and
Dignities, his heart was weaned from them all, all of them things too low, and
too mean for him to be exercised about; now be ye lift up ye gates, and he
means the heart and conscience of a man, the affection of his soul, lift up
these to the ways of God, he would now be of an higher strain, so that a man
would wonder at this, though the matter be great and high, every way far
above all earthly things, yet notwithstanding he looks at them all as matters
fit for his heart to be raised up unto, he looks at the favor of God, and the
blood of Christ, and pardon of sin, the Kingdom of glory; he looks at all
these high matters as fit objects for his heart to be set upon: His eyes were
not haughty, and he did not exercise himself in great matters concerning
earthly things, and yet, was it not a great matter to be King of Israel? yet is
it not a greater matter to be the Son of God, then to be the Son in Law to a
King? but his eyes are not haughty, he does not exercise himself in such
things as these be, but yet he exercises himself in greater matters then
these things are; and therefore, when as Christian men are thought to be of
shallow weak spirits, and know not how to carry on end matters in this world,
yet when they come to spiritual matters, there they can tell how to set their
hearts a work about such matters, about the inheritance of the Kingdom of
Heaven, about the favor of God, and the light of Gods countenance, these be
great matters; when they come to have the eye of God upon them, they can look
for the glory of his presence, and the fellowship of the Angels; and they can
discourse, and tell you of great blessings that God has laid up for them in
Christ; then they can exercise their hearts in such great matters, Psalm. 149.6.
Let the high praises of God be in their mouths; what a strange speech is
there, Psalm. 149.6 expounded.
for a man that sometimes said, Great matters are too high for him, yet now, as
it is in the Original, High things, the high glorious things of God, the great
things of God, the magnanimous things of God, the high praises of God, the high
Majesty of God, the high praises, and thanksgiving of God, let them be in their
mouths; the mighty power of God, let that be in their lips, and a two-edged
sword in their hands. He speaks of a word of Prophecy, and instruction to
the people; the word is called, the sword of the Spirit, whereby Kings are
bound in chains, and Lords in Iron bonds, and such honor have all the Saints;
he would have all the Saints of God to invest themselves with this honor, that
they might speak of such glorious excellent things, as their words might be
like to a two-edged sword, to cut asunder the hearts of great Princes, to bring
Kings and great Lords in chains of horror, and anguish of soul and
conscience, such chains as out of which there is no redemption, but by the
high words of the Saints, by the high promises of God to speak peace to the
souls of Princes; but let the high threatenings of God be in their mouths, the
high Commandments of God in their mouths, and those will bind Kings in
chains, and Lords in fetters of Iron; and then let the high promises of God,
the spiritual promises of grace be in their mouths, to set Princes at
liberty, and to teach their Senators wisdom. A strange kind of combination
in the Spirit of grace wrought in such hearts, they can call upon their hearts
to be lifted up to the high things of God, nothing then too great for them to
exercise themselves in; no Mercies, nor Judgments too great, no not the
unsearchable counsel of God, the depths of the Mysteries of God, nothing is
too high for them, it will be prying, and looking into the secret counsels of
God, and yet both together with most modesty, when the soul is most lifted up
in the ways of God, yet at the same time he looks at himself as nothing, and
yet notwithstanding so far forth as God will be pleased to reveal it to him,
he will be searching into the deep things of God, and yet all this will he
do with a very modest spirit.

Thus you have seen six combinations severally of the gracious affections,
that are not to be found in nature, no not set upon civil objects, much less
upon spiritual, but upon civil objects, they cannot be so combined together.

Seventhly, The seventh combination of graces.
there is another combination of virtues strangely mixed in every lively holy
Christian, And that is, Diligence in wordly businesses, and yet deadness to
the world; such a mystery as none can read, but they that know it. For a man to
rise early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of carefullnesse, not a
sinful, but a provident care, Diligence in worldly business, and yet dead to
the world.
and to avoid idleness, cannot endure to spend any idle time, takes all
opportunities to be doing something, early and late, and loses no
opportunity, go any way and bestir himself for profit, this will he do most
diligently in his calling: And yet be a man dead-hearted to the world, the
diligent hand makes rich, Prove. 10.4. and you read of the godly woman, that
she rises while it is yet night, Prove. 31.27. And of this ye read, Prove.
15.13. and 18, 19.27. Now if this be a thing which is so common in the mouth of
the holy ghost, and you see was the practice of the greatest women, then upon
the earth; the greatest Princes in those times, the more gracious, the more
diligent, and laborious in their callings: you see it will well stand with the
life of grace, very diligent in worldly business. And yet notwithstanding, the
very same souls that are most full of the worlds businesses, the more diligent
they be in their callings, yet the same persons are directed to be dead with
Christ, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. Set not your affections upon things below, but on
things that are above, for we are dead with Christ. Meaning dead to all these
earthly things, and all the comforts here below, they are not our life, but our
life is hid with Christ in God; and therefore to this world are we dead. And
Paul therefore so speaks of it, Gal. 6.14. The world is crucified to me, and I
unto the world, the very same men that are so crucified to the world, yet the
spirits of those men, though their affections be in heaven, yet their labors
are in the earth, Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in heaven, but our
employments is here upon the earth, diligently taking pains in our callings,
ever very busy in outward employments. Observe the Ante, learn her ways, and
be wise, Prove. 6. be busy like Antes, morning and evening, early and late, and
labor diligently with their hands, and with their wits, and which way soever
as may be the best improvement of a man's tallent; it must be employed to the
best advantage, and yet when a man has labored thus busily, yet his heart,
and mind, and affections are above; he goes about all his business, in
obedience to Gods Commandment, and he intends the glory of God; and he thereby
sets himself, and his household at more liberty for the service of God in their
places, and so, though he labor most diligently in his calling, yet his heart
is not set upon these things, he can tell what to do with his estate when he
has got it. Say not therefore when you see two men laboring very diligently
and busily in the world, say not, here is a couple of worldlings, for two men
may do the same business, and have the same success, and yet a mavelous
difference between them, the heart of the one may be dead to these things, he
looks at them as they be; indeed, but crumbs that fall from the childrens table,
he looks not at them as his chiefest good, but the bread of life, the
spiritual food of his soul, that is the thing which he chiefly labors after,
another man places his happiness and felicity in them, and makes them his
chiefest good, and so there is a manifest difference between them.

So then you see seven combinations of graces that are in the life of
holiness, and all of singular use in this kind.

Eighthly, the last virtue is a single one, and that is love of enemies. Love of
Enemies.
I say unto you, love your enemies, Matthew. 5.44. that you may be the children
of your heavenly Father. Love your enemies. This very grace whereby we do love
our enemies, it has a contrary work to nature, for naturally, this we shall
find to be the frame of our hearts, toward our enemies, we are cold and
undisposed to do any good office unto them, very hard and cold, and frozen
toward them: Those who are our enemies, we take no pleasure in them, but now
in such a case as this, the love of a Christian will come and warm the heart,
and thaw this cold frostinesse that is in our souls; whereas before a man was
cold toward his Enemies, his heart now begins to reflect upon him in pity and
compassion; and instead of hardness, his heart now melts and is made soft
within him, to see what ill measures it could have put upon its enemies. But on
the contrary side, the same hatred in a man that is toward his enemies, it
makes a man of an hot distemper, with boiling in heat of wrath against his
enemies, he is all upon it to do him any harm, his heart is full of hot and
bitter wrath; so as that love which was as heat and fire to thaw and warm,
cold and hard hearts, when it comes to the fire of wrath, it is as it were cold
water, and allayes that heat and bitterness, and harshnesse, which else our
hearts are subject to.

This is the nature of love, as it is the nature of water to cool hot
distempers; and as it is the nature of fire, to thaw and soften hard frozen
spirits, and so though it be but as one entire grace. Yet in the act it puts
forth a kind of variety of work, whereby one would think it did cross it
self, but it does not, but does all by the life of Christ: thus you see what
the effects of the life of sanctification is in the heart of a man, after that
God has begun, to root the life of justification in us, and he discernes
that God has wrought a change in him, and then these several graces, though
in themselves, and work one opposite to another; yet in a Christian heart they
can meet and join together.

And therefore now do but lay this to heart, he that has the Son has life.
Will a Christian say, how shall I know that I have that life, in having of
which, I may know I have Christ? Why, do but consider with thine own soul,
not now of the life of thy justification, but have thou found that ever God did
fill thy heart with joy, so as thy soul has said, the Lord has done great
things for my soul, whereof he has made me to rejoice? and have thou found
that when thou have most rejoiced in the wonderful mercy of God, then has thy
heart most melted before the Lord thy God? And thou have been ashamed and
confounded within thy self, and never open thy mouth against God any more.
Do thou see that the more God reveals Christ to thee, who was crucified for
thy sake, the more bitterly thou moanest for thy wickedness? then it is a
strong evidence of life and peace in thy soul; were it not the mighty power of
the life of Christ in thee, thou could have had neither of both these
graces, much less combined together to work the same thing, at one and the
same time: if therefore God has helped you to look at the great mercy of God
with joy, and yet with shame and bitter mourning, that ever thou should
dishonor such a God; certainly, God has vouchsafed thee life, and such a
life, as in which thou shall live. You shall have many a soul that is
marvellously comforted in hearing the word, rejoice exceedingly in what they
hear; and go home and say such a word was good and very comfortable, and
never man spoke like that man, and he never thought before that there was so
much to be found in the word, as now he conceives there is. But now if this
were the joy of Gods Elect; if it were such a joy as would not vanish away like
lightning in the air, a flash of joy, it would sink down into the heart, and
leave so much the more deeper impression mourning, by how much the more it has
had joy: I grant, that sometimes the joy of Gods own servants may soon vanish
away, but it was never known that the joy of a living Christian did so soon
vanish and depart away, but that when it did most abound in the heart, it did
cause inward mourning, and if not weeping, yet an affection of grief and
sorrow of soul; that ever we have so displeased God, the more God has been
merciful to us, the more are we shamed of ourselves, and inwardly grieve for
our shameless carriages.

If therefore you only find joy in hearing, that may deceive you, it is not
the shortness of the continuance that argues the unsoundnesse of the joy, but
the want of this combination that will argue the falsehood of it; if God yoke
not spiritual joy with spiritual mourning, then suspect your joy, for it does
not accompany salvation unto life. And in very deed, this you shall find to be
true, the joy of living souls in Christ, though that oftentimes be soon gone,
yet it leaves this spirit of mourning, which keeps possession for it, and that
many times for a long time; and you may read your comfort in the sorrow that it
has left behind, for there is as much cause of comfort in this sorrow, as in
the joy when you had it; when you see your souls can mourn unfeignedly, for
that you see so good a God to such a wretch; this very comfortable sorrow that
is left in thy heart, is an undoubted pledge that it is not a vanishing joy,
the power and work of it lasts long, and will abide in the soul for ever; a man
will in such a case mourn for his sin while he lives. If you have therefore
found your joy mixed with sorrow it is right, else it is but a fading,
hypocritical, and false joy.

Again further, how do you find your heart affected with the duties of Gods
worship? Do you come to duties mavelous unwillingly, that if you could avoid
it you would not keep such duties in your house, and if it must needs be, you
put it upon any body rather then upon your self; you may be a living
Christian, but your heart is in a dead frame at that time, and if it be always
so with you, you never did truly live, but if you find your spirits, at least
your hearts coming on most willingly to Christian duties, that you perform
them like Free Will offerings, not free, so as without warrant from Gods Word,
but free in respect of grace. Do but observe thus much, it may be you may come
off freely before God, because he has given you spiritual gifts, and you can
quit your selves well in the performance of them, and that makes you come the
more boldly; but consider, if the more willingly you come to Christian duties,
the more trembling your heart goes about them; the more the soul is prepared,
the more it fears before the Lord, and the more lowly the spirit is, and
awful in the sight of God, if a man can serve the Lord with joy, and trembling
together, then the service you perform to God is heavenly, and spiritual, and
lively, and such as in which you live, they come from a living heart, and the
sacrifice is lively and acceptable, and argues you have life, and therein you
have Christ the God of peace, but if a man have only fear in a duty, but no
joy; or joy, but no fear; his heart is not in a good frame, we must bring a
better frame of heart before God then so, before we can say that we have the
life of sanctification.

Again, for another sign; How do you find your selves in your tribulations?
are they altogether matter of burden, and weariness to your hearts? Have you
no joy in them? Have you many afflictions in inward, or in outward man, and no
comfort in them? It is an uncomfortable sign to you; the life of
sanctification is not so shed abroad in your hearts, that you may gather you
have life, but if you find that in the multitude of your thoughts within you,
Gods comforts delight your soul, Psalm. 94.19, 20. In the midst of sorrow you
find some comfort, if your life in Christ makes your saddest times joyful and
comfortable to you; and so in outward afflictions, though afflictions may seem
to be grievous, yet wait a while, and you shall see the more weight and
burden that lies upon thee, and the more thy afflictions for Christ has
abounded, so has thy consolation abounded much more, 2 Cor. 1.6.

Again, observe your carriage with men, it is good to be patient when you meet
with evil doers, 2 Timothy 2. last. yet notwithstanding not so patiently as to
bear with them in every thing that is evil, to allow them in any sin; no, if
God give you place and opportunity, show some kind of zeal to cleanse them
from their evils, and this may well stand with your patience; be patient in
things that concern your self, but bear not with them that are evil in their
evil deeds.

Again, do but observe the frame of your spirit in the things that you
suffer; Are you meek and gentle, and flexible, that is a good virtue; but how
are you in the things of God? Are you stiff, and unmovable there? 1 Cor. 15.
last, that though they may persuade you very far in any reasonable thing
concerning man, Note.
but in things concerning God, you will not bait any thing of the peace of
your Conscience, for any man's pleasure; are you unmovable in such a case? both
these together do very well, steadfast, and yet soon persuaded; such an heart
as is thus mixed, and knows how to temper and frame his spirit according to
God, he is a living soul, and has life, and Christ the Prince of life.

Again, thou art a modest Creature, and think meanly of thy self, and art
weaned from this world, it is a virtue, but how is it coupled, for God couples
every grace with another grace, that they may poyse one another, as Christ sent
out his Disciples, by two and two together; so all the graces of the Spirit
join one with another, they balance one another, that he may not be too high
on the one side, nor too low on the other, but that all things may be carried
according to God, and therefore thou art modest; it is well, but have thou
withal an high and a lofty spirit, that if it be heavenly matters thou art to
be exercised in, they cannot be too high for thee. Let a man tell thee of State
matters, coming before Princes, and tell thee of nobility, thou art ashamed,
and know not how to set about such things as those be, but tell thee of an
inheritance in the Kingdom of glory, and the making it sure to thee in a way
of Gods grace. Tell thee of pardon of sin, and of the Spirit of grace, and
the riches of the precious promises of God, and thy heart can look at these
highly, then thou art of a magnanimous spirit, then is thy modesty in outward
things well coupled, but he whose spirit is most lofty should be most humble,
couple them together and they well suit one another; when they go hand in
hand, righteousness and peace go together, modesty and magnanimity, humility
and courage go together, they make an amiable set of grace wherever they are
so coupled; if it be of things concerning thy self, thou have not an heart to
stand out against any man of place, but he may bow thee round about; but if
they wrong thee so far as Gods honor is interested in the thing, thou can
then stand upon thy lawful rights, and if therein thou be impeached, thou
can come off with this, thou art not inferior to the chief Apostles, and
yet art nothing, nor art able to do any thing.

Again, look at thy worldly business, art thou diligent in thy Calling, it
is well; and you say, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently;
and the work of his Calling is, the work of the Lord. But how stands thy heart
affected in the midst of thy business? Is thy heart dead to the world, go not
about it with a worldly heart, go not about it for profit sake, but because
God sets thee about it? And you are more free to the service of God, and to do
more good, this is the life of sanctification.

And lastly, if God give us hearts so abundant in love, that it both thawes our
cold and stiff hearts toward our poor Brethren, and also puts a watery
temper to cool the wilde-fire of our wrath toward our enemies; it is a mighty
power of the Spirit of grace to turn it self so many ways, for the right
ordering and framing of a Christian in the course of his sanctification; these
be comfortable signs of our life of sanctification.

SERMON IX.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


NOw we come to speak of such effects of the life of Sanctification, Effects
of Sanctification signs of spiritual life.
as show themselves in the lives of Christians, by observing of which in our
selves we may know we have Christ, and life in him.

Now these effects are suitable to the effects of natural life, and they are
principally five.

The first is motion, 1 Effect motion.
when a creature is able to move it self unto the duties of its place; it is an
effect of natural life, when it is able to move it self in its place, then it
is said to live such or such a life; if you see a Creature stirs, and moves
not further then by the help of another, then you say, it lives not; but if it
stir of it self, then you say, it lives: Nor is it strait way alive if it
move, unless it be in its place, for you see earthly things will move
downward, if they be upward, and light things will move upward; but these are
out of their places, they are rather moved then themselves do move, when they
are out of their place; and it is not so much from a power of moving, but
rather an affection to rest, then a power to move themselves. And further,
suppose they should move themselves, meet it is they should move themselves to
such actions as argues as argue this, and that life which they express;
suppose a Tree moves it self, and nourish it self, and grow, and that in its
place, yet it does not move it self to see, nor hear; and beasts that do
move themselves to see, and hear, yet they cannot move themselves to acts of
Reason; and men that can move to acts of Reason, yet cannot move themselves to
any spiritual duty and work of grace, so that that motion which argues the
life of the soul, is a power to move it self, and in its place unto
spiritual duties, that is the true nature of the life of sanctification; do
you therefore see a creature no further moving it self then according to its
lightness. You shall sometimes have men to move themselves out of their
levity, come to an eminent duty in the pride of their natures, Note.
and will lift themselves up to some duties; but this is not out of an inward
principle, but out of the lightness of their spirits desire to be above,
Lightness of spirit.
will move them to this and that duty, and rather move from hence then from any
inward principle of grace; and so sometimes creatures out of their heaviness,
and baseness of mind, will be doing spiritual duties; but as the one does
them to be seen of men, and perform the mere letter of the duty, and in the
pride of his heart, not out of any inward affection to such duties; so there be
others that for profit sake will move themselves basely unto spiritual duties,
as Christ said of his Hearers, they followed him for loaves, Joh. 6.26. so that
it is one thing to move to such or such a business, or to be stirring about
such duties, out of an inward affection to the duty and inclination of heart,
and love of such a work, and another thing to be carried to such works out of
an inward levity of nature, or because by such duties a man may excel others,
and go beyond his neighbors; and it is one thing to be acting and stirring in
spiritual duties, out of an inward love to them, and another to perform them,
out of a base respect to the profit, and pleasure that may be found in them, in
outward peace and rest; as sometimes the case so stands, that if a man do
betake himself to spiritual duties, he shall perhaps find the more favor in
the eyes of men, and to please authority, if it take the better side; and so
from an heavy baseness of their hearts to such regards; they will have
respect unto spiritual duties, but these do not move but as heavy things
move, downward, and light things upward; a stone will move downward, and fire
upward. Absalom had a mavelous strong affection to be doing, 2 Samuel 15.4. he
tells them every man should have justice, if he was but made King in the Land,
so all Israel desired after him; but Absalom was now out of his place, but as
soon as ever he got into the place he desired, the first thing he intended
was to cut off his Fathers life, an act of the greatest rebellion that ever
could be done, so that men out of their places are apt to be stirring and
moving, but it is but either from the baseness or lightness of their hearts;
Note this.
O that I were but in my Masters place, says a servant, I would have duties
performed in such time and place, and when they come to be in place, and might
order and command their families, then they grow as bad as their Masters, and
it may be worse, but this are we apt to do when we are out of our places, apt
to be moving, but its not true life, because only that which moves in its place
that only lives; and yet further: A thing may move in its place, and yet move
from some kind of outward respects; as a Watch, or a Clock, it moves, but it is
from the weight that lies and hangs upon it, and so it is rather a violent
motion then a natural. So is it many times with men, the weight of the Law, or
the weight of the authority of Governors does so carry them an end in those
ways they walk in, that they go through with it, and yet it is but from an
outward principle, from some outward weights that hangs upon them; but yet,
suppose men should be doing in their places, as Jehu was; he was mighty in his
place, and was very much against Baal, and destroyed the house of Ahab, and his
children, and his friends; but yet notwithstanding though this was all in his
calling, he had a special Calling given him of God to that end; What required
to a spiritual duty.
but though you should perform duties in your places, as a tree though it move
in its place upward, yet it puts not forth; so many a man may do good duties
in his place, and yet be wanting in the graciousnesse and spirituality of them.
Now to make a duty spiritual, requires not only that it should be for the
better, a good work, but that it should be wrought.

First in sense of our own insufficiency without Christ, and yet so, as that
by and from Christ we are able to do it.

Secondly, that we have some respect to the Word of God for our warrant.

Thirdly, that in all we do, we have respect to the glory of God in all our
performances, I live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. The just shall
live by his own faith. As if he should say, he no further puts forth a work
of spiritual life, further then he denies his own ability, so far he lives
by his faith, and depends upon Christ for supply in every duty he goes about,
whether he pray, preach, or receive Sacraments, or be diligent in his Calling,
or in his carriage toward any that stand in relation to him, so far as we
are sensible of our own failings, and therefore do depend upon him for
strength; these are not such as come from common graces, Common gifts.
but do accompany sanctification to life. It is true, if men be invested with
common gifts, they may be acted and moved to many duties in their places, and
put out very sweet affections to the duty, and yet do it rather out of the
power of their own strength, and rather for their own glory and applause,
then from any dependence upon Christ; so that spiritual life has the Lord
Jesus for its root, and the Word for its warrant, and for its rule to walk by,
Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I never be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
Commandments. All such actions will be accpptable to God, and serviceable to
men; and also aim at the glory of God for the end, that is, their last end,
and all such other ends as are sub-ordinate unto that, the building up of Gods
Kingdom, Zach. 7.5, 6, 7. When ye did eat, did ye it unto me, says the Lord?
nay, did ye not do it to your selves? Hos. 7.14. They have not cried unto me
with their heart, when they howled upon their beds. Did you desire in your
prayers to bring in any service to God, to tend to his honor and glory? And
did you debase your own souls before him, that you might find help from him?
Or, did you not this to your selves, or for your own deliverance, and
redemption, and freedom from such bondage and other miseries that lay upon
you, so that if God see men go about such duties merely for themselves, they
are wanting of this spiritual life. So then, do but lay these things
together, do you find a man that is desirous to be doing good duties, but is
it to please others, or is it out of the bonds of authority that lies upon him?
Do you see them have affection to duties, but out of their place and calling,
or in their calling; they do such duties but rather out of their own strength,
then from the strength of Christ, and not out of a conscionable respect to all
the Commandments of God; or if it be from outward principles, and to wrong
ends, the glory of God not sought after, nor tending to the building up
themselves, nor others in grace; all these are such as men may be carried to
do from outward respects; they may do something that one would think would
argue life, but all the duties they do by their own strength is like a
Spider, that weaves a web out of her own bowels, we follow not the rule of
the Word exactly, but are ever wheeling about to our own ends, and to those
respects that concern our selves rather then to the glory of God, and the
Churches good; it is true, no man that has common graces, men that have gifts
of preaching, and gifts of praying may love to act, and move them, or any other
zealous gift; but yet notwithstanding you shall find this to be true, that till
the heart be sanctified by the life of Christ, we ever detain all the graces
of God in unrighteousness, as the Romans and Gentiles did, detain the truth
of God in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. So we by a spirit of ypocrisie, detain
all the graces of God in unrighteousness, and in Hypocrisy; whereas God has
given us every grace, and the manifestation thereof to edify himself, and to
glorify God withal. We wonderfully magnify our selves withal, and make our
selves goodly in the eyes of men; we are full of our selves, and think we have
this and that in us that will serve our turn, and reach our own ends, this is
not a life of grace, but is indeed a dead work all that we do; and therefore
rest not in any such kind of life and motion: But if you find an inward
inclination of soul to Spiritual duties, and to those duties in special that
are pertinent to your place, and if they be not within the compass of your
calling, you dare not reach unto them; and in your calling, you do them not out
of desire to be seen of men, but you are doing good duties out of a sense of
your own inability to reach any duty in your calling, much less of Gods
service, and in them all, you observe every commandment of God, and the ends
you aim at are singly, that God may be glorified, and that God may see you,
and not man; that good may be done by you in your places, in Church, and
Family, and Commonwealth, and that thereby others might be brought on to God,
and his Kingdom increased, this very motion and inclination of your hearts is
an argument that you have a stirring spirit to spiritual duties, and this is
spiritual life in Christ: And therefore, by how much the more God shall give
you an heart to be doing your works and duties in this order, so much the more
comfort you shall gather to your souls, that undoubtedly Christ has shed abroad
his spirit in you, by which you are able to do that which else you could not
have reached unto.

Quest. You say unto me, may not a good Christian man have his heart so dead,
that he is unfit to pray; or preach, or to instruct his Family, or for the
duties of his calling; fit, and good for nothing: And is a soul in such a case
as this altogether void of spiritual life, and sanctification? is there not
sometimes a kind of a coath come upon a Christian, that so benumbs his spirit,
that he performs no duties at all, but if he might have his own mind, he
would not pray at all, nor receive Sacraments? Is not this sometimes the case
of Christian? and will you say that such an one is a dead soul, because he is
altogether listlesse, and dead-hearted to move to any spiritual duty?

Answ. It is true, there may fall such a deadness upon the heart of Christian
men, that they are both unable and unwilling to any spiritual duty. Which
commonly God leaves his servants unto, when he has found them acting and
moving in their own strength, and upon their detaining of the graces of God in
unrighteousness, Causes of deadnes of heart.
and diverting them rather to their own praise in the world, then the edifying
of the people of God, or the glorifying of his own name, when God sees we are
much of our selves, and think we can do much by the strength of grace we have
received, then God is wont to leave us cold and dead, so as we know not in the
world what to do, nor are we willing to do any thing; The very presence of a
duty, and the thoughts of it, is an horror to such souls in such cases; we
have been too busy in our own strength, and too mighty in the grace we have
received, and rather aimed at our selves then at him, and then no marvel if
God leave us to a world of deadness.

But when God has thus by this means let us see, that all our life is in him,
and that we are dead hearted further then we have life from him, then God is
wont not to fail, but to help us thus far at the least, to look with a
wist, and a sad eye upon the forlornnes of our estates, and to cry out of our
selves, O what dead hearted Creatures, and dull spirited things are we and
bemoane our selves as Paul did, Romans 7.18. I see that in me, that is, in my
flesh, Remedies against deadness.
dwells no good thing. Sometimes I have a mind to do good duties, but I find
that I have no strength to perform; Paul comes to Macedonia, and he had an
open door, a fair calling to preach, but he had no heart to it, because he
found not Titus his brother there. Now when this is the case of a Christian
man, that he is strait, and dead hearted, he groans under the burden of it,
and he looks at it with sad countenance, and sees he is not well, but is ready
to complain of it; now this sense and complaint of deadness, and using the
best means to raise himself up out of this deadness, this is an action of
Spiritual life.

It is an act of Spiritual life for a man to be sensible of his own
deadness, which in time works the soul of a Christian to a more constant
dependence upon Christ for life, and makes him more observeable of the Word,
and more ingenuous and sincere in looking at the glory of God, and the Churches
good, more then his own; and by how much the more we come to this pass, and
the more we have respect to the Word as our daily rule, so much the more All
our stirrings in our callings is a motion of Spiritual life, and argues the
life of sanctification, shed abroad in our hearts.

Secondly, another action of life is feeding, 2 Sign of spiritual life.
the creature that feeds it self is able to live, Joh. 6, 35. explained,
John 6.35. Except you eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, you have no life in
you. He does not speak of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper there, for it was
not then instituted; but yet it is true of that, as well as of any other
Ordinance of God, the Body and Blood of Christ, fed upon in Word and Sacrament;
and Christian communion, in hearing and reading the Word, and if Christ had
ordained more Ordinances then he has, yet when he has had ordained any
Spiritual Ordinance, the feeding upon Christ in that Ordinance, had been an
argument of Spiritual life; Except ye eat his flesh, and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you. This is an argument of Spiritual life, when a man in
every duty that he takes in hand, and is sensible in them all in some measure,
though not always easy to be discerned at first; but if in every duty of
Christianity that you perform, and in every Ordinance of God you feed upon
Christ, then you have life in Christ, so that let a man observe it; You hear
the Word, and you receive Sacraments, and you partake in Christian company; Do
you eat the flesh of Christ there? and drink his blood there? If so, then it
is well; when you hear the Word, is the Blood of Christ, or is the flesh of
Christ there? or is either of both there to feed upon? Or in prayer, or in any
other duty that you take in hand, do you feed upon Christ in it? If you feed
upon him there, you have life, and he that feeds not, lives not; if a man
forbear his meat he cannot long subsist. It is true, a man may live for a
while and find no relish in any thing, but in time he must find relish in
them, else he cannot be preserved.

Quest. But how shall I know that I do feed upon Christ in every Ordinance?

Ans. 1. A soul longs after Christ in Ordinance.
First, Whether do you find an inward longing desire in your souls after the
Lord Jesus Christ in the duties you go about? Do you come with a desire to
find Christ in his Ordinance, hungring and thirsting, and not satisfied
unless you find Christ? that is the nature of hungring and thirsting and so
is the case here. This desire and thirst is such an unquenchable desire, as
that without Christ it is by no means satisfied; do you therefore find an
inward longing to find and meet with the Lord Jesus, in the Word that you read
or hear, in the Sacraments that you receive, and such a longing desire, as
that if you find not Christ there, you go away poor and dead, and finding
your hearts unsatisfied is an evident sign of life, for you came to an
Ordinance, and desired to find Christ there, and there he was not; what then,
Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. to the bed of the Ordinances, the Church goes to seek and to
find Christ, by night I sought him, that was in a time of calamity, that she
could plainly discern she found him not, and she sought him in every other
Ordinance, but found him not, or sign of life; she hungers, and sought out
after him, but could not find him, and when she missed him was not satisfied.

If a man come to an Ordinance and find nothing there, Note this.
and yet when he is gone, he is satisfied, he is well enough; that soul has
either no life at all, or life in a swound, or cold without stirring and
motion; there is not an hungering desire after him, when you can come and go
away unsatisfied, and yet be well contented too.

Secondly, feeding has another work, Strength and sweetness in the ordinance.
the former is but a preparation, or supposition of feeding, but a man also
then feeds when he finds some sweetness, and relish in the meat that he
eats, that does ever accompany feeding, and is a sign that a man does feed,
the stomach does well affect the meat it feeds on; have you then found some
sweet relish in the Ordinances, the Gospel is a sweet savor to them that are
saved, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. and as for savor to smell, so, as a sweet savor to
the taste; do you therefore find some kind of sweetness, a spiritual
sweetness in the Word you hear, or read, or Sacraments you receive, or
prayers that you make? Are they such a comfort or sweetness to you, that you
find in this or that promise, or commandment, or doctrine, any word of life?
Do you find strength, and sweetness in it? It is an evident sign of life,
because you find sweetness in it, its a sign of health to relish a
sweetness in our meat; for a sick man, it may be, eats, and drinks, but he
finds no sweetness in it, and that is a part of his complaint that he cannot
relish his meat, and it is true, it may be a man that has some life in him,
feels no relish, no savor in any Ordinance; but then he sees he is sick, and
he complains of it to God, but yet notwithstanding if a man do find
sweetness, and relish there, it is an evident argument not of life only, but
of health, and such as will maintain spiritual life; but if a man find no
sweetness in it he cannot live, for were there life, it would find sweetness.

Thirdly, 3. Particular applying of the Word.
in all feeding, there is a taking of the meat down, and not spitting it out,
but we receive it down, and there it lies in our stomachs, and we chew upon
it, and there it rests, but if we cast it up again, then we feed not; it is an
ill sign when we cast it away as soon as we receive it. If Gods Word abide
with us, and in us, that we do not reject it, but hide it in our hearts, that
so we might not sin against God, Psalm. 119.11. and receive it by a wise
applying of it to our own souls, receive it into the inward man, and apply
our selves to every duty commanded us, so far as concerns our callings, and
our estates, and takes notice of every threatening, that we had need look to
it, so far as we might sin against God; if we thus take the Word of God
down into our hearts, and make it our own case, and therefore keep it within
our selves, and give up our selves in some measure to be bowed by it, and hide
it in our hearts, and lets it sit next our hearts, then truly we do feed upon
it, and it secretly conveyes strength into us, though sometimes we less
discern it.

Fourthly, 4. Conformity to the Word in everything
all feeding contains in it a conversion of the meat into the thing nourished,
so as that which we feed upon, it becomes our selves, it is all one with our
selves; in time it is so digested, and turned into our nature, that every part
has sucked in its own nourishment, every part has received something of that
which was inwardly received. This has been anciently observed, this is
somewhat more then receiving Christ by faith, for when we apply every word to
our selves, and make Christ ours, that is receiving him to be ours; yet it is a
further work to be conformable to the Lord Jesus Christ in every thing, to be
confirmed and established in the Promises, and to be quickened by them, to be
terrified by threatenings, and to stand in awe of every word of God, and to be
bowed to an inward subjection to Christ, day by day, by the word we receive;
this is a further mighty work of grace:

If therefore he be a Christian, that by the Word and Ordinances he receives,
he is fashioned and made conformable to Christ; meek, and righteous, and lowly,
and holy as he is, and willing to do any good Office for the Church of God, and
go up and down doing good, and needs no further motion this way, but as Christ
moves him, it is a sign that he feeds upon Christ. Christ is turned into his
nature, or which is more, his nature, is rather turned into the nature of
Christ; the nourishment being so strong makes us become such as he is in this
world. Now when we are conformable to the Lord Jesus Christ by the Ordinances
that we partake in, it is an evident sign that we there feed upon him: And
therefore try your selves by this sign of sanctification, if you live, you
feed on Christ, and except you so do, you have no life in you, so then
consider, do I feed upon the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, and do I
find a spiritual appetite to the Lord Jesus raised up in my soul? and do I
find any spiritual refreshment and strength by that which I do partake in? and
that which I so find sweetness in, I apply it to my own estate, and convey it
into the inward part of my heart, that I may be able to drink it up as my lot
and portion: And do I by this strength of grace grow like to Christ? and do I
more adorn the Gospel of Christ? this is an evident sign you live, for you
feed upon spiritual food, which is an argument of spiritual life; no man can
feed upon spiritual food, but he that lives, and such a life as he lives in
Christ: Let a man come to the Word without an appetite to it, and when he comes
find no nourishment nor refreshment in it, and applies nothing as is said to
him; but let such and such look to it, he never hears profitably, that does
not particularly apply that which he hears; and if he apply it, he rather
storms at it, it is an evident argument that such a man has no life in him at
all. Not that you should here look at the natural body and blood of Christ,
for that were a Canaball eating and drinking. That which the Church of Rome
puts upon the Church of God at this day; but our Savior tells you the meaning
of this place, It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing;
had a company of Roman Soldiers fallen upon Christ, and either out of wrath
against him, or love to themselves, had pulled him in pieces and eaten him,
goblet by goblet, it had profitted them nothing; had men eaten the real body
of Christ and drunk up his blood, and joined with others in so doing, and left
none of him, all this had profited them nothing, nay, it profits nothing, for
the Capernites ask the question, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? it
is an hard saying, they thought it incredible, v. 5.2. they would think it a
savage bruitishnesse to fall upon him in that manner, and therefore our Savior
so confesses, that it is no part of his meaning, that they should eat and
drink his real body and blood: but he means the breathing of the spirit in
the Ordinances, if you can relish, Note this.
and feed upon that; and grow to be such as Christ was in this world, that was
the meat and drink of his soul, if you grow humble and meek, and be
transformed into the spirit of Christ, if you see your spirits conformable to
the will of Christ, it is a sign of the life of holiness in your souls,
which God has given you through Christ.

A third effect of the life of sanctification, 3 Sign
is growth, for that which lives, grows till it come to its full perfection,
so in all natural, Growth in grace.
vegitative, or sensitive life; if it live, it grows, till it come to its full
maturity, when it comes to its full vigor and strength, it may decay and stand
at a stay; but a Christians life never comes to that, till it come to the life
of glory, to the full measure of the stature of Christ: In this life we cannot
come to that, but therefore it is that we grow to the end of our days, and
then are forthwith translated to immortallity, ye desire the sincere milk of
the word, that ye may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. and 2 Pet. 3.18. grow in grace:
and God has given us Ministers to teach and instruct us, till we all grow to
be perfect in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Col. 2.19. Increase with the
increasings of God, with divine and enlarged and spiritual increasing, so does
the body of Christ grow, and all the members of it: they grow in grace, and in
the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ:

So that this is a third effect of life, if a man can find his heart to grow.

Quest. But does not many a Christian stand at a stay, and sometimes grow
backward, and fall from their first love, fall from the fruitfullnesse and
goodness, and rootednesse in Christ, though not wholly cut off, yet falling
from the firmness in grace, and the power of grace, and from fruitfullnesse,
and the abundance of the work of righteousness.

Answ. It is true, many a soul does so for a while, but if so be, that God
do give a Christian man, not to grow, we must not say therefore he does not
live, not but that a man for a time, may be weak; as a living man in sickness
may be very weak, his spirit fail, and his strength fail, and his work and
employment fails him, and he can do nothing, neither eat, nor drink, no not so
much as lean upon a staff, but may lie bedridden, but yet such a man feels a
sensible distemper of his body, and he cease not to use the best means he
can, and so in the end he comes to grow and recovers his first love again in
some measure; some also there are, that by sinful lusts waste, instead of
growing, as a thief in a candle wastes it, but if there be a thief in the
heart, a lurking lust in the soul; a living soul is not well till it be
removed, by some good means or other, that so it may recover it self. It is
sometimes the case of a Christian, as David speaks, Psalm. 39. ult. Oh spare a
little that I may recover any strength; so a Christian man if he find himself
in a decay, that he is dead and heartlesse in every spiritual performance, oh
then spare a little, that I may recover my strength: Now he is afraid to dye
in such a case, but he would now have some time, that he may recover his first
love and his first fruits, and that his faith might not vanish away in ashes
and smoke, if he see that his spirit decays, he considers then, whence he is
fallen, Rev. 2.4.5. and repents, and does his first works: This is the nature
of repentance, it purges out; Repentance the best purge
it purges out the noisome humors that brought the body into languish and
decay. Repentance is the chiefest purge, and so then we do our first works,
and attain to our first love, and grow more at the last then at the first, Rev.
2.19. and therefore this is to be considered of, a Christian man is a growing
man, if not always in the bulk, which is easy to be discerned, as to grow in
strength and rootednesse, etc. yet surely he grows to more sweetness of
spirit. An Apple is sometimes grown to full growth upon a tree, yet grows not
sweet till a good time after, but in time it will: So a Christian, though it
may be he shall never get more knowledge then he has, or more ability, but
though the case so stand, Simile.
that you are like to grow no further; yet you may grow to more sweetness, and
mellownesse, to more love to your brethren, and be more ready to deny your
selves of that arrogance of spirit, and pride he is now addicted to. And so a
Christian grows in sweetness, and grows in rootednesse of spirit, and sees
his more want of Christ, and gets faster hold on Christ. And though he cannot
grow more tall in his outward expression, nor more painful; yet in these two no
Christian that grows, but if he be living ahd healthful, he grows in
firmness and rootednesse in Christ, and in great dependence upon him, from
day to day in his ways, And he grows in more sweetness, aims more at Gods
glory, and is more in love to his brethren, and more denis himself in his own
matters.

And if he grow not here, he is either no living Christian in truth, or no
healthful Christian; and if a man see this, and not bewail his not growing in
these, he has no life at all in him; a man that grows harsh, and unsavory
and does not take a course to repent of it, its a thousand to one there is no
life at all in him, but if a man grow, though but in amiablenesse, and
selfe-denial, and more firmly in Christ, and more assured of Gods grace and
mercy, and more depend upon Christ for what he does, and can do nothing without
Christ, and he knows it by experience, that unless a man so grow, there is no
life in him.

Fourthly, 4. Effect of the life of Sanctification.
another effect of the life of sanctification is this, life is such a thing as
has an expulsive power to expel, and drive out of the body that which is
noisome and hurtful to it, and will cast and sweat it out; Nature cannot
endure to be clogged with superfluity, out it must one way or other, Nature
will ease it self, it cannot long subsist; pain and sickness is grievous,
and painful to Nature; if any thing trouble the stomach, or the body, out it
must by vomit, or purge, it cannot stay if the man be living; so if grace be
but living in the soul, there is an expulsive power in the soul, that will
purge away that which is contrary to it, it cannot endure superfluity, but away
it must go, there it cannot stay, nothing will he keep, but that which is
convenient for him: A Christian, look whatsoever it be that a Christian finds
superfluous, and finds contrary to the life of Christ in his soul, either too
much, or contrary to his spirit, that he abandons it more or less by degrees,
measure after measure, and time after time; so the Apostle exhorts, Jam. 1.21.
Lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, etc. If there be any
thing which is superfluous, or filthy, away with it, let it not rest there; and
if it be for no good purpose, let it have no rest in thee.

There is many parts of knowledge that is not contrary to the life of
sanctification, but are more then we shall have use of in our callings, and
though they may be such things as others may make use of, yet they are
superfluous when they are of no use to us in our callings, then put them away
unless they be of use either for necessity, or expediency, then nature will
cast them away, especially if they be naughty things; they are more then
superfluous, then they are noisome and hurtful; and therefore a Christian man
principally casts away that which is noisome, and corrupt; both doubting and
presumption is contrary to the life of faith, and therefore must be cast out,
cast out all fears, and all self confidence, Perfect love casts out fear,
1 John 4.18. Faith strives against fear, and love strives against malice, and
patience strives against frowardness, modesty against pride, and so every of
God; wonder to see how it will by the degrees either sweat them out, or else
set themselves by some serious duties of humiliation, and so cleanse themselves
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. that he may grow to
perfect holiness in the fear of God. He is weary of it, and that life of
grace casts out all the life of sin; he looks at the life of this world as
something in it that is good, yet so much of the world as he sees he cannot
well manage, but with cumberance to the Spirit of grace, he lays it aside, and
meddles not with it, he studies no more then to use in a practical life; he
would live as David in Saul's Armor, when he sees it troubles him he lays it
aside. So shall you find it with a Christian, these things are unprofitable
for him; keep them out of your souls least they prove a snare to you, and
whatever is superfluity cast it out, and whatever distracts you, and clogs you
with cares, out with it; whatever is a burden to the life of grace, cast out
all such things.

Fifthly, 5 Sign, life propagates its like.
The last act of the life of sanctification is the begetting of the like, and
propagating according to their kind; it is the nature both of Spiritual and
Natural life, it propagates its kind, though at the first it may be weak,
yet it grows to that temper by which it may propagate, and the life of grace
is most strong in this regard, it no sooner moves and feeds, or grows in any
measure, or begins to expel any ill matter, but it will have a mind to be
fruitful begetting its kind, and that is above natural life; a Christian is
most apt and ready to draw on others to be like himself. As soon as ever the
woman of Samaria saw that Jesus was indeed the Messiah, and found, true
sweetness in him, the very same hour she runs into the Town, and tells her
neighbors, Come see a man that has told me all that ever I did, (Joh. 4.29.)
Is not he the Christ? and when they came and saw it they said, We believe, not
because of thy Word, but because we have heard him our selves, and we know that
this is indeed the Christ. This is the proper nature of true life, as soon as
they are truly begotten, they beget others of their own kind, not but that
sometimes a Christian soul hides himself long, before he be well settled, but
when he truly discernes that he lives, and is conscious to himself that God
will be gracious to his soul, then he desires to propagate the like grace unto
others, Joh. 1.41. to 46. when one had found Christ, they call others to come
and see, Psalm. 51.10, Then shall I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners
shall be converted to thee; to show you, that if God will but work a clean
heart in David, and renew a right spirit within him; and his broken bones may
be recovered, and if God shall be pleased to establish him with his free
spirit, and he may be once again assured of the pardon his sins; then will he
teach others the ways of God: if he be once converted himself, he will draw
on as many others as he can. Thus you have five signs of spiritual life.

SERMON X.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


WE are now in the next place to see how we may discern life by the
properties, and adjuncts of it; you heard before of the effects of life, now of
the properties and qualities of this life, by discerning of which we may know
that we have life.

There be three properties or qualities of life. Three properties of life. 1.
Warmth


First, where ever there is life, there is some warmth, 2 King. 9.34. when the
Prophet had lain upon the child, and had done so seven times, at length the
breath of the child began to wax warm, a sign that life was a restoring, and
thereby the Prophet discerned that life began to return into the body of the
child, because warmth returned; and so is the presence of the Spirit of grace,
and the union of it with the soul and body of a man, it makes a man fervent,
and warm; Fervent in spirit. Romans 12.11 and therefore it is that it is
resembled unto fire, Matthew. 3.11 The Holy Ghost shall come down upon you, as
it were with fiery tongues, and shall warm and heat you, with whatever duties
God shall call you to, 1 These. 5.19. Quench not the Spirit; now quenching
belongs to fire, a sign therefore that the spirit is of a fervent nature, so
far forth as it is capable of any quenching and destroying by the Sons of
men, and 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gifts of grace in you; as if ye stirred up
the embers of the fire, so stir up, and kindle the gifts of God which is in
you, blow them up into a kindling flame, so that all these things express thus
much: That since the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus and from him,
communicated to his Members is a spirit of heat, therefore wheresoever there is
warmth there is life, if no warmth, nor heat, there is no life; and as our
spirits begin to wax warm, so we grow to life in Christianity. Notable is that
expression in Luke 24.22. Did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked
with us of the Scriptures? to show you, that there is a power in the Word, to
convey such a measure of the Spirit of grace to the Hearers, as that their
hearts begin to glow within them, and to convey some heat and warmth into them,
when the Word is powerfully applied to the soul.

For the further opening of this point, you shall see it in some things
principally, which are ever found in some measure in the spirits of Christian
men that have any life in Christ.

First, that which is wonderful, and is indeed no where found but in them,
their very knowledge is warm, Knowledge warm
which in all other men is cold; knowledge is but an empty speculation, brings
forth no great matter of heat; but in a Christian, his knowledge is full of
heat, Zeal must be according to knowledge, knowledge is no knowledge without
zeal, and zeal is but a wilde-fire without knowledge, Romans 10.2. So if
Christians have a knowledge of God, but no zeal, there is no saving life in
that knowledge, it is not the knowledge of Gods people. Notable is that speech
of our Savior, Joh. 5.35. (speaking of John) He was a burning and a shining
light, not only a shining light to give clear instruction in the knowledge of
the Messiah, and the true meaning of the Law, but withal a burning light; Joh.
5.3. expounde^
so as that he had a notable power when Hypocrites came before him to burn
them up, Mat. 3.12. And so where ever he came he did not only show them what
they should do, what shall we Publicans do, and what shall we Soldiers do?
Luke 3.3. to 15. but he did burn up not only those who were professed enemies
to the ways of grace, but all those that he found in Hypocrisy he burnt them
all up where ever he came, and if he did not find out their lusts, he would
kindle a fire in them; he warmed Herod in such sort, as that he was constrained
to do many things, according to John's Ministry, Mark 6. and so shall you
find it in all the Servants of God, that according to their life, if there be
true life, there is true burning, though sometimes their burning is not so
strong as their life, yet there is heat and fervency of spirit mixed with their
knowledge, that if they know the Will of God they are inflamed, and their
knowledge of Christ will not suffer them to be barren and unfruitful, 2 Pet.
3.18. So that the knowledge which a Christian man has is such, as by which he
will do what he ought to do; if he see sin in his brother he will not
suffer it to lie there, Levit. 19.17. If he see any thing amiss in his brother
that he sees not in himself, he will be helpful to him; where the Spirit of
grace is lively, they will not suffer their brethren to rest in sin, much
less themselves; and therefore this is the warmth of this knowledge, it both
burns up their own lusts like chafe, and all the sinful distempers that we
see in the lives and ways of our Brethren; this is one part of the heat of a
Christian soul, that his knowledge is a warm knowledge; Look what he knows
he thinks he must do, whereas another man knows many things, but he does
them not; but a Christian, if he know it to be the Will of God he must do it.
And that is the reason why Gods servants are many times counted very busy, as
indeed the fire is ever very busily working, no creature in the house so busy
as the fire is; and so the knowledge of Gods people makes them to be so busy
in doing, and therein they express the life of Christ.

Secondly, 2. Where there is life there is breath.
where ever is true life there is this warmth, a warmth in their breath, both
in the Natural and Spiritual body; in this Natural body, while we live it is
warm, and so long as we live we breath more or less, it is but for a little
time, if at all, breath be intercepted, it may be in some sudden fits, but
ordinarily if it tarry long it is a sign of death; but if there be life there
is breathing, and that breathing is warm, some warm breath comes from him
that is alive. And truly so shall you find it in your spiritual life.

If there be any true life in the heart of a Christian soul, there is always
some kind of warm breathing, there is some measures of warmth in his prayers;
the prayers of an hypocrite ir always but lip-labor, and accordingly lust
labor, the words vanish away in the air, but there is ever more or less some
kind of warmth-in the prayers of Gods servants, according to what the Apostle
speaks, Romans 8.26. even then when we know not what to pray for, nor how to
pray as we ought then the spirit helps our infirmities, that when we sometimes
cannot bring out a word to God, the heart is full sometimes of anguish, and
discouragement in respect of inward desertions, or temptations, and outward
afflictions, but yet though in such a case we be not able to tell what to pray
for, yet there is ever in a Christian soul something that makes him seek to
God, and the very sighs of such a soul, come from ome warmeth of spirit within
him. The scalding sighs and deep groans of the soul, they come from a spirit
of life, and warmth in Christ Jesus: Therefore though it be true, there be many
cold prayers, that Gods servants do put up, yet there is some kind of sighs and
groans that springs from them, which argues some heat and life in them.

And so is it, As they breath thus to Godward, so do they breath one to
another; so that if they speak of the things of God, they speak not of God,
and his Word lightly, and wantonly, or loosely, as those that have no affection
to them; but if they speak of the Word of God, of his threatenings, promises, or
of any of his commandments, or any of the works of his providence, they
speak not of them coldly, as those that took no pleasure in them, but if they
speak of any of the things of God, they speak with some reverence, and desire
after them, and settling a confirmation in them: they have love to the word,
and rejoice in it, and stand in awe, and in fear of it, and they exercise
their hearts and wits about it, when at any time they speak of the things of
God, so that there is some kind of warmth in the expression of a Chirstian in
some savoury affection, whereby he esteems of the things of God, above what is
found in an hypocrite.

Thirdly, Spiritual warmth digesteth Gods Ordinances.
There is a certain kind of warmth, by which the soul does not only affect
the Ordinances of God, but by which it does in some measure digest them; there
is no living man wanting some such measure of heat as makes him able to digest
some kind of diet, though not always strong meat, especially, if he be in any
measure of health, and that is no small measure of heat, Psalm. 119.20. the
very longing desire, it always has to Gods Judgments, was it that even made
his soul to break within him, and so to pant after Gods Word, and his
presence in his Ordinances, Psalm. 42.1. there was a kind of panting, and
longing, and eager desire after God, by which it comes to pass that the soul
of a Christian closes with God in his Ordinances, and turns them into
nourishment within himself, and so is more strongly, and inwardly bent toward
God in the ways of his grace, whereas a dead spirit is flat, and has no
affection to the word, no affection to Gods presence, no list to the things of
this nature.

Fourthly, things that are warm put them, together and they are the more warm,
4. Spiritual warmth heateth others.
but put cold clogs, and pieces of wood together, and they are never a whit the
warmer, but if you take but two or three of them things that are well kindled,
and they will set all a fire that comes nigh them, though ready before to go
out for want of supply, if you lay two or three warm brands together, they
will kindle one another. And truly so it is among Christians, take you a
Christian, that has this spiritual warmth in him, though almost benumbed for
want of good company, and good conference, and breathing forth of Gods spirit
and grace in the soul. Yet if he meet with two or three like himself, they
presntly begin to kindle one another; And the breath of such Christians, is
like bellows, to blow up sparks savoury and sweet expressions of their hearts,
and edify themselves by their mutual fellowship one with another.

Yea, and sometimes they grow so warm by this means, as that they are fit to
admonish one another, to exhort, and to comfort, and if need require, to rebuke
one another, as occasion serves, 1 Pet. 4.8. Have fervent love one to another,
above all things have fervent love among your selves, this is a special thing:
love among Christians, by which love they so kindle one another, to such deep
respects to God, and the ways of his grace, and so burn one out of another,
much sinful folly and frailety which will be in them, that are so loose one to
another, and raises them up to that power of godliness, which sometimes they
had grown up unto, and now almost lost for want of often joining together, for
by so doing, they do what they can to put out the fire; when Satan means to put
out the light and life of Religion, out of both Church and Commonwealth, he
lays one Christian in one corner, and another in another, that they shall,
when they list, go to bed, and sleep, and then a lazy spirit shall come upon
them, and so they lie, till they be dead in trespasses and sins: But above all
things, have fervent love among your selves, forsake not the fellowship you
have one with another, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.25, 26. Love covers
a multitude of sins. So as that though there was much evil in Christians
before, yet their very lying together, does burn out all that superfluity of
naughty stuff that hangs about the servants of God, 1 Pet. 1.22. see that ye
love one another with a pure heart, and fervency of spirit.

This warmth in Christians, it is found in these four things. And thus you see
the properties of this life.

Quest. You say, but if this were always found in Christian men, how comes it
to pass then, that the servants of God do many times find their hearts so
cold in their prayers, and appetite so little to the word, and so unprofitable
under it? How should a man hear so much and profit so little, if a man aid
digest the word? and is it not a common complaint of Christians? how much they
hear and how little they profit? Yea, and will not some Christians say, he
profits nothing at all, no not any thing? And is it so many times, that
Christians come together, and they are little edification one to another, very
little profit? sit together, and talk of matters, that little edify, but
rather corrupt the spirits one of another? how is it then that you say, where
ever there is life there is heat? so such as makes them more lively in
Christian duties?

And it might be objected, that Luke 24.32. Did not our hearts burn within us,
etc. A sign that till he came to them, and came into conference with them, and
did rub them up, they were very cold hearted, and dull spirited, and went on
their way with much darkness of soul, without life and strength of soul,
until he came to put life into their spirits?

Answ. It is true, many times, Gods servants, are very cold and benumbed, and a
cold spirit grows upon them exceedingly,) so as that they scarce feel any
life breathing in their knowledge, or prayers, or appetites to the Word, or
love to their Brethren, little warmth in any of these, partly through want of
supplying the life of Gods grace, with fit nourishment, whereby the heart
should grow warm. As natural fire, if it be not supplied with new fuel it
will go out, and partly sometimes, by pouring cold water upon it; which is as
much as in us lies to dampe the fire. And we do power cold water upon this
life of grace, when we admit of any sinful lusts in our souls, those do
marvellously eat out all that life, and heat of spirit that sometimes we had
in our hearts, and sometimes by an excessive use of worldly things, which
without a very spiritual mind does clog the soul, as much as if you should
throw cold water upon a fire, it will damp it very much; so is this case, men
sometimes walk in worldly businesses, with worldly affections; and sometimes
give leave to distempered lusts, and sometimes neglect to put any fuel to the
fire of grace, but as soon as ever they find the heart well warmed with some
good Sermon, or a good Prayer, or Conference, or the like, they think this
fire will never go out, and so they begin to neglect it, and so either the fire
goes quit out, or else is so damped, as that you can discern no life, no
savor or power of Religion there: And therefore such a thing may befall Gods
servants, they may grow dull hearted one way or other, as you have heard. But
yet thus much let me say, though this sometimes do befall the spirits of Gods
people, yet even then, when they want burning and chafeing, and stirring up,
there is something in them, that argues some life, and where is some life,
there is some heat, so much life as there is, so much heat is there, so much as
you take away of your Christian heat, so much life you take away: And therefore
for these two Disciples, that went to Emaius. It is said, when they were
talking one with another, they were talking of Jesus Christ, and upon all the
things that befell him in his passion. And said Christ to them, ver. 17. What
manner of communication is this, and what is the matter that you are thus sad?
what was it, that made them sad? was it not an affection of grief for all the
evils done to their Savior, that was life of grace, and some heat there was
in them that their spirits should be so troubled, to see their Elders and
Princes, and all the people to cry out so bitterly against the Lord Jesus
Christ, and not to leave him till they had crucified him, there was some sad
expression came from them, upon that occasion. And so, though it left the
outward man sad, yet there was something in the heart; though full of doubting
through unbeleife, what this Christ was, and what this would come to, we hoped
this was he that should redeem Israel, etc. then Christ began to put a little
warmth into them, by saying, ought not Christ to suffer these things? v. 24,
25. and so he opens to them the Scriptures spoken of himself, and these words
put new life into them, and did blow up the spirit and heat of that decaying
life, which was overwhelmed with grief and care, their hearts was heated yet.
So that take you a Christian man when he is even in the most disordered
framelook how much he has lost of his spiritual heat, so much of his true
life; if he have left to be warm, so much life has he lost, and if his warmth
be smoothered, his life is smoothered for the present.

And even as life will show it self, in the very sad face of the heart, and
dejection of spirit that they fall into, and sometimes in the deep sighs and
groans of the heart, which in such a case it sometimes will break forth into.
So a Christian soul when his heat is most damped, there is a sad face in his
spirit, that he discerns all is not well with him, his spirit is benumbed, and
his heart in his own thoughts is frozen within him. It is a burden to him, and
a matter of sadness to his spirit, and therefore he does express himself
sometimes with many sad and deep sighs and groans, about his forlorn and lost
estate, and yet sometimes you shall have his heart, even then when his heart is
most cold (which is worse then the former) for you shall sometimes have a
Christian soul, not only not affected with sadness, (...) this.
when his life is smothered within him, but vanish away in much empty carnal
delights, and contentments, and rejoicing in those comforts which have no life
at all in them. A Christian man that has his life so deaded, may come not
only to have nothing left, but sadness of heart to behold it, but he may
loose his sadness too, and even that vanish away in outward rejoicing, so as
no life in his heart, in a manner, is left. Peter when he had denied his
Master, his heart was much oppressed within him, he was pricked and wounded
with anguish in his soul, but there was some life in that. But what was it with
David after his committing of uncleanness nine or ten months together? he
pleases himself in his pleasures, and delights, and contentments which his
royalty put upon him, and made Vriah drunk, and did eat and drink himself
liberally with him: and in the end put him to death, and that very slightly,
and when he hears of it, makes no matter of it, but the sword devoures one, as
well as another: and had not his pulse beating in him, no warm breath comes
from him, but an empty flourish, and outward joyallity as if he had sung all
care away, and all fear of God out of his heart. As if there was no spiritual
affection left in his heart of the estate of the whole Church of God, whereas
his poor servant could say unto him, shall I go home and sollace my self with
my wife and children, the case standing with the Church so as it does, he would
not do so, a word that one would have thought, would have warmed a good man's
heart, but he was not warmed with it, nor with any lively affection, not any
beating of his pulse to Christianity, nothing stirring, but a swounding of the
whole man, that he that had seen David in such a case, and had never known him
before, he might have written in his forehead, a man forsaken of God and void
of all fear of his name, had he seen him in this case, Where was then David's
life all this while? It was a fearful condition, and of all we read in the
Scripture, none so far forsaken, whose whole spirit was so far benumbed as
David's then was? and yet truly life there was still in him; I doubt not though
all this while you shall see that either David prayed not all this while, and
that has been the case sometimes of right godly men, that have sometimes not
of three years together made a private Prayer in their Closets, have been
content to come to duties in the Family, and cause others to perform duties,
but for their own parts further then a form of religion, or shame, or
satisfying of conscience forces them, they let all rest, no affection at all to
the duty; they know God took no pleasure in such a soul while they lived in
such a course, and so would they lie many months, and years, and all that
while not so much as lift up a private prayer to God; and this is a far worse
case then the other, and yet even this sometimes befalls them, when as sinful
lusts have so distempered the life of Christ in them; there is still an habit
of grace in the soul, but yet scarce any life of Religion putting forth it
self, but still where warmth is removed, so much life from holy duties is
taken away.

And another answer to this point is, that even as you see it is by the
Almighty power of God that there may be fire, and not heat, as you see in the
fiery Furnace, whereinto the three Children was cast, though it was made
exceeding hot, yet it had not power to hurt an hair of their heads, nor to
swinge a lap of their Garments, the power of the sire was propended by the
mighty power of God; as there is this power in God concerning material fire,
so is there a mavelous hellish and Devilish power in sin, though not an
Almighty power, yet very like to an Almighty power, that that which has a
mighty work of God, by the Almighty power of his grace in the hearts of the
Servants of God the work of an Almighty power.

There is such a venomous power in sin as that it will susspend all acts of
grace, Power of sin.
not so much as show any act of grace in a Christian soul, but the soul and
all the graces in it shall lie as the body of a man in a swound, not any
breathing, or sight, or hearing, or motion, nothing to show of any spiritual
life; that if he should continue so, you would conclude he were dead, only this
kind of life of grace is there, you shall have thus much life in him: There is
a kind of unlistinesse and heaviness of soul, to act wickedness with all
that strength and power, which sometimes a godly man, while he was carnal, did
reach forth his heart and hand unto, a kind of frame of spirit in a Christian
when it is at the worst, though it can solace it self very far in sin, and
goes on hardening its heart in its own way, most desperately, and frowardly,
yet notwithstanding there was always something in his heart, that will not
suffer his soul to break out, with all that strength of the spirit of
wickedness, as it did when it was carnal, and the reason of that is because
of that speech, Gal 5.17. there is flesh and spirit in that soul, so as
neither can the spirit do what it would, nor the flesh what it would; take a
Christian when he is most strong, and he cannot so glorify God, nor so edify
his brethren as he would, by reason of the body of sin; there is always in
the best of a Christian, something like the spots in the Moon, some darkness
in it, not a Christian man; but when he is most lively in grace, but he has
some darkness in his best performances; so when corruption is most strong, and
grace most feeble and weak; as in the former, corruption will weaken the best
performances, so here corruption cannot carry a Christian man to do all that
wickedness, which else he would break forth into; nor with that strength and
vigor which else he would put forth in it though he do rejoice in his
wickedness, Note this.
and bear it out; yea outface his very conscience, and out-stare the very
light of the graces of God within him, and go on pleasing himself in the
hardness of his own heart, yet there is something in the bottom that keeps
possession for God, and makes him go about it bunglingly, it becomes him not,
he cannot set it forth with a grace; David in his worst, comes not off with
full power of wickedness, which else his corrupt heart would willingly break
forth into, were it not for the Spirit of grace that moves slowly in such cases
as these be, so that still the case stands clear; how much life, so much
warmth, and that warmth will express it self if any life be there at all.

So that take a survey of your own estates, by this means you would know
whether you have Christ or no, whether you have life, or no? If you have the
life of grace, there is some spiritual warmth in thy soul, some heat in thy
soul; do but consider then the knowledge that is within thee: Is thy
knowledge such as lets thee alone, and only puffes thee up, and makes thee to
think goodly of thy self, if that be all the work of thy knowledge, thou art
a dead-hearted Christian; if it cause thee to vanish away in empty
contemplation, and thou therefore talkest, that thou may let others see thou
have knowledge as well as others; and if it be dead, and cold, and empty, and
vanish away in empty notion, and speculation, and dead conference, then thy
knowledge is barren in goodness, and that is an argument of no life in thy
soul; but if there be any truth of life in thy soul, thy knowledge is warm
and lively, thy knowledge that is in thee has some zeal, and that sets an
edge upon it, and makes it serviceable to God and thy brethren. I know not
better how to express it, then from Revel, 1.14, 15. in the description of our
blessed Savior, His eyes were as a flame of fire. It is true, the eye is
lightsome, but it does not burn, they are not hot, but the eyes of Christ is
as a flaming heat; and the meaning is, Christ is described just according to
the state of the Church, to whom John was to write, as he had feet of brass;
when he writes to a Church, that though burned in the fire, yet the more you
burn it, the less it wastes, and the more pure it is, and by degrees the more
bright; so where he speaks to a Church in persecution, and it is not consumed,
then Christ has feet like brass; but if he write to a Church of Thyatira, a
Church of a warm spirit, then, thus faith he that has eyes like a flame of
fire, Revel. 2.9. meaning the knowledge that that Church had, which was full of
zeal as well as of light, and according to the measure of its knowledge, so it
grew more in grace, and therefore the works were more at the last then at the
first. As their knowledge grows, so grows their zeal; so that if thou have
that life in Christ which accompanies salvation, thy eyes are like a flame of
fire, full of burning light, as well as brightsome knowledge. Is thy knowledge
such as suffers thee to sit down barren, and though thou know that thou
ought to do this and that, yet thou do it not, then there is no heat
and warmth in thy knowledge; but if there be true life and warmth in thy
spirit, thy knowledge stirs thee up to be doing, and stirs up others to be
doing also, and thy knowledge will not suffer thee to let them alone; just as
Peter and John sometimes said to the high Priests, We cannot but speak that
which we know, and have seen, and heard, Acts 4.18, 19, 20. And therefore
though they threatened them is perrill of life, to speak no more in Christ's
name, yet say they, that which we know to be the Truth of God, that we must
needs speak; as Jeremy speaks, chap. 20. I could not forbear: The light
that was in him was a glowing, and warm heat, and the Word of God in him, was
as a mighty fire; and it will not suffer him to rest, and he must also stir up
others. So then, examine whether there be any heat in thy knowledge, if thy
knowledge be not according to zeal, it will but aggravate thy condemnation.

Again, examine thy breath, whether do thou breath or no? Do thou smell
a good savor in Gods Word, when thou do read, or hear it? And do thou
smell a sweet savor in the conference of Christian men? or does it stink in
thy nostrils? if it be sweet to thee it is well: Do thou pray to God with
some kind of panting after him, and thy spirit is fit to faint within thee,
and thou can sit down and bemoane thy self to God, that thou have so lost
thy self, then there is breath in thee; or can thou bring out a word to
edify thy brethren, it is well; but if there be no breath in thee it is an
evident sign thou art dead, or at least in a deep sleep, if thou have no
ability to pray, and can relish no ordinance of God, and have no kind of
aptness to edify another, then either there is no life in thee, or else it is
much benumbed, and therefore either no life, or none that is extant in thee;
And so how do thou find thy warm affections stand to the Word? have thou a
stomach to the Word? And have thou not so much profit by it, as to see thou
do not profit and art ashamed of it; but if not, there is no life in thee.
And if thou love to be disjoined from thy brethren, and you are never better
then when you are falling off, and sitting loose from your brethren, if you
love to be asunder, there is no life in you, no life of Religion there, for
Religion desires to preserve it self, and love is a principal work of
Religion, above all things have fervent love among your selves. A man had
rather cover a multitude of wicked practices, then loose the fervency of his
love one toward another. And if therefore the Devil throw brands among you,
and you fall asunder; one Christian hangs here and another there, in the end
while you lie so a sunder the fire goes out; and men may bid one another good
night, and then may you all take your pleasure in sin, the truth is, then all
the life of Religion goes out, and every business in the Family draws away,
and so rests till all the life be lost. And therefore if you see men are
willing to sit loose, and fall off one from another, then there is an end of
the life and power of godliness; a bidding of Religion good night. And no more
profit to be had while such distempers of soul does last. But if you see that
men come together, as in that ancient famous Vision, Ezekiel. 37. every bone finds
out his fellow and joins with him, and then there was a noise and a shaking,
if you see bones gather, bone to his bone, then at the next prophesying flesh
will come, and sinews, and the next prophecy, will breath life into them, so
if men begin to annex themselves one unto another, as living brands; If one
begin to seek out another, and to draw together, and to lie close together, if
bone begin to gather to his bone, then there is hope of an Host of armed men to
stand up for God, in good ways; then there will be life, and strength, and power
of godliness; else make account of it, that in very truth there is no life; no
power of Religion, where there is no relishing, no closing one with another, if
therefore you see men closing together, and warming one another, in the ways
of Gods grace, and there is some sense of your own unprofitablenesse under the
Word, and if you can digest it, turn it into edification of your self and
others, then there is true life in you, and having life you have Christ, and in
him you have life in abundance.

There are two properties more of life,

Where there is any life, there is some kind of plyablenesse, Pliablenes of
spirit.
whereas dead carcasses are cold and stiff, and unsavory though never so
sweet before, this is a certain truth, the more you keep a dead corpse above
ground, the more it stinkes and is unsavory; It shoots out at length, and you
may sooner break him then bend him any way, but while he is alive you may bend
him which way you will; now therefore consider thus much, if there be any truth
of grace in you, you are gentle and easy to be entreated, Jam. 3.17. but if
not, Jam. 3.17 expounded.
then you are of a stiff spirit, inflexible and implacable, for to be gentle,
and easy, is the true nature of life; but if not, then have you lost your
life; then either you never had life, or else it is a swound, and so evapoured
that there is no bending or bowing of it, but they are fit to be buried as a
dead carcass.

Quest. What is this plyablenesse, and easiness to be entreated, and on the
contrary this stiffenesse?

Answ. There is Four things in easiness to be entreated.

First, Easy to be pleased, 1 Pet. 3.18. any thing that you do about them, is
pleasing to them, that is point of gentleness; and a gracious man in whom is
the life and power of godliness, he is easy to be pleased. If you go about
any thing, with any tolerable endeavor to give him content, he is not hard to
be pleased; and if not easy to please, there is little grace; or dangerous to
be none at all, if you have much a do to bow or bend them to comply with them
that asks and thing of them, there is a dead heart in such a spirit.

Secondly, A man that is easy to be entreated and gentle, if he be offended he
is easy to be entreated, Romans 1.31. It is a sign a man is of a reprobate
sense, when he is implacable and stiff; when life is gone, a man is stiff,
not easy to be entreated.

Thirdly, If so be that he have offended another man, he is easy to yield,
and to acknowledge that he is in a wrong, Eccles. 10.4. There is in a living
Christian an aptness to yield when he is in a wrong. If a man be in a wrong,
and will not see his error, will not see the evil he has done in Gods sight,
his stiffenesse is a sign of his dead-heartednesse; So much stiffenesse here,
so much deadness in his heart, and so much nearness to the chambers of death:
For a living Christian if he have offended he is willing to yield, and will
acknowledge himself a failer, and promise amendment.

Fourthly, He is willing to deny himself, of his own right, even upon equal
easy terms, to prevent an offense that may grow, and he stands upon equal
terms, least an offense should arise, he yields and denies himself, 1 These.
2.6, 7. So Abraham yielded to Lot, though he had not offended him, yet he
condiscended to his inferior, and if any, Lot shall be the chooser, Genesis 13.8.
This gentleness of spirit argues life of Christ in the holy servants of God.
Abraham was not stiff, but gentle and easy to be pleased, when he was
offended. Now therefore art thou easy to be pleased, easily entreated to pass
by a wrong? And if thou have offended another, thou will acknowledge it, and
art easily willing to deny thy self to prevent offense, then thou art not
stiff; but art living Christian; but if men be stiff in spirit, hard to be
pleased, and froward, no man can give him content; as Naballs servants said of
him: And of we have offended hard to be entreated, and will by no means see
it, or acknowledge it; and by no means yield, but turn our selves to endless
devices, and if we stand upon our own ends, and we will have our own to the
utmost farthing, and why should we bend; then truly we are cold, and little
power and life breathing in us.

The last property of life is this. So much sweetness so much life.
The body while it is alive, is sweet and savoury, but so soon as ever it
begins to smell, it must be buried, it cannot be kept above ground, every
living Christian is a sweet savor to God, a Cor. 2.13. and Col. 4.4, 5, 6. Let
your speech be savoury, seasoned as with salt; And the Apostle says, let no
unsavory or corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, How then do
you find your own spirits? do you breath savoury and sweet? and does your
conference yield edification? and is it all wel-pleasing to God, what ever you
do? does it savor well in the nostrils of God, and your brethren? If the dutys
you perform be so, it is sign you are living in Gods sight: But if your
speeches be profane, conference unsavory, and carnal, so much as we loose our
sweetness so much we loose our life, when a Christian carries himself
serviceably, and amiably, then we live, and in having life we have Christ.

SERMON XI.
1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


HAving handled an Use of Trial of life, and this depends upon our having of
Christ. We come now to another Use from this Doctrine.

he that has not the Son, has not life; No life in us, if there be no
Christ in us, Danger of being out of Christ.
this is that which Apostle speaks often to, that we are dead in trespasses and
in sins, Ephesians. 2.1, 5. This is the of estate of them all, so far as we are
without Christ, we are without life; no Christ, no life.

It is with the sons of men in this kind (that I may so speak) as it was with
the Soldiers, 2 Kings 19.35. they were all dead corpse: truly, that is the case
of us all by nature; every soul of us, as long as we live in the world without
Christ, so many men, so many dead corpse, so many unsavory carcasses: And
indeed all that work of life, which you have heard opened, it is no spiritual
motion, no feeding upon Christ, no growing in grace, no expelling of noisome
lusts, no care nor endeavor to beget others to an estate of grace, in any men
that are dead, no motion at all to any spiritual good, Heb. 9.14. al our works,
the best works we do in an estate of nature, they are all of them but dead
works; And so are we to any spiritual motion. As the Apostle tells you, we none
of us do good, and which is worse, we can do no good; yea, and still, which
is worse, we would do no good if we could; this is the estate of us all by
nature; The Lord looked down from heaven, to see if any of them did good, but
they are altogether become unprofitable, not one, does good, no not one, Romans
3.12.

And he speaks of all men in an estate of nature without Christ, not one does
any good, no not one; All the thoughts and imaginations of such men's hearts are
evil, and only evil, and that continually, Genesis 6.1. and Christ says as much
of their words, Matthew. 12.33, 34. And so in all our works, A good tree brings
forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit, Mat. 7.18.
Wherein he shows you, that as we do no good, so we can do no good, not a good
thought, nor a good word, nor a good work comes from such a man all his days;
and all our speeches are rotten and unsavory, not any spiritual life in most
seeming best duties; we are not able to speak unto any good purpose, let if be
truly molded an it is a precious fruit of righteousness, but if spoke as
comes from nature, be it never so well spoken, it is corrupt, either full of
pride or self-conceit, or to please others, or the like; nor do we regulate
our words by the language of Canaan, nor open our mouths from a spirit of
says, 2 Cor. 4.13. This is true in all natural men; we do not therefore
speak because we believe, we speak not, because we believe God has commanded
us so to speak; as our Savior said, John 14. last. Nor therefore work any
thing because God set us aworke, or to aim at any service of God, or good to
his people in it, so that as our thoughts be, so are our words, evil, and
only, and continually evil; and much more all the works of our hands, that
require greater strength of grace then either our thoughts or our words do; so
that without Christ there is no act of spiritual life comes from us, we would
do no good if we could. If God should at any time assist us, and supply us
with something more then ordinary, yet we will not be made clean, that we might
do well: Jer. 13. last opened.
O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean, when will it once be? Jer. 13.
last. As if it were a thing never to be looked for, God might wait upon a man
from one end of the year to another, and sometimes be asking of him, Will thou
be made clean? and he may ask again, Man, will thou be made whole? but if he
but say, Will thou be made clean, we have many devices to put off God, and we
can never find that day, wherein we will say, This day we will hear Gods
voice, and be made clean; from this day forward I resolve never to think my
own thoughts more, nor to do my own will more, but now will give up my self
to seek for life and salvation in Christ; that day is yet never pitched upon
till we have found Christ, never since we were borne until now: but now it may
be we are convinced, that it is good to become a Christian, and we wish well to
such as are Christians; but when it comes to the matter, we are but almost
Christians, as was Agrippa; or if we be satisfied, that we must become
Christians indeed, then truly it must not be to day, but to morrow; and when we
think to set God a day when indeed it shall be, as sometimes at our Marriage,
or when we come out of our Apprentiships, or when we fall sick, when left alone
upon the Deathbed, and if God say, Yet, when will it once be? we cannot yet
set him a day, only we will say, We will consider of it, and we would be loath
to disappoint God; as Creditors will say to their Debtors, We would be loath to
set you a day, because we know not whether we shall hold or no, and therefore
spare us in that, but we will pay you as soon as we can; but when will it once
be? Truly we are not yet persuaded, there is yet something or other to be done;
and therefore you shall find this to be true, that we are so far from
spiritual life in Christ, that none of us do any good; there is nothing you
do whereof you may say, This have I done because God has set me a work, and
in respect of Gods Command, or that God may be sanctified thereby, never yet
could we say so; and as we have not done any good, so neither are we able or
capable of good. And in truth this is a further want of spiritual action, that
if God should make us able to do it, yet we would not be willing to do it,
but if he put us to the question, When shall it once be? read that Chapter and
the next, and see if ever they set God a time, they will by no means set God a
time, least they overmuch engage themselves; indeed, sometimes it may be you
shall see such men lying under some heavy hand of God, and near to death,
resolve upon time. See our unwillingnesse to come off to God when we are in
health, we think in sickness to be made clean, but in sickness, what will
we say then, some of you can tell what men are then wont to say; What do we
then say? Oh, if God would but restore me to health, you should see I would
become a new man; why when he was in health he said, If sickness or danger
came, that should be the time wherein he would be made clean, but when
sickness comes, then we put God off till health again. As if a Debtor should
put off his Creditor from Summer to Winter, and from thence to Summer again,
the answer will never be given; why now it shall be this day say you in
sickness, it shall be when God shall bring me to health; but why not to day?
you put off God from health to sickness, and from sickness to health again,
and when they do not so, and come and tell them of it, they will say, Why it
is true, God forgive them, they thought to have done such a thing, and they
hoped to have done it; But when shall it once be? Why not to day before to
morrow? what if you dye of this sickness, will you go to Hell immediately?
will you take no course for turning the wrath of God from you; Are not you now
sick, why do you defer it any longer? and though he be not able to turn
himself in his bed, yet he may turn to God. It is a vain thing to put off
God to health, for in our sickness God will sooner visit us, and does expect
that in the day of our affliction we should seek him diligently and early, Hos
5. last. When will it once be? So that take notice of this desperate deadness
of a man's heart out of Christ, he is dead in sin, so as that he neither does
any good, nor is able to do any good, nor is willing to do any good.

And as there is no spiritual motion in him, no act of grace, so it is another
act of spiritual life, for a man to feed upon Christ; but do you think a
dead man is able to feed upon Christ? you know what God said of the Idolatrous
people in old time, Esa. 44.11, 12. Esa, 44.11. explained.
The same says (...) to every natural man; He feeds, upon what? upon
Christ? No, no, upon ashes; why upon ashes, ashes is far from feeding upon
the living God, and yet truly a man feeds upon ashes; every soul that feeds
not upon Christ has some Idol for his God, and so falls down to worship it,
some god of profit, or pleasure; and this is the estate of all wicked men, they
feed upon ashes; upon ashes, it seems to me to be a borrowed speech, or
similitude taken from children, or some women with child, that being sometimes
taken with some ill humor, and distemper of stomach, they have an eager desire
to feed upon ashes, and such like dry unsavory meat; Children will be eating
coals, and ashes, and so will sometimes women with child; so truly it is with
every natural man, he is a natural Idolater, he worships something besides
Gods, he feeds upon ashes, some dry and unsavory, and unwholesome meat, which
cannot profit him in the day of wrath, which gives not his soul any
nourishment, for the soul of man is an immortal spirit, and we only feed it
with profit, and pleasure, and credit, and these be but ashes, bodily food. The
good things of this life are no more suitable to a man's soul, then ashes be to
a man's body, and therefore Solomon so compares the estate of all the sons of
Nature, Eccles. 3.21. Who knows the spirit of a man that goes upward, and the
spirit of the beast that goes downward to the earth? his meaning is this; he
complaining of the vanity that lies upon the sons of nature, he speaks not
in the person of an Epicure (as some conceive) but his meaning is, Who knows;
which of all the sons of men considers, or takes it to heart, that his soul
goes up to any better place then the soul of a beast, which of all the sons of
Nature feeds his soul upon better food, then the soul of a beast is fed upon?
Do they not all feed, as if they all went to one place? and therefore upon the
dust of the earth they feed; turn me out the man that is in an estate of
nature, considers that his soul is to live for ever, and therefore takes care
to feed his soul to immortality; this is the woeful distemper of all the
sons of nature, that we feed not upon Christ, but upon the blessings of this
world, so long as we are without Christ, all our food is upon earthly things
here below, there is not any power in a man by nature, not any wisdom or
strength in us to deliver our souls, and then is not this a false course? A
lying vanity: is not my heart deceived with this and that? he is not able to
ask his heart such a question, am I such a fool, to forget all good to my
soul, thus long? it would deliver his soul, if he did but consider that there
was a lie in the other way, and he flatters himself in his good estate before
God, and considers not the truth of the thing; he thinks he is as fair a
dealing man as any of them all, but his heart deceitful, and desperately
wicked, and so cannot see the falsehood of his way.

And for growing, which is a third act of spiritual life, a man is dead to any
growth, never comes to any growth in grace, but he is apt to grow in evil and
sin, evil men and deceivers shall wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. take you
any natural man, and he is ever growing worse and worse, ever growing of the
worse hand; he grows more and more unprofitable, and more loose from God, and
estranged from the ways of his grace, and settled in the ways of sin. And
this is that which the Prophet, Jeremiah complains of, chap. 9.3. they
proceeded from evil to worse, and this is the estate of us all without Christ,
we grow from prodigality to covetousness; and from wantonness, to
voluptuousnes, and so go on til we come to take pleasure in all sin, though
it be but for a season: This is all the growth and progress that such men make.

And in the fourth place, for cleansing our selves from al superfluous, and
noisome lusts that we do not, neither can we be freed from them: O Jerusalem,
wash thy heart from thy wickedness, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee? Jer. 4.14. Purge out all those sinful lusts, God knows the
thoughts of the hearts of men are but vain, 1 Cor. 3.18. and they being vain,
God would have us to wash our hearts, how long shall it be that we suffer these
lusts to lodge within us? we never cleanse our selves from these: but such
woeful cleansing it is, that if we go about to purge them out, by the motions
of the spirit of grace, that he casts into our hearts; we think its a
troublesome work, and does cross the tranquillity, and peace of our estates,
we think they are noisome, and therefore, if any good motion be darted into
the heart, in the Ministry of the Word, or in the Counsel of Christian
friends, we are sick of it, till we have cast out all those good motions
again, and what ever good affection God has been pleased to cast into us, we
are not well til we be shut of it: as was the case of Ahab, he comes sadly and
mourning from Eliahs sharp reproof, 1 King. 21. two last verses, but he could
not be well at ease, til he had cast it all off, with putting Naboth to death,
and put it off with calling a Council about going to War, and so damped all the
sorrow that was in his heart. Let Caine have any good motion come in his heart,
and he will put it off with building of Cities: His sin, and punishment is
great, Genesis 4.13. and would he not now seek to God for mercy that his soul
might live? no he goes out from the presence of God, and from all good company,
and good council, and whither goes he then? Into the land of Nod, and there he
builds Cities, and calls them by such and such names, and so takes off his
thoughts from any good motion, and extinguishes all the motions of grace: And
truly so stood the case with Foelix, Act. 24.25. when he trembled at Paul's
Sermon, he would not endure to hear him any further, but when he had convenient
leisure he would hear him again; but he never sent for him. And so you shall
ever find this frame in a natural man's heart, those motions which the spirit
of God casts into his heart, that might induce him, and lead him on by the hand
to better courses, we are not well til we have cast them all off. Just as Paul
complains of the Jews, Act. 13.46. since you have put it away from you, lo,
we turn to the Gentiles, we purge, and cast out the motions of Gods spirit,
and cannot endure that any Ordinance should bring us nearer to Christ; Act.
7.51. Ye have always resisted the holy ghost, expelled the blessed of God that
if the holy ghost but dart any good council into their hearts, they cannot
endure to hear it, nor entertain any motion of it, but grieve and vex the holy
Spirit of God, and they are not well till they quench it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Esa.
5.3. we are alive to nothing but to run away from God, alive to sin, alive to
do evil, but to do well we have no understanding, Jer. 4.22. Apt to purge
and cleanse our selves from all good things, but wholly undisposed to do any
thing that is well; this is the true estate of us all: Look at us as we are by
nature, all of us without Christ cannot put forth one act of spiritual life,
not one good motion to be found in such a condition.

And in the first place for begetting any unto grace, we rather do the quite
contrary, we addict our selves to beget men to become the children of Hell,
worse then our selves, Matthew. 23.15. twofold more the children of Hell; and
because that may be more proper to corrupt teachers, Jeremy speaks it of all
the sons of nature, and those especially that had lived a while under the
means, and were not thereby brought on to an estate of grace, those whom God
had kindled some fire in their hearts, and whom he would have brought on to
grace, even these; They are all grievously revolted, walking with slanders,
they are brass and Iron, they are all corrupters, Jer. 6.28. He does not say,
they are all corrupted, but all corrupters; that is, such as are not only
naught themselves, but they corrupt others also, they make others worse for
their sakes; No man that sets his face to Godward, but if he come among them,
he is the worse for them; every man is kept off the more from goodness by
their means, they do not love that men should be too forward, or too precise,
nor to keep such a puleing, nor such a praying; we are all by nature
corrupters, Genesis 6.11. All flesh had corrupted their way; even every man had
done it, every one is the worse for us that has to do with us, if we see but
any good disposition in them to be coming on in the ways of grace, we do as
much as in us lies to quench, and damp, and smother them, and never rest by our
good wills till we make them as ill as our selves, and harden their hearts from
Gods fear; this is the true carriage of all those who are out of Christ: He
that has not the Son, he has no life; no motion of spiritual life, no
growing up in Christ, no purging out of sinful uncleanness; and therefore now
to apply this, conceive thus much:

First, It applies it self against the Church of Rome; Application.
first, who maintain, that men in the state of nature, have free will to lay
hold upon Christ, and they conceive it is upon very fair terms; but I would
only demand of you this question, Whether when they do lay hold on Christ (as
they conceive) whether they have him, or they have him not? they, will say,
They have not Christ till they have received him; for what have thou that thou
have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7. And till they have received him, how shall they
lay hold upon him? and if not receive him, they are dead men; and when a man is
dead what can he have by any benefit that is offered him? Offer him never so
largely, and he can receive no benefit by it; and if that any do lay hold upon
Christ, were they not living when they so laid hold upon him; so that when
they do lay hold upon Christ, whether is it an action of life or no? If not,
how shall they lay hold on Christ, and without Christ no life. A man in the
state of nature neither does good, nor can he do any good, nor is he willing
to do good; and therefore well does the Apostle say, It is God that works in
you both the will and the deed, Phil. 2.12, 13. Any thing that we do that is
good, is wholly from the grace of Christ, and this is just against the Papists.

Secondly, It serves to teach us all to bemoane our own estates, or the
estates of any of ours, that we yet see in the gall of bitterness, lying in an
estate of nature; is it thy self, or thy father, or mother, or thy children or
servants? whatever he be, be he never so good a natured man, if he be yet
without Christ, there is no life in him; I say, look upon him as thy dead
friend; If thou did look upon thy father, and mother, or children, and see
them lie dead before thee, thou would mourn bitterly for them; you know
what is said, Zach. 12.10. As a man mournes for his first borne; if our first
borne, or any that is near to us dye, we mourn bitterly for them, and refuse
to be comforted, as was the case of Rachels mourning for her children, and
would not be comforted because they were not, Matthew. 2.18. they were all dead,
and therefore caused a bitter mourning; it was the wounding and rending of her
soul. And may not this be the case of many a fruitful mother, many children,
and yet all of them dead in Gods sight, not a soul living in the sight of God?
And is it not a far more bitter death to be dead in sin, then to be dead in
the body, when it is a living soul in Gods sight? then, blessed are the dead
that dye in the Lord, for even so says the Spirit, that never spoke words of
falsehood, Revel. 14.13. I say therefore, if that our children live to God, and
have the life of grace in their hearts, there is no danger of their death; then
thy children shall come again to thy hearing, at the resurrection of the just,
and thou shall embrace them with comfort, and fill thy soul with unspeakable
joy, and fullness of glory; if they dye in the favor and grace of God, they
shall rise to glory, but if they be spiritually dead, no goodness in the world
in them, no spiritual life at all, no life of righteousness or holiness,
which are the first fruits of the Spirit, and of glory in this world; then weep
for these children, and those friends, that husband, or wife, or brother, or
sister; weep for every soul that is in an estate of sin and death, they are
as so many dead Corpse; you may sometimes see a whole house-full of dead
creatures, not one of them living to God, not one of thy acquaintance, not one
of all thy brothers and sisters; weep and mourn bitterly for them that are
thus wounded with sin, and bleed deadly, and gasp for their last breath, and
it may be shall never find grace from God in this world, their present
condition is fearful; and mourn thou for them in a godly manner, that thou
may be the more earnest with God in that behalf; and never leave, till thou
have got some grace from Christ for them, and in so doing you shall find, that
he that gave you children will give them life, and he that gave you brethren,
and sisters, and friends, and acquaintance, he will put some life into them,
and it shall do you good at the heart, as in verse. 16. of this chapter; Let
him ask, and he shall give him life. The promise is mavelous sweet and
strong, you may handle the matter so, that as you have instrumentally given
them natural life, you may procure them spiritual life, they came out of your
loins dead in sin, and they will grow in sin more and more, more
unsavory, and more unprofitable, and worldly, and proud, and wanton, this is
their natural condition; well, if they be so borne, then weep over them, and
mourn bitterly for them. You would mourn for a child if still-borne, much
more if you see it dying, and giving up the ghost, and lying in extreme and
bitter pain, how much more for that soul that has no grace, nothing at all
in them, in regard of which you can say, this is a pledge to me of Jesus Christ
in them; you know what a bitter mourning fell out in Exodus 12.30. A great cry
was heard in Egypt, and they all rose up at midnight; What was the matter? Why
this was it, There was not an house wherein there was not one dead, and upon
this occasion they rose up at midnight, and filled their streets with bitter
cries, and what then think you would they have done, if in every family there
had been but one alive? all dead but himself, neither one nor other, sometimes
old, and sometimes young, all gone save only one, to mourn for all the rest;
and this is sometimes the case of many a soul, he may rise every morning, and
see not a soul in his family of which he can say, this is not a dead corpse; if
there were but one dead soul it might cause thee to mourn, and that greatly,
just occasion to mourn bitterly, if there be but one in thy house that comes
not on to the ways of grace and salvation; this is it that God calls us to,
sadly to consider of it, bitterly to bemoane it, and to pray heartily for such
poor souls to God, that he would be pleased to show mercy to them all, that
you might have some living companions, some that might be wrapped up in life and
peace, and bring them within the covenant of grace, and life, and salvation; if
you have but the bowels of friends, if but the bowels of Christian men, take to
heart your own, and others miserable condition, if they be dead, and without
Christ.

Use 3. To teach us all, that if so be that we, or any of ours be yet without
Christ, Procure Christ for our selves, and others.
let it exhort us not to give rest to our eyes, nor slumber to our eyelids,
till we have procured Christ for our selves, and ours, that we may procure life
for our selves, and others. What is it for a man to have a good wife, or a good
husband, or beautiful children? What if he had rich kindred and acquaintance?
What if he had all the world, and have not Christ, he has no life; had we all
the friends we have, and as much comfort as we could wish, and want Christ, it
were poor empty comfort, and therefore labor above all things to get Christ.

For motives hereunto:

Motives to get Christ.
First, it is taken from the sweetness of life, Skin for skin, and all that a
man has will he give for his life, Job 2.4. and what is a life without grace?
What is the natural life without a spiritual? This natural life is worth the
giving and parting with for a spiritual; What shall a man give in recompense
for his soul? Matthew. 16.26. You know what Christ said of Judas, and the same
reason holds true in every man that wants life in Christ, Matthew. 26.24. It had
been good for that man he had never been borne; so may we say of all our
souls, it had been good for us we had never been borne, if we dye without
grace, we shall then have our portion with hypocrites, and unbeleevers, and
therefore let spiritual life be more sweet to you then natural.

you have life, and that in abundance, and you have all the blessings of God,
of all lives it is the most comfortable, 2 Cor. 1.20. If you have Christ, you
have all the promises, For in him they are, yea, and in him Amen; and they
shall all be ratified and confirmed, and established to you, and all the
blessings of God are thine, Esa. 1.3. He has blessed you with all spiritual
blessings in Christ Jesus; all blessings both spiritual and temporal too, all
the blessings of this and another life, 1 Timothy 4.8. 1 Cor. 3. last. All is
yours; all the ordinances of God is yours, and all the world is yours; not a
creature in the world but is at your service: yea your enemies is for your good
and service. Esau was Jacobs Servant even then when he calls him Lord; and
therefore make account of this, if you have Christ, make account of this, you
have all things; and therefore read the Promises, and gather them up, and lay
them up as a treasure, all things are yours; all the blessings you read or
hear of, they are all some way or other for your benefit, and I want but faith
to see and discern it, and an heart to acknowledge it, if I do feel it; and
therefore if you want righteousness, or peace, or goods, or friends, or any
blessing in this world, or for another, if you have Christ you have all that
his is; He that has given us his own Son, will not he with him give us all
things also? Romans 8.32. So that there is a double motive, that every soul
might be stirred up to look after Christ; and this is the season, stay not
till to morrow, and though the morrow be a Sabbath, a blessed day, yet you know
not what this day may bring forth; some of us may fall sick, or dye this night,
or not fit to profit by to morrowes means, as it is this day, and therefore
while the day of grace lasts, take hold of Christ.

Object. But what shall I do to get him? how may I come to have him? you said,
we cannot reach Christ by nature, and though we could we will not; Are not
exhortations then in vain?

Answ. No, they are not in vain, for though in nature we are neither willing,
nor able to look after Christ, but look at him as a vain refuse commodity;
we would have lands, and goods, but no Christ, and therefore what must we do?

1 Though we be of that natural sinful distemper, that we would have all
things but Christ, and let him go, yet while we are thus speaking to you, God
many times conveys such a spirit of grace into us, as gives us power to receive
Christ; what power had the Cripple to stand, much less to walk, Act. 3.6, 7.
he had no power to walk; and it had been a vain speech to him if there had
not been a power in it to convey strength into him by his breath, and the Lord
Jesus working in it, which did convey such strength into him, as that presently
he did walk. And truly so is it with the Servants of God, those that shall be
saved, we speak not in vain to them, the word that we speak conveyes spirit
and life into them, then they begin to receive life in him, and are glad, that
they may find Christ, and for other men, it leaves them without excuse, if
they do not use the means, God appoints them to use.

And the means God prescribes to us are these.

Means of having Christ.
First, as ever thou would have Christ, labor wisely to ponder upon and
consider, how dead thou art without Christ, for thou shall never find life by
Christ, unless thou find thy self lost without him, Luke 10.10. Christ came
to seek and to save that which was lost. If thou see thy self lost, Christ
will seek thee up; be fully satisfied of this in thy judgment and mind, that
unless thou have Christ, thou have no life, and therefore mourn and pray, The
whole need not the Physician but them that are sick, Matthew. 9.12, 13. See thy
self a sinner and a perishing creature unless Christ seek thee up.

Secondly, Take this means, as ever you desire to have life in Christ, if thou
know any sin by thy self, thou art much to blame in thy self, if thou do
not by any means wash thy hands of it, Note this.
cleanse thy self from it. There are many sins which a man lives in, which he
might avoid by very common gifts, which would he renounce, God would not be
wantng to lead him on to further grace, John 3.18, 19. This is condemnation
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light. 2
Cor. 6.17, 18. touch no unclean thing, meddle not with vain company: and have
nothing to do with the unfruitful works of darkness, and then I will be a
father to you, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters; if we would but abhor,
that which we know to be naught, God promises to receive us. And it is the
same that you read, Esaias 1.16, 17, 18. to show you that if men do begin to
learn to be better, if they cease to do evil, and learn to do well, if they
acknowledge their sins, in the sight of God, God will so sprinkle the blood of
Christ upon them, as that their great sins shall be forgiven them; and upon the
same terms men might feed upon the paschal Lamb, Exo. 12.15. they must put all
leaven out of their houses, purge out therefore the old leaven, and ye shall
become a new lump, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. purge out the old, and ye shall be new
creatures in Christ, purge out the leaven of maliciousness and wickedness,
and whatever is sinful before God, away with it, touch no unclean thing; and
Esa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his wickedness, and the unrighteous his
thoughts, and then, I am a God ready to pardon, I will forgive all your
iniquities.

Thirdly, Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is nigh,
Esa. 55.7, 8. Seek him and your soul shall live; God is abundantly ready to
pardon, etc. How shall I seek him? no man has a desire to seek, but that
which he has a desire to find; and therefore hunger, and thirst after him, as
it is in the first verse of that Chapter; desire nothing so much as thy part in
Christ, and besides, endeavor to find him in the means, verse. 3. Hear, and
your souls shall live; hearken diligently to the Word of God. It is a notable
promise that in Prove. 8.34. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily
at the posts of my gates, for he that finds me, finds life. Consider, there
is no man that hears Christ but he finds him; and if he find him, he shall
have life by him. And therefore how much cause have men to straighten
themselves a little in their worldly business, to hear daily? for who so
finds me finds life, and he that hears me finds me: Hear therefore
diligently, and your souls shall live: Shake off all drowsinesse of flesh and
spirit, and be desirous to receive Christ in his Word that is spoken to you,
and so seek him in calling upon him, ver. 7, 8. Call upon him while he is
nigh; And when is he nigh? Every day, if you stay longer then the present day,
you have no further opportunity offered you; call upon God now, and wrestle
with him in your prayers, that that which you have heard may be life, and the
length of your days.

Use 4. To teach every soul that has already found Christ, and yet complains
thou have a dead heart, and a dull mind; an heavy spirit, heavy affections,
nothing lively cannot expel thy corruptions, cannot beget others to God, and
art not active in spiritual works; then if thou find a want or decay of
life, then seek for Christ again, labor for more Christ, and thou shall have
more life; rest not in having a good measure of grace, for thou will find a
world of deadness and weakness, in beginnings of grace; but as thou would
have any further measures of life, so look for further measures of Christ, for
Christ dispenses himself to us in measure by little and little, and use the
same means to increase him, as thou did to get him at the first; see thy
self lost without him, and thirst after him, and hear diligently, and call
earnestly upon him for more strength, use Christ and have Christ, use grace and
have grace; grow up in the use of him, and thou shall grow up in the possession
of him; and therefore as you have received Christ so walk in him, Col. 2.7, 8.
As if that were the way to get more rooting in Christ; labor to live by faith,
and walk to the glory of Christ, and by the rules of Christ, and by that
means you will be more built up, rooted, and established in him.

Use 5. Of comfort to every soul that has any part in Christ, thou have life
in him, and that in abundance, and favor with God, having him thou have life,
Prove. 8.34, 35. They that hate me love death; if you seek not Christ, you seek
death, and mischief, and destruction to your own souls and yours, verse.
last; and therefore as you desire to find Christ seek him, and having found
him, rejoice in him, that God has given you to find him, and then walk as
those that desire for ever to have him, as not to change your portion by any
means. If you have Christ you have enough, and if you sit loose to Christ for
the enjoyment of earthly blessings, what will they advantage you; but chiefly
labor to get Christ, and then, He that has the Son has life, and he that
has not the Son, has not life.

SERMON XII.
1 John 5.13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of
the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may
believe on the name of the Son of God.


WE are now come to enter upon the beginning of the conclusion of this whole
Epistle, wherein the Apostle rehearses the intention and scope of the whole
fore-past Epistle; the persons and subjects to whom he writes, and the end and
scope of his writing: These things have I written unto you; To whom? To you
that believe on the name of the Son of God. And he intends a double end:

First, That you may know that you have eternal life.

Secondly, That you may believe on the Name of the Son of God.

Now to encourage to this latter end that John aims at; believing on the name
of the Son of God, he propounds three motives, in the 15, 16, 17. verses;
amongst which the last of them is a promise of prevailing with God for pardon,
and a prevention of falling into the great sin, and so propounds certain
encouragements to the end of the Chapter.

Now at this time, we shall treat of the first part of this conclusion, which
is an expression that John here makes, or a description of the persons here
spoken to; to them that believe on the name of the Son of God; from the persons
to whom John dedicates this Epistle, to them that believe on the name of the
Son of God; observe,

Doct. This Epistle of John was written, or directed to believers on the name
of Jesus Christ.

This is evident in the text, which may be gathered from the beginning of the
Epistle* in Chapter 1.4. he writes to such, who by reading this Epistle might
attain to fullness of joy, and those are only believers, who are capable of
that mercy and blessing; you may gather the same from the three sorts of
Christians, to whom he writes in particular, verse. 12. in chap. 2. I write unto
you little children, because your sins are forgiven you; and these little
children are divided into three sorts, verse. 13. Fathers, young men, and babes,
so that look at all that John writes to, they are such as make a faithful
acknowledgement of God the Father, as chap. 4. verse. 4. And look at his second
Epistle, and that is to the Elect Lady; and look at his third Epistle, and
that is first to the beloved Gaius; and he shows you what a notable Christian
he was, he wishes no further prosperity to his body and outward estate, then
his soul had attained unto, his soul was in great prosperity, only his body
and estate was weak, for he was the Host of the whole Church of God, so that
look at all John's writings, and they are all written to them that believe on
the name of the Son of God. And in very deed look at all the Epistles of all
the rest of the Apostles, and they are all written to Believers; if you sum
them all up from first to last, look at the Prothesis of every Epistle; in the
first, second, and third verses of every Epistle, and they are written
sometimes to Saints by calling, sometimes to faithful brethren, sometimes to
the Churches of Christ, natural Sons, partakers of the common salvation; in a
word, only to those that were faithful believers in Christ Jesus. And when our
blessed Savior himself writes, he writes to the seven Churches of Asia, all
of them such as sometime had been eminent, and glorious, and gracious, and
amongst the weakest he had a few names, even in Sardis, that had not defiled
their garments, chap. 4.3. Now when a man shall consider, that all the Apostles
do dedicate all their writings to believers and Saints, it gives us just
occasion of inquiry, Wherefore he writes to these, and to these only?

What help John's Epistle yields to believers.
and to all other believers that should succeed them to the end of the world.

And those benefits are many and diverse.

As first, Teaching, Teaching
that is one benefit the Churches receive by these Epistles, 2 These. 2.15.
brethren stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whither
by Word, or by our Epistle. This was one end of the Apostles writing their
Epistles, to the intent they might teach the Church of God sundry things which
else they had not known.

Admonition.
2 Another benefit the Churches received from these Epistles, was Admonition,
and putting them in remembrance of the things they had heard, things which they
did know before, and which happily they had forgotten, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. I
thought it necessary to put you in remembrance.

Practice.
3 And in verse 13. there is a third benefit of them, To stir them up to do such
things, which though they well knew should be done, yet they were dull, and slow
of heart, and stood in need to be stirred up to them.

4 Another end of their writings was this, Humiliation.
That sometimes they might Humble and bring low the spirits of those that were
puffed up, and had not repented of the sin which they had committed, 2 Cor.
7.8. I was sorry at the first that I made you sorry, but now I am not sorry,
for it was a godly sorrow; so that it seems the writings of the Apostles did
much prevail with the faithful people of God, and wrought in them such godly
sorrow, that it was a comfort to the Apostle, that he had sometimes grieved
them.

Confirmation in the faith.
5 Another end was, that so by this means they might be strengthened in the
faith, according to what you read in the words of the Text, to them that did
believe, he wrote that they might believe, meaning that they might be confirmed
and established in believing.

Consolation,
6 Also, to the intent that they might fill the hearts of Gods people with joy in
believing, 1 John. 4. according to what you read was effected, Act. 15.31. So
that see how much help the Church of God has had by these writings, so that
they have found much comfort in them. And these writings have been the
foundation of the faith of Gods people, from that time to the worlds end, they
have ever yielded matter to the Ministers of the Gospel, to preach and expound
to the people, that by preaching they might bring on men to salvation, so that
the holy ghost would not have Ministers nor any other to be wise above what is
written, 2 Timothy 4 16, 17. That when these are put into the hand of a faithful
Scribe, taught unto the Kingdom of God, he may be able to use this two-edged
sword of the spirit, to all those ends by which we come to be made perfect unto
salvation, and this is the scope of the spirit of God in Scripture.

Reason, 1. Why they are written to such as believe, As they serve for those
benefits, so also for those ends. It is taken from the little use which
unbeleevers will make of these writings till they come on to believing, so
little, that were it not for some believers among them, whom God had respect
unto, none of all the Apostles would have vouchsafed to have written any one
Epistle to any unbeleever of any Town or Assembly, none of them all writes to
any, but to such as believe on the name of the son of God: had there been any
benefit likely to be expected from unbeleeving Nations, some or other would
have written to them: but from first to last, look over them all, and observe
them, whether they be written to particular persons, or to particular
Congregations, or to Churches or Nations, they are all written to such as
believe on the name of the Lord Jesus: For it is with the Apostles writings, as
the Apostle sometimes speaks of prophecy or miracles, miracles are for them
that believe not, but prophecy for them that believe, he does not deny but
prophecy is for them that believe not, but he speaks by way of opposition to
miracles; miracles are rather for them that believe not; and he would have
believers know, it is rather for them to attend unto prophecy, then unto
miracles, so that this is the point: Observe it, as a just ground of the
Apostles dealing in these writings, Because of the little use that unbeleevers
will make of them.

Take you men that believe not, and let them read the Word of God over again
and again, and yet they receive little instruction from what they read, little
admonition, little stirred up to any goodness: And you shall not at all find
any blessing, no saving gift of God, can be wrought in the heart without faith,
and because faith comes not by reading, but by hearing, therefore the Apostle
writes not to them that believe not, but to such as are believers. If ever God
had intended that the reading of these writings had been effectual to the
begetting of faith, surely he would have followed them with mighty works, as he
blessed the preaching of the Gospel, in the primitive times, with miraculous
works; but you shall not read in any Scripture, that ever God so far blessed
the Word read to any man, or that he ever wrought a miracle to confirm the
Word read, where the word has been taught: God magnified it much in the first
publishers of it, til the whole world was convicted. And had God been pleased
at any time to think that these writings should be effectual to convert men to
grace, surely, it had been a notable means for the Apostles to have sent
sundry Epistles to many Churches, to whom they should never personally come:
But this was their care, to go all over the world, to preach here and there,
all the world over, round about the world, as much as in them lay, which they
needed not to have don, in case the sending of an Epistle would have served the
turn. Notable is that speech, and famous in this kind, Romans 10.14, to 17.
Faith comes by hearing, etc. So that in very truth, because the Apostles did
not see, of what use their writings might be to any unbeleevers, because all
the work that reading could reach unto, could not reach to beget and work
saving faith, which is the principal scope of preaching; therefore they did
never address themselves to write any of their Epistles, to any unbeleever,
but only to such as believe on the name of the Lord Jesus.

Object. You say, But sometimes God has been pleased to bless in old time the
reading of the Word to the conversion of souls; and therefore why may we not
expect the like blessing upon the reading of the Gospel in these days, as
well as the Law in former times? in Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12, 13. (A place much stood
upon in this case) it was commanded there that the people should come up to
Jerusalem, and there the Law should be read before them, verse. 11. that they
may hear, and learn, and fear, verse 12. and their children that knew not
the Lord, may learn to fear the Lord their God: Where you see, God blessed
the reading of the Law, not only for the benefit of them that knew it before,
but their children also, that knew not any thing, may learn to fear the Lord:
And if God did so bless the reading of the Law in former times, as a notable
instrument to bring on them to believe that never knew any thing of Gods word
before? Surely one would expect that the Gospel, which of the two, is rather
the ministration of the spirit then of the letter, or then the Law, that it
should be as mighty this way for the begetting of Gods fear in men, as ever the
Law was.

Answ. You shall not read, that this was the benefit or blessing that God did
accompany the Law withal, in ordinary reading of the same; But this was a
solemn reading, once in seven years, and no oftener, or once in fifty years.
It was a reading at the feast of Tabernacles, in the year of solemnity, as
verse 10, 11, to 13. In a time of solemn release, that was once every seven
years; And what was the reason that then it should have such a more then
ordinary blessing? Why, this year of Release, was the acceptable year of the
Lord, which typed out to them, the year of release by the Lord Jesus Christ:
For he was crucified in one of these seventh years. Note this.
In the year of Jubilee; And to make it a type and shadow of what benefit we
should have by reading the Word, when we should be released from our sins by
faith in his blood.

In that solemn reading, God gave a more then ordinary blessing to little
children those poor ignorant things that usually come to the Congregation, and
hear much, but learn little, yet even they in the year of Release, when the
time comes that God would shadow out to them their release by Christ; even then
little children, that know not any thing, shall get some knowledge, and fear of
God, by hearing of those words then read, so that it was such a reading as was
upon such a solemn year of release as typed out Christ's Redemption; to show
you, that men that are come to a year of release from all their sins by
Christ, they shall hear and know, and though they know nothing before, now
they shall never read but with some profit, and some growth in Gods fear.

And another answer may be this; That when he there speaks of reading, he
speaks not of bare reading, reading is some times put for all that expounding
and applying, that did ordinarily accompany their reading at such a time, for
it was at the same feast that Nehemiah speaks, chap. 8. last. It is said, chap
8.4. to 8. there was a Pulpit of Wood; and in verse. 8. it is said, They did
read distinctly in the Law, and caused the people to understand the meaning of
it; so that it was not a mere outward and bare reading of the letter, but an
opening of the sense, and such a kind of applying it to the hearts of the
people, that the people went away much rejoicing, because they understood the
Law that was read unto them, and many of them could not but joy and rejoice in
it, as you see from verse. 8. to the end of the 12th. and when they had so done
the people went away rejoicing, and he said to them, Go your way home, eat
the fat, and drink the sweet, etc. verse. 10. So that this you shall find to
be true, that God has either never so far forth blessed the reading of the
Word, as to bring on unbeleevers to Christ, either never, or if he have, it is
at some solemn extraordinary feast, once in seven, or once in fifty years,
which was their great Jubilee, to make known to his Church what in after times
it should be, when they knew Christ.

Use, It may serve first, to let us see a reason why so many Writings of godly
men to so good purpose, and by such holy men, and so effectually by many, have
so little prevailed against the Papists, and Heretics in any kind, a man
would wonder to read so many Writings of so many holy men, and to see so few of
the Church of God brought on to God by this means; Why what is the reason?
surely it is no wonder, the Apostles themselves, though they should never
prosper in writing to men that believed not, but to such as believed, that they
might have joy in believing, they knew reading would not prevail; It is true,
it may be some means of conviction, and leaving men without excuse; and their
Writings have not been in vain, to establish them in the truth that believed
it before, and for satisfying the judgments of them that are studious in the
truth, to seek out the truth of Gods will; but for men that are unbeleevers,
and settled in the dreggs thereof, never any Writer in England, France, or
Germany did any good, some have come over that have pretended, that this and
that man's learned Writings has been of much help to them, but those who have
professed such conviction, have been but mere counterfeits, and deluders of the
State, and did it only to provide for their honor and credit here in this
Country; and as little has been done by the Writings of godly men, against the
adversaries in this kind; So in very deed, The bane of congregations that have
no means of preaching.
if you shall look at all the good that has been done by reading in poor
Congregations, that have had no means of preaching, the people are as ignorant
as those that never heard of the name of Christ, as empty of faith, and of the
knowledge of Christ, and of every grace of his, as those that never heard of
them.

Object. But you say, This is mavelous uncharitable, to say, that they who
have but reading fall short of faith in Christ, and of the fruits of faith that
accompany salvation?

Ans. Whether is it more uncharitableness to let such as live under such
means know their danger, that they might come to salvation, then to flatter
them with a false opinion of their own safety, to speak peace to them, and
yet they to live without God in the world; Gods people are in an unsafe
condition without God, while they are without a teaching Priest, 2 Chronicles. 15.3.
A long time they had been without God, why had they not the Word of God read in
their Synagogues? Do you think Ieroboams Priests did not read the Law? Was
there no mention of the Law of God among them? Had they not so much form of
godliness, as to read the writings of the Law? Yes sure, their Civil Law, in
which their civil Government stood, and by which they executed Justice, was
the Law of Moses, and did they not then understand the letter of the Law?
doubtless these books being their Law, they were known among the body of the
people; and what did the Priests, if they did not read the books of the Law,
were they only to offer sacrifice to the Calves? I doubt not the people did not
do it, neither was it usual to offer any of their Oblations in their
Synagogues, but at Dan and Bethel only, and therefore they were not wanting to
hear the Prophets read, and yet notwithstanding all that reading, it is said
Israel, has a long time been without God, they had a Priest to read, but not a
Priest to teach, and so were without God, and without the Law; that is, the
sentence God gives of the people at that time, and think not that God was
uncharitable in so speaking of them, for God expresses his love in showing the
people their dangerous estate, Ioh. 15.14, 15.

Quest. But is it not said, Act. 15.21. Moses of old time has in every City
them that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day; and is
not then the reading of him preaching?

Answ. It implies, that when he is read, he is preached; for every Sabbath day
when they read the Law, they gave the sense and meaning of it; that shows what
diligence the Priests did use, when they did read they gave the sense, and
wisely applied it to the edification of the people; and not that reading was
all the preaching they had, or that this was any preaching, that they only read
the Word of God; for if they had but Moses read, and not preached, they were
then without the Law, and without God in the world. And you know what God
himself threatens, Amos, 8.11, 12, 13. That he would send a famine of hearing
the Word, never was there a famine of reading the Word, since there was any
face of a Church at all; but a famine of hearing the Word of the Lord, that men
should go far from sea to sea, and from place to place to hear it, but
should not hear it: And by that means, the young men, and the fair virgins
should perish for thirst, and none to satisfy them with the Word; and those
who were able to stir, would go far and near to hear the Word, and yet
should not find it, and so shall perish for want of that knowledge of it,
which does accompany salvation; so then, marvel not that the Holy Ghost says
these things, I write unto you that believe; to Believers only was this
written. Note the Miserable case of Congregations that have but bare reading.
Wonder not then if so little good be done among the Papists, or in any other
Churches where there is only bare reading; make account of it, as the Lord
says, My people are then destroyed for want of knowledge. Was there ever any
soul so desperately ignorant think you, as to take the place of a Minister, and
not have skill to read, no, but these had no knowledge to teach the people the
meaning of the Law of God, whose lips should preserve knowledge, and at whose
mouth the people should seek the Law, Mal. 2.7, 8.

Use 3. To teach all that believe on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
diligently to be conversant in the Writings of John, and of the Apostles; Shall
the Holy Ghost have a Pen to write unto us, and shall not we have a hand to
receive these Writings, and by faith to behold and believe them? Shall he take
care to write us Letters from Heaven, from the Lord Jesus Christ, indicted by
the blessed Spirit, and written by the hands of faithful Scribes, who were
carried to all truth? and shall they write them to us, to continue to the end
of the world, and shall not we attend to them? These be written to every soul
that believes in Christ; for if written to them that believe in Christ, then
every believer may say, These writings are written to me, to thee and to me,
and therefore let us carefully read, and attend to them. And therefore do not
neglect a Letter written by such precious Scribes, and from the hand of a
gracious God, that directed them to us; but if written to us, and for our
instruction and learning, let us hear, and read, and obey, and look at them
as the chiefest blessings, and ornaments of God vouchsafed to us. Among all the
means of grace, put up these writings as the Oracles of God, for our
instruction, Romans 15.4. Whatever was written aforetime was written for our
instruction and edification, as well as for them that lived in ancient times;
how much are the Church of Rome to blame, that lock up these Epistles from the
common people in strange Languages? and if they understand not Latin they must
not read, unless with license, or in a strange Tongue; heavy will the curse
of God fall upon them, they may as well read a Fable to them as the Scripture;
yea many times the Priests themselves understood not the Latin that they read,
it was given to them as a clasped book, they were not able to expound it, but
say, that ignorance in the people is the Mother of Devotion, and therefore both
fall into the ditch together.

Use 4. Serves to be some direction to every carnal man; you say; if these
Scriptures be written but to believers, will you not allow ignorant carnal men
to read this part of the Word of God?

Ans. Even they have thus much benefit by the Word, first, Carnal men have
benefit by the Word.
whatever is expounded to them from this Word, may be effectual to bring them
on to salvation; but faith comes by hearing.

Secondly, These Scriptures when they are read, they are a profitable and
helpful means to get knowledge, though that knowledge I believe reach not to
salvation.

Thirdly, it is a means to put people in remembrance of what they know, though
it be not to salvation.

And lastly, it kindles in them some desires to know these things, that they
might understand them; though that be rare, I dare not reckon the Eunuch among
the ignorant and unbeleevers, Act. 8.30, 31. and that were a blessed use, if
men shall read the Scripture, and complain for that they cannot understand
them, and shall be stirred up to desire a Guide, to help them to see and
understand what they before understood not, and so be brought on to some
knowledge, it were a blessed use of the Scriptures. And besides, they are of
this use, they are of singular benefit to discover to people what sin is, and
open to men what moral and common virtues be, and so are a means to preserve
people in a form of godliness: whereby they know that Magistrates are to be
obeyed, Ministers reverenced, Parents honored, Murder not to be committed, the
Sabbath not to be prophained, God only to be worshipped; the body of these
things they see are to be done, and these evils eschewed; they are a means to
keep people in good order, and to prepare them to a better understanding of the
Ministry of the Gospel, that shall at any time be blessed to them; so that
some profit there is hence to them that want faith, but the principal thing
the Apostle aims at is this; I write unto you that believe on the name of the
Son of God. But further, I say to you that are not yet brought on to believe,
let this be your instruction, diligently to attend to what you hear from these
words, for you may say, and truly you may read every day a Chapter or two, and
read them over again, and again, and spend many hours about them, and in
prayer too, and yet no nearer salvation then at the first; I say not, not
nearer salvation, for you are stirred up to many duties, but when you see you
have read much, and prayed much, and yet get little hold of the saving grace of
Christ, how should this provoke all that live without means of grace, to give
diligent heed to that Ordinance of God, in which faith to salvation is wont to
be conveyed; and that is an use that may be of notable efficacy to stir them
up to hear diligently those who are destitute of the knowledge of God, let
them be the more diligent to seek after more means in the Ordinances of God.

Use last. It is an use to all those that do indeed believe on the name of the
Lord Jesus, to be not only careful to read, but to read these Scriptures, in
hope of finding those very blessings for which these Scriptures were written,
and sent us: Were they written that you might be taught? truly you make an il
use of reading, if you know no more at last then at the first, you may well say,
you are unprofitable if you do not observe something from your reading, and if
they were written to stir us up to be doing good, you make an il use of reading
if it bring not forth some profitable fruits; yea if by reading these Epistles
you might believe, and be humbled and comforted, and your joy might be full in
reading, then truly you should not rest, till by reading you find some measure
of faith strengthened in you, to an holy fear of God, in whose presence you
stand, and whose word you take in hand, and find your hearts take comfort from
what you do read, since they were written for your sakes that believe, and for
your sakes only if you shall be negligent to read them, shall you not take
this blessed Ordinance of God in vain? and therefore read them, and read them
diligently, and profitably, for the blessed ends for which God has written
them, that you may find the blessed fruits of them.

Now we come to speak of the end for which he wrote them, that you might
believe on the name of the Son of God, and to know eternal life, only now to
speak of it so far as it is pertinent to this place.

Doct. 2. Such as do believe on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, by these
Epistles of John, may know that they have everlasting life.

John in this Epistle does set before you where eternal life is to be had, as
the verse before the text, he in sundry places sets forth the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the life which we are to receive from the Father; he shows where it
is to be had, and where forgiveness of sin is to be had, and by whom we have
propitiation, chap. 2.7.

If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9. that is one means; and secondly, he calls upon us to look unto him as
our Advocate, and propitiation.

Signs of grace.
whether you have the Lord Jesus Christ or not. This for one sign; If we say,
we have no sin, we make God a liar; and verse. last, If we keep his
Commandments, we know that we know him. If God give us a conscionable care to
keep his Commandments, we know that we know him. And some other signs, as
Chap. 3.3. if God give us hearts to purge and cleanse our selves from all such
sins as hang about us, and if God give us hearts to love the brethren, etc.
these and many more such signs of grace he gives us in this Epistle.

Use 1. If God having thus written, and given us these Epistles, then first, it
will be a just refutation of that Popish Doctrine, that think it impossible
for a man to know that he is in an estate of grace. If John did write these
Epistles for this end, that we might know we have eternal life, then sure we
may know it, else John fails of his end; and for John to be disappointed were
less matter, but the Holy Ghost himself, for John being the Penman of the
Holy Ghost, the holy end he aims at not being attainable, is to put a defiance
upon the Almighty, and therefore the knowledge that we have eternal life may
be attained; and whereas they tell us, we may have a conjecturall knowledge,
but no certain knowledge, but to say we have a knowledge, and yet but
conjecturall, is as much as to eat up a man's words he had formerly said; for a
conjecturall knowledge is no knowledge at all. Knowledge what
Knowledge is the judgment or discerning a man has of a certain thing. If a
man ask you, whether he know if such a man have possession of such a place,
and he say first, yes, and afterward says, he conjectures so; his knowledge
is no knowledge, it is a false intelligence. If you ask a man, if he knows
whether such a man have such a portion of such a value, and he say, he has, he
conjectures so, it is no knowledge; but if he know it, then he speaks of a
certainty. And therefore if the holy Ghost say, We may know it, then surely we
may have more then a conjecturall knowledge, even a certain knowledge of our
happy estates; and were there no more Arguments in the world to discourage a
man from Popery, this were sufficient, even this very doctrine of doubting, and
conjecturall assurance of a man's eternal estate, which leaves a man's
Conscience destitute of any peace. Consider therefore, Rome an Harlot.
that the Church of Rome is an Harlot, and brings up strange children; when she
does not teach her children to know God to be their Father, it argues she is no
lawful spouse of Christ; but do but hope such an one is your Father, but
count it presumption to say, you know it. That Church that trains not up her
Children to know God to be their Father; is a false Church; and a sign that
the Church of Rome has mixed her self with so many Idols and abominations,
that she cannot teach the children of her Church, to know that they are the
sons and children of God, but condemns them to the death, if they dare presume
to say, that God is their Father.

Use 2. May refute that opinion of the Papists, that will not suffer the common
people to hear this Scripture; take notice here how injurious they are to the
faith of Gods people, and to the knowledge of their chiefest comfort, to debar
them of the knowledge and means of their salvation; take away these
Scriptures, and take away the principal means of the knowledge of our
salvation.

Use 3. To teach such as are in any doubtful temptation at any time about
their first estate and condition, who are not able to apply with comfort
assuredly their grounded knowledge, that Christ, and eternal life is theirs;
It may teach them among other Scriptures, to be diligent in inquiring into this
Epistle, the Holy Ghost says, it was the maine scope of his writing unto all
those that trust upon the name of Christ, that they might know their
blessedness to lie upon him, and those that did not certainly know they had
found him, he writes to them to look after Christ, to long for him, and to
desire after him. Do thou then desire not only to believe eternal salvation
belongs to thee, but to know it? for to know is something more then to believe.
A man may believe a thing, and upon good ground he may look for salvation
there, and wait for it, and desire that he may be more assured of it, but to
know that thou have eternal life; and the certainty of it, that God has
sealed it up to thy soul and conscience, of which thou need doubt no more,
this is a far more greater blessing then to believe in Christ, though by
believing we have eternal life; and therefore if thou so believe in him as to
look for salvation in him, and not elsewhere, though as yet thou be
doubtful of thy estate, yet thou may learn much by reading these
Scriptures, read them again, and again, and leave not reading and searching
into them, till thou find even from this Epistle ground of assurance.

Use 4. May serve to teach the Children of God to know when you have made a
good use of reading these Scriptures, you read much and often, and you think
when you have done you have done God good service. An usual vanity among
Christians if they have prayed in the morning, and read a piece of a Chapter,
they think they are better blessed all the day after for it; and we are unquiet
all that day when we have not had time to read, and pray, but if that be done,
we think we have quit our selves well; but a man may read, and never consider
what he has gotten by it; a man may pray, and never observe what answer God
makes to his prayers all the day long, but God requires that you should get
knowledge by reading, and that not of small matters, but of your possession of
everlasting life, and therefore you read to purpose, when you thereby come to
know that you have eternal life, and your joy is increased, and you are
brought on to believe and trust in the name of Christ more and more, and
unless you so read you have taken this blessed Ordinance of God in vain; and
therefore be diligent and conversant in reading these Epistles, and as you
would search for treasure, so be diligent and laborious herein, that you may
know you have eternal life.

SERMON XIII.
1 JOHN 5.13. That you may believe on the Name of the Son of God.


NOw we come to speak of the other end of the Apostles writing of these
Epistles, and that is, that you may believe on the name of the Son of God.

Doct. It is an holy end of the holy scriptures that believers may believe.

John, when he writes the Gospel, he speaks as well to believers, as to others,
but chiefly to believers, John 20.31. These things are written that you may
believe. Say not what is this, but to make the work that is already wrought,
for though faith and believing, be wrought in the hearts of Gods people, yet
such as do believe, had need to be helped to believe more and better, Romans
1.17. It is not only the power of God to work faith in such as believe, but
to lead them on from faith to faith, from one measure of faith to another, and
the Gospel is revealed from heaven for that end, that such as believe not might
be brought on to believe. And such as do believe, may be carried an end in
believing, such as are faithful, had need be yet more faithful; you read also,
Phil. 1.25. I shall abide with you, for your furtherance and joy of faith, such
a furtherance as is for the increasing and augmentation of your faith, so that
there is not only faith but increase and growth of faith too: as furthered by
the Gospel, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10, That I might supply the defects of your faith, to
supply what is wanting in your faith, there is not any of the servants of God,
no not those that receive the word with much joy in the holy ghost, in much
affliction and tribulation, no not those that give good pledges and evidences
of their grace, as 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. yet there is something wanting or
lacking in your faith, not any, no not the most exemplary Christians, v. 7. but
there is something wanting in their faith, and therefore to this end he desires
to come to them, Note this.
as verse. 10. he is pressed exceedingly night and day, stirred up unto that
duty, with much vehemence and in earnestness of spirit desires exceedingly to
see your faith, and to perfect what is wanting in it. A mavelous thing, that
the best Christians should yet have something wanting in their faith, so that
this is not a needless work he undertakes, in writing to them that believe on
Christ, that yet they may believe better.

Quest. Now what is that which they had need grow unto?

Answ. First, they had need to grow unto the belief of some further principles
of Gods truth, some further Articles of faith, which yet they know not: Some
have need to grow in the object of their faith, to believe more then they yet
do believe. Some of the Apostles did not believe the resurrection of Christ,
Thomas said, he would not believe, unless he might see and feel, John 20.25.
he was wanting in the belief of one Article of faith, the resurrection of the
dead, and 1. Cor. 15. the whole Church was wanting in this and in many other
Articles of their Christian faith; they doubted not but that their bodies
should rise, but they wanted that before. And the Thessalonians, they wanted
this in their faith, they could not tell what to make of the long delay of the
second coming of Christ; they did expect a sudden coming, and therefore
many of them were troubled in their minds, so as that they neglected their
callings, and minded not their outward business in the world, expecting a
sudden dissolution of all: And therefore the Apostle supplies what was
wanting in their faith, by acquainting them further of the council of God. That
Christ must not come to Judgment, till Antichrist have first come, with all
deceiveablenesse, and lying wonders, and till the Church have made an Apostasy,
and the Galathians, they were ignorant of the Doctrine of Justification, for
supply of which, and satisfying them therein, that whole Epistle is spent; so
in all other Churches the Apostles labors to supply what was wanting in the
object of their faith.

Secondly, there is something wanting in their approvednesse of the habit of
faith, something wanting in the gift and grace of faith. The Apostle prays for
the Colossians, That as they have received Christ they would so walk, and that
they might be rooted and established in him. Many of them were not so rooted
and established in Christ as they stood in need to be, not able to exclude and
banish those doubts, and fears, and cares of spirit, that sometimes accompany
believers, even those that believe already on the name of Christ, yet there is
something wanting in the root of their faith; for look as you see it is with a
Plant, that is grafted into a Stock, it does not forthwith take root, but a
little matter will soon unsettle it; so is it in this case, a man may in some
measure be implanted into Christ, and yet for a time be marvellously unsettled,
and far off from that rootednesse which God looks our faith should grow
unto, and so in a building, it at the first framing may be so green, as that
yet it is not settled upon the foundation, but it would have a time to be dried
and withered, that it may stand the firmer on the foundation without shrinking,
and be more fit for a man's dwelling, so is it sometimes with the faith of a
Christian man, he may be knit to Christ, and may have a place in Christ, but
his mortar may yet be green, and may be easily shaken with wind and weather of
temptation, and not be yet rooted and established; there may want such holy
confidence, and assured persuasion of fellowship with the Lord Jesus Christ, as
we had need to be lifted up unto a further increase of faith, which this
Epistle, and such other Doctrines as these be, are wont to work in them.

Thirdly, It may be increased in the comfort of it, in the sense and feeling of
it, for it may so fall out, that many a good soul may come to a large measure
of a lively faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, as that they may cleave to him, and
seek him early, and do and suffer any thing for the name of Christ, and yet
sometimes doubt, whether their faith be sound hearted or no; in such a case he
doubts whether his faith be true or no, he wants the sense of his faith, for he
believes not that he has faith; now this faith of his had need to be increased
in the sense and feeling of it, that he may plainly see the faith he has is no
fancy, or presumption, or delusion, as he has very much suspected; but that he
may see the faith he has is the faith of Gods Elect, he had need be built up
in his faith more and more: Lord I believe, help thou my unbeleefe, Mark 9.40.
He could not tell whether he might call his faith, faith or unbeleefe, he could
not tell what to call it, he was willing to believe, but it was with so much
difficulty, and so much impotency of faith, that he prays for the removal of
his unbeleefe; so that in regard of the doubts that a man has many times of
his own faith, he had need grow up in faith, that he may believe that he does
believe, and this is that you read, Phil. 1.25. For the joy of your faith. This
was something in which they were to be furthered, it was the joy and comfort of
their faith; so to rise up in believing, as that they might have comfort in it,
for so far as a man believes, and yet is doubtful of it, he has little
comfort and joy in his faith, and therefore the Apostle would have them
furthered in their joy, that their faith might be a joyful faith, such as
where in they might have comfort, and might be joyful for that they had
received faith.

And fourthly, faith had need be increased, in respect of the acts, the proper
acts of faith, which are chiefly persuasion and trust upon the name of Christ,
and those heavenly truths, in which the Lord Jesus Christ is revealed, and
graciously dispensed unto the hearts of his people, even these also had need to
be marvellously enlarged in Christian men, above what at the first they do
arise unto; see them both put together, Peter when he walked upon the water he
was fully persuaded, and did trust upon Christ for protection in a very
doubtful and dangerous case, he did trust upon him, Matthew. 14.30, 31. but when
the wind began to blow, and the storm to arise, then Peter's faith began to
shrink, and his body to sink, and then he cries out, O Master, save me, else
I perish. O thou of little faith, says our Savior, to show you, that a man's
faith had need be further increased, for you see our Savior rebukes him for
his little faith; not only weak in the habit of it, but little in the proper
act of it. He begins to shrink in his persuasion, and in his trust, and that
was thought the littleness of his faith; and so the two Disciples that went to
Emaius, they looked sadly to think of the death of Christ, and complain of it
to Jesus, and when he asked them, why they looked so sadly, they tell him the
cause, concerning the death of Christ, and say they, we trusted this had been
he, that should have delivered Israel; O fools, and slow of heart, verse. 21,
22. and 24. ought not Christ to have suffered these things? to show you, that
there is even in Gods own servants that are true believers, something to be
supplied in the acts of their faith, their persuasion and trust is many times
very much overwhelmed, so as that many times they call in question the maine
principles and foundations of their faith. We trusted this was he, but we are
doubtful whether we be not deceived or no, God knows whether it was he or no;
but we have just occasion of doubting, for they thought the Messiah should have
lived forever, and now this is the third day since he was crucified, and we
trusted this was he, but now he is dead, and has lain so long in the grave,
and we are therefore doubtful whether this was he or no, and therefore in this
regard faith had need be increased.

Fifthly, Faith had need to grow, even that faith which accompanies salvation,
by which we believe on the name of Christ, not only thus far as has been
said, but had need to grow in the fruits of it, for many times though faith may
have some strength and comfort, and put forth it self in some acts, yet
notwithstanding it may sometimes fall out, and often does, that even the faith
of Gods people is much intercepted from putting forth it self, in those lively
fruits of faith which redound to the praise and glory of God, Gal. 5.6. Faith
works by love; now you know what you have heard of the love of Gods people,
that they may depart from their first Love, yea so far depart from it, as
that he may fall short of the performance of his first works of his faith and
love together, Revel. 2.4, 5. Faith at the first was more abundantly fruitful
then now it is, and so their first love was more abundantly fruitful unto good
works, then now they are able to reach unto, but Chap. 2.19. it is said of the
Thyatirans, their works was more at the last then they were at the first. It
is a sign their faith was as much growing in fruitfulness as the other was
decayed, so that something may be supplied to the faith of Gods people, their
faith and love, and the fruits thereof had need to be increased; so that this
is not a vain end of John's writing to them that believe on his name, that they
may believe, though they now believe, yet they had need to believe yet more,
though it may seem to be a Tautologie, yet it is an evident truth.

Now then for further opening of this point, first to show you, that all which
at this time has been said, may be one reason of the point why John writes
thus to them, which is taken from the defects that are found in the faith of
all Believers, which it were meet and necessary should be supplied.

Reas. 2. It is taken from the mavelous power that is in this Epistle, and so
in other Scriptures, to supply these defects that are thus wanting in our
faith, whether in the object of it, or in whatever else; there is a mavelous
power in the holy Scriptures to supply it all, and indeed the Scriptures are so
carved out, and so dispensed, and when dispensed aright there is a mighty power
in them to supply faith, and the defects of it in every Believer, The
Scriptures are mighty through God, whether preached or read, or heard, or
conferred upon, or meditated upon; for to my remembrance, the Scriptures are
sanctified of God to none other use but to one of these five; the Word of God
is mighty, and mighty to this end, that believing in the Word, whether
preached, or heard, or read, or examining what you have heard, or meditating,
or conferring upon it, there is a mighty power in the holy Scriptures to supply
the faith of Gods people.

Mighty power in the Scriptures preached.
First, For Preaching, there is a mighty power in the Scriptures preached, for
he writes these things that they may be preached, and to be read, and to make
use of them in conference, and meditation, and in them all there is a mighty
power. But first for preaching, Romans 1.16, 17. The Gospel is the power of God
to salvation, for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith. By the Gospel of God preached, the Righteousness of God is revealed
from faith to faith, to lead on believers to believe, and not to rest growing
in believing, til they reach unto salvation; it is the mighty power of God to
salvation, to every one that believes, such an one, while he lives shall be of
the thriving hand in faith. And when the Apostle prayed so earnestly, night and
day to come again to the Thessalonians. Does he not therein imply, though
there may be a mighty power in the word read to increase faith where it is
already wrought, yet his personal presence would help it much more, whether by
conference or by preaching, and therefore he prays much to see them again. An
evident argument, though the word read may be of much use to establish us; yet
much more the personal persence, and conference and preaching of the Gospel of
Christ, else that prayer of his had been something impertinent.

Conference.
And so secondly, for conferring of the Scriptures, you know when the two
Disciples were doubtful whether that was the Christ or no, Luke 24.21. our
Savior does not only reprove them for that doubtfulnesse, but he begins at
Moses, and opened to them the things written in the Prophets, till in the end
their hearts glowed and burned within them, and that was a furtherance of their
faith, for then they presently ran to Jerusalem, and then they do not say, we
trusted this was he, but they say, the Lord is risen indeed: In very truth
without any further dissension, never distrusted it more, he is risen indeed,
so that there is a mighty power in the word confered upon, in private
conference, and therefore they doubt no more of it: So that the word opened by
way of conference made their hearts to burn within them, they do not call it
preaching, but rather a private conference, an applying the Scripture to this
point they stood need to be instructed in, and they go away with full
resolution, the Lord is risen indeed.

And you know the mighty power and use of the conference of Phillip with the
Eunuch upon that conference, the Eunuch believed and was baptized, Acts 8.37.
So that take the word preached, and there is a mighty power of God in it to
lead a Christian man from faith to faith: And take the Gospel of God and
confer about it, and it is a mighty power to increase faith, that believers
may believe.

Reading the word.
Thirdly, And so it is for the word read, another kind of dispensing this word,
that is a special end of it, that by reading you might believe on the name of
the Son of God, that is the next use of the Scripture, they which do read,
shall by reading find their hearts confirmed, and established in the faith,
John 20.30, 31. There is a mighty power of God that accompanies the word of God
read, to strengthen men in the faith, that such as believe already, may believe
more, and be established in their persuasion of the truth of God.

Fourthly, If you shall examine the things that you have heard, Examination of
things heard.
that is another use of the Scriptures, an examination of what you hear; go
home and consider whether the things that have been taught were true or no:
whether agreeable to the holy Scriptures or no; for a Preacher speaks not the
express words of the Scripture, but comments and explications of the
Scriptures, and therefore examine whether that which is delivered be agreeable
to the Scriptures which are alleged for to prove the doctrine. We must make
use of the Scripture as a rule to measure all the Sermon by we hear, whether
it be of just length and breadth of Gods word or no, as the balance of the
Sanctuary, the two testaments be, and when you weigh what is said, then you are
confirmed and established in it.

Now this kind of making use of the Scriptures to examine what you hear, it is
of special use to help forward the faith of such as do believe, yea, (and
which is more) it may bring on men to believe, which it may be never did
believe before, mightily stirred before, but believed not, til they go home
and searched the Scriptures, seeing that which is spoken to be fully agreeable
to the word of God, they have been brought on wonderfully to believe; famous is
that of the Bereans, Acts 17.11, 12. they heard the word, and what he spoke
they received it gladly, they thought he spoke well, but they searched daily to
see whether those things which were spoken were so or no, therefore see the
blessing of God upon it, verse, 12. many of them believed, they received the
word with reverence and did not cavell at it, but heard it patiently, and when
they came at home conferred about it; and when upon examination they saw it was
according to the Scriptures of the holy Prophets, when they saw, that what Paul
preached was suitable to Moses and the Prophets, the blessing of God was great
upon them, for the number of them that believed was not a few, to show you that
a man that has heard the word, and has been stirred with what he heard, if he
shall go home and consider and weigh well, and see how one thing bears witness
to another, Note this.
so as that the word preached, opens the word written; and the word written,
confirms the word preached, then though before he was doubtful, as sometimes
a godly man's heart may fail him in applying the word to himself, as Jacobs
heart failed and he believed not, yet when he considered it, and saw what
tokens of love was sent him, and laid circumstances together, then his spirit
revived. So a man hears much, and some thing pertinent to him, yet his heart
may fail him, and may have much ado to gather any comfort out of it, but when
he considers things more privately and searches the Scriptures, upon
examination, Repetition of the word blessed.
many a man believes the word, which before he was doubtful of. Repetition and
examination of the word, is marvellously blessed by God to this end, to help
forward our faith, it is of good use both to begin, and to increase faith;
sometimes to work it, where it was heretofore wanting, much more to increase
it where it was begun before, and therefore as we were begotten by the
immortal Word of God; so no Word of God, being dispensed in any Ordinance of
God, none of them but are of mighty use for the supplying our defects of faith,
and to make us believe more.

5. Meditation on the Word.
Fifthly, the Word also meditated upon, when a man has heard it, and searched
it, and believed it, read and conferred about it, or say none of these for the
present, but whether these have gone before or no, for the present the very
meditation of Gods Word, which a man now takes into his mind as he is riding,
or working; there is a mighty power in the Word, pondering upon it, and chewing
of it, to make a man more rooted in it, more fruitful, and more comfortable in
believing. This truth you see in Psalm. 1.1, 2, 3. when a man meditates upon the
Law of God day and night, he grows to more delight in it; one of these helps
another, and what will be the fruit of it? He shall be like a tree planted by
the rivers of waters, planted and rooted, and well watered there, and he brings
forth his fruit in due season, and whatsoever he does shall prosper; not as
planted in a dry Wilderness, but by the rivers of water, and that makes him
not only well rooted, and grown tall, but it inables him to bring forth fruit
in due season, and as for his leaf it withers not, neither Summers heat, nor
Winters Frosts makes it to fall, but he still holds his greenness, and his
fruitfulness, and he grows in all the graces of God which tend to the praise,
and glory of his grace, and this is by reason of his delighting, and meditating
in the Word of God, and thus you see the point opened.

Use 1. First then, you may from hence gather a sign of trial of your own
faith, for if this be the Spirit of a godly Teacher to draw on those that are
believers to believe; it is a good sign, as of a faithful Minister, so of a
faithful Hearer, when he desires to supply the defects of his own and others
faith; you see John, a faithful Minister to those Christians to whom he
writes, he when he had brought them on to believe, and found faith wrought in
their hearts, it was his care not there to leave them; he does not say as some
would, well, there is now truth of grace in them, and truth of faith, such
faith as accompanies salvation; and now he that begun this work in them will
finish it, and so leave them; and you say, now you need take no further care
about them, but now they will do well enough; no, this is not the spirit of a
faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, and it will be but uncomfortable to such
Ministers, as think now they may be left to the wide world, Property of a
faithful Minister.
they will shift any where, but where we see any seeds of faith begun, we must
be desirous to increase it in our selves, and ours; the Apostles themselves
pray, Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.5. and so they desire to increase other
men's faith, we had need grow fast this way if we would have a true sign of a
lively faith, true and lively faith always desires to grow in it self, and it
would cause the like faith also to grow in others, and therefore as you see
faithful Ministers are thus desirous to grow themselves, and to cause others
to grow, as Paul prays exceedingly night and day, to come to those whom he had
taken pains withal, that he might make a supply of what was wanting in their
faith, and as faithful Ministers must cloathe themselves with this earnest
desire, to be calling yet more and more upon believers, that such as do
believe may believe yet more, and grow from faith to faith. Truly so godly
Christians, look as Ministers are desirous to grow in their own faith, and to
help on others, so in Christians, it is a true sign of faith, not to content
our selves in truth of faith, but to desire earnestly after growth in faith,
had not they cause to pray that Paul might come among them again and help
them? And therefore, doubtless this is that which every true believer has
respect unto, every faithful Christian prays for himself, Lord increase my
faith, Lord help my unbeleefe, this is the prayer of every soul that comes to
Christ, that though we have some measure of faith already, yet mixed with so
much unfruitfulnesse, and unsetlednesse, and so many defects, that every
Christian has cause to pray, Lord help my unbeleefe; sometimes a man is
hindered with offenses, and they are to be avoided, in which a man will not be
able to put forth love unless he have a strong faith, and that was the reason
why the Apostles prayed so earnestly Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.5. for it
was upon this occasion our Savior had been exhorting them, how to carry
themselves in respect of offenses, if thy brother trespass against thee rebuke
him, and if he repent forgive him, etc. Now they apprehended, it was a great
work, they saw it was a great work to rebuke him, he had need have much faith
before he can do that, but suppose upon that a man do humble himself, and
repent, then for a man to forgive him, Note this.
it requires a great faith to forgive a wrong, or an injury offered to us; but
what if he come and offend me again, and again, seventy times seven times?
why if he do, and say it repents me, thou shall forgive him: Now when they
hear this, that a man must be so free-hearted in forgiving wrongs and
injuries done to themselves, they had need have a strong love, and strong love
stands in need of a strong faith, to show you, that a man that shall have
occasion to trade with his faith, and to live and walk by his faith, he shall
have much need of the growth and increase of it, if it be but for the healing
of offenses, many occasions and temptations may meet with us in the world,
temptations from Satan, as well as from the world, 1 John 2.14. And if a man
have strong enemies, he will stand in need of a strong faith, to cut asunder
all the fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.16. Above all take the shield of
faith. There is no man willing to go to the field with weak armor, he would if
he could have armor of proof, such as might repulse a weapon or a dart cast
against him, so a Christian he has to fight against many enemies; And a shield
covers his whole body, and so differs from a buckler, that covers but one part,
but a shield covers the whole man stands upon the ground, and covers him all
over, and now faith being such a shield, it is of mighty force, and is able to
repulse all the fiery darts of the Devil, and all the rest of the enemies of
their salvation, so that the servants of God, that know what use they have of
their faith, they know they have need of the growth and increase of it.

And so again, in regard of their daily employments, the just man lives by his
faith, Romans 1.17. Gal. 2.20. A man does nothing Christianly and spiritually,
but by his faith, Faith profitable to all things.
now when faith must be the instrument to help us to work all our works
spiritually, we had need to grow to some life and fruitfulness in faith, and
if our faith be not fruitful, we shall make but hard work of our daily
employments, how shall we depend upon God, and do all in the name of Christ,
and do all in obedience to a commandment, and live by a promise, for Gods
presence and blessing in it? how shall a man do this if he have not faith, yea
if he have not some dexterity of faith? A weak faith will then slug it, when a
man stands in most need to use it: and therefore that a man may be ready to
show his faith upon every occasion, in prayer in conference, in every thing
both concerning this life and another. A man had need of a great deal of faith,
and therefore this is an evident sign that a man's faith is well wrought, a
sound, and a lively faith, if it be a growing faith: But if you hear men
saying, they thank God they have a strong faith, and they always believed on
Christ; and fie upon them that do not, let me say, this is a presumption of
faith, but is no faith, yea, it is the badge of the want of faith, when
therefore you see the Apostle writes to them that believe, that they may
believe more certainly, and more strongly, that is a true faith, and it will
grow.

Use 2, It serves to reprove the most sacrilegious and uncharitable faith of
the Papists, that take away these writings from the people, John writes this
Epistle to the intent, that believers may believe, you heard that the word
dispensed in any ordinance is of mighty power to increase faith, where it is
begun, and to beget it, where it is wanting. Take away reading of the
Scriptures, and conference about them, Infidel practice of Papists
and you take away all. And therefore an infidel practice to go about to take
away the faith of Gods Elect. God sent us the Scriptues to the end that we
might believe, and if this be the nature of faith, to desire that themselves and
others might grow in faith, what are they but Infidells in truth, who as much
as in them lies lock up the Scriptures in a strange tongue, that the people may
not understand what is read unto them, and as much as in them lies drives the
Bibles out of their houses. And it is heretical presumption for such and such
men to use the Scriptures, this is infidelity, and most sacrilegious to God:
And it is likewise uncharitable and injurious to the faith of Gods people.

An evident argument of infidelity, how can you charge the wisdom of God of
more folly, and lightness? God sends his word to his servants, that they might
be reading, and hearing, and conferring of it; and that by believing they might
believe: These men to cast an imputation of folly upon God, they are afraid
that God did not consider the danger of it, if believers should fall a reading,
and poor tradesmen a conferring about the Scriptures, they are afaid they will
be distempered with heresy, and so trouble the whole Church; do not they by so
doing set the wisdom of God at naught, and show themselves sacrilegious against
the truth of God?

Use 3. It may serve to exhort us all, since the holy ghost did write these
things, to the intent that you that believe on the name of the Son of God
might believe.

First, to you that believe, and then to you that believe not. You that have
been diligent in hearing and reading the word, be diligent in it still, and make
it a point of your Christian practice, not to fail to read some part of it
every day, unless you be necessarily hindered, or if you have been necessarily
hindered by business from reading, yet be sure nothing hinder you from meditating
upon it, the blessed man meditates on Gods word every night, and every day, and
though he takes the shorter time to it, yet he must have some time for
meditation upon the word, upon something he heard this day, or something he
has sometimes read, and you shall find a mighty power in it to fructify, as
if you were planted by the Rivers of waters, Mighty power in meditating upon
the word.
for the spirit of God breaathing in the word, and your hearts sucking it up,
and by meditating upon it, you grow in more knowledge in the object of your
faith, in the rootednesse in the sense, and in the acts and fruits of your
faith, and this by hearing, and reading, and meditating; read therefore, the
King himself must do it daily, Kings must read the Word of God daily.
who has more business then any man, Deuteronomy. 17.19. And if he do so, God will
learn him the fear of his name; now if God will not excuse Kings, much less
private men, who have less affairs then Kings have; and therefore be reading
every day, and when you cannot read, be sure you meditate upon some part of
Gods Word, every day, and every night.

As ever you desire to believe, use the means that you may believe, this being
sanctified of God to that end, then be not you wanting to use it; and do not
only so, but hear it likewise, and confer upon it, and search it daily
whether it be true or no; use the means that God has sanctified his Word to
be dispensed in, and by which he will bless it to his people, and then you
shall find this: In believing you shall believe, you shall grow from faith to
faith, and from sense to sense, and in the fruits of faith till you be perfect
in Christ Jesus: be diligent in hearing Gods Word, for it is the mighty power
of God unto salvation; and confer of it, there is a mighty power in the Word
being conferred upon, take heed ye neglect not occasions in this kind, and
search the Scriptures, and examine what you hear, and you will find a mighty
power in it to increase faith; Since therefore God has given you his Word, and
shed abroad the water of his Spirit, to run through every line of the
Scriptures, Note this.
so that the more you shall read, and hear, confer, and meditate, and search
the Scripture, the more you shall find the life of faith increased in you; and
therefore you must not wonder if you see Christian men that neglect these
duties, complain of the deadness of their hearts. Do thou doubt in thy
persuasion, is thy confidence mixed with much diffidence? then ask thy heart
this question; Whether have thou used the Scriptures for those ends God has
appointed them, and have thou been diligent in conferring about them, and
searching of them, whether what is delivered be suitable to them or no, and
meditated of them, and brought them home to thy house, and compared them
together, and meditated upon them day and night, and taken times to chew and
digest them? If thou had done thus, then thou would have believed more
assuredly; but if we be negligent in any of these kinds, then wonder not, if we
take away bodily food, we take away bodily heat, take away the fuel that
nourishes faith, and then it must needs grow weak and infirm. And therefore
as you desire to grow in believing, be diligent in these duties, that you may
believe on the name of Christ, and in believing may believe much more. And for
you that do not believe savingly, whose faith will not put you in possession
of eternal life, though this Scripture was not so much written for your use
and benefit, Note this.
as for them that already believe, yet since there is no means to come to
faith but by the Word, be not you wanting, as ever you desire to come to that
faith which accompanies salvation; be not wanting diligently to hear the Word
of God, and confer about it with those that believe already, Faith comes by
hearing, Romans 10.17. and it is the mighty power of God to salvation. Be glad of
any opportunity to hear the Word, and wait at the posts of wisdoms gates,
Prove. 8.34, 35. He that finds me finds life, the promise is very plain,
waiting daily at my gates. Implying, that in hearing we shall find him, and in
finding Christ we shall find life; be diligent therefore to hear, and when
you have heard it go home, and search whether it be true or no; and if you
have liberty be doing this often, be conferring about it, as you can have any
opportunity; God has sanctified these Ordinances to this end. Be diligent in
inquiring after wisdom, after Christ in the Scripture; there is a treasure
lies, dig for it and you shall have it, especially if with all these you
join humble and hearty prayer to God for a blessing upon all these Ordinances,
for 1 Timothy 4.5. they are all sanctified by the Word, and Prayer, and Prove. 2.2,
3. God would have you to use Prayer, entreat him to open your eyes and hearts,
that you may believe and obey, and that no Ordinance might be in vain to you,
but might profit by them all, and might grow up in believing.

SERMON XIV.
1 JOHN 5.14, 15. And this is the Confidence that we have in him, that if we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

And if we know that he hears us whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the
petitions that we desired of him.


IN the former Verse the Apostle described to us, the maine scope of his
writing this Epistle, which was partly, that Believers might know that they did
believe, and partly that they might believe on the name of the Son of God.

Now in this latter end John aims at in writing this Epistle, he exhorts
Believers to embrace it by three several Motives in the verses following, the
14, 15, 16. verses.

This is the confidence that we have in him; meaning, we that believe on his
name, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

we know he hears us, we know we have the things that we asked of him.

see any Brother, which has sinned a sin, that is not unto death, not a
deadly sin, that is, not the sin against the Holy Ghost, so mighty and
prevalent shall our prayers be with God, that in case we believe on the name of
Christ, and ask pardon of sin for our brothers offense, God will give him
life; so that if we believe on his name, our prayers shall be heard, and they
have a prevailing power with God to obtain at his hands the pardon of all our
brothers sins, that have not sinned unto death.

The Doctrines hence are these:

Doct. 1. First, That a prayer that is made well, never speeds ill.

Or thus: A prayer that is made according to Gods will, is ever granted
according to our will; or, as the Apostle says, according to our desire, verse
15.

Doct. 2. Secondly, Such as believe on the name of Christ for salvation, may be
confident, and certain of the hearing and granting their petitions.

Doct. 1. A prayer made according to Gods will, shall be granted according to
our will.

For so says the words of the Text, If we ask any thing according to his
will, he hears us. We praying according to Gods will, shall find acceptance
according to our will. Notable is that speech of encouragement and acceptance
of our Savior to the woman of Syrophenitia, Matthew. 15.28. O woman great is thy
faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. She had prayed, as Christ would,
according to Gods will, and she received answer according to her desire. As if
a man that did believe, and had a spirit of Prayer, and had learning to pray
according to Gods will, he might be able to carve for himself in the treasures
of Gods goodness, as if God would let him into the chamber of his presence, of
his grace and favor, and bid him take what he will, take for himself and his
friends, and for his brethren as he will.

For opening of this point observe thus much; First, let us see what it is to
pray according to Gods will; and then secondly, what is the ground of the point.

For the first, to pray according to Gods will, To pray according to Gods will
in two things
are contained in that Phrase, and yet diverse things besides those are
comprehended in it.

First, when he says, according to his will, it implies first, That we pray for
such things as God wills, such things as are not according to his secret will,
for so we cannot guide our actions, for secret things belong to the Lord our
God; but of things revealed, it is according to his revealed will, and it
implies, that we should ask him nothing but what he gives us Commandment to
ask, all that he commands us to do, as to ask that we may ask, and for that
we are to pray for expressly; As for the glory of his Name, the coming of his
Kingdom, and the building up of his grace in any, the doing of Gods will, for
our daily bread, etc. These are the things he has given us warrant to pray for.

Secondly, According to Gods will, this is evident; That whatsoever we ask, we
should ask it with submission to the will of God; so our Savior says, Matthew.
26.39. He asked that which was a lawful thing, and yet because he would not
trench upon that which might cross the will of his Father, he would not put
forth any the least affection of his soul to the overruling the Counsel of
God, and therefore he expresses himself thus; Nevertheless not my will, but
thy will be done. So that whenever we ask any thing that is lawful, it must
be with subjection of our own wills to the will of God. But for more full
clearing of this point see it thus enlarged.

First, a man is said to pray according to Gods will, either partly as his will
is expressed in his Word, and partly the will of God, expressing the work of
the Spirit in the heart of a Child of God, for both these are effectual in
every prayer that is made according to Gods will.

First, according to his will expressed in his Word; 1. Ask things lawful.
therein God requires that we should pray only for such things as are lawful,
and such as therein he has commanded us to ask, that we may do them. Notable
is that example in Psalm. 119.4, 5. Thou have commanded us to keep thy
Commandments diligently; and in the next verse see what is his request, O that
my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes; look whatsoever God commands us
to do, we have warrant to pray for that, we must pray for things lawful, and
only for such.

Secondly, 2. Ask in Christ's name.
Whatsoever we pray for, we must pray in the name of Christ, John 16.22, 23. he
makes a large promise to such as so ask in his name, verse. 23, 24. Whatsoever
you shall ask the Father in my name he will give it you. This God requires,
that we should put up all our petitions in the name of Christ.

Now to ask in the name of Christ does require the exercise of two graces.

First, He that shall ask in the name of Christ, implies the asking of it in
humility; 1 To ask in Christ's name requires humility.
whatsoever we ask in humility, and lowliness of spirit; that is, to ask in
the name of Christ; and that will evidence and put forth it self in three or
four several acts in every prayer that is made according to Gods will, and
put up in the name of Christ.

First act of humility.
First, A prayer made in the name of Christ is made with this humility, whereby
we acknowledge our selves less then the least of all Gods mercies, as Jacob
does acknowledge, Genesis 32.10. He was less then the least of all the mercies he
had already received. And therefore if God should never grant him more mercy,
he could not but acknowledge he had done abundantly more for him already then
he had deserved; he prays not in his own name, but in the name of another;
and no man can pray in the name of Christ, but he must pray in humility, he
must have no confidence in his own worth.

Cor. 3.5. Romans 8.26. This is humility and self-denial, when a man comes
before God, and acknowledges his own unworthiness to ask any mercy of God,
and confesses his own unablenesse to ask any blessing according to Gods will.

God would satisfy him in any lust, but only grant him the things that are
expedient for him, so far as may stand with the good pleasure of his heavenly
Father, and no further. Matthew. 26.39.

a voluntary humility, consisting in the worship of Angels, Col. 2.18. They
thought themselves not worthy immediately to rush into Christ's presence, but
rather entreat the Angels, to intercede the Father for them; but it is
counterfeit humility, and such men are puffed up with a fleshly mind in their
voluntary humility; it shows, that it is a vain pride of heart, to express
more baseness and meannesse of spirit then God requires, and is but a
counterfeit humility.

Now to pray in the name of Christ, is not only to pray in humility, but also
to pray in faith, and these acts of faith you have in all the prayers that you
put up to God according to his will.

First, Faith directs you to pray only unto him, First act of faith in prayer.
upon whom you have believed, Romans 10.14. We only believe on God the Father,
and on his Son Jesus Christ, and the blessed Spirit, and therefore upon the
Lord; Faith only directs us to call; he teaches us not to pray to our Mother,
as the Papists do; nor to our Brethren, and Sisters, as the Papists do to the
Saints and Angels, but only to the Father; that is the voice of faith, Gal,
4.5, 6. Romans 8.15. The Spirit helps us to cry, Abba father.

John 20.17. And it is the nature of faith to cry out as Thomas did, My Lord,
and my God, John 20.28. So that this is another work of faith, that when ever
you come into Gods presence, to ask any thing at his hand, you come to him as
to your Father, he knows what you want better then you can ask, and is more
willing to grant whatever is meet for you, then your selves can desire to come
to God as our heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ, is an act of faith, he is
so well acquainted with us in him, that himself loves us, Joh. 16.26, 27. So
that to pray in faith, is to come to God as the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and through him a Father also to us, abundant in goodness and in
truth; a Father that is great in counsel, and excellent in work; that has
compassion of his own Children, and will therefore perform that which seems
good in his sight.

Iam. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. A wavering minded man is unstable, etc. This is one, and a
principal part of the meaning of it; he speaks of such a kind of wavering
faith, as whereby a man is (...) a heart, and an heart; he has a mind to draw
near to Christ, and to become a servant of Christ, and yet withal a mind to be
hankering after some sinful lust or other which takes up his mind, and which
his soul lusts after; and therefore he is unstable in all his ways;
sometimes he is for God, and sometimes for himself, ever halting between God
and the World; but let such men think they shall not receive any thing at the
hands of God, this should have been in the second place.

Mark 11.24. Believe that you shall receive, and you shall receive it; meaning,
so far as you have commended your Petitions to God, in the name of Christ,
with subjection to the will of your heavenly Father; believe it, that God has
respect to your poor estate, and he will do for you what you desire, yea even
in those things wherein he seems to delay an answer; but in the mean time,
for your part make account your prayers are heard, in that very blessing you
desire, for God does wisely ponder, not only the hearts of the sons of men,
but all the words of their lips, and he knows the meaning of the spirit in the
hearts of his children.

And though we must express our selves in words, in our desire of this and
that blessing, yet God looks principally at the grounds of our desires, and
wherefore we desire to obtain the blessing: What it is, that moves us to have a
desire after such and such a mercy, and observing well the byas of our hearts
in such requests, he does in this respect constantly hearken to his servants,
and fails not to grant us the things we ask, even when he seems to deny us,
Heb. 5.7. he speaks of the prayer of Christ, he was heard in what he desired.

What was he heard in? why, he prayed, that if it were possible the cup might
pass from him. And was he heard in this? did not he drink it to the very
dregs? did he not taste of Gods deepest displeasure? and how is he then said to
be heard? why the Father did consider what it was that his Son did desire,
which was principally that Gods will might be done, and not his own.

And Gods will being done, Christ's desire, being that Gods will might be done,
he was heard in the thing he desired. And again, he was heard in the thing so
far as it concerned himself, as to be saved from that which he feared; that
though he did drink of the cup, yet he should be saved from being overwhelmed
by those fears, which his soul trembled at, and groaned under, and pressed him
heavily, even unto the very death, though not from tasting of them, yet from
being overwhelmed of them, and he was supported in them, so that Christ's main
end being the doing of his fathers will, and the redemption of mankind, in these
things, he was graciously heard: And so Moses, he prayed that if it might be
Gods will, he might go over Jordan, and see that good land, his end was to see
that good land. Well, God said in displeasure, he should not go over, and yet
in mercy he answers his request, for his desire was to see that good land. Now
God could make him see that good land, and never carry him over Jordan, and he
shows him all the land of Canaan: all the coasts of Israel from the one end
thereof to another, God so strengthened his sight this way, as one would not
have thought it credible, but that God was able to grant him his desire, and
strengthened him beyond what he desired, so shall you observe Gods manner of
dealing with his servants, if we be content to pray according to the will of
God, and bow our spirits to ask nothing but what is lawful, and with
submission to Gods will, and run to God as our heavenly father, in the name of
Jesus Christ; and look at him as one more ready to give, then we to ask, then
make account God will ponder all the petitions of your souls, and weigh well
what you have said, and he knows what you aim at in asking this, and that
blessing: and though he may seem to defer it, he better knows your need of
it, then your selves do, and when he seems most to cross it, then does he
most abundantly answer it.

Moses said, the Lord was angry with him, and would not hear him, and yet he
did hear him; he limited God to a means to show him that good land, but he
need not appoint God a course: Moses knew hot how he should see it, unless he
went over, but God knew how he should see it; So that even those prayers, with
which God seems to be angry, in regard of some infirmity, that God may see in
our prayers, yet this we are to make account of, that even then, when God is
displeased with our poor petitions, even then does he answer them most
graciously, Deuteronomy. 3.23, 25, 26. God was wroth with me, and would not hear me,
And he said speak no more to me of that matter. It was a mavelous strange
kind of expression of Gods fatherly counsel to Moses: that when he is angry
with some weakness in our prayers, and some unworthiness in us to desire, or
have, this or that; see his carriage: Moses his words provoked God, and
therefore, because he desires to go over Jordan to see that good land; God was
wroth, and God would not have him go, and yet he should see it, he should have
as much as he desired, but into the Land he should not go; so that come with
that confidence in prayer, that though our prayers be such as for which God may
be angry with us, yet many times God hears those prayers, and answers them in
mercy, far beyond what we could have thought; for Moses saw as much of it as
could be seen, and he could not have seen so much of it if he had gone over
Jordan, as he did then see. Consider therefore, God marks the very bent of my
soul, and desire in every petition I put up, and therefore observing what I
desire, he will accordingly grant either the thing I desire according to my
desire, or that which I aim at in my desire, and this is a glory to the name
of Christ, whatsoever we should ask in our own names would be thrust out of
heaven; yet this magnifies the name of Christ, that a Christian soul believing
on his name, and laying hold upon him, and cleaving to him, and shall come to
God, as believing that God is more ready and able, and willing to grant, then
we to ask, and that he will grant us the very petition that we desire; this
does magnify the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and this is to pray according
to Gods will, as expressed in his Word.

But now in the second place, there is something in our prayers made according
to the will of God, as is expressed in the spirit of him that prays, for this
you shall find ordinarily in Scripture, that men that pray, pray in the
spirit, Jud. 20. Praying in the Holy Ghost; and Ephesians. 6.18. Pray in the spirit;
And you know what the Apostle says in that well known place, Romans 8.26, 27.
We know not what to pray for, nor how to pray as we ought, but the Spirit
helps us, etc. God searches the heart especially in prayer, he knows the
meaning of the Spirit, for he makes requests according to the will of God,
that is the words of the text; so that if you would ask how we may pray
according to the will of God? look what is revealed in the breathings of the
Spirit, which marvellously declares it self in the wrestling, and longing
desires that it puts up to God, Psalm. 119. My soul longs and breaths after
thee; and it lets us know what the will of God is, and for that the Spirit
helps us to pray.

First, to pray in the spirit is to pray feelingly.
Now to open this a little; First, you shall discern the will of God by the
breathing of the Spirit, first when the Spirit helps us to pray feelingly, and
sensibly for those blessings that we stand in need of, when the Spirit does
lift up our hearts, and reach after those mercies we stand in need of, in some
feeling and sensible manner. The will of God is revealed in the breathing of
the Spirit, that stretches forth it self in such an humble and faithful
manner, as that the soul is very sensible of its need of it, we pour out our
souls before God, for what we stand in need of in feeling desires, and this
good Hannah expressed in her prayers, 1 Samuel 1.15. I am a woman of a sorrowful
spirit, I have poured out my soul before the Lord. To show you, there was an
inward sensible work of the Spirit of God in her heart that did enlarge her,
not so much to pour out words, as sighs, and groans; this feeling power of
the Spirit does mightily express what the will of God is that we should ask,
this is according to the will of God, according to what you read, Esaias 26.9.
With my spirit within me will I seek thee early; my spirit within me, that is
to say, he speaks as if there were a spirit within his spirit; besides the
inclination God had given and wrought in him to the ways of grace, and
besides, his soul that did animate his body, the Spirit of God within him;
with that spirit will he seek God early in prayer, the spirit will inwardly be
working, and turning him toward God; so then, this is the first thing wherein
God reveals his will to us, and we pray in the spirit; which we do, when we
pray in the sense and feeling of our own wants of those blessings we want at
Gods hand, that is, by a certain strength, greater then any of our own
spirits can reach forth themselves unto; the Spirit of God comes, and helps us
to wrestle with God, with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed; that we
think more then we speak, and we speak more then we thought of.

2. Fervently.
Secondly, besides this, this spirit helps us to pray unto God with fervency,
and heat of spirit, so much as that in such a case as this we strive with God
in our prayers, and wrestle with him; The effectual fervent prayer of the
righteous avails much, Jam. 5.16. When the Spirit of God helps us to
fervency, to cry to God, and to be earnest with him in that regard, and not to
give him over, and comes from a sensible want of the blessings we stand in need
of, and that makes us go out of our selves to God, for the mercy that is
according to the will of God, and this in Scripture is called wrestling, and
striving with God, Romans 15.30. when you grow sensible of your own danger, and
you strive with him for the blessing; this is to express fervency of spirit,
and this was commended in Jacob, that he wrastled with God, Genesis 32.24, 26.
which is expounded, Hos. 12.4. that he prayed and wept; his wrestling was
chiefly in prayer with tears, that God would be merciful to him in this case.

Thirdly, 3. Perseverance.
We pray then in the spirit when we also persevere in prayer, for that is also
requisite in all the Petitions we put up; our Savior put forth a Parable for
this very end, that men should pray constantly, and never be weary, Luke 18.1.
Pray upon all occasions for every thing that you stand in need of, and never
give over til you be heard and answered, and the Parable teaches thus much
from the unjust Judge; Shall a sinful mortal man be moved with importunity,
and shall not God arise, and be moved for those poor souls that cry unto him
night and day? yes doubtless, though you may think God is not sensible of
your prayers, but he rests himself quietly in heaven, and remains in fullness
of glory, who is blessed for ever in himself, and will not trouble himself
with such poor requests as yours is; but let me tell you, this woman did not
so much trouble the Judge here, nor could be more troublesome to him, then a
poor Christian is to God, that wrastles with him in prayer: God cannot be
quiet in heaven for such a soul, but in the end he must rise and satisfy its
desire; so you have the like, Luke 11.8. to 13. If you continue knocking he
will rise, and so will your heavenly Father do for you much more, so as that
though God might seem to be asleep, and rest himself satisfied in that blessed
estate he enjoys in another world, and no more regard things below then men
asleep, yet if you continue knocking and begging, you will disturb his peace,
till he arise and show mercy to you, and this he speaks after the manner of
men, to show you, that he does as unfeignedly, and as deeply take to heart the
desires of your souls, as any of you can do one of another; and therefore be
constant and persevering in prayer, and never give over; when we have a good
petition in hand never give over, when we pray for pardon of sin, or for peace
of conscience, or for strength of grace for our selves or for others, when we
pray for the healing of our souls, or our bodies, for the Church or
Commonwealth, whatsoever we have in hand, if the Spirit of God do but move us
this way, it is for us never to give over until God show mercy to us in some
one kind or other, that we may see our requests was not neglected, Ephesians.
6.18. Watch thereunto with perseverance, verse. 19. where you see what course
God would have his Servants to take, take this course, ever follow God, watch
night and day, and never give over till he bless you and yours, until he
bless Magistrates, give Ministers a door of utterance, that they may speak
savingly, and powerfully to the souls of their Hearers, so as that as it were
you may weary God, and prevail with him to arise, and give you your desire.
Wherefore is it think you that Christ calls prayer knocking? but for this very
end, to manifest unto us, that when we continue praying we continue knocking,
and we make as a loud noise at Heaven gates, as any man that knocks at your
house doors, and God so esteems the nature of prayer, Matthew. 7.7. For to him
that knocks it shall be opened. So that if God do but give us hearts to
knock, and to be instant and constant in prayer, for that is knocking, if we be
fervent and persevering in prayer, and spring from our feeling and sense of
want of the blessing, and what comfort it would be to us to obtain it, and
give him no rest until we receive at his hands what we ask of him; to him
that thus knocks it shall be opened. So did the Woman of Syrophenitia, she
knocked hard at our Saviors door of mercy, have pity, have mercy upon me; and
when at the first Christ answers her not a word, she then cries out again,
Lord help me; and when thereupon he tells her, he was not sent to her, but to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel: Did she then leave off? No, she would
not be put off, when he then told her, it was not meet to take the childrens
bread and to cast it to dogs; She said, Truth Lord, but yet the dogs eat
the crumbs that fall from the table; Why then says our Savior, be it unto
thee even as thou will. Like as a man that is weary of a Petitioner. As if he
should say; Why, if thou be so importunate that thou will have no denial,
if it must be so, why go thy way, and be it unto thee even as thou will. And
when God gives us so to pray as not to give over, we may know for a certain,
God intends to give us a gracious answer in all the desires of our souls, and
this is to pray according to Gods will.

Now to speak of the second part of the Doctrine, and that is the reason why a
prayer thus made is ever granted, pray well, and speed well.



him the Father hears always, Jo. 11.42. Now if Christ give us to use his
name, look whatever petition we put up, and use his name in it, it is now the
prayer of Christ; for look as if any of you should send your child or servant
to any of your neighbors to desire such or such a favor from them, you send
them, but the petition is yours; they desire it in your name, and if you send
him, and bid him use your name, and then you are sure it will be granted; and
if he should deny your child or servant of such a petition that he asks in
your name, in denying him he denies you, so that God cannot deny the petition
you ask in Christ's name; for him he hears always, and all such petitions he
has promised to hear. The word of promise you heard before, and it is full to
this purpose, Joh. 16.23. Verily, verily I say unto you; He takes his own
truth to witness it, as a solemn asseveration: Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name he will give it you. And therefore, Ask in my name that you
may receive. If therefore the Lord Jesus Christ do but give us this
encouragement, that we faithfully give up our selves to become his, and in
sense of our own unworthiness to ask any thing at Gods hands. And we come to
the Father as being set a work by Christ, and beseech him to answer us in this
and that mercy, and cannot give over till he receive our prayers, and reach us
an answer of them, then the promise stands good, Ask and you shall receive.

Romans 8.26, 27. The Spirit it self makes intercession for us, so that these
prayers are not only received and gratified, because they are put up in the
name of Christ, but also because the Spirit it self makes intercession for us,
according to the will of God; and God knows the meaning and voice of his own
Spirit, God knows that without this we could never be fervent for any
spiritual blessing, according to the will of God; our dead hearts would soon
make dead work of it, if there were no spirit in our prayer but our own, if
our flesh be weak we shall soon have done, and therefore when God sees us
pray thus feelingly, and are not willing to leave him til he answer us in our
desires, then God knows, there is a mighty power of a spirit that speaks in
us, and God cannot deny the intercession of his spirit.

And further to strengthen this point, Christ himself tells us, that he will
pray in our behalves for us; for the Lord Jesus Christ himself sits at Gods
right hand making intercession for us, John 16.26. At that day ye shall ask
in my name, and I say not unto you that I will pray the father for you, for the
father himself loves you, because you have loved me, etc. And the Apostle
sweetly expresses how the Lord Jesus prays for us, Romans 8.34. Who is he that
condemned, it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even
at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us, so that the Lord
Jesus Christ takes up our prayers, as our mediator: As the great master of
Requests, and he dresses and perfumes them from all that sinful frailty, and
coldness that usually accompanies our prayers, he perfumes with the merits of
his own sufferings, and so presents them before the father with his own worth
in his sight, and so they come to be accepted in the sight of God, so you read
Rev. 8.3. howsoever that may be verified in some tipe of Christ on earth, yet
especially it is meant of Christ in heaven, he perfumes the prayers of the
Saints, and expresses his own will to the father, as beseems the majesty of
the Son of God: And as a Mediator, he perfumes our unsavory prayers, and
presents them to his father, so as they become accepted in his sight.

Simile.
As if an elder brother should set a child one of his younger brethren to get
his father a posie of flowers, and the child out of ignorance, should gather
some weeds and put in it: And the elder brother gathers out the weeds, and
sprinkles the flowers, and then presents them in the child's name to the father.
So does Christ to us, while we gather up Petitions here and there, and as we
think for the best, and some truth and work of grace there is in them, yet
some weeds of sinful folly, then Christ takes them out of our hands, and pulls
out the weeds, and sprinkles them with the blood of his cross, and the merit
of his sufferings, what he has don and suffered for us. And so by this means
it is not possible that our prayers should be rejected.

Use 1. It may serve to teach us all, As ever we desire, we or ours might speed
well, so to learn to pray well. No one can speed ill, that can pray well.

If you can but pray, you need ask no more for you and yours. If you or yours
can pray well, they have enough; let them but speak, and speed; pray, and
have; seek, and find. Oh woman be it unto thee, even as thou will! In such a
case, God will accept you so far, as to carry you in among the treasures of
his grace, the storehouse of his mercy, and there for to fill you with what
you would have. And bring but your desires large enough; and open your mouths
wide enough, and he will fill them. The woman was to blame she borrowed no
more vessels, so long as you have but a mouth to pray; especially, an heart
open and enlarged to desire much at Gods hands, you shall need no more mercies
but this, you have enough: If God give you an heart to pray, you want nothing.

And therefore of all blessings, beg this blessing, That you may learn to
pray, Note this.
you shall need no more mercy for this nor another World. I pray you consider
what I have said in this behalf. Do but observe,

First, Take heed you be not of a double mind; of a wavering mind, James
1.6. take heed of wavering. That is when a man halts between two opinions;
When he knows not whether he had better cleave to God or to the World: loath
to deny himself, and yet would be some body: But if a man be of a wavering
mind, let not such a man think he shall obtain any thing at the hand of God;
he must be of such a mind and heart, as by which he must cleave fast to the
Lord.

As Barnabas, exhorted them with full purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord,
Acts 11.21. and if so with full purpose of heart you cleave to the Lord, you
do pray in some measure of faith: And then may you sooner learn what God has
commanded you to do, Psalm. 119.4, 5. And this you shall find of much
consequence, that according as we hearken to Gods commandments, so God
hearkens to our requests, look with what ear you listen to him, with the same
ear he listens to us: If he see that we give up our selves to observe every
word of God, then shall we never be confounded. If God see you have a tender
heart, to all his commandments, he will have as tender a respect to all your
desires. And therefore be careful, as first to grow to a free-hearted giving
up your selves to Christ, so listen duly to what God commands, and then God
will have a tender respect to every one of your petitions; when this is your
first aim, then may you have respect to other things, God will then satisfy
your souls in revealing to you his granting of all your petitions.

Use 2. Of Comfort to every soul, that has given up it self to Christ, and
do thus call upon his name, this is the confidence all such have, they shall be
satisfied according to their wills, many a soul that has received a spirit of
prayer, is many times much discouraged: And what is the matter? Why, this and
that I have prayed for, but my faith is faint within me for want of the thing
I desire; Why, but be not discouraged, heaven and earth shall fail, but the
word of God shall never fail, do but consider what it is thou have asked, and
know there is no prayer of thine, but it stands upon record in heaven, and God
waits and stays but for a fit and seasonable time. Notable is that speech in
Daniel, At the beginning of thy supplication, the commandment went forth, It
was sent forth to grant thee thy request but it was hindered so many days, that
it could not be don till now, from the beginning the prayer was heard, and the
answer was decreed, but it must have a time to be wrought, Dan. 12.10. Look as
you see a man that makes a petition to a King; the King grants the Petition the
same day it is asked, but it must pass from the privy Seal to the great seal,
and so be a good while before the business be gone through with; truly so,
the first day that any soul seeks to God in Christ, for any blessing, God
hears in heaven, only it must pass through the hands of some Angels, they
must see it done, means and creatures must be wrought upon, something must be
done before our petitions be granted, notwithstanding our prayers be accepted,

SERMON XV.
1 JOHN 5.14, 15. And if we know that he hears us whatsoever we ask, we know
that we have the petitions we desire of him.


NOw to come to a second Note.

Doct. 2. Such as believe on the name of Christ for salvation, may be confident
and certain of the hearing and granting of their petitions.

There is a double Act and a double Object; the double Act is confidence and
knowledge. And the double Object, is first, Hearing of our petitions, And
secondly, the granting of our petitions, and both expressly distinguished in the
Text.

And so the point will be evident, Such as believe on the name of Jesus Christ
for salvation, (for of them he speaks in verse. 13.) they may come to a
confident, and certain knowledge of the hearing and granting of their
petitions, and the having of them all fulfilled.

To open this point unto you. And because John does gather this from the end of
his own writing, for he says, he wrote these things only to them that
believe in the name of the Son of God, for this end, That they might believe
on his name.

Therefore, let me show you first, how these two great benefits, confidence and
certainty of hearing and having our petitions, does both spring and arise from
what is here taught us.

First, Which is the foundation of all the rest, 1 John 3.1. speaking of
Adoption, says he, Behold what manner of love the Father has showed on us,
that we should be called the Sons of God; he does stand and wonder at the
mavelous and incredible love of God, that he should vouchsafe to stoop so
low, and honor us so much; debase himself, and lift us up; not only stoop so
low as to behold low things are on earth, Psalm. 113. but so low as to take up
such earthworms as we be from the Dunghill, and set us among the Princes of
the people, ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. he not only beholds them with an eye of
providence, but his people with an eye of fatherly compassion, and lifts us up
to become sons and daughters to himself, and helps us to believe it that we
are so.

This is the first ground of the certainty and confidence of the hearing of our
petitions, if once we may come to be certain, that we are the sons of God,
upon which occasion a great part of this Epistle is spent, this is the first
ground, and these the Apostle is wont to join together, as the ground of all
comfort in this kind, Gal. 4.5, 6. Romans 8.15. so that to be persuaded, or to
grow confident that we are the children of God, will be a good foundation to
the certainty of the hearing and granting of our Petitions. To whom may a Son
come for any blessing but to a Father? and what makes him more confident of
speaking, and acceptance, then this principle, that he knows he is the child
of such a Father as is willing, and able to help him?

Secondly, another principle in this Epistle tending to build up this
certainty, and confidence, is not only our adoption, but likewise Christ's
advocation, 1 Io. 2.1, 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Advocate what.
What is it to be an Advocate? To be an Advocate, is to plead on our behalves
with the Father, for the granting and answering of our Petitions, for the
pardoning and healing of all our transgressions, and the performing to us, and
giving of us all the good things we stand in need of, whether we ask them, or
ask them not; but especially, there is no Petition we put up, but Christ takes
it at our hands, and puts it up in such form to his heavenly Father, as that
by and through him it is accepted; As a man retains an Advocate in a Court, he
brings him his cause rudely drawn, so as it would be rejected in the Court,
but his Advocate puts it into such a form, as is agreeable to the Law, and
suitable to the order of the Court, so as it finds free acceptance: So we put
up our Petitions rudely, and many times far short of that frame which God
especially looks for from his servants hands, but Christ takes them at our
hands, and puts them into form, and so preferres them to his heavenly Father,
and so as from thence we have good occasion, and good ground of confidence and
certainty, that whatever we put up in any measure according to Gods will, being
presented to our Advocate, to our heavenly Father, shall be accepted.

Thirdly, The Atonement, or propitiation that our Savior makes to our blessed
Father, spoken of in the same place, 1 Ioh. 2.2. Atonement, or propitiation,
the thing is this: That whereas many a servant of God might fear his Petitions
would never be granted, because he has been so sinful before God, and has so
many ways dishonored God, that he knows not however God should hear such an
unworthy creature as he is. Now the Apostle sets forth in this Epistle the Lord
Jesus Christ as our Atonement, that if we come to our Advocate, and say, We
have such Suits, and Petitions to put up to our heavenly Father, but we have so
displeased him, that we think he will never regard us; Why says the Apostle,
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and therefore for our own
hearts, though we have just cause of discouragement in regard of our sins, yet
we have a propitiation, an atonement, he makes intercession for us as an
Advocate; but you say, God will not hear him for such sinners as we be? Yes,
he makes propitiation or atonement, that we perish not by our sins, nor that
they should hinder Gods acceptance of us, or granting our desires, ver. 7. of
the first chap. and so here is a third groundworke of our confidence and
certainty of our desires.

Fourthly, There is another, and that is the annoyntment that we have received
from him, by which we know all things, 1 John 2.20. implying, that though we be
dark in our own minds, and dead, and straight in our own spirits, and do
not know what the Lord or Christ has done for us. Why yet we have received an
unction from the Lord Jesus, who will tell us what he has done for us. As a
man's Advocate, will send his Clyent word of all things how they go in the
Court about his business, that he may know how far he has proceeded, and
where they stick: So the Lord Jesus Christ, he is the holy one there spoken of;
You have received an unction from him, he sends down his holy Spirit into your
hearts, and lets you see and know all the petitions and requests that God
grants you; you shall no sooner have a petition granted, but you shall have it
certified to you by this unction of the holy one, whereby you know you have
them granted, and for whose sake it is that they are granted by this unction;
you know all things pertinent to life and godliness. And this is that which
the Apostle Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 2.12. God sends forth his own Spirit into our
hearts to let us know so much, and this is a mavelous point that the Holy
Ghost gives us to know all things that are done in Heaven for us, and how far
God has accepted us.

Further, If you be inquisitive to know, why the Spirit of God does certify
the soul of this.

First, the Spirit certifies us of this, that surely our Petitions are heard
and granted, because he has given us an heart to pray, he has helped us to
pray, we could never have prayed fervently, and feelingly, unless the Holy
Ghost had helped us; we know we have straight hearts, and if we therefore come
and pour out our souls to God in any spiritual affection, then we know we have
this unction, the Holy Ghost came and opened our mouths, and healed our lips,
and made us pray affectionately, and feelingly; and that is a great light to
the hearing of our petitions, for a prayer well made, is never ill heard, and
therefore you know what is said, Psalm. 10.17. Thou preparest the heart to
pray, and thou have heard the desire of the poor. How shall a poor Christian
know that his desire is heard? Why, thou have prepared the heart to pray; If
God prepare our hearts, then he will cause his ear to hear, these always
accompany one another; That is something that this unction does, it works in
all our hearts to pray according to Gods will, and to pray in the name of
Christ, and so satisfies us.

Secondly, This Spirit of God that we receive from the holy one, it is also a
spirit of faith, that inwardly persuades us that God has indeed heard us, and
that he will do for us whatsoever we desire, and will sometimes evidently
bear witness of it to the heart of a man, Man. 11.24. What thing soever ye
desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall receive them, and ye shall have
them. We must believe that what we have said to God he will certainly do it,
and the spirit of faith will come, and say to the heart, God in heaven says
Amen to it, he gives out a f^at, let it be done, Psalm. 6.8. David was in a
grievous affliction, both in bodily affliction, and spiritual desertion, as in
the beginning of the Psalm, He cried out day and night, God had forsaken him,
and his soul was sore vexed; but thou O Lord, how long, etc. And now away from
me all ye mine enemies, for the Lord has heard my petition, and he will accept
me; so that even while he is in bitter complaints, and grievous mourning; while
he is yet speaking, this unction comes, and reveals to him Gods acceptance of
him, and therefore now he encourages himself, and casts a defiance upon all
the troubles of his soul, he looks at them all as vanishing away like snow
before the Sun, and now he comforts himself therein.

And this oftentimes and usual, when the soul makes use of Gods Ordinances,
and Privileges which himself has granted, that surely God has heard our
requests, he never refuses to grant that prayer which he stands to hear; for
this purpose is that you read of the good woman Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.15. to 18. Ely
suspected she was in some distemper, but says she, I have poured out my soul
before the Lord. She prayed feelingly, and fervently, and faithfully, not
words, but her soul before the Lord; she had prayed with her whole heart, and
her soul did raise up it self heavenward, the strength of her desire was set
upon that; and he then said, The Lord give thee favor in his eyes, and grant
thy request; which was, as if this answer had come from heaven, for God does
reveal himself in his Ordinances: She looked at him as the high Priest, and so
a Type of the Messiah and she took it as a voice from heaven, and the text
says, She went home, and looked no more sad. God has set it on, and spoken
comfort to her heart, so as that her faith was established, she saw the voice
of God in it, and went home resolved upon it, and takes such encouragement to
her self from thence as to fear no more in that kind. When Gods spirit gives
us to pray affectionately, and to believe confidently, then we know we have our
petitions, we are persuaded of it.

But besides this cofident persuasion this follows, there is another work of
faith, and that is a constant wrestling against all discouragements that falls
between our requests, and the accomplishment of our petitions. Famous is that
story of the woman of Syrophenicia, Matthew. 15. from 23. to 29 you know the
manifold discouragements she met with, she prays, and at first God gives her
no audience, answers her not a word; she prays again, and then he gives her a
denial to grant her any such request, and tells her plainly, It is not suitable
to his calling, and therefore he may not apply himself unto her; yet she is
not discouraged with this (which is very much) but she follows him still, and
though yet reproached, and called a dog, yet she is not discouraged, but out
of the word of reproach gathers some hope of comfort; if she be a dog, why
then let her have that which belongs to dogs, let her have but the crumbs that
fall from the childrens table: She is not discouraged with all the
difficulties that lay in her way, nothing shall cut her off from importunity,
and when he could forbear no longer, he then tells her, O woman, great is thy
faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. To show you, that if the Holy Ghost
do but give a Christian soul so much resolution and confidence, as not to
give over praying, till God be pleased to give over answering, It is a good
sign, this spirit of faith will certainly prevail at length, All things are
possible to them that believe, and not only possible but certain.

Thirdly, There is a third work of this Spirit, and that is this; it works as
it is a spirit of hope, and that moves a man to wait upon God, that though God
should tarry long, and he should pray heartily for such and such requests to be
granted; in such a case as this our spirits would be sad and uncomfortable, and
give over, and be ready to say, Wherefore should I wait on the Lord any longer
(as that profane Prince said, 1 King. 6. last,) having been long pressed with
Famine, he in the end burst forth with this, This evil is of the Lord, why
should we wait on him any longer? our foolish hearts soon grow impatient, and
we cannot dance after attendance upon God; and therefore in this case though
flesh and blood be short winded, and soon weary, yet the truth is, this
unction when it works in us a spirit of hope, it still waits upon God, it
sets it self to wait upon him, and is very well contented to stay Gods
leisure, though he should tarry very long, Psalm. 62.1. and Psalm. 130.4, 5. and
2 last, he sets both morning and evening watch for him, and he is well
contented to wait for him, and Psalm. 123.1, 2, 3. Our eyes wait upon the Lord
our God; so that when God gives us a spirit of waiting, then does he certainly
seal up unto us the granting of our petitions, for when a man attends at the
Court for an answer upon his petition, if the King bid him attend, it is a good
sign he means to grant him his request, else he would have rejected it; but a
wise Prince, if he see a man come in good sort, and desire a reasonable request
of him, that such a thing is according to his Princely will, and he bids him to
attend and stay there, a sign he means to take it into consideration, at
least, and good hopes it will be accepted. Now God consults with no body, but
if he give us a heart to wait and stay, assure your selves he means not to
send you empty away, but it is an undoubted argument he will give us an answer,
because thou can thus wait upon him.

Fourthly, There is a fourth work of this unction, and it tends marvellously
to the speeding of our requests, and that is that which you read, Psalm. 145.19.
He will fulfill the desires of them that fear him. Do thou find that the
Lord has wrought a spirit of fear in thy heart, so as that thou walks
awfully before him, and in the fear of his name goes about every duty, and in
his fear dependest upon him, and endeavourest to approve thy self before him?
truly he will assuredly fulfill the desires of them that fear him, when we
reverence him in his Ordinances, pray with reverence, and in an holy fear,
Psalm. 2.11. Them that go about holy duties in a reverent and holy fear, do
all things in the fear of the Lord, he has a spirit of power to prevail with
God; this is such a fear as whereby a man keeps Covenant with God, and
consequently prevails with God to keep Covenant with them, Jer. 32.40. This
fear is it which makes us keep Covenant with God, this fear of God always
keeps possession for God, so as that we dare not do that which is unlawful,
we dare not sin against God, nor perform good duties carelessly, and
fearelesly, for the fear of God bows us to go about holy duties, in an holy
and reverent manner, and blessed is that man that so fears always. If
therefore God take from us a wanton and wild heart, a loose and unreverent
heart, and work in us an awful reverent fear of his name, in every duty of
his service, and our own callings, that keeps us from departing from God, and
it keeps God from departing from us, that we always have him near at hand, to
hear all the desires of them that fear him. It is that spirit of which you
read, spoken of concerning our Savior, in which he shall prosper in all the
works of his hands, Esa. 11.2. The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him,
etc. A spirit of power, and of the fear of the Lord, and that shall make him
quick of understanding, and so shall prosper, which is a blessing promised our
Savior, Esa. 53.10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to
grief, but the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. This is the end
of this blessing, when God puts us to grief and humiliation, and so works in
us the fear of his great name (which ever accompanies those dispensations)
then the work of the Lord prospers in our hands. If God give us a Spirit of
his holy fear in any duty we go about, then it will assure us that God will
hear our desires.

Fifthly, But yet further, there is a spirit of obedience, which does
marvellously seal up unto us the hearing and granting of all our prayers and
petitions, 1 John 3.22. Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep
his Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight. It is
of necessary use, that when God gives us hearts to listen to every word of his
mouth, he will then listen to the desires of our souls, Prove. 28.8. The prayer
of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but the desires of the righteous
are his delight, and he that turns away his care from hearing the Law, his
prayer shall be abominable. But if a man lend a listening ear to Gods Law, it
makes his prayer acceptable; hearken to the Lord, and the Lord will hearken to
you, else not. It is to this purpose what you read, Judge. 9. latter end of the
seventh verse, Hearken unto me, that God may hearken unto you. If God gave them
hearts to hearken to what he spoke to them in Gods name, then God will hearken
to them. If we speak, and do as Eli taught Samuel to say, Speak Lord, for
thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3.10. If we come before God with such a resolution,
that whatever God speaks to us we will hear it, and do it, we shall find
this upon it, whatsoever we speak to God he will answer us, and work it for
us; so that an obedient Christian is a powerful petitioner, he is powerful in
prayer. And this we may attain to, by making use of this holy Epistle of John,
that is written to all that believe on the name of Christ; this is a fourth
direction that John gives us in this Epistle, whereby you see how mighty this
same Epistle is to satisfy, and fill our hearts with fullness of joy.

Reas. The reason of this confidence springs from the promises, and the
discerning of them clearly to belong to us, now all these things discover to us
many promises, confidence springs partly from Gods nature, and partly from Gods
promise, and partly also from our own experience, and these are the staff of
our confidence; and from hence it is that we grow to see many promises belong
to us, we see the nature of God become fatherly to us, and we from hence in
time gather many experiences of Gods acceptance of us, and this strengthens our
confidence in his hearing of our petitions. Our Adoption assures us of Gods
nature to be ours, whereby God takes us to be his Children, and he is one that
is full of grace and goodness, nothing is wanting on his part; he is a Father
to us, and that is a great matter.

And in regard that Christ is our Advocate and Atonement, he brings all the
promises to us, which in Christ are all, yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1, 20. And this
holy Spirit of God gives us experience of all that goodness that is in God,
and the truth in his promises, yea and it gives us experience in this also;
that he that has given us his own Son, will not be give us all things else?
Romans 8.32. He gives us Election, Redemption, fatherly Adoption, and effectual
Vocation to the ways of his grace, and so he gives us experience of the
greatest matters, and from hence we know, that he will not deny us smaller
things, as victory against the remnant of our corruptions, the greatest part of
them is scattered before, the staff and strength of them already broken, and
we now conflict but with remnants of corruption.

But now when the Holy Ghost says, we know this, it goes far; for confidence
and faith springs from the testimony of him that speaks, or from the nature of
him upon whom we trust; but knowledge does not so much spring from the
testimony of any, either God, or man, but is commonly gathered from sense and
experience, and experience is both a ground of confidence, and knowledge; and
hence comes the knowledge of all Arts and Sciences, whence is their knowledge,
but from their observation of many experiences? Physicians know it, and they
therefore set it down in their books, they know it is so. Things that we
gather from sense and experience, we are said to have the knowledge of; now
this experience does not only give us confidence but knowledge, for by the
unction that we have received, we do know the love of God that passes
knowledge, Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, we come to know the love of
God toward us, Ephesians. 3.17.19. There is not any thing that concerns the love of
God toward us, but the Spirit of God dwelling in our hearts by faith, it comes
to pass that we are able to comprehend the height, and depth, length, and
breadth of the love of God toward us. This Spirit of God in our hearts gives
us sensible experience and knowledge of Gods love to us, of his atonement and
grace to us, our Consciences that had hels in them before, all such darksome
evils are now vanished and scattered, and we know that sensibly we had power
given us to pray, and to believe that our prayers are granted; and can wait
upon God, and fear God, and make conscience of obeying his will. Now this
Spirit of prayer that discovers these things plainly to our inward man, the
sense and experience of it makes a Christian able to know what God has done
for him, and makes him able to believe what God has promised him; and thus now
when we ask any thing according to Gods will, he does not only say, It is well
said, but he takes a course to answer our requests, we have certain grounds to
move us in what we ask, and the ends of our requests are right. Now God
considers not always so much the letter of our prayers as the grounds, and
ends of them, the scope we aim at, and God will so accordingly answer us.

Use 1. Let it be first a ground of encouragement to every Christian soul that
believes in the name of Jesus Christ, trust not in your own good parts, and
good gifts, if any such things increase, set not your hearts upon them; trust
not in any worldly blessing, but believe on the name of Christ. And therefore
that you may believe, humble your souls before him in regard of your sins, and
pray heartily in the faith of Christ. And why so? The ground is in the text,
you shall not only be confident and assured of your salvation, which is a great
mercy of God to my soul, and a greater then all the whole Church of Rome would
grant; they may go to Rome, and from thence to Jerusalem, and from one place
to another to have sought for pardon of sin, and yet not so much comfort
promised them, that after all this they shall find it, but in the end to
Purgatory they must go; and that is as ill as Hell fire (say they) save only
in durance;) and this is all the help they have, they might whip and scourge
themselves, and give all their goods away to the poor, and themselves go in
sackcloth and ashes all their days, and when all comes to all, they must not
be sure of any mercy or favor from God; which to believe would be Heretical
presumption; but they must notwithstanding all this rest in Hell fire till the
day of Judgment, unless they will be at cost to purchase freedom from it;
and (which is strange) though they would not suffer them to believe a release
by Christ's pardon, yet upon the Popes pardon they might have hope, and so they
take more pains for an uncertainty, then we for certainty and knowledge, but
you shall not only attain certainty of salvation, but certainty of the
granting of all your requests; no peace to the peace of a Believer, and
therefore lay aside all your confidence in the world, but be confident in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and be certain of Gods favor and goodness to you in
him, and then here is such blessings as will keep a man's heart warm in the
worst hours.

Use 2. To teach such as believe on the name of the Lord Jesus, how you may
come to be confident, and certain of the hearing and granting your petitions;
How may we come to that? Have thou good evidence to thy soul of thy Adoption,
that God is thy Father, then meditate well upon this point, that Christ is thy
Advocate, to make intercession and Atonement for thee, in case thou have
displeased thy heavenly Father. These two things will much prevail, they be
strong helps to a weak faith; and then consider what unction thou have
received, and look up to God that he would give thee a spirit of prayer, to
pray feelingly, and fervently, and humbly before him, and then labor for a
spirit of faith, which if God give thee so much faith as to persuade thee, thy
requests are heard, and to wrestle against discouragements, and that the spirit
of faith does work in thee grace to hope and wait upon God, and withal an
holy fear of his name, and obedience to walk obediently in doing his will,
and patiently to suffer his will under his hand; and observe how the Spirit
speaks evidently in this and that kind, and it will be a notable means to
help thee to grow confident, and certain that all thy prayers are heard. Now
many a Christian soul falls short of this, he considers not the Atonement of
Christ in his prayer; but many times thus stands the case with them, there is
much desolutenesse in their lives, and looseness and fearlesnesse in their
hearts before God, rejoice not with trembling, God sees his Servants loose in
their obedience, and when disobedient they seek not to Christ for Atonement;
whence it is that many times they are so full of doubts.

Use 3. Of much consolation to all those that believe on the name of the Lord
Jesus, and make use of these blessed means; this is our confidence, that
whatsoever petitions we ask he hears us, and we know it. See how comfortable
a Christians estate is, he grows certain not only of his own salvation, but
he is certain of the hearing and granting of all his petitions, if he can but
pray well, he makes account all is well, let his distresses be what they will
be.

SERMON XVI.
1 JOHN 5.16, 17. If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto
death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life; for them that sin not unto
death. There is a sin unto death, I do not say that he shall pray for it.


THese words contain a third motive to encourage us unto that duty which is
the maine scope of this Epistle (to wit) to believe on the name of the Son of
God; whereto the Apostle exhorts us, verse. 13. and propounds first this motive,
to wit, A blessed confidence of the hearing of all our petitions. Secondly, a
certain knowledge verified, that he not only hears, but grants our desires.
Now he propounds a third motive in these words, taken from the benefit which by
believing on Christ we shall in some measure be enabled, and made capable of
bestowing the like blessing upon our brethren, and that by our prayers. If such
a man should see his Brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall
ask, and he shall give him life. As an instrument, God at his request shall
give him life, God will make him an instrument of conveying special favor to
such a man.

First, the words contain three parts; First, a promise of obtaining life for
such of our brethren as we shall see sin not unto death, and shall ask life
for him.

Secondly, an acception from this general promise, he would have it understood
of some special transgression, of them that sin not unto death, he would be
so understood, and would not enlarge this promise so far, as that a faithful
man by his prayers shall obtain pardon of sin for such as sin unto death, but
not for that, that is the only caution that he gives, least this promise be
taken to extend too far.

Thirdly, A prevention of an objection or doubt that might hence arise.

For might some man say, All unrighteousness is sin, and every sin is a
sin to death, and the wages of every sin is death, Romans 6. ult. And
therefore if the promise extend only thus far, to procure peace and pardon
for such as sin not unto death; then either you must grant some venial sins,
or else this promise is of none effect, for if every sin be mortal, and you
only promise pardon of sin to such as is not unto death; and no man sins but
it is unto death, this promise is of none effect.

John Answers to this Objection, verse. 17. and says, though all
unrighteousnosse be sin, yet there is a sin that is not unto death. It is true
the deserved wages of al unrighteousnes is unto death, but there is a sin that
is not unto death, not that there is any sin, which does not deserve death, but
not that which does undoubtedly cut off a man from all hopes of life, but
notwithstanding that sin he may be converted. As sometimes our Savior said of
the sickness of Lazarus he is sick, but not irrecoverable, John 11.4. So that
the meaning of the Holy ghost is, that there is a finne unto death, which does
not only kill the soul, but irrecoverably, out of which there is no hope of
recovery or salvation, and that sin they must forbear to pray for.

This promise thus opened will afford us three notes.

First, That a faithful Christian (or which is all one) a believer on the name
of Christ, is not to hide his eyes from observing, and discerning the sins,
and slips of their brethren. If any man see his brother sin a sin, which is
not unto death, which he cannot see if he neglect to observe them.

Secondly, A faithful Christian discerning the sin of his brother, is to
pray for him, Let him ask when he sees him sin not unto death.

Thirdly, A faithful man praying unto Christ, for the sin of his brother,
shall obtain life at Gods hand for him, pardon and peace and grace for him.

For the first of these.

Doct. A faithful believer is not to hide his eyes from observing the sins
and failings of his brethren.

If any man see his brother sin a sin, he must observe him, else he cannot
see him, Gal. 2.14. When I saw that they walked not uprightly, according to the
truth of the Gospel, etc. he observed them and discerned their course, he
turned not his eyes from beholding it, but he did take notice of it, Heb. 3.12,
13. Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbeleefe, in
departing from the living God, take heed: he does not speak of himself only,
though that principally, but least there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbeleefe, that is not only for every man to take heed to himself, but to his
brethren also, as appears by the following verse, implying that a man should
not only take heed to himself, but as much as in him lies, take heed to his
brethren. And if you should ask how should I prevent another man, from having
an evil heart of unbeleefe? he tells you how; By exhorting one another daily
while it is called to day, look to your selves, and also to your brethren, and
show your care of them, by stirring them up daily; And this is that the Apostle
speaks of in Hebr. 10.24. Let us consider one another and provoke one another
to love and good works, see therefore and observe one another, and see where
any thing is amiss, and stir up one another to every holy performance.

Reas. 1. It is first taken from the love we owe them. Secondly, from the love
we owe our selves.

First, The love we owe to our brethren, God requires our love to our brethren,
yea toward our enemies Ox or Ass, we should not see one of them fall under
their burden or go astray, and hide our face from them, Deuteronomy. 22.24. If you
should see the beast of your enemy to sink down, you shall not pass by him and
let him alone, but you shall raise him up from under his burden. Now if God
require so much love to our beasts, and that to the beasts of our enemy, how
much more does God require this love to our brethren, that if we see them going
out of the way we should call them back again? if we see them to sink under
the burden of sin, not there to let them lie, but though we could find in
our hearts there to let them lie, yet we ought not so to satisfy our selves,
but to look unto our brethren in such a case, and do the best we can to
recover them from going astray.

And in respect of our selves, this benefit we our selves shall have, we shall
learn a more holy fear of the Lord, and have a more just jealousy over our
selves, we shall keep the better watch over our selves when we see our brethren
fall before us, Romans 11.12. Be not high minded but fear; to show you, that
when we see other men through unbeleefe, and corruption fall into any sin, we
ought to benefit our selves thereby, not to be high minded upon this occasion,
to bless our selves, and we thank God it is not with us as it is with other
men, we are not such and such as these Publicans are wont to be, but fear we
in such a case, the faylings of others should be the fears of Gods people; the
more they see others fall, the more should they suspect their own aptness to
fail in the like kind. If such things do befall the green tree, such as are
full of the Ointment of the Holy one, how easily may the dry stubble kindle, so
that what out of respect to learn the more to watch our selves, and out of
compassion to our Brethren to restore them, what by seasonable admonition,
Levit. 19.17. and what through prayer in his behalf, it is a necessary duty of
every faithful Christian man to observe the failings of his brethren.

For further clearing of this point, let me first show you with what an eye we
should look upon their falls. Secondly, come to answer an objection, and then
to make use.

First, when you look at the falls of your brethren, First, partial eye.
and have occasion to behold them; look not at them with a partial eye, or an
hypocritical eye, as they in Matthew. 7.3, 4, 5. but reflect we our eye upon our
selves, and conceive that there is either the same or a greater evil in our
own bosoms, or at least there is a pronnesse in our selves to do it if God
should leave us to our selves. A man should never see his brother fall into any
sin, but if he know himself well, when he sees a moate in his brothers-eye,
he might see a beam in his own; for though God leave not all his servants
alike to fall into scandalous evils, yet there is found in them all a root and
aptness to all sin, that if God should not restrain them, they would fall
into as great evils as the other have done. And hence a Christian man that is
sensible of this, he knows there is not any thing found in his brother that is
singular, but he knows that both himself and all the rest of his brethren are
subject to the like evils, and that is an eye of sincerity, by which we should
ever survey the falls of our brethren, an eye that does not so soon espy an
evil in our brethren, but it sees the like, or a greater in it self.

Secondly, As we must not behold their falls with a partial eye, Censorious
eye.
so neither must we observe them with a curious or censorious eye, for there is
such an inbred vanity in the hearts of men, that we love to be prying into
other men's frailties, and love to be busy in finding fault with other men, not
out of a desire to amend them, but to reprove them, and to have something
against them, Jam. 3.1, 2. Be not many Masters, for in many things we offend
all. What is his meaning? his meaning is, Be not of a masterly spirit, be not
masters of many persons, to be every man's master is out of censoriousnesse, our
natures are ready to sift into every man's failings, and would ever be taxing of
them, and that is the utmost end such men aim at, not so much the healing and
cleansing of our brethrens sins, but to be masters over them; but my brethren,
be not many masters: As if this were the frame of our spirit, to be busy as
Masters in an imperious manner.

Thirdly, Neither with an envious and malicious eye, that is complained of by
Jeremiah, Malicious eye.
he much complains of it; when a man opens his eyes to observe curiously, and
to pry narrowly, that if they could but find him halting at any time they
would recompense it, Jer. 20.10 When a man observes his brothers halting to
heal it, but for this very end, that he may take advantage against him, and
overthrow him, they did stare in his face, and they thought to be even with
him, they watched for his halting; this was an envious and malicious eye.

Fourthly, Neither must I behold my brothers failings with a wanton eye, that
is, when a man is not humbled for his brothers faults, but partly puffed up
with it, Wanton eye.
and prides himself with beholding another man's failings, and thinks every
man's fall is a refreshing to himself; he builds his comfort upon the
remembrance of the failings of his brethren, and his own falling short of
them, this is an inbred vanity amongst men; this the Apostle taxed among the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.2. You have not so sorrowed for it, ye have not been so
humbled for it as ye should have been, but rather have been puffed up; Puffed
up, why so? what reason had they to be puffed up? Why only this, that they were
not such as he was, they had carried themselves better then he had done, they
compared themselves with him, and in the balance found themselves better then
he, and this puffed them up. And this is a wanton eye, for a man may behold it
with a wanton eye, either when he prides himself in it, or is induced thereby
to licenciousnesse, and are glad of the occasion, and will say, Note.
If such and such men take such liberty, then they hope they may take the same
liberty as well as such men do; and therefore they run into the same course
with all greediness. This is that which the Lord complained of in the whole
Church of Judah, Jer. 3.7, 8. Her treacherous sister Judah saw it, and though
for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed Adultery I had put her
away, and given her a divorce, yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but
went and played the Harlot also. You heard one use that we ought to make of our
brethrens failings was, that we should thereby become to fear, but she saw the
fall of Israel, and would not be reformed, she feared not, she was not humbled
at such falls of her Sister Church, but was wanton her self, and went and
played the Harlot also. As the Church of Israel had gone a whoring after false
gods, Judah saw her sin, and saw me reprove and afflict her for it, yet she
feared not, but went and played the Harlot; to show you, that a man may see his
brothers sin, priding himself in his better watching over himself, or with
a wanton eye; and this kind of observing the falls of our brethren we ought
not to make use of, he pre-supposeth a man ought to observe and see his
brothers sin, but not with any of these eyes.

Use 1. But for further use, learn we from hence not to neglect the falls of
our brethren, and think it is good for us, neither to meddle nor make with
them, let that be far from us; that was the spirit of Caine, Genesis 4.6. Am I
my brothers Keeper? as if he would neither meddle nor make with him, what had
he to do with him? now this is a churlish and an unnatural frame of spirit,
for a man not to be sensible of another failings. We should look at every
man's failing, as things that behoove us to observe, and as much as in us lies
rather to prevent them then not to take notice of them. Many a man thinks it
is best to live quietly, and let every man say, and do as he will, but this is
not that which the Apostle John would have to be in faithful Christians.

Use 2. Secondly, Let it be our parts therefore to take a due observation not
only of our own, but also of the steps of our brethren, we should not hide our
selves from the beholding of them, if we be occasioned to see it, we should not
blind our selves, and put out our eyes, you see that love to our brethren, and
enemies beast, would require it, if we find them out of the way, or fallen
down under their burden; and you see God requires this love to our selves,
that we should make some use to our selves of our brethrens fall.

As first, if you see a brother sin, whatever sin it be, learn we to fear
God, and that is true Christian affection, to be first affected with an holy
fear of your own weakness; we should be jealous of the sinful frame of our
own hearts, that doubtless of themselves are as apt to start aside as any of
our brethrens be, the want of this (as you heard) Jeremiah reproved in Judah;
and this Paul required of the Romans, Be not high minded, but fear; and what
privileges has the Church of Rome above others? the Apostle knew that the
Church of Rome had not received an impossibility of error in his time; he made
account in his time, if that Israel (which was the natural branch) were cut
off, then be not thou high minded, but fear, for if they be cut off, why may
not thou? First therefore lay we our hands upon our own hearts, and see if
there be not the like folly in me, the same root of unbeleefe in me, or if I
be not led to the same, am not I led to as great, or a greater evil then
theirs is? This use should we make to our selves.

Again, we should labor to make benefit to our selves by it, look at your
brethren in this case, with such an eye as may stir you up the more to pity
them; if they be gone out of the way call him back again, if he lie under his
burden lift him up, or if his estate and condition be such, as that you can by
no means have opportunity to speak to him, or if you should, happily your
labor would be in vain; and if you should fail here and cannot reach him,
yet whether he will or no you may power out your souls to God in his behalf,
and so may you do him good; we ought so to do, and not to fail therein; and
that will be of special use to help us this way; to hear of the sins and
falls of our brethren is much, but to see them is more; to see such heavy
burdens lie upon his soul that he is not able to subsist, in such a case as
this, there will be a special compassion kindled in the heart of a living
Christian; for living Christians are loving Christians, so far as living so
far loving, for the whole life of Christianity is but faith toward God, and
love toward our brethren.

Object. But say you, you would not have us to shut our eyes upon the failings
of our brethren, but to see and observe them; but does not the Holy Ghost say,
Love covers a multitude of sins? as if we should smother them, neither
meddle nor make with them?

Answ. But yet though love cover a multitude of sins, yet how does it cover
them? First, with a mantle of wisdom, then with a mantle of faithfulness, and
then a mantle of compassion.

A mantle of wisdom, when a man so covers it as not to skin it over, Mantle of
wisdom.
but to cover it so effectually as that it may be covered from the eyes of God
and man, Iam. 5.19, 20. this is a wise covering of a multitude of sins, when
a man takes a course not only to cover them from the eyes of men, but
principally from the Conscience of the sinner himself, as that in time he be
not over-pressed with them, and then when he is least able to bear them, and
so endanger wholly to over-whelme him; for let a man go on in sin, he goes
on from day to day, and thinks himself fish whole, and yet it is neither
covered from Gods eye, nor from the Conscience of such a soul, and in the end
it cannot but see it, and then so bitterly bewail it, that it is much to be
feared he will be quite overwhelmed with it. And therefore, this a man must
have principal respect unto, principally to cover his sin from Gods eye; and
that it may likewise be so covered, as not to be smothered and dawbed, but
cover it with an healing Plaster, so as that in time it may be rooted out,
that no sprig of such a sin may remain there, not a mantle of flattery, but
healing; such as whereby they may be careful to take a course, that such evils
may be covered with some corrisive Plaster.

Secondly, Mantle of faithfulness.
with a mantle of faithfulness, not to discover the sins of others further
then will be of necessity for the healing of them. If a man be fallen under his
burden, or under his beast, and he is not able himself to help him up, he
must then call them that are of strength, and may be of use to help a man in
such a case, so that if in this case, if a man's integrity of heart tells him,
that he aims at no more in making known his brethrens failings, but to help
his brother out of those falls, Prove. 11.13. When a man reveals a matter no
further then to gather help to restore him, it is well; but because there is a
snare in that, a man had need be wary, for a man may reveal it with derision
and scorn, and then though a man should speak it to them that are able to
help him, it would be a sin to him, as you may read, Genesis 9.22, 23, Noah
being drunk, and his nakedness discovered, Came coming and seeing his father
thus naked, he in a deriding manner, goes forth, and tells his other two
brethren, when as he might himself have covered his nakedness, but he does it
not, but goes forth and acquaints them, and they do what they can to cover it,
they go backward, and draws a garment upon him, And when he awoke, he by a
spirit of prophecy knowing what was done, he said, cursed be Came for ever, and
he made him a servant to both his brethren, when it was in his power to have
covered him but did not, but made a jest of it to his brethren, he was accursed
for it, but because they in a modest reverent manner did cover him, a blessing
fell upon them to this day.

To show you that God requires this faithfulness in us in this case. If we be
able to do it our selves, we must not discover it, but do it our selves and
let it go no further; but if the burden be too great, that he cannot lift it
up, it is too weighty a matter for him, then he may call in those that are able
to help him in such a work, so as that he do not speak by way of derision, but
rather with trouble of mind to see him thus foiled.

Thirdly, So also a mantle of compassion, Mantle of compassion.
so as that if so be, that a man's brother be brought at length to see his
failing, and to acknowledge it, and shall express himself that it repents him
he has so done, both in offending God and his Brethren, then thou shall
forgive him, our Savior said so, Luke 17.4. and the like you read, Ephesians. 4. so
that when the Holy Ghost commends this as a property of love, that it covers a
multitude of sins, he means not that it covers them in silence, or
forgetfulness, or carelessness, as if we never meant to meddle nor make with
them, in a careless silence, and in an indifferent putting of the matter from
us, as if it nothing concerned us, but cover them by wisdom, faithfulness and
compassion, even such as God for Christ's sake has showed to us.

Object. But you say again, but if a man be thus willing to see and observe
the failings of his brethren. It may be he shall be counted a busy body in
other men's matters, a Bishop in another man's Diocese, meddling in matters that
concerns him not, and makes us to do there, where we have nothing to do?

Answ. We may be so counted, but it is not to be doing, where we have nothing
to do, for God would have us to take notice of one another failings, God and
Christian love requires it, it is not out of our element and charge, but God
lays a charge upon us to keep and look to this and that man's soul. As it
was said to the King of Israel, keep this man, and if he be gone, thy soul
shall go for his soul. It is for us to keep diligent watch, and to consider
one another, and to take heed, there be not an evil heart of unbeleefe one
in another, and therefore we must not only have respect to the ways, and
words of our brethren, but to the healing of their hearts to see there be no
deceitfulnes in the bottom, God therefore requires that we should exhort one
another daily, while it is called to day, If therefore you do but keep your
selves within these terms, not meddling with other men's sins, with an
hypocritical eye to condemn them and to justify our selves; nor with a
sensorious, envious, malicious, wanton eye, but with an eye of wisdom,
faithfulness, and compassion, in such a case you do not go beyond your
Commission.

Object. But you say, I shall be more busy, then I shall have thank for my
labor, I may be worse, and they never the better?

Answ. It may be they will be the worse for the while, and never the better,
but he that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor, then he that
flattereth with his tongue, Prove, 28.23. A man must sow this seed in patience.
It may be a winter will follow upon it, but at length he shall find the fruits
of his labors; even as the Husbandman waits with long patience, til the
season and time of harvest, yield him a comfortable increase, he that deals
plainly with his neighbor, shall find more favor at the length then he that
flatters him; If you loose his favor, it is but for a season, and if a man in
this case have been more busy then for the present he gets thanks for, yet
God will bless it, and recompense it, and God will not let such a man go
without finding favor with himself, how ever he may from others.

Doct. Upon the sight of a man's brothers sin, a faithful man is to pray for
him.

If any man see his brother sin, let him ask, So did holy Moses, Exodus 32.31,
32, 33. This was the first work he had to do upon their sin, and he spent
forty days and forty nights about that work; when he saw it was a sin, and
punished it as a Magistrate, he satisfies not himself in so doing, but he gets
to God, and wrastles with him about it, and lays his own soul to pawn to
God, either pardon that sin, or if he do condemn them, condemn him with them.
The like did God direct Job to do, he bids his three friends go to Job, and
he shall pray for you, him will I accept Job 42.7, 8. God would have it so, Job
must pray for them when he sees them in a sin. And Jeremiah speaks to the
same purpose, Chap. 13.17 My soul shall mourn and weep in secret for you, and
the pattern of our Savior is without exception, Luke 23.34 happy was he that
could do him a mischeife, and all men cried out away with him, crucify him,
crucify him, that when one would think a man's heart should burst with
indignation, yet he prays to his father, Father forgive them, they know not
what they do, he prays for pardon of their sin, when they use him most
wickedly, one that had never done them wrong. And so you read of Stephen, the
first Christian Martyr Act. 7 60. when they flung stones about his ears, he
kneeled down and cried with a loud voice; Lord lay not this sin to their
charge.

Reas. 1. It is first taken from the compassion which we owe to our brethrrn,
we ought to pray for them if they had been but sick, Psalm. 35.13. When they
were sick I mourned for them, my prayer shall be for them in their misery. Now
if a man should pray for men in any calamity, how much more in this, the
greatest of all the rest, we ought most to pray for our Brethren when they
sin.

Reas. 2. Taken from the duty that lies upon a Christian to exhort his
brethren, Heb. 3.12, 13. and Levit, 19.17. and neither of these can prevail
without prayer, for this as well as any thing else is sanctified by the Word and
prayer, 1 Timothy 1.4, 5.

Reas. 3. Taken from the desperate danger of sin, and the helplesnesse of a man
under sin, unless God put in; and therefore in some case though if man be
too weak, he may call in others to help, yet however amongst the rest call for
Gods help, for unless we do so, all helps without him are in vain; though
good helps are of special use, God blessing them to save and lift up a poor
soul out of sin, but know this, that it is a work of an Almighty power to
deliver a soul from sin no less then the Redemption of the Lord Jesus
Christ, He redeemes Israel from all his iniquities, Psalm, 1 30. last, unless
he put forth a redeeming hand, there will be no good done, there is such a
deceitfulness in sin, as that it will harden a man. Sin is of the nature of
poison, it stiffens and hardens the body, puts out the eyes, and so inflames it
with heat, that it is not possible to quench it; so when a man has once
sinned against God, he presently loses his eyes, Satan and his Lusts having
gotten him into sin, they first put out his eyes, that he shall see no danger
nor hurt in it, and then he is so hardened with the sin he has committed, that
no counsels or admonitions can recover him out of it, but only the mighty hand
of God, and therefore prayer must be made to God for him.

Reas. 4. Taken from the displeasure that God takes, if he see that we do not
pray for them, when we forget to remember them before the Lord, this is ill
taken, God is displeased when there is none to stand in the gap in such a case
as this, Esa, 59.15, 16. God does not afflict willingly, and yet if he be
stirred up he must destroy them, if there be none to stand in the gap; you then
provoke the wrath of the Lord, and this displeases him much, and God may
justly leave us to the like sin for which we are not humbled in others.

Reas. 5. Tak^^ ^^om the blessing that befalls Gods Servants, when we do so,
as was upon Job, in chap. 42.8, 9. when Job begins to pray for his friends,
then God turned the captivity of Job, he had long time lain under many
vexations, woeful calamities, but when he begins to pray for his friends that
had sinned, then the Lord turned his captivity; and so it is expressly said,
Esa. 57.18, 19. I will restore comfort unto him, and to his mourners. To show
you, that God will restore comfort to us if we lament the falls of others, and
mourn over them in that condition. We shall have comfort in their comfort,
because we did mourn in their grief. If Gods people can mourn with their
brethren in sin and misery. God will restore comfort to them, and to their
mourners.

Before we make use of this point, come we to the next.

Doct. 3. A faithful Christian, praying for his brethren fallen into any sin,
shall obtain peace, and pardon, and grace for him.

It is said so in the text, If any man; that is, any man that believes in Jesus
Christ, he shall ask, and he shall give him life So that you see here is the
promise made to such, the promise is, that upon asking, he shall give life to
his sinful brother. Who shall give him life? Interpreters take it both ways,
and both agreeable to the text, and the Analogy of faith; for whether he that
prays be as an Instrument, or God, it is all one, for it must be God that does
it, and he that prays is an Instrument, he procures to his sinning brother
great favor from God.

Life] that is, the life of Justification,, and of Sanctification consolation
and comfort to his soul notwithstanding his sin; the promise is evident, he
shall prevail with God, to bestow life upon his brother. This you shall see
evident from Scripture, Deuteronomy. 9.25, 26. I fell down before the Lord forty
days, and forty nights, etc. and thereupon the Lord did show mercy, and
pardoned their sin. Job prayed for his friends, and the Lord said he would
accept him, Job 42.8, 9. And so our Savior, he prayed for his crucifiers. And
it is generally thought, that the powerful prevalency of Peter's Sermon in
converting three thousand souls at once, did especially spring from our
Saviors prayer, and the efficacy of it, Act. 2.37. And Stephen, he prayed for
his persecutors, and Paul was one of them that had an hand in his death, Act.
7.6. And yet ere long God answered Stephens prayer in converting Saul; so that
let a man (a believing Christian) pray for his sinning brother, and he shall
give him life.

Reas. 1. It is taken from the pleasure that God takes to knit the Members of
the Body of his Son together, and no better means to join us together, and so
fitly to make us useful Members one to another then this, those members of the
body that are most weak should be most helped this way, 1 Cor. 12, 21, 22.
Every member should be of some use one to another, and it does better compact
the body together. God did not say to Jobs friends, Go you and pray for your
selves, but, Go to my servant Job, and he shall pray for you He would have
them beholden to Job, of whom they had spoken the thing that was not right,
else God would not accept them.

Reas. 2. It is taken from the Intercession of Christ, who performs that
office for every member of his body: This honor have all his Saints; though
they do not merit this by their prayers, yet there is this efficacy in their
prayers, not of merit, but of grace, to prevail with the Father in their
brethrens behalf, Romans 8.34. Intercession is such a part and kind of prayer
as a man makes for other men, to procure favor from God to them, to be
Mediators for them, to pray for others in the name and mediation of Jesus
Christ, and that for his sake they may be accepted, God will then hear us for
Christ's sake in the behalf of our brethren.

Use 1. It may be a ground of much encouragement to every Christian man, to
wrestle earnestly with God in the behalf of his brethren, when you see them
sin a sin that is not unto death, be it a man's wicked covetousness, and
such as a man is froward in it, and will by no means be admonished, and go on
resolutely in it, yet in this case God expects and requires we should mourn
for him, Esaias 57.17, 18. and therefore neglect not to pray for your brethren in
this case.

First, it will displease God if you pray not for them, is it nothing to you to
pass by, and to see such a man lie in sin? assure your self of this, Gods
heart will fit loose toward you, if your hearts sit loose to your brethren,
and therefore neglect not to pray for them.

Secondly, if you pray for them you shall have comfort restored to them, and to
your selves with them, and though for the present you might seem to procure
hurt to your selves, and no good to them, yet pray, and pray heartily, and use
the best means you can, and you will surely find the comfort and benefit of
it; may not this be a notable encouragement to you this way, that God should be
pleased to make thee an Instrument of life to thy brother, when he is a dead
man in Gods sight; a dead man will be stiff, and cold, and putrify, and yet
even such a man if thou prayest for him, thou shall give him life to his soul.

Object. You say, But does not many a man pray for his brethren, and yet is not
heard and accepted, did not Abraham pray for Ishmael? And what think you of
Samuels prayer for Saul, and yet says God, How long will thou mourn for Saul,
1 Samuel 17.6. I have cast him off, mourn no more for him; so that sometimes a
man may pray for his brethren, and that earnestly, and yet his prayers fall to
the ground in vain?

Answ. First, it would be considered whether a man be a brother or no; Abraham
did not pray for one that was already gracious, that did belong to the election
of grace, and the text does not reach to such a brother; but I understand it of
such as are either called, or belong to the election.

Secondly, Suppose you do not know whether he belong to the election of grace
or no, it may be you pray for them whom you have not used other means to heal
them, I doubt not but David prayed for Absalom, and Adonijah, but not using
other means, his prayers are rejected, these are not prayers of faith, when
other good means are not used.

Thirdly, Its possible that a man may pray without faith, and without fervency,
Jam. 5.15. and such requests should be faithful and fervent, and God requires
you should come before him, and submit your selves to him, and acknowledge your
own unworthiness to ask such a blessing, and yet in the name of Christ you
press God with it, and you must walk close with God in a course of
Christianity, else your prayers are to no purpose; and to wait on God through
Christ for a gracious acceptance, and God will recompense your prayers, and
labor of love in due time.

FINIS.

