THE Royal Prerogative Vindicated in the Converted RECUSANT, CONVINCED By
Scripture, Reasons, Fathers, and Councils, that the Oath of Abjuration
(compared with those of Allegiance, and Supremacy) contains nothing, but what
may be lawfully taken by every pious Christian, and Loyal Subject; And that the
known Doctrine, and Discipline of the Church of England, in opposition to
Popery on the one hand, and all Sects, and Schisms on the other, is the safest
way to Peace and Loyalty here, and Salvation hereafter.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED The KING'S SUPREMACY in all Causes, Ecclesiastical, and
Civil, asserted in a Sermon preached at the Assizes at Monmouth before Sir
Robert Hide, one of His Majesty's Judges, March 30. 1661.

By JOHN CRAGGE, M. A.

Matthew. xxii. 21. Render unto Caesar the things, that are Cesar's; and unto God
the things, that are God's.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for H. Twyford, N. Brook, Tho. Dring, and John
Place, 1661.

TO THE HONORABLE, And truly-worthy, Heroic Sir TREVIR WILLIAMS, Baronet.
SIR,
I Present, with all Humility, to Your pious consideration, a Defense of that
cause, which is, and ought to be infinitely dearer to You, then the riches of
China, or the wealth of the West India Company; as being that, which Divine
Providence has so signally carried on with a Palm of Victory; and promises
(if we be not deficient to our selves) to crown with the Olive Branch of peace:
I mean Religion, and the Royal Prerogative, in opposition to Romish
Superstition, and Fanatic disorder, and sedition; which is compendiously set
forth in that form of Abjuration, and unparalled Oaths of Allegiance, and
Supremacy, intended to conjure all Romanized, and other Recusant Dissenters
within the circle of verity, and obedience. In vindication whereof, I have
taken up the Gantlet against all Antichristian, and Antimonarchical
challengers; not doubting, but that, upon this entering the Lists, I shall be
censured for undertaking so great a work, so far beyond my weak abilities. But
it is satisfaction enough to my self and may be to others, that I was not
induced to it out of any unballanced conceit of my self, whose personal
defects (according to that of the Oracle, (...)) are the only thing I presume
to know: But undertook it in obedience to him, who exhorted all his Brethren
earnestly to contend for the faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints;
now torn in pieces, like Hippolytus his body, by Babylonish Wolves, Jesuits,
Quakers, and Fifth-Monarchists, swarming like Locusts out of the Infernal pit;
which daily invade our Folds, worrie our Flocks, and seduce them both from
Piety* and Loyalty: whom to countermine (while the Sword of Justice sleeps
not) a necessity lies upon every faithful Pastor, not only by the power of
the Keys, as Preaching, Praying, and Discoursing, (when opportunity shall
fairly tender it self) but even by Penning; though we must expect our writings
will be dealt withal by them, as the tongue of Cicero was, after his death, by
Cleopatra, Wife to Mark Anthony, who thrust it through and through with
needles, and stabbed it again and again with poisoned pens.

For my inscribing to it Your Patronage; as gratefulness may plead my duty, and
obligation on the one hand; so your signal sufferings, and activity for His
Sacred Majesty, may sway acceptance on the other, if the handling of it were
answerable to the subject. I confess, my person, and parts are over-mean to
engage in such an excelse, and sublime Province. For, if Alexander would commit
the proportion of his Body to be effigiated by none, but Lysippus; Apelles
himself could never set out the outward beauty of his Face, but slubbered, and
far short of the native vivacity: How then shall I, poor Zanie, emblazon the
Seraphick sublimity of the Royal Prerogative, the livelyest Representative upon
earth of that great Tetragrammaton in Heaven? But as he, that dwells on high,
despises not things below; so I hope my Mite, and Goats-hair, may be accepted,
seeing it was intended in all sincerity for the honor of God, and of our dread
Sovereign 's Royal Majesty, and to confirm his liege people in the right faith,
and true love, and obedience of his most just, and gracious Government. As an
Angel of God, so is my Lord the King to discern good, and bad; therefore the
Lord will be with him: 2 Samuel xiv. 7.

I have no more to apologize; but pray, that he, which rules in the Armies of
Heavens, would crown with the blessings of his right, and of his left hand,
Your Self, Your truly virtuous Lady, Your hopeful Issue to the glory of God,
and comfort of all Your Relations; which is the daily petition of him, whom you
have obliged for ever,

Your Honor's most humble, and devoted Servant in the Lord, JOHN CRAGGE.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
PErhaps thou will admire, why I vindicate the Doctrine of our Church, and the
Royal Prerogative, under the Notion of that illegal Oath of Abjuration: It is
well known, I never acknowledged that Power, whence it issued, but made use of
it only, thereby to assert the lawfulness of this present Power; As Saint Paul
at Athens did of the Inscription of an Altar, (...), TO THE UNKNOWN GOD, to
introduce the worship of the true God; Or as Arnobius, and Lactantius searched
the Sibyls, and other Heathenish Writers, that by the Concessions of their own
Oracles they might convince them of their Heathenish Idolatry. For, having been
questioned for a Sermon preached before our then Sovereign Lord, King CHARLES
the First of ever-blessed Memory; for stiling him a Martyr in a printed Book;
committed for not taking, and opposing the Negative Oath; and involved in
further danger for replying to Mr. Milton's Answer to Salmasius (which took
Air, though, by reason of the times, no Stationer durst print it) I still
projected how I might continue in discharging my Conscience to His Sacred
Majesty, and the Royal Family; where, lighting upon that Oath of Abjuration,
which the then-pretended Power had mounted as a Cannon for their own Defense, I
found, that the force; and fury thereof might easily be turned against
themselves; as, if the Contrivers thereof had acted Caiphas, who, being
High Priest that year, prophesyed what should be. For the matter thereof is in
every Syllable concentrick, and symbolical with the Articles, and Apology of
the Church of England, the Oath of Allegiance, and Supremacy; which are the
Cynosura, or Pole Star, by which we ought to direct our Sails to the Haven of
Piety, and Loyalty. This I endeavored to improve to the best advantage; but,
when the Children were brought to the Birth, there was none to deliver them:
for it has lay dormant in the Hands of the Printers almost three years; but
now creeps out in these Halcyon days to give the world a visit, where I hope it
will find some Entertainment, seeing it it comes not out of a Cage, where (as
is Storied of Macrobius Birds) there was one for Pompey, as well as for Caesar;
as perhaps some, who formerly were the greatest Sticklers against, now, since
the Success of the Pharsalian Victory, defend the Oath of God: but it stood up
in the worst, and most dangerous Times, when the Furnace was seven times
hotter, then ordinary. Besides, this Dialogue, in a great part, was a real
History, crowned with the Success here pretended. Howsoever, if I may discharge
my Duty to my Sovereign, if Truth may be advanced, true Godlyness countenanced,
Disloyalty unmasked, the Church edified, God glorified; I have mine Ends.

I. C.

THE Converted PAPIST Convinced BY Scriptures, Reason, Fathers, and Councills;
THAT THE Oath of Abjuration
Contains nothing, but what may be lawfully taken by every pious Christian,
and Loyal Subject.

Minister. WELL met, Sir, it joys me to see that Debenairity in one of your
Profession; though I resent it not without some regret; that we, whom one
County, and, which is less, one Parish confines, cannot be contained within the
Verge of one Church. What Magical Charms of that Apostate Rome has bewitched
you? that neither our common Mother's Tears, like Monica's: nor divine Motives,
like St. Ambrose's to Augustine, Possidonius in Vita Augustini.
while a M^^icke, can prevail with you to come out of Babylon: Speramus
meliora; for my mind presages, that a Son of so many Tears, and Prayers cannot
perish: and your very Countenance suggests me this hope, which (like
Sebastian's Picture, wounded with a Shower of Arrows) speaks Sadness, and
Compunction; as if in, or after our last Discourse, your Isaiah xxx. 21.
Ears had heard a word behind you, saying, This is the way, walk in it; or
Christ by his Ambassadors had met with you (like Saul going to Damascus) and
sent you to some Ananias for further Instruction; or the Augustine. Confess.
still Voice of the Spirit had alarmed you to take up the Book (our Bible) and
read.


Gentleman. You mistake in your Physiognomy; for, though my thoughts are
troubled, and Spirit perplexed, yet not from any Scruple of Conscience, or
unsettledness in Religion, which, like the Poles of Heaven, is unmovable,
founded upon that impregnable Rock, against which the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail. But my Sadness arises from the Storms of Persecution, which assault us
poor Catholics, like Waves, one after another. As if the rigor of Anno 1581.
24. Elizab. Anno 1584. 27. Eliz.
former Statutes had not been severe enough, this late one (like
Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace) is seven times hotter then ordinary; throwing us upon
the Horns of this inevitable Dilemma: either by a solemn Oath to abjure our
Faith, or be despoiled of two parts of our Patrimonies; in a word, shipwreck
either Souls, or Estates for ever. Durum telum! And, if you will but truly feel
how the Systole, and Diastole of my Pulse beats, this is the right cause of my
Distemper.


Minist. Is that a just cause of Distemper? or is it so new, or strange a
thing, for Laws to inflict a Penalty for breach of Uniformity in Religion? You
might reflect upon your own Spanish Inquisition, and consider, that Magistrates
are Custodes utriusque Tabulae, Guardians as well of divine, as humane Laws,
Romans xiii. 4.
executing wrath on them, that do evil. False-Teachers are styled Philip. iii.
2.
evil workers, and Heresy a Fruit of the Flesh. The Spirit of God Revel. ii.
20.
condemns the Church of Thyatira for suffering the Woman Jezebel, to teach, and
seduce Christ 's Servants: reproves Revel. ii. 14.
the Church of Pergamus, for suffering them, that taught the Doctrine of
Balaam, for entertaining them, that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans. Hence
unsound Doctrine is resembled to a Canker, ^ Tim. ii 17.
that corrodes the sound Flesh: the Abetters and Fomenters thereof to Thieves,
that spoil; to ravenous Wolves, that devour; to deceitful Workers, Cor xi. 13.
that undermine the Truth. Now how the Surgeon cauterizes, or cuts off a
Canker, what Penalty is due to Thieves, Wolves, deceiptful Workers; you are not
ignorant.


Gent. I know the Church has power to anathematize, excommunicate, and
exercise Ecclesiastical Censures against contumacious Children, and Heretics.
Dic Ecclesiae, Tell the Church; and, if they will not hear Her, let them be as
Heathens, and Publicans.


Minist. And what no more? This Doctrine concenters with that, which your
Asseruit non licere Haereticum incorrigi^^lem tradere Saeculari potestati, and
permittere com^ur^re eum. Bellarm. cap. 21. lib. 5. De la^c^^.
Bellarmine Fathers upon John Huss, Johannes Huss, Articul. 14. in Concilio
Constantinensi, Sess. 15.
as condemned in the Council of Constance, that It was not lawful to deliver an
incorrigible Heretic to the Secular Power, and to inflict corporal, or
pecuniary Mulcts. Which St. Augustine, August. lib. 1. Contra Epistolam
Parmeniani, cap. 7. lib. 2. Contra Lit^^ras Petiliani, cap. 10. lib. 2. Contra
Epist. Gaudentii 17. Epist. 5 c. ad Bonisacium.
reproves of old in those Donatists, Parmenianus, Petilianus, and Gaudentius;
and is backed by your Cardinal, Bellarm. Tomo secundo, De controversiis
Christianae fidei. lib. 3.
who undertakes to prove it by a Vollie of Arguments. In time of the Law, Asa,
Jehoshaphat, Josiah, and Nehemiah, punished abuses in Divine Worship. Under the
Gospel, God by Miracles supplied the defect of Christian Magistrates: smiting
Ananias, and Sapphira with sudden Death by St. Peter, Elymas the Sorcerer with
Blindness by St. Paul. Concurrent with Scriptures are the Primitive Fathers.
Tertullian says; Tertull. advers. Ghost. cap. 2.
Heretics must be compelled, not prayed to do their Duty. Athanasius says;
Arrius, Eudoxius, and Patrophilus, when they write unsound Doctrines, are
worthy of all Punishments. Augustine ( August. Epist. 48.
) tells Vincentius, that it is no Paradox, that men ought to be forced to
Righteousness, seeing he reads, the Master said to his Servant, Compel all you
find to come in; and that Paul was forced to receive, and embrace the Truth by
violent Compulsion of Christ: except he judge Goods, and Lands, dearer unto
men, then their Eyes. Gregory Nazianzen Nazianz. Homil. in Dict. Evangel.
says, Cut off the Arrian Impiety, cut off the pernicious Error of Sabellius:
this I say unto the Magistrates. Seeing my words have not that Efficacy, their
Edict shall, if they will suppress such, as are infected with pernicious
Heresy. Eusebius. de Vita Constantini, lib. 2. cap. 36.
Constantine prohibited the Exercise of all unsound Religions, either in
public, or private Places, commanding their Books to be burned, their Goods to
be sold, their Houses to be pulled down, and proscribed them as Traitors, and
Enemies to the Truth. Here you have an Abridgment of that large Systeme of
coercive Power, that might be alleged against Heretics.


Gent. Coercive Power (I confess) is lawful, and useful in the Church: but
this Statute now in Force against us, is (like Draco's Laws) writ in Blood,
tending to ruin, either Body, or Soul.


Minist. Compared with the rigor of yours, where you have any Power, it truly
may be said to be writ in Oil, for the gentleness thereof. If I may have leave
to parallel: What think you of your Pope Innocent the Third, Ex Hermanno Mutio,
Innocentius, 111. Anno 1212.
who made but one Bonefire of an hundred Nobles, and others, in the Country of
Alsatia, in one day? See these Stories at large in the Book of Martyrs, page
868.
Of Minerius, one of the Pope's Captains, who destroyed two and twenty Towns of
the Merindolians, barbarously murdered the Inhabitants, whether they resisted,
or not; ravishing Virgins, and Matrons, butchering Women with Child: and, when
their Men had deserted their Cities, leaving their Females, and Infants behind,
in hope of Commiseration, the bloody Assasinat practiced such inhumane
Barbarity upon five hundred Women at once, besides innocent Babes, as has been
unheard off. In the Town of Cabriers, he culled out thirty choice Men, carrying
them into a Meadow, caused them to be hewed in pieces, by his Soldiers: he
shut up forty silly Women, whereof some with Child, in a Barn, full of Straw,
and Hay, and caused it to be set on fire at the four Corners* and when a
Soldier, pitying the Outcry, let them out, the Tyrant Doctor Tailor in his
Romish Furnace.
commanded them to be cut in pieces, exenterating their Bowels, that their
Children fell out, whom they trod under feet. And, Dioclesian-like, he sent a
Band of Ruffians into the Church, where a numerous Company of Women, Children,
and Sucklings had taken Sanctuary, and, without respect of Age, or Sex, slew
all they found. In this one Town the Catalogue of murdered Protestants was
above a Thousand. In the year 1560. under Pope Pius the Fourth, Acts, and
Monuments, page 859.
were, in two Towns of Calabria, condemned at one time six hundred Protestants,
whereof fourscore and eight were executed at once in this manner: having
enclosed them in one house; the Executioner singles one out after another, and,
blindfolding them with a Muffler, causes them to kneel down, and cuts their
throats, till all were dispatched.

Virgil. Aenead. 2.
-- Quis talia fando
Myrmidonum, Doloptimque, aut duri Miles Ulyssis
Temperet a lacrymis? --
A direful, and lamentable Spectacle! insomuch that a Romist, writing to his
Friend at Rome, and one Simon Florellus, writing to an Italian Doctor of
Physic in the University of Basil, profess both, they cannot express
themselves without weeping: But the Turkish Histories, the Stories of Nero,
Decius, and Dioclesian veils to the Barbarity of that French Massacre at Paris,
Gathered out of Janus Augustus Thuanus, President of the Parliament at Paris.
where, in the Space of three days, ten thousand; and, in the space of thirty
days, thirty thousand Protestants were perfidiously murdered. I need not
instance in the Martyrologies of Queen Marie's days, nor revive the Tragic
Stories of the Albigenses, Waldenses, Wicklifists, Taborites, and Lollards in
former times. The Sufferings of them of Piedmont, under the Duke of Lorrain, is
fresh in our Memory.


Gent. You have said too much: though I do not approve of this Cruelty in the
extent, and Dimensions of it; yet it may seem pardonable, in comparison of
yours, in a twofold respect. First, This was acted by Catholics against
Heretics: yours by Heretics against Catholics. Secondly, This you mention
respects the punishment only of the Persons offending, and has no influence
on Posterity: yours tends to the ruin of Posterity, although they should
conform to your Profession, leaving the Parents scarce a Shroud, nor the
Children any Livelihood.


Minist. Whether ye, or we be true Catholics, I shall demonstrate anon, as
impartially, as Solomon decided, whether the living Child was the true
Mother's, or the Strumpet's. For the present; Have your punishments no
influence on Posterity? when the former Records discover so many harmless Babes
destroyed, so many Infants perishing in the Womb: you are able to name the
Inquisitor; who, when the Child sprang out of the womb of the Mother bound to
the Stake, caused it to be thrown into the Fire,, and burned with her, because
it was a young Heretic. Your Forefathers rage was not appeased with the death
of Protestants, for Acts, and Monuments, page. 816.
Bucer, and Fagius were cited out of their Graves to appear, or any, that would
for them, and that at Cambridge, four years after their Burial; which when the
silly Ashes could not do, they were dug out, Page 1780.
and burned on the Market-Hill. Wickliff Page 739.
was condemned after his Death, and his Bones burned one and forty years after
his Burial. Richard H^^n Stow's Chronic.
was first apparently hanged, and murdered in Prison by wicked hands, and
afterward burned after his Death. Peter Martyr's Wife, Page 1785.
the Divinity-Reader of Oxford, was two years after her Death dug out of her
Grave. John Glover Page 1556.
was not only excommunicate, but struck with the great Sentence of Maranatha,
after his Death. John Tooly was cited by Bishop Bonner after he was dead, and
buried, to appear before him on such a day: and the time of Citation limited
being expired, and, he not appearing, he was excommunicated, and straight
Charge was given, that none should eat, or drink with him, or salute him; and,
if he came to Church, tempore Divinorum, he must be thrust out: after this
Excommunication, he was condemned, and committed to the Secular Power, to be
burned for an Heretic; and so by the Sheriffs the poor man was the second time
executed.


Gent. I love not to hear of these things, neither do I think they were
justifiable, moderate Catholics disclaim them. Prove me two things, and I
shall be satisfied. First, That ever such an Oath was approved by any General,
or Provincial Council: Secondly, That the matter of this Oath is just, and
lawful.


Minist. If I prove not both these; I Will loose the Gantlet.


Gent. If you prove them, I Will yield up mine Arms, and abjure my former
Profession.


Minist. I am contented, let us join issue in these. For the former, the
Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 74.
Spaniards imposed an Oath upon all those Subjects, of whose Disloyalty they
were jealous, and that above a thousand years ago; which was ratified by
several famous Toletan Councils: which one of the latter expresses in these
Words, Quicunque ex ipsis, vel totius Hispaniae populis, qualibet conjuratione,
vel studio, Sacramentum fidei suae, quod pro patria, gentisque statu, vel
conservatione Regis salutis po^licitus est, temeraret, aut regem necare
attrectaret, aut potestate regni exueret, aut praesumptione Tyrannica regium
fastigum usurparet: Anathema esset in conspectu Dei Patris, and Angelorum,
atque ab Ecclesia Catholica, quam profanaverat, haberetur extraneus. Conc.
Tolet. 5, 6, 10.
Whosoever of them, (meaning, discontented persons) or of the people throughout
all Spain, by any pretense, or endeavor, shall violate the Oath of his
fidelity, which he has engaged for the State of his Country, and Nation, or
preservation of the safety of his Prince; or shall attempt the death of his
Sovereign, or divest him of his Regal Power, or by Tyrannical power usurp the
Supremacy: let him be Anathematized in the Sight of God the Father, and Angels,
and be excommunicated from the Catholic Church, which he has profaned.


Gent. What gather you from hence?


Minist. I gather four things; First, That there has been such an Oath exacted
in former times. Secondly, That Oath very much resembles this of Abjuration.
Thirdly, That that Oath was approved off, and confirmed by several Councils.
Fourthly, That the Violaters of that Oath were anathematized by the
Ecclesiastical, and otherwise severely handled by the Secular Power; as the
Stories of those times relate more at large.


Gent. But the Contents of that Oath was legal, this illegal, which ought not
to be taken, and being taken obliges not. Our Canonists teach us, that
Isiodore. Can. 74.
Votum non debet esse iniquitatis vinculum; Unjust Vows are not binding.


Minist. That is the second thing I engaged to prove, that The matter of this
Oath is just, and lawful: which I will make good in every Circumstance, if you
will be pleased to recite it.


Gent. I have not the Copy of the Oath by me, neither can I repeat it verbatim,
though my memory (as I have too signal an occasion) is retentive of the whole
Substance of it.


Minist. I shall repeat it for you, having for mine own, and others
Satisfaction, digested it into twelve Articles, which in order run thus.

Article I.

I A. B. do abjure, and renounce the Pope 's Supremacy, and authority over the
Catholic Church in general, and over my self in particular.

II. And I do believe the Church of Rome is not the true Church. III. And that
there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or
in the Elements of Bread, and Wine, after Consecration thereof, by any Person
whatsoever. IV. And I do also believe, that there is not any Purgatory. V. And
that the Consecrated Host, Crucifixes, or Images ought not to be worshipped,
neither that any Worship is due to any of them. VI. And I also believe, that
Salvation cannot be merited by Works. VII. And I do sincerely testify, and
declare, that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church,
or See of Rome, or by any other means, with any other, has Power, or Authority
to depose the chief Magistrate of these Nations, or to dispose of any the
Countries, or Territories thereunto belonging, or to authorize any foreign
Prince, or State to invade, or annoy him, or them. VIII. I do sincerely
testify, and declare, that the Pope has not any authority to discharge any of
the people of these Nations from their obedience to the chief Magistrate, or to
give license, or leave to any of the said people to bear Arms, raise tumults,
or to offer any violence, or hurt to the Persons of the said chief Magistrates,
or to the State, or government of these Nations, or to any of the people
thereof. IX. And I do further swear, that I do from my hear abhor, detest, and
abjure their damnable Doctrine, and Position, that Princes, Rulers, or
Governors, which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may, by virtue of
such excommunion, or deprivation, be killed, murdered, or deposed from their
Rule, or Government, or any outrage, or violence done unto them by the people,
that are under them, or by any other whatsoever upon such pretense. X. And I do
further swear, that I do believe that the Pope, or Bishop of Rome has no
authority, power, or Jurisdiction whatsoever within England, Scotland, and
Ireland, or any, or either of them, or the Dominion, or Territories belonging
to them, or any, or either of them. XI. And all Doctrines in affirmation of the
said Points, I do abjure, and renounce, without equivocation, mental
reservation, or secret Evasion whatsoever; taking the words by me spoken
according to the common, and usual meaning of them. XII. And I do believe, no
power derived from the Pope, or Church of Rome, or any other person, can
absolve me from this my Oath, and I do renounce all Pardons, and Dispensations
to the contrary. SO HELP ME GOD.


Duo sunt in unoquoque Juramento praecip^e advertenda; alterum, materia, sive
res illa, in quae juratur; alterum, forma. sive modus jurandi. Dr. Andrews.
There are two things especially considerable in this, as in every Oath. First,
The res, or matter, that is sworn, or abjured: Secondly, The modus, or manner
of abjuration. The former is comprised in the ten first Articles: the latter in
the close, or two last. I shall, God willing, give you Satisfaction in order;
beginning with the first, which is this.


The First Article.
I A. B. do abjure, and renounce the Pope 's Supremacy, and Authority over the
Catholic Church in general, and over my self in particular.

Gent. How can I, or any Catholic abjure the Pope's Supremacy over the Church
in general, or my self in particular? Seeing it is an Article of our Creed,
Symboli Tridentini Articulus primus.
and my Conscience tells me that, which it did Sir Thomas More Surius.
Commentar.
at his Trial; that having studied the point, at least seven years, I find
that the Truth thereof is sounded upon Fathers, Councils, Scriptures, and
Traditions, with Prescription since the Apostles; which demonstrates it to be
of Divine Institution.


Minist. You will fall short in all these, and upon impartial Survey find the
Rise, and Spring of it to be from novel Usurpation. The Pythagoreans were so
accustomed to Numbers, that they fancyed the Ingredience of them in every
Composure. Your seven years study, with Doway, and Lovain's Education, has so
molded your imaginations, that it hears no Melody, but, like that of Sappho's
Herodotus.
in the Woods, Clemens in Prooemio in Glossa.
Dominus Deus Papa, your Pope's Supremacy. Whence you make Scriptures, and
Fathers, like Procrustes Plutarch. in vita Thesei.
his Bed; what comes short, you rack, and stretch it to your meaning; what is
too large, you curtail it by amputation.


Gent. I read Scriptures, and Fathers with that Traveller's indifferency, that
Epictetus Aulus Gellius. Noct. Atti^.
requires in all, that would find the Truth: and therein I discover, First,
The Necessity of one Head to be constituted over the Catholic Church.
Secondly, That St. Peter was that Visible Head, and had Supremacy over the
whole Flock of Christ, and the rest of the Apostles. Thirdly, That he fixed his
Seat at Rome, and delegated his plenitudinem potestatis, fullness of power, to
the Bishops, his Successors there. Fourthly, That all Bishops of Rome have
enjoyed it since.


Minist. Not one of these Positions is true, but comes from that spirit of
lies, as shall appear in order. First, there is no necessity of one Head to be
constituted over the Catholic Church; if you mean militant, Christ the
triumphant Head is sufficient, for all your Canonists blaspheamy, who say, Non
videretur Dominus discretus fuisse (ut cu^ reverentia ejus loquar) nisi unicum
post se talem Vicarium reliquisset, and qui haec omnia posset. De majoritate
and obedientia, unam sanctam, in Glossa.
Christ, our Lord should not have seemed to have dealt discreetly (to speak it
with reverence) unless he had left one such Vicar behind him, that could do all
these things; that is, regulate the whole Church. For neither is it possible
for one man to take cognizance of the whole Church, unless he were omniscient,
as of all Europe, Asia, Africa, China, and Prester John's Dominions, Peru,
Mexico, with Magellanica, and the rest of the Americans, no Civil Prince had
ever the fourth part of it under his Scepter, much less an Ecclesiastic;
neither could the Church possibly (if this were granted) be preserved from
ruin. A Pope himself has delivered it e Cathedra, and that is Gregory the
Great, who said of John Bishop of Constantinople, who first claymed to himself
this universal power; Si hanc causam aequanimiter portamus, totius Ecclesiae
fidem corrumpimus: corruit universa Ecclesia de statu suo, si is, qui
Vniversalis dicitur, cadit. Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 34. 38. and Epist. 78.
If we patiently suffer this matter thus to proceed, that one man shall be
universal Bishop, we seek not ways to preserve unity, but we overthrow the
faith of the whole Church: if he, that is said to be Universal Bishop, happen
to fall, the whole Church falls from her state. And, relating to this
Question, Saint Augustine says, Augustinus, De ve^ae religione, cap 45.
Habet and superbia appetitum quendam unitatis, and omnipotentiae. Pride it
self has a certain desire of Unity, and universal power: though the tendence
thereof be to ruin. In conformity to this Saint Paul expresses the lasting
Polity Christ settled in his Church, who, Ephesians. iv 12, 13.
when he ascended far above any heavens, gave (not one Universal Pope to rule
the whole, but) some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors, and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, for the working of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. Whereupon Saint Cyprian
descanting says Vnus est Episcopatus, cujus a singulis in solidum pars
tenetur. Cyprianus De simplicitate Praela^o^u^.
Vnus est Episcopatus, etc. There is but one Bishopric; part whereof is holden
of several Bishops in whole. And again; Ideo plures sunt in Ecclesia
Sacerdotes; ut, uno Haeresin faciente, caeteri subveniant. Cypr. lib. 3. Epist.
13.
Therefore there are many Priests, or Bishops in the Church, (not one over all
the Church) that, if one fall into Heresy, the rest may help. As Paul reproved
Peter, and Irenaeus Pope Victor. Upon that place of Hosea, The children of
Israel, and the children of Judea shall be gathered together, and appoint them
one Head, Saint Hierom Paraphrases thus; Haec omnia fient; quia magnus est dies
s^minis Dei, qui interpretatur Christus. Hierom. in Hoseae cap 1. verse. 12.
All these things shall come to pass; because it is the great day of the seed
of God, which seed is interpreted (not an Universal Bishop, but) Christ. Lyra
harps upon the same string. Congregabuntur filiae Judae; id est, Apostoli: and
filii Israel; id est, Gentiles conversi: pariter; id est una Ecclesia: and
ponent sibi caput unum; id est, Christum. Nicol. Lyra in Hoseae cap. 1.
There shall assemble together (says he) the children of Judah; that is, the
Apostles: and Children of Israel; that is, the Gentiles converted: together;
that is, in one Church: and shall appoint unto themselves one Head; that is
(not one Universal Bishop, but) one Christ. Saint Augustine is of the same
consort saying, Recolatur lapis ille angularis, and duo illi parietes; unus ex
Judaeis, and alter ex Gentibus. Augustine. De Civitate Dei. lib. 18. cap. 28.
Let us remember that Cornerstone Christ (not any Prelate) and the Walls, the
one of the Jews, the other of the Gentiles. Dionysius; In Opere Tripartito,
lib. 2. cap. 5.
deciphering purposely the Polity of the Church, and comparing the same with
the glorious Hierarchy of the Angels, and Powers in Heaven, yet never dropped
one word of the universal government by one Prelate. So that we may safely
conclude with that Appendage of the Council of Lateran; In caelesti Hierarchia
tota congregatio Angelorum non habet caput unum, praeter solum Deum: ergo, a
simili, in Ecclesiastica Hierarchia hominum non debet esse unum caput, praeter
solum Deum: That is; In the Celestial Hierarchy, the whole Chore of Angels
has no other head, but only God; therefore, by like proportion, in the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of men, there ought not to be any one Head, but God;
That is, Christ, God-man.


Gent. I should easily grant, by virtue of those Premises, that there is no
apparent necessity of a visible Head over the whole Church. Christ, and his
Spirit can easily supply that defect. And it is congruous enough to reason;
that no one Prelate (Atlas-like) can bear the axle-tree of the whole Church
upon his Shoulders: yet, methinks, there are clear Evidences in Scriptures, and
Fathers, that Saint Peter had supremacy over the rest of the Apostles, and the
whole flock of Christ.


Minist. This is your Second Position, which, for all your confidence, will
vanish into Ashes, like Sodom's Apples. But, I beseech you, tell me these
Evidences out of Scriptures, and Fathers.


Gent. Of Scriptures, these two places are pregnant: the one, Matthew. xvi. 18,
19.
(...). Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. Heart against
Rainolds.
Though in (...), and (...), may seem in the Greek to be a difference in
termination, and an Enallage of Genders, the Hebrew, or Syriak Word, Cephas,
which our Savior used, signifies both Peter, and a Rock: whence I gather, that
Peter was that rock, upon which Christ builded his universal Church; as appears
by his further promise, that he would give unto him the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven, etc. The other place is, John xxi. 16.
(...). Feed my Sheep. (...) signifies as well to rule, and govern, as to feed.
Out of thee shall come, says Micah Micah v. 2. Matthew. ii. 6.
of Beth-lehem, (...), a Governor; (...), that shall rule my people Israel.
Homer styles Agamemnon, the Grecian General, (...), the Ruler of the people.
Hence I gather, that Christ appointed Peter the Ruler, or Governor of the
whole Church.


Minist. You gather Conclusions without Premises, as erroneously, though not as
imperiously, as did your Pope Boniface, Declaramus, dicimus, definimus,
pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis omni humanae Creaturae, subesse
Romano Pontifici. De Majoritate, and obedientia.
who declared, said, defined, determined, and pronounced, that it was of
undoubted necessity of Salvation, for every humane Creature, to be subject to
the Bishop of Rome: but it was from his not right understanding of those Texts;
whence, as Saint Hierom Hierom. in Matthaeum. cap. 16. lib. 3.
said of others, Aliquid sibi de Pharisaeorum assumpsit supercilio; He assumed
something of the Luciferian Pride of the Pharisees. For the Primitive Fathers,
who lived nearest the Fountain, judged it no less, then Blasphemy, to
interpret any mortal man, as Peter was, but only Christ, the only Son of God,
to be this Rock. So Gregory Nyssen. Gregorius Nyss^^^ Testimoniis (...) ex
Veteri Te(...)
says, Tu es Petrus, etc. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church: he means the confession of Christ, for he had said before, Thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God. Saint Hilarie says, Haec est una felix
fidei petra, quam Petrus ore suo confessus est. Hilar. De Trinitate, lib. 2.
cap. 6.
This is the onely-blessed Rock of Faith, which Peter confessed with his mouth,
and upon this Rock of Peter 's Confession is the building of the Church. Where,
you see, Peter, and the Rock, are two distinct things. Cyril says, Petra nihil
aliud est, quam firma, and inconcussa Discipuli fides. Cyrillus, De Trinitate.
The Rock is nothing else, but the strong, and impregnable faith of the
Disciple. Saint Chrysostom Supra hanc petram, id est in hac fide, and
confessione, aedificabo. Chrysostom. in Matthaeum, Homil. 55.
goes on in the same Equipage, Upon this Rock, that is to say, upon this Faith,
and this Confession, I will build my Church. Saint Augustine speaks home,
Augustinus De verbis Domini, secundum Matthaeum, Sermon. 13.
Petra erat Christus, supra quod fundamentum etiam aedificatus fuit Petrus:
Christ was the Rock, upon which foundation even Peter himself was builded. And,
lest he should leave any in the Clouds, he adds further in the person of
Christ, Non me aedificabo super te, sed te aedificabo super me: I will not
build my self upon thee; but I will build thee upon me. And, that no man might
conceive, that Peter was in any sense singularly this Rock, or that he had the
monopoly of the Keys, which were first promised to him, but performed in a
Juncto, with the rest of the Apostles; Origin, who lived nearer the Original,
tells us, Petra est, quicunque est Discipulus Christi, and supra talem petram
constituitur omnis Ecclesiastica Doctrina. August. ibidem.
He is the Rock, whosoever is the Disciple of Christ, and upon such a Rock all
Ecclesiastical Learning is built. Quod si supra unum illum Perrum existimas
aedificari totam Ecclesiam, quid dicturus es de Johanne filio Tonitrui, and
Apostolorum unoquoque? nu^ audebimus dicere, quod adversus Petrum unum non
praevaliturae sunt portae Inferorum? an soli Petro dantur claves regni
coelorum? Orig. in Matthaeum, Tract. 1.
If thou think, that the whole Church is built only upon Peter, what will thou
say of John, the Son of Thunder, and of every of the Apostles? Shall we dare to
say, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail only against Peter? or, are the
Keys of the Kingdom of heaven given only unto Peter? Seeing Saint Cyprian
Cyprian. De simplicitate Praelatorum.
avers, Hoc erant alii, quod Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris, and
potestatis: The rest of the Apostles were the same, that Peter was, all endowed
with the like fellowship both of honor, and power. That Saint Ambrose,
balancing them in Scripture-scales, is at a stand, Inter Petrum, and Paulum*
quis cui praeponatur; of Peter, and Paul, whether of the two should be
preferred before the other. And, if Gregory, Gregorius, lib. 4. Epistol. 32.
who was a Bishop of Rome himself, may be believed, Petrus universalis
Apostolus nonvocatur: Peter is not called an Universal Apostle. And for your
Criticism, that (...), and (...) are Synonomous, Budaeus (...). Budaeus in
Lexico.
denies it, unless in a Dialect the Gospel owns not. Whether our Savior used
the Hebrew, or Syriak word, Cephas, is uncertain, (...). Aristoteles, lib. 1.
De Coelo, cap. 11. text. 110.
and more certain, if he did, it is (...), and concludes nothing, amounting but
to a fallacia aequivocationis in the one Language, to a Paronomasia, or
collusion of words, in the other. And Christ's promise of the Keys to Peteter
inferrs no more, then Saint Augustine gathers from it, Petrus pro omnibus
dixit, and cum omnibus accepit: Peter was the mouth, and spoke for the rest of
the Apostles, and received the promise with all the rest. Now, to concenter all
these lines in one point; If by the Rock be meant principally either Faith
confessing, and relying upon Christ the Rock himself; or instrumentally the
Apostles, who were all Equal, and by a joint Commission received the Keys; it
comes far short of proving the Supremacy of Peter over the rest of the
Apostles, and the whole Church.


Gent. I have not what further to reply in that, being mistaken in the Fathers,
which I see are unanimous against us: yet, before I surrender this Hold, Ajacis
Clypeus, and (...).
in which our Side most confides, let me hear what you can say to the other
Scripture, whereby Christ commissioned Peter to Feed, that is rule, his Sheep,
and feed his Lambs, and that thrice repeated in presence of the rest of the
Apostles: whence our Pope Boniface concludes, Dominus dixit generaliter, Pasce
oves meas, non singulariter has, aut illas: ergo commisisse intelligitur
universas. De Majoritate, and obedienti^.
The Lord said generally unto Peter, Feed my flock, he said not specially, Feed
these, or these: therefore, we must understand, he committed all his flock to
him.


Minist. Your Premises are weak, and Boniface his Conclusion consequentleess.
What can be more ridiculous, then this Inference? Christ said to Peter, Feed my
Sheep; he said it thrice, he said it in the Presence of the Apostles; (...)
signifies also to rule; Therefore he gave him Supremacy over the Apostles: It Is
my Sheep indefinitely; Therefore he gave him Power over the whole Flock, or
Universal Church, Prince, and People. To answer; St. Augustine, Augustine. supra
locum.
and the Primitive Fathers gave other reasons. Christ said to Peter thrice,
Feed my Flock, in relation to his threefold Denial; that he, that abjured him
thrice, might be adjured to Fidelity in his Pastoral Charge, by this Advice
repeated thrice. He said it in the Presence of the Apostles, that they, that
were scandalized with his fall, might be confirmed by his Establishment, and
make use of the Instruction, which also concerned themselves. Haec, velut ad
Petru^ dicta, sunt omnium communia. Orig. in Matthaeum, Tract. 1.
These words, being spoken, as it were, unto Peter, are common to all the
Apostles, says Origin. (...) not only in St. Matthew, and Homer; but in Plato
(...). Plato, lib. 1. De Legibus.
(who also uses the same words) signifies to rule; but is (as Budeus says)
Pastorum more gubernare, and curare gregem; To rule, and take care of the
Flock, Pastour-like. As the Father of Hippo emblazons it, Non te pascere
cogita; sed oves meas, sicut meas pasce, non sicut tuas: gloriam meam in illis
quaere, non tuam; Dominium meum, non tuum; lucra mea, non tua. August. in
Johannem, Tract. 123.
Think not to feed thy self, feed my Sheep; feed them as my Sheep, not as thine
own; seek mine Honor in them, seek not thine; seek my Dominion, and not thine;
seek my Gains, and not thine own. No man ever denied this Feeding, this ruling
of the Flock to St. Peter; nor did Peter himself ever deny it to any other
Pastor; but said, (...). Feed, or, if you will, for it is the same word, rule
the Flock of God, which is among you, (...), 1. Pet. v. 2, 3.
taking the Oversight thereof; not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy
Lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as (...), overruling (or being Popes) over
God's Heritage; but being Ensamples to the Flock. Where you see St. Peter
yields that to every Pastor, which Christ yields to him. But, says Boniface,
Christ said to St. Peter, Feed my Sheep: Therefore he committed all his Flock
to him. What sequel more then in this? Peter said to all Pastors, Feed the
Flock: Therefore he committed the whole Flock to all Pastors. Bishop Jewel
Defense of the Apologic of the Church of England, page 92. Bishop Jewel.
challenges the Romanists to produce the Authority of one ancient learned
Father, that ever made this Collection; but ne (...) quidem: yet we deny not,
but St. Peter had Commission to feed, and rule the whole Church; but it was a
joint Commission with the rest of the Apostles, upon whom Christ breathed
alike, saying, John xx. 22. 23.
Receive the Holy Ghost, whose Sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whose Sins
ye retain, they are retained: gave them mission, and commission alike in the
same extent, and latitude, Matthew xxviii. 19.
Go teach all Nations, etc. Whereupon St. Hierom Hierom. Contra Jovinianum,
lib. 1.
says, All the Apostles received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Stability of the Church was built equally upon them all.


Gent. But, though I should be forced to relinquish my hold from these Texts,
and the ancient Commentaries, and Glosses thereupon; yet it is undeniable, that
the Fathers give St. Peter Primacy over the rest of the Apostles; for St.
Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Matthaeum Homil. 83. Homil. 87. Homil. 55.
calls him Verticem Apostolorum the Head of the Apostles; the Head, and Pastor
of the Church; the Master of the World, Ruler over all the World.


Minist. So does the same St. Chrysostom Chrysostom. ad Romans Homil. 18.
call Elias Caput Prophetarum, the Head of the Prophets: yet had not Elias
Primacy over Moses, and all his Colleagues. He gives Paul Nullus Paulum
antecedit, de ea re nemo omnium dubitat. Chrysostom. de laudibus Pauli. Chrysostom.
in Genesin Homil. 7. in Genesin Homil. 11.
Pre-eminence over all the rest, over the World: Paulus Magister Orbis, Paul
the Master of the World. And from Generalities condescends to induction of
particulars. Paulo tribuitur cura omnium Ecclesiarum, non unius, vel duarum,
vel trium, sed omnium, quae sunt in toto orb. Chrysostom. in Johan. Homil. 11.
in Act. 53.
Paulo tribuitur cura omnium Ecclesiarum, non unius, vel duarum, vel trium:
Unto Paul the charge of all Churches is given, not of one, or two, or three
Churches, but of all the Churches, that be in the world. Gregory, Gregor. 1
Reg. lib. 1. cap. 4.
a Roman Prelate himself, styles Paul, caput Nationum, the Head of Nations.
Eleutherius, Epistola Eleutherii ad Episcopos Galliae. Stow, Chronic.
another Bishop of Rome, writing to the Bishops of France, says, Vniversalis a
Christo vobis commissa est Ecclesia: The Universal Church is committed to you
by Christ. Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Phil. Homil. 13.
calls the Women of Philippi, caput Ecclesiae, the Head of the Church: and
salutes Theodosius the Emperor Chrysostom. ad populum Antiochen. Homil. 2.
with this Encomium, Summitas, and caput omnium supra terram hominum; the
Height, and Head of all men upon Earth. Yet neither had St. Paul, nor the
Gaulish Bishops, nor the Women of Philippi, nor Theodosius the Emperor Primacy
over the Apostles, or Superintendency over the whole Church.


Gent. But St. Ambrose says, Ambros. in locum, cap. 24.
Christus Petrum amoris sui veluti Vicarium reliquit: Christ left St. Peter, as
the Vicar of his love: which Attribute, and Elogy is not given to any of the
Apostles.


Minist. He says not expressly his Vicar, but as his Vicar: which, Tertullian
being Judge, is the Holy Ghost's peculiar: who, speaking of Christ, says,
Misit vicariam vim Spiritus Sancti, qui credentes agat. Tertull. De
praescriptione adversus Haereticos.
He, sitting at the Right Hand of God the Father, instead of himself, sent the
power of the Holy Ghost, as his Vicar, to direct them, that believe. But, if
St. Peter in a borrowed Sense may be termed Christ's Vicar, the Style is but
the same Eleutherius of Rome gave Lucius, first King of Britain; And that
Eusebius gives not only the Apostles, but all Ministers, saying, Eusebius
Episcopus Romanus, Epist. 3. 2. Cor. 5. Caput Ecclesiae Christus est. Christi
autem Vicarii Sacerdotes sunt, qui vice Christi legatione funguntur in Ecclesia.
Christ is the Head of the Church, and his Vicars are the Priests, that do
their Embassage in the Church in place of Christ. Now the Collection would be
wild, Eleutherius styles King Lucius, and Eusebius calls all Priests Christ's
Vicars: Therefore Lucius had, and all Priests have Supremacy over the whole
Church. But I beseech you, if it should be granted, that Peter was Christ's
Vicar in some peculiar Sense, (supposito, sed non dato) what makes it for the
Pope's Supremacy, and Authority over the Catholic Church in general; which is
the Question?


Gent. It makes in this, That Peter fixed his See at Rome, and delegated his
Plenipotentiary Power to the Bishops, his Successors there; that what Power he
had, he left it in Fee, and hereditary to them.


Minist. You speak much in little; for this is 2 Thessalonians. ii. 7, 8.
(...), the mystery of that wicked one: wherein is touched, Doctor Sclater
upon Thessal. page 94.
First, Temerarium, a rash avouchment, that Peter fixed his Episcopal See at
Rome. Secondly, Erroneum, a palpable mistake, that he could delegate his
Apostolic Power to Successors. Thirdly, Haereticum, a notorious falsity,
little less then Fundamental, that he actually invested the Bishop of Rome with
his Apostolic Power, derivative to all Posterity.


Gent. Will you deny, that Peter fixed his Episcopal See at Rome? when the
Fathers so frequently call Rome the Seat of St. Peter.


Minist. Gildas, page 2. Epist. De excidio Britanniae.
So Gildas the Wise calls Britain St. Peter's Seat, telling the British
Priests, Quod sedem Petri Apostoli inverecundis pedibus usurpassent; that They
had usurped the Apostle St. Peter 's Seat, with unreverent Feet: I hope you
will not conclude hence, that St. Peter fixed his Episcopal See in Britain;
which is as genuine Logic, as the former. That Peter was ever so much as at
Rome, you have neither Scripture Proof, nor Presumption. Vellenus printed by
Illyricus.
Vellenus, with many others, proves the contrary. Consider but these Reasons
impartially: Whereas Peter is said to come to Rome the Secundo anno Claudii,
Petrus Apostolus Roman venit; qui annos aliquot antea Antiochiae praedicaverat,
and hic initium sumit Romana Ecclesia. Carrion. Chronic. lib. 3. page 122.
second year of Claudius, and to reside there twenty five years, which is till
the last of Nero; why does St. Paul, writing his Epistle to the Romans, the
last year of Claudius, or first of Nero, make no mention of Peter, saying, Romans
1. 5, 6. that They were called of Jesus by his Apostleship amongst all Nations.
Secondly, In the last Chapter, he greets, and salutes near thirty eminent
Saints at Rome, with their Families; and names not Peter, which had been an
irreverent oversight, if he had been resident, as Primate there. Thirdly,
Claudius banished all Jews from Rome; Peter was a Galat. ii. 7, 8.
Jew. Fourthly, August. in Epist. ad Galat. cap. ii.
The Gospel of Circumcision, that is to preach to the Jews wheresoever
scattered, was committed unto Peter; but the Romans were Gentiles
Uncircumcised. Lastly, The Ancients, that averr Peter's residence so many years
at Rome, contradict the Stories of the Acts of the Apostles, and amongst
themselves vary, speaking the confused Language of Babel. But, admit Peter was
at Rome, will it follow, he was fixed as Bishop there?


Gent. Does not St. Augustine give a lineal Succession from Damasus, who was
Bishop at Rome in his time, till St. Peter? And Doctor Pocklington,
Pocklington; Sunday no Sabbath.
one of your own, glories, that he can derive his Pedigree from Augustine the
Monk, Bishop of Canterbury, and from thence ascend the Scale of Primitive
Succession till St. Peter.


Minist. Not from Saint Peter, as Bishop of Rome; but as an Apostle, who, with
his Colleagues, or Fellow-Apostles, ordained Elders, and Bishops of their times;
they, succeeding Pastors, and Teachers, to the world's end. Thus the Apostles
divided the earth amongst them; Saint Paul ordained Timothy at Ephesus, Titus
at Crete, Saint John Polycarp at Smyrna, and other Bishops of Asia; Saint
Bartholomew had his Successors in India, Saint James in Spain: yet Paul was no
Bishop of Ephesus, or Crete, John of Asia, Bartholomew of India, or James of
Spain. The Apostleship was an Extraordinary Office, which expired in the
Twelve, and was incommunicable to Posterity, and would have been disparaged by
Confinement to a particular Charge. Thus Irenaeus; Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap.
Contra Haereses.
It is easy (says He) for all men to see, that will see the Truth, the
ancient Traditions of the Apostles in the Church, through the whole World; and
we can reckon those, that were ordained Bishops of the Apostles themselves, and
their Successors also, even until our selves.


Gent. Confutation of the Apology of the Church of England. Harding against
Jewel. page 95.
Apostolic Power was twofold: either extraordinary, common to Saint Peter,
with the rest of the Apostles; this expired in them, and was incommunicable to
Successors: or ordinary, which was Saint Peter's peculiar Privilege; and this
he bequeathed to his Successors, Bishops of Rome.


Minist. This is that Erroneum, palpable Mistake maintained by Petrus de
Palude, who said, Nullus Apostolorum praeter Petrum factus est a Christo
Episcopus; alii Apostoli nullam potestatem jurisdictionis a Christo receperunt;
specialiter post Christi Ascensum fuit collata eis a Petro. Petrus de Palude,
De potestato Apostolorum, Art. 2.
That None of all the Apostles, save only Peter, was Bishop by Christ: and
that The rest of the Apostles received no Power of Jurisdiction at Christ 's
hand; but that specially, after Christ 's Ascension, it was given unto them by
Peter. Blasphemy worthy of tearing of Garments, as highly prejudicial to
Christ's Prerogative, and contradictory to Scripture; as Paul declares, Gal. 1.
1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God
the Father. Whereupon Saint Chrysostom Paulus nihil opus habebat Petro, nec
illius egebat voce; sed honor par erat illi: nihil hic enim dicam amplius.
Chrysoft. in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 1.
Comments thus; Paul had no want of Peter, nor had any need of his Suffrage, or
Allowance, but in honor was his equal: here I will say no more; meaning, he
was, in some Sense, his Superior. And Saint Augustine August. in Epist ad Gal.
cap. 2.
makes Peter, without any distinction, Fellow, and equal with the other
Apostles; avouching, that Christus, sine Personarum acceptione, hoc dedit
Paulo, ut ministraret Gentibus, quod etiam Petro dederat, ut ministraret
Judaeis: Christ, without any respect of Persons, gave the same Authority to
Paul, to minister among the Gentiles, that he gave to Peter, to minister among
the Jews. Whence is gatherable, that rather Saint Paul, who writ to the Romans,
preached at Rome, lived, and dyed there, should have had this ordinary
Delegation (if any) then Saint Peter, who was designed the Minister of
Circumcision: which he himself knew well, when he said Galat. ii. 9.
James, Cephas, (that is Peter) and John, who seemed to be Pillars, gave to me,
and Barnabas, the right Hand (...), of Fellowship; that is aequalitatis, of
equality, says the Gloss: and further, Non didici ab aliis, tanquam a
majoribus; sed contuli cum illis, tanquam cum amicis, and paribus. Glossa
Ordinaria, ad Galat. 2.
I learned not of Peter, and others, as of my betters; but I had Conference
with them, as with my equals, and Friends. So that this Distinction of
extraordinary, and ordinary Jurisdiction, which gives Saint Peter a special
Legislative Power, is Scriptureless, and a mere Popish Chimera.


Gent. Though there be no ground for it in Scripture, yet it may be
demonstrated from Tradition of the Church, as the Cause from the Effect; that
St. Peter had this Power, and delegated it to his Successors, who, without
interruption, have enjoyed it since. Nil dat, quod non habet: as our Gerson,
once Chancellor of Paris avers; saying, Sicut Christo collata est omnis
potestas in coelo, and in terra, sic eam Christus omnem Petro, suisque
Sucessoribus dereliquit. Gerson. De potestate Ecclesiae, Consid. 12. part. 3.
As all Power in Heaven, and in Earth, is collated upon Christ, so Christ has
delegated it to Peter, and his Successors.


Minist. This is that third thing, (...) Haereticum, a notorious falsitie,
which Franciscus a Victoria, a Friar of your own, and once Professor of
Divinity in the University of Salmantica, confesses; saying, Victor. De
potestate Ecclesiae, Relect. 1. Sect. 1. 1. page 39.
Glossatores Juris hoc Dominium dederunt Papae, cum ipsi essent pauperes rebus,
and doctrina: The Glossers of the Canon Law, (not Saint Peter) gave the Pope
this Dominion; when they themselves were poor in estate, and Petits in
Learning. Which Pope Zosimus Zosimus in Concili. Africano.
himself was conscious of, when, in that long contention with the Bishops of
Africa, touching his Supremacy, he alleged not one word out of the Scriptures;
but only the Council of Nice, which he himself had falsified. And Meltiades,
Meltiades in Epistola Ad Episcopos Hispaniae.
writing hereof to the Bishops of Spain, claims it only by Custom, not by
Donation of Peter, or Divine Right. The Spring, and Rise whereof Philip Mornay
Historia Papatus, quibus gradibus ad id Fastigii enisus sit. Philippus Mornaius
Plessiacus.
in his Mystery of Iniquity, or History of the Popedom, discovers: and is a
Truth so clear, that it extorts this Confession from Bellarmine; Bellarmin.
lib. 5. De Romano Pontifice, cap. 9.
Etiamsi nihil horum extaret, abunde sufficeret praescriptio 800. Annorum; nam
etiam regna, and imperia per latrocinium acquisita, tandem longo tempore fiunt
legitima: Though the Prescription of eight hundred years be sufficient; for
even Kingdoms, and Empires gotten by robbery, through continuance of time,
become lawful.


Gent. This is a shrewd confession of so Learned a Cardinal, and gives our
cause a deadly blow. There are four things, wherein Supremacy consists. First,
Reformation of the Church. Secondly, Calling of Councils, and Synods. Thirdly,
Promulgation of Church-Laws, and Edicts. Fourthly, Receiving of Appeals, and
giving Decisions. Have not Bishops of Rome exercised all these, since the
Apostles times? According to Gerson, Sicut non est potestas, nisi a Deo; sic
nec aliqua temporalis, vel Ecclesiastica, Imperialis, vel Regalis, nisi a Papa;
in cujus femore scripsit Christus. REX REGUM* DOMINUS DOMINANTIUM. Gerson. De
potestate Ecclesiae, Consider. 12. part. 3.
As there is no Power, but of God; so neither any Temporal, or Ecclesiastical,
Imperial, or Regal Jurisdiction, but of the Pope, in whose Thigh Christ has
writ, KING OF KINGS, LORD OF LORDS.


Minist. You shall find upon Examination, for all Gerson's Blasphemy; that not
one of these was exercised by the Bishops of Rome, in the Primitive Times.
First, Reformation of the Church, by abolishing Idolatry, Superstition, and
Heresy, and placing of true Religion, was practiced by Constantine, and all
the godly Emperors, his Successors. The Emperor [saith Eusebius Tanquam
communu Episcopus a Deo constitutus. Eusebius, De vita Constantini, lil. 1. cap
37.
] put down Idolatry, established Christian Religion, composed differences of
Bishops, suppressed Heresies, and Schisms, heard Causes of Religion, and judged
them in his own Person; made Laws, Decrees, Edicts, and Orders for Religion;
and all this, as a common Bishop, or Over-seer, ordained of God. This in
special Constantine engaged to perform against the Fomenters of Arrianism, and
Fautours of Arrian Bishops; saying, Pestium illarum audacia ministri Dei, hoc
est, mea, executione coercebitur. Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 19.
The Boldness of such (Bishops, and others) shall be brought in order by the
execution of God's Minister, that is, my self. And the sixth Toletan Council,
speaking of Chintillanus the King, says, Council. Toletan. vi. cap. 14.
Nefas est in dubium deducere ejus potestatem, cui omnium gubernatio superno
constat delegata judicio. It is an heinous Offense to call his Power (not the
Pope's) into Question, to whom, it is apparent, that the Government of all is
delegated by the Divine Decree.

Secondly, Calling of Councils, and Synods, was by the Authority of Emperors;
not Bishops of Rome. As the four first General Councils were called by four
Emperors: The Nicene Council, against Arrius, by Constantine. The Council of
Constantinople, against Macedonius, by Theodosius the Elder. The Council of
Ephesus, against Nestorius, by Theodosius the Younger. The Council of
Chalcedon, against Eutyches, by Martian. The Council of Sardis, by Constans,
and Constantine. And many more for many Centuries after Christ: and that not
(as Bellarmine Bellarm. De Cenciliis, lib. 1. cap. 13.
says) Authoritate Rapae, By the Pope 's Authority; which appears, in that
Leo, Bishop of Rome, made Supplication Supplicationi nostrae dignetur Imperator
annu^^c. Leo. Epist. 9.
to Theodosius, that he would call a Council in Italy; but the Emperor called
it at Ephesus: and the Bishops of Italy could not come in time; so that
Eutyches his Heresy was there countenanced by means of Dioscorus, Bishop of
Alexandria. Then Leo made a second Supplication Leo, Epist. 24.
and alleged the Tears of all the Clergy for to obtain a Council it Italy.
Then he solicited the Emperess Pulcheria Leo, Epist. 26.
to further his Supplicaon to the Emperor; he wrote Leo, Epist. 23.
to the Nobles, Clergy, and People of Constantinople, to join with him in
Supplication to the Emperor, yet could not obtain it in the time of
Theodosius. When Martian succeeded, by the favor of Pulcheria, a Council was
called, not in Italy, but at Chalcedon. Then Leo made a fresh Suit, Leo, Epist.
43.
that the Emperor would command the Bishops of the Council, that the Faith of
the Nicene Council might stand in full force, unaltered: which the Emperor did
at his Request, and the Emperor's Oration Oration Martiani in Concilio
Chalcedoneusi
to that purpose is extant. Now, if Supplication, Intercession of Friends,
Sighs, and Tears of Priests be the Authority of the Pope; let him, in God's
name, use it still. And, as in the Calling, so in the Subscription of the
Council you may further see his Authority; Because (says Leo Leo, Epist. 56.
to the Emperor) I must by all means obey your Sacred, and Religious Will, I
have set down my Consent, in writing, to those Constitutions. Here you see, it
is plain, Councils were called by Princes at the Pope's Petition, and
subscribed at their Command. Therefore, when Ruffinus Doce, quis eum jusserit
Imperator convocari^e Hieron. in Apologia contra Ruffinum.
alleged the Canon of a Council, against Saint Hierom; his Answer was, Show,
what Emperor commanded this Council to be called. I will shut up this Point
with Socrates his words, who, giving a reason, why in his Church-Story, he made
so often mention of Emperors, says, Propterea, quod ex illo tempore, quo
Constantini esse ceperunt, negotia Ecclesiae ex eorum nutu pondere visa sunt,
atque adeo maxima Concilia de eorum sententia convocata faerunt, and adhuc
convocantu^. Socrat. lib. 5. in Prooemio.
Since Emperors became (like Constantine) Fathers of the Church, the Causes of
the Church have depended upon their ill; and therefore the greatest Councils
have been, and yet are called by their Authority.

The third work of Supremacy is Promulgatio Legum, Promulgation of Church-Laws,
and Edicts, expedient for Ecclesiastical Government. And this was performed by
Kings, and Emperors, not Pope's, as Church-Stories are pregnant Proofs.
Constantine made many Laws concerning Confessors, and Martyrs, Christians, and
Heathens. Eusebius Eusebius. De vita Constantini, lib. 2. cap. 20, 21, 24, 44.
mentions two Laws; one, that abolished Idolatry, Images, Sacrifices, and
Divinations: another, concerning building, and enlarging of Churches, at the
Emperor's Charge. Theodosius made a Law against the Arrians, occasioned thus;
Amphilochius, Bishop of Iconium, having been a long Suitour in vain, used this
Stratagem, saluting the Emperor, slighted his Son Arcadius, newly Created
Caesar, which the Father interpreting as a Contempt of his Son, grew angry,
till Amphilochius, discovering himself, said, Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Art thou offended, Emperor, that I reverence not thy Son? And think thou,
that God is not offended with the Arrians, that blaspheme his Son? The
Emperor, overcome with these words, Legem scribit, made a Law against the
Assemblies of the Arrians. I will not enter particulars, but refer you to the
Titles De summa Trinitate, and side Catholica. De sacro sanctis Ecclesiis. De
Episcopis, and Clericis. De Haereticis, etc.
of the Civil Law, which were promulgated by Justinian, Theodosius,
Valentinian, Honorius, Arcadius, and other Godly, and Religious Emperors.

There is a Collection of Ecclesiastical Laws made by Charles the Emperor,
Lodovick, and Lotharius, gathered by Ansegmus, Anno 827.
Ansegmus. Of Charles his Laws there be an hundred sixty eight; of the Laws of
Lewis, and Lotharius an hundred fifty seven. In the Preface, the Emperor
Charles professes, Quapropter and nostros missos ad vos direximus; qui, ex
nostri nominis authoritate, una vobiscum corrigerent quae corrigenda essent.
that he has directed his Commissioners (here you see Princes Commissioners,
and Visitours are ancient) that shall join, with others, to redress those
things, which need Reformation, according to his Canonical Constitutions in his
name, and by virtue of hi^ authority. Gregory the First Gregor. Epist.
, Bishop of Rome wrote a submissive Letter to Mauritius the Emperor, and
another to Theodorus, his Physician, to entreat the revocation of a Law
invented by Julian, and that in a very humble Style, Vtrolique ergo quod debui,
exolvi; qui and Imperatori obedientia^ praebui^ and pro Deo, quod sensi non
tacui. Gregor. Epist. 61. lib. 2.
Ego quidem jussioni vestrae subjectus: I, your Servant, and subject to your
command, have sent this Law to many parts of the World, and now I write my
opinion to your Majesty: in both I have done my duty; I have performed mine
obedience to the Emperor, and I have not concealed what I thought fit for
God's cause. And Saint Augustine says Hoc jubent Imperatores, quod and
Christus jubet; quia, cum bonum jubent, nemo jubet, nisi per eos Christus.
August. Epist. 166.
of this power of Laws, When Emperors command that, which is good; it is
Christ, and no man else, that commands by them.

The fourth work of Supremacy is receiving of Appeals, giving Decisions,
Restitutions, and Deprivations, and other punishments of Bishops for Causes
Ecclesiastical; which in Primitive Times fell to the judicature of Princes, not
Popes: for when Donatus Vide Optatum libr. 1. and August. Epist. 162, 166.
had procured Cecilianus to be condemned by seventy African Bishops, and had
set up another Bishop in his See of Carthage; he appealed to Constantine, the
Emperor, and desired him to assign him Judges: Constantine, by Commission
extant in Eusebius, Eusebius, lib. 1. cap. 5.
delegated, and authorized Meltiades, Bishop of Rome, to hear the cause; who
gave Sentence for Cecilianus: upon a second Appeal Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 5.
Constantine made a second Delegacy to Chrestus, Bishop of Syracuse; who
likewise gave Sentence with Cecilianus: upon the third Appeal, Constantine
appointed Elianus, a Civil Magistrate, to examine Felix; who acquitted Felix
also. Then the Emperor called both Parties before him, and gave final Sentence
for Cecilianus, and made a severe Law against the Donatists. In which Passage,
I pray you, observe; First, that Meltiades, not as supreme Judge of all
Controversies, but as delegated by Constantine, did judge of Cecilianus his
Cause: and Saint Augustine August. Epist. 162.
defended him from usurpation upon the seventie African Bishops; because the
Emperor, not Saint Peter appointed it. Next the Bishop of Syracuse did judge
the same Cause after Meltiades, without any wrong to the Sea of Rome; no man in
that Age found fault with it. And Thirdly, It is apparent, that Constantine was
superior to Meltiades, and both made him his Delegate, and Judge of his
Sentence, and Judgment; which Saint Augustine Vltimum Judicium, ultra quod
Causa pertransire non potest. Augustine. contra Parmenian. lib. 1. cap. 6.
calls the last Judgment, beyond which the Cause could not pass. Socrates,
lib. 5. cap. 10.
Theodosius calling a Council of all Opinions, where Nactarius, and Agilius
made the Confession (...) of Consubstantiality; Demophilus delivered up the
Arrian Faith; Eunomius the Eunomian Faith; Eleusius the Macedonian Faith: Then
the Emperor, alone, separated from all Company [saith Tum solus, and
separatus, precatur Deum. Socrates, supra.
Socrates] made his Prayers to God to direct him in the Truth; and then he read
the several Faiths, and condemned, and rent all the rest, that rent, and
divided the Trinity; and commended, and approved that Faith of the
Consubstantiality of the Father, and the Son.


Gent. You have satisfied me sufficiently in these; only one Scruple remains
behind, how the Bishop of Rome came to this height, that he is the Head of
Councils, Papa sit, qui posset transfer Reges, and regna. Gerson. De
potestate Ecclesiastica; Consider. 12.
dethrones Princes, and disposes Kingdoms.


Minist. Not at once; but by several Steps: for Popish Primacy is a Mystery of
Iniquity, and insinuated by Degrees.

The first Step was the Departure of the Emperor Constantinus from Rome to
Constantinople: at which time, Gratian says, he gave his whole Power,
Dominion, and Territories both in Rome, and Italy, and the West, to the Bishop
of Rome; Constantinus Imperator Coronam, and omnem Regiam dignitatem in urbe
Romana, and in Italia, and in partibus Occidentalibus Apostolico concessit: The
Emperor gave the Pope his Crown, and all his Royal Dignity in Rome, Italy, and
the West. And, in the next Canon, Decrevimus itaque and hoc, ut ipse, and
Successores ejus, Diademate, viz. corona, quam ex capite nostro illi
concessimus, ex auro purissimo, and gemmis pretiosis uti debeat pro honor
Beati Petri. Gratian. Distinct. 96. Can. Constable.
We have made this Decree, that the Pope, and his Successors, shall, for the
honor of Saint Peter, wear the Crown of pure Gold, and precious Stones, which
We have given him from our own Head. Thus the Decree; though Laurentius Valla,
Raphael Volaterranus, Paulus Catthalanus, Nicolaus Cusanus, and other Popish
Writers, repute it but fabulous; and even Bellarmine Regna, and Imperia per
latrocinium acquisita, tandem longo tempore fiunt legitima. Bellarm. lib. 5. De
Romano Pontifice, cap. 9.
himself seems to make a Doubt, implyedly ascribing the Original of Popish
Claim to Usurpation, and Prescription.

The Second Step was the Fall of the Empire in the West: for, after the
Division of the Empire, it began daily to decline, and was utterly dissolved in
Augustulus Anno Domini 471.
, of whom was made this Epigram; Ad Pontac. Burdeg. page 93.
Augustus Romanum Imperium condidit, Augustulus labefactavit; Augustus set up
the Empire, but Augustulus pulled it down. And the lower Ebb the Imperial
Throne had, the Episcopal See had the higher Tide.

The third Step was the Donation of Phocas; who (having murdered all the
Mauricium ipse persequi, assequi, in oculis ipsius liberos omnes intersicere,
pendentem inter alios ab uberibus infantem, ac postremo ipsum, tot doloribus
transverberatum, jugulare. Philippus Mornaius, Mysterii Iniquitatis, page 112.
Emperor Mauricius his Children in his Sight, amongst the rest, a tender
Infant, hanging upon the Nurse's Breast, and lastly him) granted to Boniface
the Third, (that he, this Parricide, might be confirmed in the Empire) Vt
sanciretur Romanus Pontifex Oecumenicus and Summus Episcopus totius Ecclesiae
Christianae: That the Bishop of Rome should be established the Ecumenical
Patriarch, and Bishop of the whole Church of Christ. From that time (says
Carrion) the Roman Prelates never ceased to labor for the increase of their
Dignity, and Power.

The fourth Step was the Voluntary Charter, which Constantine, the Emperor of
Constantinople, made Anno Domini 684. Platina in vita Benedicti Secundi.
to Pope Benedict the Second; that whomsoever the Clergy, People, and the
Roman Soldiers, should choose to be Bishop, all men should believe him to be
the true Vicar of Christ, without tarrying for the Authority of the Emperor of
Constantinople, or the Deputy of Italy, as the Custom, and manner was ever
before that Day.

The fifth Step was the Amity Anno Domini 751.
between Zachary Bishop of Rome, and Pipin Governor of France, under
Childerick the King; which Bishop assoiled Pipin, and the other Frenchmen of
their Oath of Allegiance, and Fealty made to Childerick, and confirmed Pipin
the Traitor in his Master's Kingdom. Which Bellarmine Childericum deposuit
Zacharias, and in ejus locum Pipinum, Caroli Magni Patrem, creari jussit.
Bellarmin. lib. 5. De Romano Pontif. cap. 8.
confesses; saying, Pope Zachary deposed Childerick, and commanded to place,
and invest Pipin, Father to Charles the Great, in his Throne. For this Kindness
the Popes were gratified by both the Father, and the Son, and all the Caroline
Line: for Pipin, having besieged Aistulphus, King of the Lumbards, at Pavie,
forced Anno Domini 756.
him to yield up the Exarchate of Ravenna, and Pentapolis into his Hands; who
conferred it upon the Bishop of Rome. Ita Roma Romanus que Ducatus a Graecis ad
Romanu^ Pontificem, propter nefandam little Haeresin, impietatemque pervenit.
Sigon. lib. 3. De Regno Italiae.
So now the Liev-tenants of Constantinople ended their whole Power in Italy;
who formerly had their Seats at Ravenna: and now was he taken out of the way,
who, (as the Apostle tells us) did hinder the coming of Antichrist, 2 These.
ii. 7.

The sixth Step was the Vide Philip. Bergomatem, page 277
Constitution of the Electours of the future Emperors; for Gregory the Fifth,
being a German born, and Kinsman to Otho the Emperor, did appoint Antoninus,
part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5. Sect. 13.
Seven Electours of the Empire for ever; viz. the Archbishop of Mentz, the
Archbishop of Trevirs, the Archbishop of Colen (all his own Creatures) the
Marquess of Brandenburgh, the Count Palatine, the Duke of Saxony, and the King
of Bohemia; that the Empire might be established in their Posterity, and their
Blood thereby advanced for ever. Thus I have emblazoned you in brief, how that
Beast, that obscurely sprung out of the Earth, was nascent, crescent, regnant,
and triumphant.


Gent. But how came he to have Power here in Britain; for I do not see, that
any of these Donations expressly reaches that.


Minist. Centur. 6. lib. 5. cap. 17. Anno Dom. 600.
By Augustine the Monk, whom Gregory the First sent to convert the Saxons;
which being effected, he occasioned them to be forced by the Sword to submit to
the Roman Slavery; which they knew not before, murdering twelve hundred
Students at Bangor, laying the Foundation of Popery here in Blood; as I shall
have Opportunity further to discover.


Gent. Well; you have almost staggered me in this: but, I beseech you, proceed
to the Second Article.


The Second Article.
And I do believe the Church of Rome is not the true Church.

Gent. This Proposition is contradictory to that, which was riveted into me,
when a Child. The Holy Catholic Church is the true Church; The Church of Rome
is the Holy Catholic Church: Therefore the Church of Rome is the true Church.
(...). Philo.
This was the first Syllogism I learned, and probably will be the last, (unless
I see sufficient Reason to the contrary) that I shall forget.


Minist. Sir, your Assumption is palpably false; The Church of Rome neither is,
nor ever was the Catholic Church; once it was a sound Member thereof, now, not
so much as a sound Member. Dr. Rainolds Rainolds, in his Six Positions.
and others, have unanswerably proved it.


Gent. What? not the Roman the Catholic Church, whose Faith Romans i. ^.
(...), is spoken of throughout the whole World, and has taken Possession
thereof, according to the Divine Poet,

Seeds summa Petri, quae Pastoralis honoris
Facta caput mundi, quicquid non possidet Armis,
Relligione te net? --

Minist. The Roman Church, at the best, was but a particular Church, not the
Catholic, or whole: which Saint Paul clears; saying, (Romans i. 5, 6.) They had
received Grace for Obedience to the Faith (...), among all the Gentiles (or all
Nations) (...), among whom are ye also. But a Church, which is but one amongst
the rest, cannot be the whole, or Universal Church. It is as absurd to say,
that the Roman is the Universal, or Catholic Church, as to affirm, that
England is the Universal World. Therefore Saint Chrysostom, descanting upon
those Words, says, Romany scribens, qui, velnt in totius orbis vertice
constituti erant* nihil, prae reliquis Gentibus, illis praecipue adscribit.
Neque enim ideo, quod tum potentes erant, and regnabant, plus rerum
spiritualium eos habere dieit; sed Quemadmodu^, inquit, omnibus Gentibus
praedicamus, ita and vobis; connumerans eos and Scythis, and Thracibus. Nisi
enim hoc significare voluisset, superfluum erat dicere, In quibus estis and
vos. Chrysostom. ad Romans Homil. 1.
Paul, writing to the Romans, who were placed, as it were in a sublime Turret
of the whole world, ascribes no special prerogative to them above other
Nations: for neither then, because they were potent, and bore rule, did he say,
they had more of spiritual things: but he says, As we Preach to all Nations,
so to you, reckoning them with the Scythians, and Thracians. And, unless this
had been his meaning, it had been superfluous to say, Among whom are ye also.
Theodoret says, Theodoret. super Romans cap. i.
He distinguished not them (the Romans) as having Dominion over the world,
from other Nations; but joined them with them. Eos non, ut qui totius orbis
terrarum Dominium obtinerent, aliis Gentibus secrevit, sed aliis commiscuit.


Gent. Though the Roman Church be not the Catholic, or whole Church, as the
Head is not the whole Body: yet, as all the Members depend upon the Head, and
receive Animal Spirits thence; so all the Members of the Catholic depend upon
the Roman, and communicate with it. Hence Saint Cyprian Cyptian. lib. 4.
Epist. 8.
calls the agreement with the Bishop of Rome, and communicating with him,
Catholicae Ecclesiae unitatem; the firm holding the unity of the Catholic
Church. And writing to Antonianus, in the same Book, he accounts it for one
thing to communicate with Cornelius the Bishop of Rome, and to communicate with
the Catholic Church.


Minist. The Ancients were of another Judgment; amongst whom Oecumenius
Oecumenius in Romans cap. 1.
pulls down the Roman Crest, in his Commentary upon Romans 1. 6. saying, (...).
Ad modestiam revocat, (so Budaeus renders it) He humbles, (or brings down)
their Wisdom, [the Romanes] as if he had said, Do not think, that the Imperial
City [Rome] has more Prerogative, then others; but ye are called together with
other Gentiles. With whom accords Theophylact, saying, Hic tollit eorum
cogitationem de Primatu; non enim inquit, Alias antecellitis gentes, tametsi
imperium vobis usurpetis; verum enim, Perinde ac caeteris, sic vobis
praedicamus, ne igitur turgeatis fastu. Theophyl. in Romans cap. i.
He takes away their Imagination of Primacy: for Paul says not, Ye excel
other Nations, or the rest of the Gentiles, although ye should usurp Rule to
your selves; but, We preach even unto you, as we do unto others, lest therefore
ye should swell with Pride. There is not that dependence of other Churches with
Rome; as is of the Members with the Head. The Members cannot live without the
Head. The Church was Catholic, before Rome was a Member thereof; and might
continue so still, though the Roman Church, and the Hierarchy thereof were
wholly extinct. Your Paralogism, taken from Saint Cyprian's Advice, is
Complicatio fallaciarum, a Fardle of Fallacies. First, Non Causae, ut Causae;
for the Essence of Catholic Union did not consist in Communion with the Roman
Church Saint Steven, with many thousand, lived, and dyed in the Unity of the
Catholic Faith, and never knew Romish Communion. Secondly, Fallacia
accidentis; for it is a thing Contingent, and not necessary, that to
communicate with the Romish Church is to communicate with the Catholic Church.
Christ enjoins the Jews to hear the Scribes, and Pharisees were but Novel
Intruders: for Antigonus Sochaeus was the first, who succeeded Simeon the Just,
being Coetanean with Alexander the Great. Godwin, Hebrew Antiquities, lib. 1.
page 37.
Pharisees; which is more, then to communicate with them: and yet they were not
Heads, but unsound Members of the Jewish Church; as appears by our Savior's
Caution, Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees. The same Saint Cyprian, that
calls Agreement with the Bishop of Rome, Catholicae Ecclesia unitatem. ^^prian.
lib. 4. Epist.
Unity of the Catholic Church, reproves Cornelius, and Stephanus, both Bishops
of Rome, and told them, that they were both deceived: and would not therefore
agree with them.


Gent. But we have been taught, that There is no Salvation out of the Roman
Church, that (...), Pillar, and ground of Truth; 1 Timothy iii. 15. Whose Doctrine
is spread over the Earth.


Minist. There is Salvation to them, that are baptized, believe, and repent;
Mark xvi. 16. Act. ii. 38. and which have all the ordinary means of Salvation,
1 Timothy ii. 4. but, without Dependence upon the Church of Rome, people may be
Baptized, Believe, Repent, and have all the ordinary means of Salvation; as
appears by the Jews; Acts ii. 41. the Eunuch, Acts viii. 37. Lydia, Acts xvi.
14. many Gentiles, Acts xiii. 48. the Elect Lady, and her children, 2 John i.
2, 4. the seven Churches of Asia, Apocal. ii. 3. all these Independents of that
Church. This is confirmed by Occham Extrae ecclesiam aute^ Romanam potest esse
salus, quemadmodum post Ascensionem Christi fuit salus, antequam Romana
Ecclesia inchoaretur. Occham, Dialog. part. i. lib. 5. cap. 23.
one of your own Schole-men, who proclaims, that Out of the Roman Church may
be Salvation, as after our Savior's Ascension there was Salvation, before the
Roman Church had any being. And Aeneas Sylvius, Ante Concilium Nicenum quisque
sibi vivebat, and parvus respectus habebatur ad Ecclesiam Romanam. Aeneas
Sylvius, Epist. 288.
who was afterward Pope Pius the Second, affirms, that, the first three
hundred Years, Before the Nicene Council, small regard was had of the Roman
Church. Johanes Major Indi, and Christiani, in aliis locis separati, si reliqua
ad fidem necessaria crederent, nescii quod Romanus Pontifex caput sit
Ecclesiae, durum est dicere quod sint in statu Damnationis. Major. d. 24. q. 3.
says; It were over hard to affirm, that the Indians, and other Christians,
which live in remote Countries, should be in the State of Damnation for not
knowing that the Bishop of Rome is the Head of the Church, if they believe
other necessary Articles to Salvation. And Alchasar Alchasar, Comment. in
Apocalyp. cap. xx. v. 1. 2. 3.
says, Antequam nuptiae cum Romana Ecclesia per receptam publicae Christianae
Fidei consuetudinem celebrarentur; minus frequens cum Romana communio satis
fuit: Before such times, as the public Nuptials between the Roman Church, and
other Churches were celebrated by a common-received Custom, a less frequent
communion with that Church was sufficient. Neither the Roman, nor any other
particular Church, was ever simply the Ground, and Pillar of Truth; but only
the Primitive, Generale Concilium Papae, Cardinalium, Episcoporum, Doctorum, in
Scripturis Propheticis intelligendis non est nunc tantae authoritatis; quamae
fuerit olim Apostolorum collegium. Dried. De dogmat. Eccles. lib. 2. part. 58.
comprising the Apostles, the succeeding Universal Church, and the Members
thereof, only by Office, and secundum quid: it was not spoken to the Church of
Rome, but of Ephesus, which was never the Head of the Church, and is now no
Member thereof. Caveat Roma. And, if the Roman Church be spread over sundry
Parts of the World, because some people, professing the Roman Faith, travail,
or reside in many Countries, and exercise their Religion where they travail, or
live; yet this will not demonstrate, that it is the Church universal: for both
Jews, and also sundry other Christians, which are no Romists (as the Syrians,
or Melchites, Georgians, Russians, Nestorians of Saint Thomas in India,
Jacobites, Copthi, Habassines, Armenians, Maronites) are largely diffused over
the world, and exercise their Religion in places, where they make their abode.
And there is nothing more presumptuous, Gregor. Nazianzen. Oratione De seipso
contra Arrian. Vbi illi sunt, quae Ecclesiam multitudine definiunt? Chryost. Ad
popul. Antiochenum. Homil. 40. August. supra Psalm. 39.
then to make external Fame, and Amplitude (which are things common, and
separable) proper Notes of the true Church, and upon this ground to reject
smaller Churches, which have less Fame in the world, but more verity.


Gent. Well; admit Salvation be not confined to the Church of Rome, and that it
be not the peculiar Ground, and Pillar of Truth; yet it is the Mother Church:
all, or most have received their Christianity from her.


Minist. Rome, when she was the most superlative, standing upon her highest
tiptoes, was not a Mother, but a Sister, or a Daughter Church, juniour to many.
If we look into the original; Jerusalem is the Mother of us all. De Sione
exibit Lex, and verbum Domini de Jerusalem; Isai. ii. 3. there Christ was
Crucified, there the Apostles were commissioned, there they received the Holy
Ghost, there Stephen first sealed the Truth with his Blood: one of the eldest
Sisters was Antioch, where men were first called Christians, not at Rome;
whereupon Saint Chrysostom Antiochia caput totius orbis. Chrysostom. Ad populum
Antiochenum. Homil. 3.
calls that City, The Head of the whole world. The Apostles divided this
Earthly known Globe amongst them; which, in few years after the Passion, they
compassed. Whereas it is but pretended by Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 3, and 1.
Irenaeus, that Saint Peter came to Rome, when Saint Matthew wrote his Gospel,
which was in third year of Caius Caligula, and one and forty after our
Savior's Nativitie, eight after his Passion, during which time the Foundation
of Christianity was laid by the Apostles through the world, who received not
their Faith from Rome, but were rather more ancient. Titus was sent to
Dalmatia, Crescens to Galathia (2 Timoth. iiii. 10.) or Gallia, (so Eusebius
Eusebius, lib. 3.
calls it) Aventinus in Annalibus Boiorum. Sabell. Enncad. 7. lib. 4.
Trophimus to Orleance, Photinus to Lions, Lucius of Cyrene to Germany,
Barnabas to Millain, Apollinaris to Ravenna; all the Countries, and many more,
were converted by these, and others, without Commission from Rome.


Gent. But if not others; yet we of this Nation must acknowledge Rome for our
Mother Church, as receiving our Faith, and Conversion thence.


Minist. No: for Britain received the Christian Faith, in a manner as soon as
Rome; in the second year of Claudius, and forty fourth year after the
Nativitie, Simon Zelotes, an Apostle, came hither to Preach the Gospel, as
Dorotheus witnesses. Simon Zelotes, peragrata Mauritania, and Afrorum regione,
Christum praedicavit tandem in Britannia; ubi crucifixus, occisus, and sepultus
est. Dorotheus in Synopsi.
Simon Zelotes, having passed through Mauritania, and the Regions of Africa, at
the last Preached Christ in Britain, where he was Crucified, Slain, and Buried.
Nicephorus Evangelii Doctrina^ ad Occidentalem Oceanum, Insulasque Britannicas
profert. Nicephor. lib. 2. cap. 40.
also avouches, that Simon, having Preached to many Countries, conveyed at
last the Doctrine of the Gospel to the Western Ocean, and British Islands. With
these Baronius, Baron. ad diem 28. Octobr.
and the Magdeburgenses Magdeburg. Centur. 1. lib 2. cap. 2.
agree, which Gildas the Wise sums up, saying, Interea, glaciali frigore
rigente, Insula, etc. In the mean time, while Claudius was raging with bloody
War, there imparted it self to this cold Island (removed off from the visible
Sun further, then other Countries) that true, and invisible Sun Christ, which,
in the time of Tiberius Caesar, had showed himself to the whole World.
Theodoret, Sophronius, and Arnoldus Mirmannus Arnoldus Mirmannus in Theatro,
quarto Neronis, Anno Dom. 59.
affirm Saint Paul to have passed to Britain, the fourth year of Nero, and
there to have s^wn the Seed of Life. To these I might add Aristobulus (whom
Saint Paul names in his Epistle to the Romans) recorded Mirmannus in Theatro
De conversione Gentium, page 43. Doroth in Synops. Baron. out of the Greek
Martyrol, ad diem 25. Matrii.
by Mirmannus, Dorotheus, and Baronius, to have propagated the Gospel in
Britain. As also Joseph of Arimathea with his ten Companions, who pitched in
the Island Avallonia, where Glastenbury after was builded, thence called in our
ancient Records Capgravius, Polydore Virgil, Cambden, Harpesfiend, Bal^us,
Flemingus, Scropus.
the Burial-place of the Saints: none of these were sent from Rome, nor had any
dependence on it.


Gent. But the first Christian King of Britain, Lucius, required Eleutherius,
Bishop of Rome, to send him Preachers to instruct him in the Christian Faith:
and he (as the Chronicles record) sent him two Priests, Damianus, and
Fugatianus. So it should seem, that Britain received the Faith from Rome.


Minist. How can that be? Seeing Britain received the Faith the forty fourth
year of our Savior; and Lucius was not inaugurated King, till the hundred
seventy nineth year. By this Computation it appears, the Britains had been
Christians above an hundred thirty five years before Lucius, which Baronius, a
Roman Cardinal, confesses; saying, Cum diu alioqui Evangelium Christi illuc
perlatum fuisset, ut testatur Gildas Sapiens. Baron. Annal.
Long before Damianus, and Fugatianus, came here, the Gospel was preached; as
witnesses Gildas the Wise. It is true, Beda, Asser, Flores Historiarum, Record
of Saint Asaph 's Church, John Capgrave, Marianus Scotus.
Lucius, being already a Christian himself, sent Elvanus, and Meduvinus, two
learned men in Scriptures, with his loving Letters The Epistle of Eleutherius
to Lucius, King of Britain, is extant, lib. Constitut. Londinens.
to the Bishop of Rome, importuning him to send the Roman Imperial Laws for
reiglement of his Kingdom: but he refers him to the Laws of Christ expressed in
the Old, and New Testament; whence, he tells him, by the Grace of God, and the
advice of his Senators, he may gather Instructions for ordering of his
Subjects. Where observe, First, that the Britains were Christians long before.
Secondly, That Lucius himself was also a professed Christian. Thirdly, That
the Messengers he sent, were mighty in the Scriptures. Fourthly, That they were
sent for a directory in the Imperial, or Civil Laws. Fifthly, That the Bishop
of Rome challenges no Power of Judicature; but refers him to Scripture, and his
Council.


Gent. Well; though you have driven me out of these four Holds; That the Church
of Rome is not the Catholic Church; That it is not the Head, upon which other
Churches, as Members, depends; That Communion with Rome is not necessary to
Salvation; That Rome is not the Mother of all Churches, nor of our British:
yet, I hope, I may communicate with Rome, as with a Member of the Catholic
Church, and a Sister, having prescription of a thousand years, since Ethelbert,
W. Malmesburiensis, Marianus, Florian. Beda.
in whose time Augustine, Melitus, and Justus, Commissioned by Gregory the
First, converted the Saxons, and made them, with the Britains, conformable to
the Roman Church.


Minist. Augustine, and his Companions, were not the first Converters of the
Saxons, whose Queen Berta Stow, Chronicl. page 90.
was Christianed long before, having a Bishop with her of incomparable
Holiness, whose Name was Letardus. Neither were the Britains conformable, till,
almost two hundred years after, King Osuvius his inclination, and Ecbertus his
blandishments betrayed them thereto: how ever it is not lawful Vbi incurritur
crimen Haeresis, ibi sides naufragium patitur, and perinde ratio verae
Ecclesiae am^^titur. Perez. P^^^a^cuch. sid. vol. 1. cap. 14.
for you to communicate with the Church of Rome being shamefully Apostated, and
not so much as a sound Member of the Catholic Church.


Gent. Your own Doctors approve the Church of Rome to be a true Church; as
expressly Bishop Hall in a Sermon, for which when he was checked, he
Apologized, that he had delivered the same twenty years before, at Paul's
Cross, without control, and appears to Doctor Davenant, Bishop of Salisbury,
Doctor Pridea^x, and Doctor Ward, Professors in the two Universities,
Doctor Primrose, Preacher of the French Church in London; who all accord with
him, as appears by their Determinations.


Minist. They all accord (it is true) that the Church of Rome, in a
Metaphysical sense, is a true Church: for so to be Veritas transcendentalis
nihil positivum, and reale addit Enti. Eustachius, Metaphys. page 42.
a Church, and a true Church is all one. Ens, and Verum convertuntur: nihil hoc
modo falsum dici potest, nisi quod fictitium, and impossible est. Every thing
thus is True, and nothing (says Eustachius, Metaphys. page 43.
Eustachius) can be called false, but that, which is fained, or impossible. So
a Leprous, and Hectically diseased Body, is a true body: a Monstrous
conception, a true conception. Thus the Church of Rome, though she has lost
Tot in Ecclesia abusus, and gravissimos morbos irrupisse, quibus ad sanitatis
desperationem fere laboret. Espenc. Comment. Tit. cap. 1. page 71.
as much of her Primitive composure, as Jason's Ship did, and consists, in a
great part, in a Patcherie of Traditions, has not lost her truth. But they
never acknowledged, the Church of Rome was a true Church, more then a Thief is
a true man in a Moral sense, as being notoriously depraved. And, to prove, that
the Church of Rome in this sense (which is the Question) is not a true Church,
I will demonstrate four things. First, That it is corrupted in Doctrine,
Secondly, In Manners. Thirdly, That Rome is Apocalyptical Babylon. Fourthly,
That the Romish Hierarchy is Antichristian.


Gent. Prove these four, and conclamatum est, the Controversy is at an end.


Minist. First, The Church of Rome is manifestly corrupted in Doctrine, and
therein fallen from the Apostolic, and Primitive purity. To give some
Instances; Christ Nec caro sine sanguine, nec sanguis sine carns, jure
communicatur. Paschas. De corpore, and sanguine Domini, cap. 9.
instituted, and gave the Sacrament in both kinds: They rob the Laity of the
one moitie, with a non obstante, in the Council of Constance; notwithstanding
Christ appointed both Elements: Sit Anathema, Let him be accursed, that says,
one is not sufficient. Christ Non recedet liter Legis hujus ex ore tuo: sed
meditaberis die, and nocte: ut observes facere omnia, quae scripta sunt in eo.
Cyprian. Epist. 74. ad Pom peium.
enjoined the reading of the Scriptures, (...), Search the Scriptures: They
forbid, and bring under the Inquisition all Laymen, even Regulars unlicenced,
that in known Language read the Scriptures. God says, Thou shall not make to
thy self any graven Image: They wholly defalk the second Commandment, and, to
make up the Decade, Dichotomize the last. The Scripture says, ^psum conteret,
The Seed of the woman (Christ) shall bruise the Serpent's Head; so See the
several places, as they are quoted by Doctor Raynolds, Ad Anglic. Seminar.
Hierom, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Leo, Serapion, Moses Bar-cepha, Rupertus, Pererius,
Isiodorus Clarius, Lipomanus, and St^uchus interpret it: Costerus the Jesuit,
Picus de Mirandula, Canisius, Gregory de Valentia, Guido Fabricius, maugre the
Original, correct it, and make the Vulgar speak, Ipsa conteret, She (the Virgin
Mary) shall bruise, etc. Anacletus, and Calixtus, both Bishops of Rome,
decreed, Distinctio. 1. Episcop. and 2. pacta.
that, after Consecration, all Dominica coena debet omnibus esse communis.
Hieron. 1. Cor. xi.
present should communicate, or else be thrust out of the Church: They enjoin,
and practice the celebration of Private Masses, only by the Priests, while the
people are Spectatours. In private Masses (says In Missis privatis sufficit,
si unus sit praesens, scilicet Minister: qui populi totius vicem gerit.
Aquinas, part 3. Quaest. 83. Art. 5.
Aqninas) it is sufficient, if there be one present, that is the Minister, that
represents the whole people. Saint Augustine, August. De side, and operibus.
with all the Primitive Fathers interpret those words, 1. Cor. iii. 13. The
fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is, of the Fire of
Tribulation. Bellarmine Bellarmin. De Purgat. lib. 1. cap. 5.
rejects that, and, with his Roman Accomplices, interprets it of Purgatory.
Saint Augustine says, Christ spoke these words This is my Body, when he gave a
sign of his body: Romists say, It is Christ's very body; Anathematizing all,
that deny Transubstantiation. Saint Augustine says, with Scripture; Sine fide
etiam, quae videntur, bona opera in peccatum vertuntur: The works, which are
done without Faith, though they seem good, are turned into sin. Maldonate, Non
sequendum illam opinionem, quam Tridentinum Concilium nuper merito damnavit,
Omnia infidelium opera esse peccata. Maldonat. Comment. in Matthew. vii. 18.
with the Council of Trent, says, They are not sins. Saint Augustine Augustine.
De meritis Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 34.
says, I know certain worshippers of Tombs, and Pictures, whom the Church
condemns: this the present Church of Rome approves; whose Mouth Bellarmine
is, saying, Bellarmin. De Imag. cap. 6.
This Book was witten in the beginning of Augustine 's first conversion to the
Catholic faith. And, as Rome is apostated from the Apostolic, and Primitive
Verity, so even from of the ancient Doctrine of their former Bishops. Gregory
the First, who lived six hundred years after the Nativitie, says, Greg. Moral.
lib. 19. cap. 13. Art. 6.
We do not amiss, if we produce a testimony out of the Books of Maccabees,
which, though they are not Canonical, yet are they set forth for the
edification, and instruction of the Church: The Council of Trent says, Council.
Trident. Sess. 6.
If any shall refuse the Books of Maccabees for Canonical Scripture, let him be
accursed. Gregory says, Gregor. in Ezekiel. lib. 1. Hom. 9.
In hoc volumine omnia, quae erudiunt, cuncta, quae aedificant scripta,
continentur; whatsoever serves for edification, and instruction, is contained
in the Volumes of the Scriptures: Romists say, Scripturae sine Traditionibus
nec fuerunt simpliciter necessariae, nec sufficientes. Bellarmin. De verbo
Domini script. Et
, Council. Trident. Sess. 4. Decret. 1.
Scripture, without Traditions, are neither simply necessary, nor sufficient.
Gregory says, Gregor. in sex Psalm. poen^^ent.
Christ gives unto his Members the most holy Mysteries of his quickening Body,
and Bloody, making a plain difference between the body of Christ offered on the
Cross, and the Mystery of that body offered in the Sacrament. The Church of
Rome says, Council. Trident. Sess. 13. cap. 1.
In the Sacrament of the Eucharist, after Consecration, our Lord Jesus Christ,
true God, and man, is truly, really, and substantially contained under the form
of sensible things; that the Jesuit Holcot Holcot in 4. Sentent. Quaest. 3.
professes, If there had been a thousand Hosts in a thousand places, at that
very time, when Christ hung upon the Cross, then had Christ been crucified in a
thousand places. Gregory says, Gregor. in lib. Capitulari, capit. 7. apud
Cassand. Liturg. 33. page 83.
Sacerdos Missam solus ne celebret; Let not the Priest alone celebrate Mass:
The Trident Conventicle says, Council. Trident. Can. 8. Sess. 22.
If any affirm, that Private Masses, in which the Priest alone does
sacramentally communicate, are unlawful, and therefore ought to be abrogated;
let him be accursed. Gregory faith, Gregor. in xxviii. 1. Job. lib. 18. cap. 32.
There are some, that glory, that they are saved by their own strength, and
brag, that they are redeemed by their own precedent merits; but herein they
contradict themselves, for whilst they affirm, that they are innocent, and yet
redeemed, they frustrate the name of redemption in themselves. The Roman
Proselytes say, Rhem. Annot. ^^ Hebr. vi. 10.
Good works are meritorious, and the very cause of Salvation, so far, that God
should be unjust, if he rendered not heaven for the same. Gregory says Gregor.
lib. 7. Epist. 109.
to Serenus, Bishop of Massilia; Your Brotherhood, seeing certain Worshippers
of Images, broke the Images, and cast them out of the Church; the Zeal, which
you had, that nothing, made with hands, should be worshipped, we praise. The
Church of Rome says, Council. Trident. Sess. 15.
We teach, That the Images of Christ, the Virgin Mother of God, and other
Saints, are chiefly in Churches to be had, and retained, and that due Honor,
and Worship is to be given to them Gregory says, Gregor. lib. 6. Epist. 30.
Mauritio. August. lib. 6. Epist. 24.
Ego confidenter dico, etc. I confidently say, whosoever calls himself, or
desires to be called the Universal Bishop, in the Pride of his heart, is the
forerunner of Antichrist. Roman Extravagants say, Subesse Romano Pontifici
omni humanae creaturae definimus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. Bonifac.
viii. in Extrag.
We define, that every humane Creature, upon necessity of Salvation, must be
subject to the Roman Bishop. I could bring you more of the same Bran, as of
their depraving of Scriptures, Fathers, Councils, their Indices Expurgatorii,
and forged Authors, if you will have the Patience to hear.


Gent. No; This is sufficient, and more, then I could have believed; but that
the Authors, you produce, are so pregnant. I beseech you, proceed to the
Second Position, that The Church of Rome is manifestly corrupted in Manners.


Minist. Your own Friends, and Followers testify, that your Church has been,
for many Ages, notoriously defiled with the Enormity of Vices. Gerson says
Gerson. Tomo 4. Epistol. Brugis script. page 71.
in general Terms, that, from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot,
the ulcerous matter of enormous sin has defiled, and deformed the whole body,
and state of Christianity living under your profession. In the Council of
Basil, Council. Basil. respons. Synodal. page 139. Surius.
it was affirmed, that all Ecclesiastical, and Christian Discipline was, in a
manner, extinguished in every place. In the Lateran Council, that Oppression,
Rapine, Adultery, Incest, and all pestilent Vice, did confound all Sacred, and
Profane things; and that Ita in fancta^ Naviculam impetum facere, ut pene
scelerum fluctibus illa latus dederit, and prope mersa, and pessundata sit.
Oration Aegidii, Council. Lateran. sub Julio ii.
the same beat Saint Peter's Ship so impetuously, that it began to hull, or
wallow upon the one side. Platina says, Platina in Marcello 1.
Vices were so exalted, and multiplied, that they hardly left any space for
God's Mercy. Macchiavel says, Macchiavel. Disp. De Republ. lib. 1. cap. 12.
page 73.
There is no place, wherein there is found so little Piety, and Religion, as in
those people, who dwell nearest Rome. Espenceus says, Espenc. Comment. Tit.
cap. 1. page 71.
that you have not only imitated, and matched, but surpassed all the Avarice,
Ambition, Lubricitie, and Tyranny, that was ever heard of amongst the
Heathens. Sundry of your own part have written Volumes, [as Alvares Pelag. De
planctus Eccles.
Alvares Pelagius, Nicholaus Clemangis, Onus Ecclesiae] containing the
Narrations of the outrageous wickedness, which reigned among you. Platina
Platina, in Johanne xiii.
styles your Grandfathers Monsters of mankind. In the Council of Constance
Council. Constable. Sess. 11. Art. 5.
they are called the Dregs of Vice, incarnate Devils. Aventine says, Aventin.
Annal. Boiorum, lib. 3. page 211.
Nothing was more luxurious, covetous, and proud, then Priests; they spent the
Church's Patrimony in gluttony, riot, upon Dogs, and Queans; and all their
Preaching was to maintain their own licentiousness. Matthew Paris says,
Matthaeus Paris, Chron. in Henrico iii. page 535.
The Prelates of Rome seek not to make people devout, but to fill their Coffers
with treasure: They study not to win Souls; but to encroach upon other men's
revenues: They oppress the Godly, and impudently usurp other men's right: They
have no care of honesty, or right* King John of England, from whom Pope
Innocent extorted forty thousand Marks at once, and twelve thousand annually,
to absolve his Kingdom being Interdicted, said, that Matthaeus Paris, ibid.
Anno 1213. page 327.
He had learned by woeful experience, that the Pope was ambitious beyond all
men living, an insatiable Gulf, and thirster after money, and ready, for hope
of Gain, like wax, to be molded to any thing, kind, or degree of wickedness.
Alvarez has these words, Alvarez De planct^^ Ecclesiae, lib 2. Artic. 5.
litera Aleph. Vide Suriu^ Tomo 4. Council. page 820, 824, 569, 579. Abbatem
Usperg. anno 99. Luitprand. Vit. Pap. lib. 6. cap. 6. Dionys. Carthus. Epist.
in sine Comment. Apocal. Petrum Blesens. page 39, and 40.
The Mystical Sion, the Church, which, in her Primitive state, was adorned of
her Spouse with such, and so many Royal Graces, is now clouded, and eclipsed
with the black mist of ignorance, iniquity, and error, and we behold her cast
down from heaven, as a Desert uninhabited of virtue: and, if any godly people
remain, they are esteemed as Arabians, and Sarracens. The Prelates of the
Church are an army of Devils, potius depraedandis, and spoliandis, and
scandalizandis hominibus; quam lucris animarum operam dantes: they rather
labor to rob, spoil, and scandalize men, then to win souls. The consideration
of which moved Cornelius, Bishop of Bitanto, in an Oration at the Council of
Trent, to express himself thus; Vtinam a religione ad superstitionem, a fide ad
infidelitatem, a Christo ad Anti-Christum, a Deo ad Epicurum, velut prorsus
unanimes, non declinassent: Dicentes in cord impio, and ore imputencio, non
est Deus. Epist. Bitant. in Concile Trident.
O would to God they (meaning the Romish Prelates, and Dependants) had not
fallen with common consent, and that altogether, from true Religion to
Superstition, from Faith to Infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist, from God to
Epicurus; saying, with a wicked heart, and shameless mouth, There is no God.


Gent. This is a loud Outcry, and I am convinced, that our Church was in a
great part guilty; but part of this might be kindled from Factions, and
Interests; as, at this present, with you, each Sect studies to disparage the
other, and render them ignominious.


Minist. You might have said so, if I had cited against you, the Evidences of
the Albigenses, Waldenses, Wicklifists, Lollards, Taborites, Poor men of Lions,
who were Dissenters from you in Judgment; but the Authors I produced, are
unbiassed with Partiality, and wholly your own bosom-Friends; who, out of a
Sympathy, bewailed the Rottenness in their own Bones. No wonder, if, amongst
us, Civil Wars have untwisted the Cords of Discipline, and that has begot
Liberty; Liberty, Diversity of Opinions; Diversity of Opinions, Difference in
Affections; hence every latter endeavors to rout the former: as the
Anabaptists whosoever went before them; the Quakers would dismantle them. It is
as ancient, as Hostility, for the prevailers to asperse, and burden the
conquered, as they please. But, even in calm Times, the offenses of your Church
in this Nation were so outrageous, that Gulielmus Nubrigensis, Gulielmus
Nubrigensis, lib. 2. cap. xvi. Roger Hoveden, Anndl. part. post.
an Historian of your own, confesses, that the Judges complained to the King,
that there were many Robberies, and Rapes, and Murders, to the number of an
hundred, committed within the Realm, by Ecclesiastical Persons, in the Compass
of one year. And the very Tendency of your Romish Doctrine is to
Licentiousness: For, says Aventine, Quemcunque sceleris obnoxium, Parricidio,
Incestu, Sacrilegio pollutum, continuo, ubi cruciculam vesti assuisset, solutum
esse and crimine, and poena, d^clamitabant; quippe, ans^^ hinc accepta,
inimicos suos prius tollebant, hinc in militiam sacram nomine dabant. Aventin.
Annal. Boior. lib. 7. page 530.
they declare any man guilty of wickedness, contaminated with Parricide,
Incest, Sacrilege, as soon as he has sewed a Crucifix to his Garment, to be
quit from the Crime, and Punishment; which lays open a great Gap to Wickedness;
for many first murder their Enemies, and then retreat into a Monastery for
Sanctuary, and, under the covert of a Cowl, secure themselves. And your
Sanctuaries are Harbors, and Dens of Assassines, and other enormous
Delinquents tolerated, and supported by your Church; you openly maintain Stews,
and receive Nam and Mariscallus Papae de facto eximit ^^^butum a Meretricibus.
Constit. Otho. De concubitu Cler.
yearly Tribute, and part stake with Harlots.


Gent. I always disliked those Sanctuaries, that were receptacles of Murderers,
and Assassines, as also toleration of Stews. But, admit the Church of Rome be
somewhat corrupted both in Doctrine, and Manners, yet I cannot conceive it is
become so vile, as to be that Apocalyptical Babylon, which is your third
Position; because, in Scripture, Rome is never called Babylon.


Minist. Whether Rome, in Scripture, be ever called Babylon, is not much
material; though Jesuits, for want of beter Arguments, prove, that Peter was at
Rome, from 1 Pet. v. 15. The Church, which is at Babylon (that is Rome, say
they) saluteth you: but Babylon is not taken here literally, either for Babel
in Egypt, called now Cairus; or for that Babylon in Chaldee Justin. Histor.
lib..1
begun by Nimrod, and finished by Ninus, and Semiramis: but figuratively, as
your own Jesuit Ribera confesses; saying, Hoc primum constet, nomen Babylonis
hic non proprie; sed figurate accipi: cum dicit mysterium mysticum esse dicit,
quod indicat id est arcanum, quippiam latere in nomine Babylonis, nec ita
debere accipi, ut sonat. Ribera in Apocal. xiv.
Let this be first agreed upon, the name of Babylon here not to be taken
properly, but figuratively: when he says a Mystery, he shows that to be
mystical, he speaks of, that is some hidden thing to be couched in the name of
Babylon, and not so to be taken as it sounds.


Gent. But, if Babylon be taken mystically, must it necessarily be interpreted
of Rome?


Minist. Yes; Jesuits of Rhemes upon Revel. xvii. 5.
your Divines of Rhemes are forced to confess, that the first persecuting
Emperors were but Figures, and it may well be, that the great Antichrist
shall sit in Rome also, as his Figures sat in Rome: Bellarmine (p) not only
confesses Babylon is Rome, but proves it by the Testimonies of ancient Fathers.
Ribera says, Romae convenient aptissime omnia, qua de Babylone dicuntur, atque
illud inprimis, quod alii convenire non potest, Septem capita septem sunt
montes. Ribera in Apocalyp. cap. 14.
Whatsoever in the Apocalypse is spoken of Babylon agrees most properly to
Rome, especially that, which can agree to no other, The seven Heads are seven
Hills.


Gent. But none of them, that I remember; interprets it of Rome in the present
state, as now.


Minist. No; for that were to yield up their Arms; but they are forced to
miserable shifts, and to speak the Language of Babel, confounding one another.
Bellarmine says; By Babel is meant Ethnica Roma sub Imperatoribus, Heathen
Rome under Emperors. Viega says, Sermo non est deantiqua illa Roma, sed de
illa, quae florebit in extremo mundi tempore: The Speech is not of old Rome,
but of Rome, as it shall be in the last time of the World. Ribera joins both
together, saying, Quicquid mali de Roma scribitur in hac Apocalypsi, vel ad
tempus illud spectat, quo Gentilibus Imperatoribus serviebat, vel Pontificatum
suum a se ejecerat. Ribera in Apocalys. cap. 14.
Whatsoever evil is spoken of Rome, in this Apocalypse, pertains either to that
Rome, which was subject to Heathen Emperors, or to that Rome, that will eject
the Bishop of Rome. For they grant the Pope will be cast out of Rome, and that
the City will be ruinated. Thus you see, how they reel, Some say Rome was
Babylon; others say, it will be; none deny, that Babylon, spoken of by Saint
John for the chief Seat, and City of Antichrist, is Rome.


Gent. I confess, they are brought into great straits, when forced to confess,
that Rome is Babylon; but they have one main Fort yet untaken, which is this,
This present Rome under Popes is not Babylon.


Minist. Either this present Rome is Babylon, or Heathenish Rome under
Emperors, or that at the end of World: but neither of the later; therefore
present Rome is Babylon. The Proposition is their own confession, the branches
of the Assumption I will prove in order.

First, Not Heathen Rome, under persecuting Emperors, was Babylon; for the
Times of this Mystical Babylon, and Antichrist do (...), and are
contemporanean: but Antichrist succeeded the persecuting Heathen Emperors;
which Viega confesses, for, having spoken of them, he says, Haec est quarta
Visio hujus operis, eaque illustrissima, and ad Anti-Christi tempora pertinens.
Viega.
This is the fourth Vision of this work, and that most remarkable, and
pertaining to the times of Antichrist. With him accords the Jesuit Ribera;
who, having finished his Discourse of the Emperors, comes to the second part
of the Book, which, he says, Est hujus libri pars secunda, and tota ad
Anti-Christum, ejusque tempora pertinet. Ribera, a cap. 12. ad 21.
wholly pertains to Antichrist, and his Times.

Secondly, Heathenish Rome had never been married to Christ; but Carthusian,
their own man, interprets Babylon Meretricem adulteram. Carthus. in locum.
an adulterous Whore, who had fallen from Christ, and committed spiritual
fornication. There must be (...), a standing in Faith, before there can be
(...), a falling from Faith.

Thirdly, This Whore of Babylon has a Golden Cup in her hand full of
abominations; Revel. xvii. 4. This Golden cup, says Berengandus, Documenta
erroribus plena. Berengandus in locum.
is Documents full of errors: but Pagan Rome subdued the World by Sword, not
false Doctrine, and Miracles.

Fourthly, This Babylon is called (...).
the Mother of Fornications, Revel. xvii. 5. which not only, her self, played
the Whore, corrupting the true Worship of God, but enforcing her Corruptions,
and superstitions, upon others: But Heathen Rome infected not other Nations
with superstitions, but was rather infected with the superstitions of others,
erecting her Pantheon in honor of all Gods.

Fifthly, Says Carthusian, one of your own, This Babylon est Mysterium, in quo
aliud cernitur, aliud intelligitur; A Mystery, wherein one thing is seen,
another thing understood. Quia enim tot simulatis vi^utibus decoratur, non
omnibus mulieris hujus pravitas innotescit, sed viris justis, and prudentibus.
Hieron. in Daniel. 1.
Because, she is embelished with so many fained Virtues, the pravitie of this
Strumpet appears not to all, but to the just, and prudent: Simulabit se Ducem
Foederis; (says Saint Hierom) she shall fain her self to be chief of the New
Covenant. But we never find, that Heathenish Rome put on this Veil of
Sanctity, or ostentaciously set her self forth with the Dress of Hypocrisy,
or spoke lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timoth. 14. 2. which is her Character.


Gent. It is clear enough from these Characters, that Pagan Rome was not this
Babylon; prove, That Rome is Babylon already, and we need no further discovery
at the end of the world.


Minist. First, Observe, that the Woman John saw sitting upon the Beast, is
that great City, which had rule over the Kings of the Earth; Rev. xvii. 18.
and that is confessed to be Rome.

Secondly, The Beast, that was, and is not, and (...). sic legit Editio
Complu^ensis, Primasius, and Syrus Interpres.
yet shall be, Apoc. xvii. 8. who carried the Whore, is the Roman Government.

Thirdly, This Beast, which carried the Whore, had seven Heads, which were
seven manner of Governments, Quorum quidem quinque, Regum, Consulum,
Tribunorum, Decemvirorum, Dictatorum, Johannis aevo jam praeterierunt. Mede,
Comment. Apoc. page 260.
whereof five were expired in Saint John's time, to wit, Kings, Consuls,
Tribunes, Decemvirs, Dictatours; the sixth was then in being, which was shortly
to fail, that was the Roman Empire, which has been taken from Rome above
twelve hundred years. The seventh Head is Novissima illius (puta Pontisi^i^)
capitis vice, qua demum ^ajularet Meretricem. Mede, supra.
that of the Popes, which ever since succeeded the decayed Emperors, and this
is that, which carries this Mystical Whore.

Fourthly, These ten Horns of the Beast, that the last Head was adorned
withal, are ten Kingdoms not known in Saint John's time, but arising out of
the dissolution of the Roman Empire. 1st, Vortimer of the Britains. 2ly,
Hengist of the Saxons. 3ly, Childeric of the Franks. 4ly, Gunderick of the
Burgundians. 5ly, Riciarius of the Alamans. 6ly, Gensericus of the Vandals.
7ly, Theodoricus of the Wisi-Goths. 8ly, Sumanus of the Alamans. 9ly, Theodemir
of the Ostro-Goths. 10ly, Marcian of the Grecians. These are characterized to
be Contemporanean with this Apocalyptical Babylon.

Fifthly, These ten Horns, under the Banner of the false Prophet, that fight
against the Lamb, are those ten Kingdoms, that have fought under the conduct of
the Pope against Christ; but he rides on upon his White horse, conquering, and
will conquer. Which is so evident, that Viega, Nobis etiam iliud d^cendum
videtur cum Aretha, Primasio, Ambrosio, Ansberto. Haimone. Idololatriam ejus
verbis significari, defecturamque esse Romam fide, atque adeo futuram esse
habitationem Daemoniorum, ob execranda fiagitia, and Idololatriae
superstitione^. Viega, in locum.
after a long Dispute, is forced to conclude, that he is of the same judgment
with Arethas, Primasius, Ambrose, Ansbert, Haimon, that Idolatry is signified,
and that Rome shall Apostate from the Faith, and become an habitation of
Devils, for her execrable crimes, and superstitious Idolarrie. Thus you see
this painted Strumpet described, as if she had been Emblemed by Messallina
Augusta, in the Satyrist, Juvenal. Satyr. 6.


-- Nuda papillis
Constitit auratis, titulum mentita Lyciscae.

Gent. Well you have made this more probable, then I imagined; prove also your
last Position, that The Romish Hierarchy is Antichristian, and I will yield
you the Church of Rome is not the true Church.


Minist. I shall supererogate in this, and prove, that the Hierarchist, or
Bishop of Rome himself is Antichrist.


Gent. That will be strange News in the Vaticane, where they are possessed, that
Antichrist is a Jew of the Tribe of Dan, that should sit in Jerusalem.


Minist. That is a Fable, which even your own Jesuits reject: amongst whom
Viega In hac multa sunt, ad quae Visio invita, and repugnans trahitur. Viega,
in Apocalypse. xvii.
proclaims, it can never be reconciled to the Apocalyptical Vision. For
Antichrist must not sit at Jerusalem; but be eminently visible in the Church:
wherefore the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 3. Let no man deceive you by any
means; for this day shall not come, except there come (...), a falling away
first, and that man of sin be revealed, that Son of perdition. The Ancients,
among whom Saint Augustine, interpret this of Anti-Christ's falling from the
Faith. Nulli dubium est, eum de Anti-Christo ista dixisse. August. De Civitate
Dei, lib. 20. cap. 19.
No man doubts, says he, but the Apostle spoke that of Antichrist. Aquinas is
of the same Judgment.


Gent. We deny not, but it is meant of a defection from Faith, and of
Antichrist, but how reaches it the Pope? may not Luther, and Calvine be as
well struck at here, who Apostated from the Church of Rome.


Minist. No; for this Antichrist is further characterized, 1 Timoth. iiii. 1.
that he shall depart from the Truth, attending to spirits of error, and
Doctrine of Devils. What is that? they shall forbid marriage, and abstinence
from meats, which God has created to be received with Thanksgiving. When did
ever Luther, Calvin, or any of their Followers so? it is apparent, the Pope
forbids marriage to all in Holy Orders, interdicts meats, and that under
penalty of Death. Saint Paul says further, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 7. The Mystery of
iniquity works, only he, which now withholdeth, will let it, till he be
taken out of the way. All interpret this of the exstirpation of the Roman
Empire. So expressly Tertullian. Donec de medio fiat: quis nisi Romanus status?
cujus abscissio in december Reges Anti-Christum superinduest, and tunc revelabitur
iniquus. Tertull. De resurrect. carnis.
Till he be taken out of the way, says he, till the Roman State be defalked,
whose division into ten Kingdoms will bring in Antichrist, and then that
Wicked one shall be revealed. Cyril says, Non prius vemet Dominus, quam regni
Romani defectus fiat, and appareat Anti-Christus, qui interficiet Sanctos.
Cyril. Carthus.
The Lord will not come before there be a defection of the Roman Empire, and
Antichrist appear, who will slay the Saints. Hilarie says, Hisar. contra
Auxentium.
Antichrist shall come, when the times of the Roman Empire shall be
completed, and that he shall sit in the same Temple, we now honor, and shall
be contrary unto Christ sub specie Euangelicae praedicationis, under the
pretext of preaching the Gospel: and we know none, except the Pope, who has
risen by the fall of the Empire, in so much, that now the Imperial Seat, Robes,
Crown, Rents, and all except the mere Title, and spread-Eagle are his. A Third
Character of Antichrist is, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 4. that He shall sit in the Temple of
God, showing himself, as if he were God. As the Heathen Emperors sat in the
Capitol, prescribing Rules to all captivated Nations: so the Pope in the
Vatican, dictating Canons to all Churches. So Saint Hierom; Anti-Christus
simulabit se Ducent Foederis; hoc est, Legis, and Testamenti Dei. Hieron. in
Da^. x.
Antichrist shall fain himself to be Head of the Covenant; that is of the Law,
and Testament of God. And the Jesuits of Rhemes Divines of Rhemes supra locum.
confess; That Antichrist, if ever he were in the Church, shall be an
Apostate, or Renegado out of the Church, and shall usurp upon it by Tyranny,
and by challenging Religion, and Government thereof, so that he himself shall
be adored in all the Churches of the world; this is to sit in the Temple of God.


Gent. It is apparent, that the Pope sits in the Temple of God, and by his
Superlative Grandeur overtops the Church. But how does that other part of the
Character also belong unto him, that he shows himself, as if he were God?


Minist. By assuming to himself, with Herod, the Name, Attributes, and Honor
of God. Christopher Marcellus used this Elogie to him in the second Lateran
Council, Tues alter Deus in terris; Thou art a second God upon the Earth. The
Canonists style him Dominum Deum Papam, The Lord God the Pope. It is their own
expression, Dicere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam non potuisse statuere, prout
statuit, Haereticum est. Extravag. Joan. xxii.
To say, that our Lord God the Pope might have decreed otherwise, then he has
decreed, is Heretical. And, that they Deifie him, these blasphemous Panegyricks
may let you see, Si Papa, suae, and fraternae salut^s negligens, innumerabiles
secum ducat catervas in Geheunam, hujusmodi culpam nullus mortalium praesumat
redarguere. Distinct. 4. cap. Si Papa.
If the Pope, secure of his own, and others Salvation, should carry with him
innumerable Souls by heaps into Hell, no mortal man may presume to reprove his
faults: And That Quod facta Papae excusantur, ut Homicidiu^ Sampsonis, Furta
Hebraeorum, and Adulterum Jacobi. Distinct. 40.
The evil deeds of the Pope are to be excused, as the Self-murder of Sampson,
the Theft of the Hebrews, and Adultery of Jacob.


Gent. All the Characters are manifestly convertible with the Pope, yet I
wonder, that there was no more notice taken of it in former Ages, if he be the
(...), that signal Antichrist.


Minist. What greater notice could be, then that both Heathens, and Christians
have marked it nigro carbone, with black Obelisks. Sibylla said Sibylla,
Oraculorum cap. 8.
He should be (...), white-headed: so the Bishop of Rome wears solemnly, on
his Head, a white Miter of Silver adorned with three Crowns, and Precious
Sons; or (...), having many heads, as by Saint John the Beast of seven Heads:
That he should be called by a Name much like Pontus, which suits with his Title
in Latin PONTIFEX; and That the Seat of his Empire should be upon the Banks of
Tyber. Irenaeus, speaking of the number of the Beast's Name, six hundred sixty
six, says, Irenaeus, lib. 5.
that (...) valde verisimile est; Antichrist very likely will be a Latin, or
Italian. Tertullian says, Babylon apud Joannem Romanae urbis Figura est,
perinde magnae, and de Rege suo superbae, and Sanctorum Dei bellatricis.
Tertull. Contra Marcion.
that Babylon in Saint John is a Figure of the Roman City, very great, and
proud of her King, (Antichrist) a Persecutour of the Saints of God. Gregory
(who was immediate Predecessor to Boniface the Third, from whom, till Pompey's
subduing of Syria to the Roman Empire, were six hundred sixty six Years)
says, Rex superbiae prope est, and, quod dici nefas est, Sacerdotum et
exercitus praeparatur. Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 38.
The King of Pride is at hand, and, which is irreverent to say, an Army of
Priests is made ready for him. In the Abbey of Saint Edmonds-Bury, in Suffolk,
the Story of Antichrist was Painted, and he Pictured in a Glass-Window, in
the Habit of the Pope wearing his Triple Crown, attended with Monks, Friars,
Priests, and Cardinals, stopping their Ears against Enoch, and Elias, and
persecuting them, that hearkened to their Preaching: a Transumpt of which was
to be seen in Sir John Croft's House of Saxham, near Bury. Thetgand, Bishop of
Trevir, above seven hundred Years ago, calls the Bishop of Rome Antichrist, a
Wolf, an Usurper of Dominion, a Deceiver of Christendom, and Rome he calls
Babylon. Joachim an Abbot, who lived almost four hundred Years since, said,
Joachim. Abbas in 2 Thessalonians. ii.
Anti-Christus jamdudum natus est in Roma, and altius extolletur in Sede
Apostolica; Antichrist long since is born in Rome, and shall be advanced yet
higher in the Apostolic Seat. Francis Petrarch, Archdeacon of Parma, who
lived in the thousand, three hundred, and fiftieth Year, compares Petrarch.
Epist. 5. 14, 17, 18, 19.
the Pope to Judas, who betrayed Christ with a Kiss; his Clergy to the Jews,
who said, Ave Rex Judaeorum; his Prelates to the Pharisees, who, in mockery,
clothed him in Purple, and after Crucified him: and again, Deny, if thou can,
that thou art She, whom Saint John saw sitting upon many Waters, thou art She,
and none other, that Babylon, the Mother of Whoredoms of the Earth, drunken
with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; thou art She, who have made all Kings
of the Earth drunken with the cups of thy poison. The like Oration Sub
Pontificis Maximi titulo, Pastoris pelle lupum saevissimum (nisi caecisimus)
sentimus, Romani Flamines arma habent in omnes Christianos, audendo, fallendo,
and bella ex bellis ferendo, magni facti, oves trucidant. In Synodo
Reginoburgensi, lib. 2. cap. 5.

Doctor James, in his Epistle Dedicatorie before his Book, Of the Corruption
of the Fathers, etc.


was delivered by a Bishop against the Pope in the Synod of Reginoburg, part
thereof, being Anti-Christ's Description, was, In cujus front Contumeliae
nomen scriptum est; In whose forehead (the Pope's) the word MYSTERY, the mark
of the Beast, was in those days written. By this, I hope, you see, That the
Church of Rome is neither the Catholic Church, nor the Head thereof; That
Communion with Rome is not necessary; That the Roman Church is not the Mother
Church, That neither our British no, nor our Saxon Church ows her conversion to
her; That Communion with Rome is not lawful, in so much as she is not a sound
Member of the Catholic Church, as being notoriously corrupted in Doctrine, and
Manners; That Rome is that Apocalyptical Babylon; and the Romish Hierarchy,
Antichrist.


Gent. You have so evidently declared this out of authentic Authors, void of
exception, that I have no more to say; but desire you to proceed to the third
Article.


The Third Article.
And, That there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord 's
Supper, or in the Elements of Bread, and Wine, after Consecration thereof by
any person whatsoever.

Minist. THis is identically the same with the twenty eight Article of the
Church of England, wherein is expressed; That The Transubstantiation of Bread,
and Wine, in the Eucharist cannot be Non potest per ullam Scripturam probari.
Joann. Fisher. Contra Captivit. Babylon.
proved by Sacred Writ: but is contrary to John vi. 51, 53, 54.
evident Testimonies of Scripture, and overthrows the nature of a Sacrament,
and gives occasion of many Superstitions.


Gent. Is Transubstantiation contrary to Scripture? when Christ, in the
institution thereof, says expressly, Matthew. xxvi. 26. Take, eat, this is my
Body: whereupon your own Casaubon confesses, Casaubon. Respon. ad Caedinalem
Peton. page 399, 400.
Praesentiam credimus, non minus, quam vos veram; We (Protestants) believe a
presence, no less true, then you.


Minist. Real, or true presence is twofold.

Either by Faith, whereby the true Body of Christ in the Sacrament is eaten
spiritually, not corporally. By reason of the relative union between the
Elements, and things signified, this is a real presence (as Cajetan Manducatur
verum corpus Christi in Sacramento; sed non corporaliter, sed spiritualiter:
spiritualis manducatio, quae per animam fit, ad Christi carnem in Sacramento
existentem pertingit. Cajetan. Tom. 2. Tract. 2. De Eucharist. cap. 5.
confesses) but it will not infer Transubstantiation, or a corporal presence,
when the the thing signified is, in the natural substance thereof, contained
under the outward, and visible signs: this is the Transubstantiation, which we
deny.

And the Presence acknowledged by us, though expressed by figurative Speeches,
is as real Figuratio locutionis veritatem rei non perimit. Rupert. in Joann.
lib. 6. page 131.
as theirs:

For first, a Mystical Head is really present to the Mystical Body, which is
taught in Scripture by Tropical Expressions; Psalm xlv. Canticles, Ephesians. v.
John xv.

Secondly, our Savior's words about the other part of the Sacrament, (to wit,
This Cup is the new Testament in my Blood, Luke xxii. 20.) is confessed by the
Romists Non negamus in verbo Calix Tropum esse. Bell. larm. De Eucharist. lib.
1. cap. 11.
themselves to be figurative: why may not this as well?


Gent. But our Catholic Writers have taught, that Transubstantiation may be
gathered from those words of Consecration; and that they are not figurative.


Minist. Here you affirm two things First, That your Catholic Writers taught,
that Transubstantiation may be gathered from the words of Consecration:
Secondly, That they are not figurative.

For the former, your Doctor Fisher, once Bishop of Rochester, ingenuously
confesses, that Hactenus Matthaeus, qui and solus Testamenti Novi meminit,
neque ullum hic verbum positum est, quo probetur in nostra Missa veram fieri
carnis, and sangiuins, Christi praesentiam. Fisher. Contra Captivit. Babylon.
There is not so much as one word there, whereby the real bodily presence of the
flesh, and blood of Christ can be proved in the Mass; no nor in any Scripture
else: these are his words, Non potest per ullam Scripturam probari. So you see,
it is acknowledged, that your Popish Transubstantiation is Scriptureless.

For the latter, That the words of Christ, This is my Body, are not taken
figuratively, but Substantia panis nunquam est corpus Christi, quamvis
convertatur in ipsum. Richard. 4. Did. 11. in sine Art. qu. 9. 6.
properly, consider these Arguments.

First, If the Elements of Bread, and Wine, remain in their specifical Nature
without alteration, even after Consecration, as before, then the Words must
needs be figurative; for one individual substance cannot be predicated of
another property: but I shall prove anon by Scriptures, and Fathers, That the
Elements of Bread, and Wine, remain in their specifical Nature without
alteration, even after Consecration, as before.

Secondly, The Body, and Blood of Christ would be delivered, and received
without the Soul, and Deity of Christ. For, in propriety of Speech, the Body
is distinguished from the Blood, and Soul. If the Body be only received, as
the letter purports, then Christ is dead, his Soul, and Blood, separated from
his Body. If by Body, Blood and Soul be also meant, it is a Synecdochical, and
so a figurative Expression; the part put for the whole. This Dilemma is not
easily answered.

Thirdly, That, which Christ delivered to be participated by his Disciples, he
did Sacramentally eat, and drink himself; Luke, xxii. 15. as Hieron. Ad Hedib.
Qu. 2.
Saint Hierom, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 83.
Saint Chrysostom, Euthym. in Matthew. xxvi. cap. 64.
Euthymius, with Aquin. 3. Quaest. 81. Art. 1. Vasques. in 3. Disp. 2.
Conclusio est affirmans, in qua omnes Catholici, quos ego legerim, plane
convenient. Sic. Vasquez.
many Schole-men, affirm: but, if the words be literally interpreted, then he
did eat his own Flesh, and drink his own Blood, which the Cannibals abhor.

Fourthly, If the Words be understood literally, then Christ gave his passible,
and mortal Body to his Disciples: but a passible, and mortal Body could not be
received of several Communicants, and so be in several places at once, could
not wholly be contained in a piece of Bread, be divided into parts, without
sensible effusion of Blood: But Bellarmine avers, Corpus exhibitum Apostolis,
and sumptum ab ipso Christo Domino, vereerat passibile. Bellarm. De Eucharist.
lib. 2. cap. 14.
That The Body Christ gave his Disciples, and they received, was a passible
Body.

Fifthly, If our Savior's Words be literally expounded, then Verum corpus
Christi manet adhuc sub speciebus a Brutorum ore acceptis. Turre-Cremata.
Dogs, and Swine may eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of the Son of man: but
all, that eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of the Son of man, have
everlasting life; John vi. 49, 50.

Sixthly, If our Savior's Words were literal, and plain, they themselves could
not be so distracted, and divided about the sense thereof: but they are
notoriously divided, as Vasques confesses, (p) Ingens (q) Vasques in 3. Thom.
Tom. 3.
inter Catholicos de horum verborum sensu est controversia; There is a great
Controversy amongst the Catholics, of the sense of these words. And Suarez
says, Catholici in tanta opinionum varietate sunt constituti, ut singulatim
eas recensere, nimis molesiu^ esset. Suarez, in 3. part. Thomae.
Catholics are in such variety of opinions, that, to reckon them severally,
were too troublesome.


Gent. What variety of Opinions? I had thought, that there had been summa pax,
a complete Harmony.


Minist. No; for in every word their different Conceits outstrip the number of
Letters.

First, For the subject of the Proposition, Turre-Cremata says, Turre-Cremata,
De Consecrat. Did. 2.
That The Pronoun This signifies nothing; so the sense would be, Nothing is my
Body. Alexander of Hales says, Alexander Hales, 4. q. 10. m. 4. Artic. 2.
Sect. 3.
Hoc, id est, Panis transubstantiandus in corpus meum, est corpus meum: This,
that is the Bread to be transubstantiated into my Body, is my Body. Bonaventure
says, Pronomen demonstrat Panis substantiam sub Accidentibus, quae oculis
conspici potest. Bonavent. 4. Did. 8. Art. 1.
It signifies the Accidents, and Forms of Bread. Others say, Suarez, in 3.
partem Thomae, Disp. 58.
It signifies the Body of Christ: Others say, It signifies confusedly that,
which is couched under the Forms. And all of these have their Daedalian
Windings, Labyrinths, and Limitations.

Secondly, For the Copula, or Verb Substantive Est, Is, Aquinas Aquinas, 3. q.
75. Art. 8. Art. qu. 78.
expounds it by Continetur: Under these forms my Body is contained. Bellarmine
Bellarm. De Euchar. lib, 1. cap. 11.
interprets it by Erit; This shall be my Body. Marsilius Marsil. 4. qu. 6. Art.
1.
by Transmutatur; It is changed, and converted into my Body.

Thirdly, For the Predicate, corpus meum, My Body; some make it materia prima,
the first matter of Christ's Body; and that is common with the Bread, and needs
no Transubstantiation: Others Corpus materiatum, the materiate Body, with the
reasonable Soul; Others an organized Body without reference to a living Body;
Others a living Body. Durand Durand. 4. Did. 10. q. 4.
makes it a Body (indeed bodyless) without quantity, dimensions, or parts:
Occham Occham, 4. Did. 10. q. 4.
a body having quantity, without extention, figure, and order of parts:
Bellarmine Bellarm. De Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 4. lib. 1. cap. 2. and 14.
a Body, having dimensions, without external relation to place, or ubi, a Body
without matter: like Angels, and Spirits, which he resembles by the image of
man's face reflecting in a Glass. A Body (says Suarez, in 3. partem Thomae,
Disp. 52.
Suarez) having the stature of a man (palpable contradiction) and yet contained
in every crumb of Bread.

Thus the Romists incurr that of the Poet.

Horat. Satyra 1.
Dum vitant vitia, in contraria currunt:

For to avoid one Figure, or Metonymie in our Savior's Words, they are forced
to forge innumerable Figures (sixteen at the least, as Bishop Jewel has
observed) to make it a fantastical Body, or rather Chimera, or Ens fictum
impossible, a Body bodyless.


Gent. But the ancient Fathers, and our Scholemen agree, That this Conversion,
though mysterious, and inscrutable, is by Transubstantiation.


Minist. Nothing less: for Tonstal, one of your own, confesses, Deo modo, quo
id sicret satius erat curiosum quenquam relinquere suae conjecturae, sicut
liberum fuit ante Concilium Lateranum. Tonstal. De Euchar. lib. 1. page 46.
That for the manner, how this is Christ 's Body, it were beter to leave every
curious Fellow to his own conjecture, as it was free before the Lateran
Council. Lombard, Master of the Sentences, says, Si autem quaeritur, Qualis
sit illa conversio, an Formalis, an Substantialis, vel alterius generis?
definire non sufficio. Lombard. Sent. 4. Did. 11.
That he is not able to define the manner of conversion in the Sacrament.
Bandinus, Sent. D. Sacr. page 367.
Some affirm one way, some another. We say, with Saint Augustine, The Mystery
is safely believed, but not with safety searched into. Cyril of Alexandria
says, Cyril. in Joan. lib. 4. cap. 13.
We ought firmly to believe the Holy Mystery; but let us never in Matters thus
sublime, so much as imagine to utter the manner how, the manner how this is
done can neither be conceived by the mind, nor expressed by the tongue.
Theophylact says Theophyl. in Joan. vi.
when we hear these words of Christ, unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man,
etc. We ought firmly to believe the same, and not to enquire after what manner.
According to that of Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Homil. 17.
(...). It is better to be soberly ignorant, then naughtilie intelligent. For
this mystery is of that nature, that Athanasius testifies, Athanas. Ad Serap.
(...). The very Cherubims veil their faces, when it comes to this: and yet
the Romists, with the Beth-shemites; dare look into the Ark, though Salvianus
accounts it Sacrilegae temeritatis auoddam genus est, si plus scire cupias,
quam sinaris. Salvian. lib. De Provid.
a sacrilegious temeritie, to covet to know that, which we are not permitted.


Gent. But the Fathers, although they mention not Transubstantiation, or the
manner of presence, or conversion in the Sacrament, yet they call it the very
body, and blood of Christ, as Saint Cyril of Jerusalem, in his book highly
commended by Whitakerus, De Sacris Scripturis.
Doctor Whitaker, says, Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. Mystag. 4.
Let us therefore, with all certitude, receive the Body, and Blood of Christ.


Minist. They call it the Body and Blood of Christ, in conformity to out
Savior's Metonymical, and mystical Expression, but withal, that no man
mistake, they unfold what they mean by Body and Blood: for, treating of the
Sacramental signs, the Ancients Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 83. and Epist. Hebr.
Hom. 17. Gelas. Cont. Eutych Theod. Dial. 2. Dionys. Hierarch. cap. 3. Gregor.
Nazianz. Apol. Macar. Homil. 17.
call them Figures, Representations, Memorials, Anti-Types; but that, which is
a Figure, Similitude, Type, and Representation of a thing, is not properly the
same. Saint Augustine says, August. De Doctr. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 16.
It is a figurative speech, commanding us to be partakers of the Lord's
Passion, and sweetly, and profitably to keep in mind, that his flesh was
Crucified, and wounded for us. Dominus non dubitavit dicere. Hoc est corpus
meum. quando dedit signum sui corporis. August. in Psalm. 98.
The Lord did not stick to say, This is my Body, when he gave a sign of his
Body. Origin, speaking of the consecrated Element of Bread, says, Origin. in
cap. xv. Matthew.
This I speak of the Typical, and Figurative Body. Saint Ambrose Ambros. De
Sacr. lib. 4. cap. 5.
calls it, figuram corporis, and sanguinis, the figure of the Body, and Blood
of the Lord Jesus. Saint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. Opus imperfect; in Matthew.
Homil. 11.
In the sanctified Vessel there is not the true Body of Christ, but a Mystery
of his body is there contained. Gratian's Gloss confirms this, The Divine Bread
[saith Gratian. De Consecrat. Did. 2.
he] which represents the flesh of Christ, is called the Body of Christ but
improperly. Beda says, Beda in Lucam, 22.
Christ substituted his Flesh, and Blood in the figure of Bread, and Wine.
Druthmarus, Druthmar. supra Matthew. cap. 26.
The Blood of Christ is aptly figured thereby. Bertram, Bertram. lib. De corp.
and sang. Domini.
Bread and Wine is Figuratively the Body, and Blood of Christ. And Tertullian,
who lived nearer the Apostolic Times, says, Tertull. contra Marcion. lib. 1.
cap. 14.
that Bread represents the Body of Christ, calling it in two places The
figure of Christ 's Body. By all these it is most evident, that the Ancients
taught, That the body of Christ was not essentially, and substantially in the
Sacrament, but only figuratively, and Typically.


Gent. But the Orthodox Fathers teach, that The Bread our Savior gave his
Disciples was changed not in shape, but in nature, and by the omnipotence of
the word was made Flesh. Amongst whom Cyprian says, Cyprian. Sermon. De
Chrismate. Epist. 102. ad Eudoxium.
Christ carried himself in his own hands: and Saint Augustine affirms,
Augustine. De Civitate Dei, lib. 13. cap. 20. Sermon. De Coena Domini.
that The Body of our Lord enters into our mouth, and that Our tongues are
cruentated with the Blood of Christ: is not this an essential, and substantial
Conversion?


Minist. The Orthodox Fathers never taught, that Bread, and Wine were changed
in Essence, and Substance; though hyperbolically sometimes they affirmed them
to be changed in nature; meaning in their signification, representation, and
exhibition. So Cyprian in your own instance interprets himself; for, when he
had said, The nature of Bread, and Wine were changed in the Sacrament of the
Body, and Blood of Christ, he adds, Sacramenta habere nomina earum rerum, quas
significant. Cypr. Sermon. De Chrismate.
Sacraments have the names of those things they signify: which agrees with
Chrysostom's Saying, Quod est Symbolum tribuit rei significatae, maxim quoad
fidem, and mentis cogitationem. Chrysostom.
The Sign has the Attribute of the thing signed, or signified, especially by
Faith, and cogitation of the mind. And, whereas Saint Augustine averrs the
Body of our Lord enters our Mouth, he means by Faith; for so he vindicates
himself, We cannot [saith Nos Christum in coelis sedentem manu contrectare non
possumus, sed Christum fide contingere possumus. In Epist. in Joanem. Aug.
Tract. 1.
he] touch with hand Christ sitting in heaven, but we can lay hold on Christ by
Faith: and again, Ascendit in coelum corpus Christi, quaerat aliquis? quomodo
in coelum manus mittam? fidem mitte, and tenuisti, Aug. Tract. in Joh.
The Body of Christ is ascended into heaven, some may enquire, How shall I lay
hold on him being absent? how shall I send up my hand into heaven, that there I
may apprehend him sitting? fidem mitte, and tenuisti, Stretch but out the hand
of Faith, and thou have laid hold on Christ. And, descanting upon the Seventy
third Psalm, he says, Christ did carry himself in his own hands quodammodo,
in a manner, how? quia gestabat in manibus suis corporis sui Sacramentum,
because he carried the Sacrament of his body in his hands: Sacraments have the
names of those things they signify, and are sublimed to an higher condition,
then before, hence Scripture calls the Supper, the Supper of the Lord, and the
Cup, the Cup of the Lord, and 1 Cor. x. 4. the Rock, of which the Israelites
did drink, a Spiritual Rock. I will conclude this with that of Theodoret,
which, methinks, is more, then satisfactorie, Dominus, quae videntur, symbolae,
corporis, and sanguinis sui appellatione honoravit, non equidem naturam ipsam
transmutans, sid gratiam naturae adjicions. Theodoret. Dialog. 1. cap. 8.
The Lord has honored the (Sacramental) Symbols with the appellation of his
Body, and Blood, (...), not changing Nature it self, but adding Grace to Nature.


Gent. But our Church has defined, That, After Consecration, the substance of
Bread, and Wine is abolished, and the Shapes, Accidents, and Quantity thereof
only remain.


Minist. Your Church (it is true) has defined it, but without testimony both
of Scripture, and Antiquity; as your own Authors confess. Cajetan evidences,
that, secluding the authority of the Roman Church, there is Non apparet ex
Euangelio coactitium aliquod ad intelligendum haec verba proprie. Cajetan. 3.
quaest. 75. art. 1. impress. anno 1528.
nothing in the Scripture, which may compel one to understand the words
properly, or the Elements to be transubstantiated. Scotus says, Scotus. 4. D.
11. quasi. 3. lit. 13.
There is no Scripture, that proves the substance of Bread does not remain.
Alphonsus a Castro says, De Transubstantiationo panis in corpus Domini rara
est in antiquis Scriptoribus mentio. Alphonsus a Castro, Contra Haeres. lib. 8.
There is seldom any mention in ancient Writers of Transubstantiation of the
Bread into the Body of our Lord: he might have said, Never; seeing purer ages
know no Doctrine, but that of Macarius, (...). Bread, and Wine presents in the
Church an Antitype of his (Christ 's) flesh, and blood, and those, that partake
of the apparent bread, do eat the flesh of the Lord spiritually; And of
Theodoret, Signa mystica post Consecrationem no^ recedunt a sua natura. The
odor. Dialog. inconfusus.
The mystical signs after Consecration depart not from their nature; And of
Gelasius, Non desinit substantia, vel natura panis, and vini Gelasius, De
duabus naturis, Adv. Eutych.
It ceases not to be the substance, or nature of Bread, and Wine*


Gent. But if the Ancients be against Transubstantiation, and Scriptures
countenance it not, is there any Scriptures against it?


Minist. Quod non dicit Scriptura, id contradicit: in matters of Faith, that,
which the Scriptures countenance not, they discountenance; because, as
Augustine proclaims, Aperte in Scriptura inveniuntur omnia illa, quae continent
fidem; moresque vivendi; spem scilicet, atque charitatem. August De Doctr
Christian. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Therein are found all things plainly, which contain Faith, and Morality of
life, Hope, and Charity: with this Weapon only Tertullian fights against
Hermogenes, saying, Scriptum est, doceat Hermogenis officium: si non est
scriptum, ^^meat Vae illud adjicientibus, aut detrahemibus destinatum. Tertull.
Contra Hermog. page 373.
Let the shop, or Schole of Hermogenes make it appear, that that, which he
pretends as a Plea against me, is written; If it be not written, let him fear
that Woe, that is denounced against them, that add, or diminish. This Woe the
Romists incurr; seeing, by their own confession, there is no Scripture extant
for Transubstantiation: nay there are apparent Scriptures against it.

First, Matthew. xxvi. Mark. xiv. Luke xxii. 1 Cor. xi. it is said, Christ took
Bread, blessed Bread, brake Bread, gave Bread to his Disciples. Paul says, let
a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup;
whosoever shall eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup unworthily, etc. But
Christ brake not his own Body (it was the Soldiers, that Crucified him) This
Tertullian clears, saying, Acceptum panem, et distributum Discipulis, corpus
suum illum fecit, Hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est, figura corporis mei.
Tertull. contra Adamant. cap. 12. contra Marc. lib. 4.
He made the Bread taken, and distributed to his Disciples that his body, by
saying This is my Body, that is, a Figure of my Body.

Secondly, The Body of Christ was delivered up for us, Romans viii. 32. but the
Bread, that Sacramentally is called his Body, was not delivered up for us;
Therefore the Bread is not properly Christ's Body.

Thirdly, Christ says not (as the Transubstantiatours wrest it) My body is
contained under these forms of Bread, and wine: but this, The very bread is my
Body Antitypum sancti corporis, and sanguinis tui. Basil. in Liturg.
, Antitypa pretiosi sanguinis, and corporis Christi. Greg. Nazianz. Oratione De
Pasch.
symbolically; that is, as Saint Ambrose tells us Ambros. in 1 Cor. xi. De
Sacrament. lib. 4. cap. 5.
In edendo, and potando, sanguine^, and carnem Domini, quae pro nobis oblata
sunt, significamus; In eating, and drinking, we signify the flesh, and blood
of the Lord, which were offered forus.

Fourthly, Christ says not, This shall be made my Body: therefore the words of
Christ do not convert Bread into the substance of the Body of Christ: but only
declare the Bread in this use to be the Body of Christ, that is Sacramentally;
as Saint Chrysostom evidences, Antequam sanctificetur panis, panem nominamus,
divina autem illum sanctificante gratia, mediante Sacerdote, liberatus est ab
appellatione panis, dignus autem habitus est Dominici corporis appellatione,
etsi natura panis in ipso permansit. Chrysostom. ad Caes. Monach.
Before the Bread be sanctified, we call it Bread; but, Divine Grace
sanctifying it, by the ministry of the Priest, it is freed from the
appellation of Bread, and is accounted worthy of the style of the Lord's Body,
Et si natura panis in ipso mansit, although the nature of Bread remains in it.

Fifthly, If the Bread should be transubstantiated, it would destroy the nature
of a Sacrament, which is defined by Saint Paul (...), Romans iv. 11. a seal of
the righteousness of Faith; and by Saint Augustine, Ista ideo dicuntur
Sacramenta, quod in eis aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur, quop videtur,
speciem habet corporalem, uod intelligitur, fructum habet spiritualem. August.
Sermon. Ad Infant.
a visible sign of invisible grace; now nothing can be imagined, but the
Bread, to be this visible sign, this seal, that Signum res prater speciem,
quam ingerit sensibus, aliud aliquid faeciens in cogitationem venire. August.
lib. 2. De Doctr. Christ. cap. 1.
presents it self to the senses, and something besides it self to the
understanding. In every Sacrament (says Irenaeus) there is a thing
terrestrial, which is visible, a thing celestial, which is invisible: the
Terrestrial visible thing in the Eucharist is the Bread, and Wine; the
Celestial, and invisible, is the body of Christ, that was broke, and his Blood,
that was shed upon the Cross: but Transubstantiation takes away one part;
therefore the whole Sacrament, which is Duorum unio, a relative Union of two.

Sixthly, If the Bread, and Wine were Transubstantiated into the Body, and
Blood of Christ, then there were nothing left, that could nourish the body: but
there ought to be something in the Sacrament to feed our body, seeing our Faith
is confirmed by the proportion between the Bodily, and Spiritual Alimonie; as
the material Bread feeds the body, so Christ by Faith feeds the Soul: as
Euthymius says, Naturalis cibus, and potus est panis, and vini. quae
proponuntur; supernaturalis vero efficax eorum operatio. Euthym. in Matthew.
xxiii. cap. 64.
It is the Natural meat, and drink of Bread, and Wine, which are proposed; but
the efficacious operation of them is supernatural. The Accidents of Bread, and
Wine, void of matter, and form, cannot nourish, as being not capable to be
Nutritio est adjecti alimenti in corporis substantiam conversio, and perfecta
assimilatio. Fuchsius, Institut. Medicinae, lib. 1. Sect. 7.
chilified, sanguified, agglutinated, or assimulated to our bodies; for
Whatsoever nourishes (says the Philosopher) must be simile genere, like in
kind with that, which is nourished, but dissimile specie, specifically
different; but Accidents differ from Bodies, which are substances, toto genere,
and have nothing common with Flesh, and Blood, that from power can be reduced
into act.

Seventhly, If every crumb of Bread, and drop of Wine were transubstantiated
into the entire humane Nature of Christ (as the Romists maintain) then in
receiving one Element, we should receive the whole mystery, and commit no
Sacrilege in detaining the Cup from the Laity: but the Ancients judged
otherwise; as Gelasius, Divisio unius ejusdem mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio
pervenire non potest; The division of one, and the same mystery cannot be
without great Sacrilege: And Ignatius, Vnus panis omnibus confractus, (...),
unum poculum omnibus distributum. Ignatius in Epistol. Ad Philadelph.
One Bread was broke for all, and one Cup was distributed to all: And Saint
Chrysostom, It is not with us, as in the old law, where some parts of the
sacrifice was given to the Priests, others fell to (e) Non est apud nos, ut in
Lege veteri, ubi aliae parts ex Victimis dabantur Sacerdotibus, ali^e vero
cedebant offerentibus: sed nobis omnibus idem Christi corpus proponitur, atque
idem poculum. Chrysostom. Homil. in 1. Cor. xxv.
them, that offered; but to us all the same body of Christ is given, and the
same cup: here you see he distinguishes the Body from the Cup; where, according
to their Tenet, the Cup is as well the Body, as the Bread.


Gent. How then, if not by Transubstantiation, is the Bread Christ 's Body? or
what manner of praedication, or enunciation is this, This is my Body?


Minist. Not identical, where the same thing is praedicated of the same, as
This my Body is my Body: not proper, and regular, for so one disparate, as the
Body of Christ, cannot be praedicated of the Bread: but it is an analogical
Enunciation, where Tropically, or Figuratively, the thing signified is affirmed
of the sign; Ex similitudine Sacramenti signa ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt.
August. Epist. 23. ad Bonifacium.
From the similitude (says Saint Augustine) the signs of the Sacraments take
the very names of the things themselves; for Dominus non dubitavit dicere, Hoc
est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui. August. contra Adamant. cap. 12.
The Lord doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he gave a sign of his
Body. Which manner of expression is familiar in Scripture: Circumcision is the
Covenant, Genesis xvii. the Lamb is the Passover of Jehovah, Exodus xii. the
Sabbath is the Covenant of God, Exodus xxxi. the seven Kine are seven Years,
Genes. xli. 26. I am the Vine, John xv. 1. the Field is the World, Matthew. xiii.
38. Herod is a Fox, Luke xiii. 32. John is Elias, Matthew. xi. 4. Christ was the
Rock, 1 Cor. x. 4. the Way, the Door, the Bread. John vi. 35. yet Christ was
not transubstantiated into a Rock, or Way, or Door, or Bread, And Duae
potissimum causae sunt, cur Spiritus sanctus, and ipse Christus taelibus
praedicationibus, and Phrasibus sit usus: quaru^ prima est Analogia, and
arctissima unio Sacramentalis inter signa, et ros signatas; altera est summa
certitudo obsignationis spiritualium bonorum, and eorundem in usu legitimo
exhibitionis. Kec kerman. Logic. lib. 2. page 395.
there are two reasons, why the Holy Ghost, and Christ himself, has used such
enunciations, and manners of expression; whereof the first is the Analogy, and
most strict Sacramental Union betwixt the signs, and things signed; The other
is the infallible certainty of the obsignation, and exhibition of spiritual
good things in the right use of the Seals.


Gent. All this, I acknowledge, seems very probable. But we have been taught,
that in this stupendous Mystery we must deny both sense, and reason.


Minist. Where any Mystery is evidently expressed in Sacred Writ, sense, and
reason must submit to Divine Revelation, as in the Incarnation of the Word, The
Word was made flesh, John i. 14. the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of
Essence. These Mysteries are clearly revealed in Scripture, and though Oportet
igitur nos, cum audiverimus, Nisi ederetis carnem filii, non habebitis vitam,
in sumptionibus divinorum Mysteriorum indubitatam retmere fidem, and non
quaerere quo pacto. Theophylact. in Joann. vi.
above reason, yet not contrary to reason. But Transubstantiation (as you have
heard it proved, and by the Romists confessed) is Non apparet ex Euangelio
coactitium aliquod ad intelligendum haec verba proprie. Cajeran. 3. Quaest. 75.
discountenanced, nay diametrically opposite to Scripture, besides there are
sequeles, and concomitances, that attend it, that involve Mirum videtur, quare
in uno Articulo, qui non est principalis Articulus fidei, debeat talis
intellectus asseri, propter quam fides pateat contemptui omuium sequentium
rationem. Scot. 4. Did. 11. q. 3. lit. 13.
contradiction, and inextricable absurdities; as in particular these,

First, That the Bread should be changed into the Body, or humane Nature of
Christ, which was Virtute Transubstantiationis non accipit corpus Domini Esse
post Non esse, quoniam prius erat. Aureol. 4. Did. 11. q. 1. Art. 1.
before.

Secondly, That the accidents, or forms of Bread should be without a subject.

Thirdly, How whole Christ should be in every crumb of Bread, and drop of Wine.
Fourthly, That at once Christ should be in Heaven, and in a thousand Hosts upon
Earth.


Gent. The Meditation of these has oftentimes staggered me; therefore I
request you to lay them open more distinctly, and that in order, as you named
them; First, That the Bread cannot be changed into the humane Nature of Christ,
which was praeexistent, or before.


Minist. The impossibility of this change is apparent; Because in all
substantial conversions, natural, or miraculous, there is a new thing, which
was not before, produced out of that, which is converted; as appears in the
conversion of Water into Wine, Wine, that was not before, is made of Water; and
Lot's Wife into a Pillar of Salt, Salt, that was not before, is made of Her
Body converted into it. But, in Popish imaginary Transubstantiation, the Body
of Christ is not produced anew; for it is praeexistent, and receives no
substantial change by the confession of Romists themselves; for Faventinus, one
of your own proposes the Question, Quaero quis sit terminus formalis hujus
actionis [Transubstantiationis] and conversionis? Non est corpus Christi.
Faventin. in 4. Disp. 35. cap. 6.
What is the terminus formalis, the formal Bound of this Action
(Transubstantiation) or conversion? and answers, Non est corpus Christi, It is
not the body of Christ: for that, says he, is the terminus materialis, the
material bound, intimating it was before; and concludes Hoc totum est
accidentale, there is no substantial change, but only an accidental
alteration. Neither is the Body of Christ substantially united unto the
accidents of Bread, and Wine; for it gives no subsistence to them, and it
sustaineth them not, but is united accidentally only, by being made Terminus
novae actionis accipit Esse per ipsam actionem, sed per Transubstantiationem,
quae est actio nova, non accipit corpus Christi Esse substantiale, sed
praesentialitarem ad specics; ergo corpus Christi non est terminus
Transubstantiationis secundium Esse substantiale, sed solum secundum
praesentialitatem. Petigian. Summa Theol. in 4. Did. 11. q. 3. Art. 3.
present, where the substance of the Elements formerly were: now if Water
should be poured upon the Ground, or otherwise consumed, and Wine brought from
Heaven, as Hail, and Snow are, and be placed where the Water formerly was, here
is no substantial conversion: so likewise, when the substance of Bread, and
Wine cease according to their Doctrine, and Christ's Body, and Blood are
brought into the place where these were, no substantial thing is produced; but
one substance succeeds in the room of another, by that, which they style,
Ubiatio est quando aliquid de Vbt non transit ad aliud Vbt. Aureol. 4. Did.
11. q. 1. Art. 3.
Vbiation: Therefore, I conceive we may safely conclude, thus; That Body, which
was completely praeexistent before, was glorified, and impassible, took (q)
Praecise unum succedit alteri, non est verum dicere, quod illud, cui
succeditur, accedat, and convertatur ad illud, quod succedit. Aureol. supra.
its substance of the seed of the Virgin, cannot be made anew of the
Consecrated Bread; But Christ's body is completely praeexistent before, is
glorified; and impassible, took its substance of the seed of the Virgin;
Therefore Christ's Body is not made anew of the Consecrated Bread. Again,
Nothing, that is Illud non transit in aliud, quod desinit ante, quam veniat ad
illud. Auteol. 4. Did. 11. q. 1. Art. 1.
annihilated, and cease to be any thing, is changed into that, which was
before: Bread, according to the Romish Tenet, is annihilated, and ceases to be
any thing, Therefore it cannot be changed into the Body of Christ, which was
before.


Gent I apprehend this as very reasonable, and consequent from our own Grounds,
proceed to the second, that The Accidents, and Forms of Bread cannot subsist
without a Subject.


Minist. That Accidents may subsist, and have their natural operation, without
a Subject of support, or inhaerencie, implies a contradiction; that the Bread
shall cease to be, and yet taste, color, weight, and form to remain, as before;
to be sweetness, and nothing sweet, whitness, and nothing white: for it is of
the Definition, and Being of Accidents to be, in another, or to be in their
subject, so Porphyrie says, Accidentis Esse est Inesse. Porphyr. Isagog. cap.
5.
(...). Thus you see it is Dissonant to Reason: and Doctor Biel a Romish
Champion, confesses, Quomodo ibi fit corpus Christi; an per conversionem, an
sine conversione incipiat esse corpus Christi, cum pane manentibus
accidentibus, non invenitur express in Canone Biblii. Gabr. Biel, De Canon.
Lect. 4.
How the Bread becomes the Body of Christ, whether by conversion, or without
conversion, the accidents still remaining, is not contained in the Canon of the
Bible. And if both reason, and Scripture disclaim it as an erroneous Prodigy,
let us see what countenance it has from Antiquity. This Doctor Tonstall upon
search has found, Cuthbert. Tonstall. De Eucharistia, lib. 1. page 45.
That it was determined in the Council of Lateran, which was holden in Rome, in
the Year of our Lord a thousand, two hundred, and fifteen, and that, before
that time, it was ever more free for any man without impeachment of his Faith
to hold the contrary. And indeed they learned it from the Manichees, who hold,
that Christ was but a spectrum, or phantasm, and what outwardly appeared in him
was nothing else, but Accidents. The result is, Post consecrationem accidens
est sine subjecto, quia existit tum per se; transit enim substantia, sed
remanent accidentia. Innocent. 3. Mist. Miss. lib. 4. cap. 9.
That, which is impossible in Nature, and is supported neither by Scripture,
nor Antiquity, is not to be believed; But the Accidents (as sweetness, color,
etc.) to remain without a subject is impossible in Nature, and is supported
neither by Scripture, nor Antiquity; Therefore Accidents to remain without a
subject, is not to be believed.


Gent. This is agreeable to Philosophical grounds; and it seems destitute of
Scripture-evidence; proceed therefore to the third, That the whole body of
Christ cannot be in every crumb of Bread.


Minist. Aquinas 3. p. q. 76. Art. 1.
Aquinas, Bellarm. De Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 2. col. 468.
Bellarmine, Melchior Canus, Joseph. Angles in 4. 1. page 9. 4. De Eucharist.
Josephus Angles, the Council. Trident. Sess. 3. Can. 1.
Council of Trent, with all the Romish Proselytes teach, that the whole
Organical body of Christ, which was born of the Virgin, crucified, sits now at
his Father's right hand, is wholly, and entire under the Accidents in every
crumb of Bread, and drop of Wine; which, by their own Principles, is not to be
believed as possible, if Bellarminus De Eucharist. lib. 3. cap. 19. col. 748.
Bellarmine may be credited, who says, Fides nostra ad id nos non obligat, ut
ea defendamus, quae evidenter implicant contradictionem; Our faith does not
oblige us to that, that we should defend those things, that do evidently imply
a contradiction: then, that the body of Christ should be visible, and in
perfect stature, and, at the same time, to be not visible, and not in a perfect
stature; as it must needs be, if it be confined to a point almost indivisible,
as is the form of the least crumb of bread. This Chimaera was not hatched in
St. Augustine's time, who affirmed, that Ita futurum sit spirituale corpus, ut
propter ineffabilem quandam facilitatem spirituale dicatur, servet tamen
substantiam corporalem. August. Enchir. cap. 91. ep. 76.
The body of Christ was to be so spiritual, that by reason of a certain
unexpressible facility, it might be styled spiritual, servet tamen substantiam
corporalem, yet would still keep its corporal substance; nay space, positure,
distance of part from part, spacia locorum toll corporibus, and nusquam erunt,
and quia nusquam erunt, non erunt: Take away, says he, space from bodies, and
they will be no where, and because no where, they will not be at all. Hence I
conclude, That, which implies a Contradiction, by the Romists confession is not
to be believed: but that the same numerical body of Christ should at the same
time be in perfect stature, and contained in every crumb of Bread, implies a
contradiction by the Romists confession; Therefore that the body of Christ
should be in every crumb of bread is not to be believed.


Gent. There is but one difficulty yet remaining, that it is Cum quaeritur,
Vtru^ aliquid sit Deo possibile, quod naturae sit impossible, distinguendum
est de impossibili; quia si hujusmodi impossible dicitur, quia repugnat ipsi
Esse, prout est verificatio contradictoriorum, sic quod naturae impossible
est, est Deo impossible. Ae^idius Romans 1. Sent. D. 42. q. 4.
impossible, that at the same time Christ's body should be wholly in heaven,
and in a thousand consecrated Hoasts upon the earth.


Minist. That an individual body may be in many places at once, and in diverse
forms, and according to diverse actions, and have no reference to place, nor any
properties inward, nor outward of a true body, is not divine verity, but an
audacious fiction, and incongruous dream, disowned by all the Ancients.
Vigilius, an holy Martyr, taught, that Caro Christi cum esset in terra, non
erat in coelo, and nunc, quta est in coelo, non est utique in terra. Vigil.
cont. Euticher. lib. 1.
The flesh of Christ, when it was on earth, was not in heaven; and now, when it
is in heaven, cannot be also upon earth. Saint Cyril demonstrates, Christus non
poterat versari in carne cum Apostolis, postquam ascendit ad patrem. Cyril. in
Joan. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Christ could not be conversant with the Apostles in the flesh, after that he
had ascended to the Father, the Heavens must contain him till the end of all.
Saint Augustine testifies, that Donec saecula finiantur, sursum est Dominus,
sed tamen hic nobiscum est veritas Domini: corpus enim, in quo resurrexit, in
uno loco esse oportet, veritas autem ejus ulique diffusa est. August. De
consecr. Did. 2.
Our Lord is above until the world's end, but yet his truth is with us here;
for the body of our Lord, wherein he rose again, must be in (...) place, but
his truth is diffused every where And that, Secundum praesentiam corporalem
simul and in Sole, and in Luna, and in Cruce esse non posset. August. contra
Faustum, lib. 20. cap. 11. Tom. 6.
according to his corporal presence, it was not possible for him to be both in
the Sun, and in the Moon, and on the Cross at one, and the same time. This
Truth is so clear, tha^ ^^ ^^torts this confession from Aquinas, Corpus Christi
non esse in pluribus locis secundum proprias dimensiones; The body of Christ
cannot be in many places according to the proper dimensions thereof; for Angels
cannot, which are pure spirits, much less a body. They are, says Marsilius,
Marsilius, 2. q. 2. Art. 1.
in loco definitive, quia sunt sic in uno situ, quod non sunt in alio quolibet;
Definitively in a place, because they are so in one positure, that, at the same
instant, they cannot be in any other. Thus you see the impossibility of
Christ's body to be wholly in heaven, and in innumerable consecrated Hoasts upon
earth at the same time, demonstrated by Scriptures, and Fathers: Hence my final
Conclusion about this Article is, That Doctrine, which is not expressly taught,
or formally deduced from holy Scripture, which no ancient Council, or Church,
for the first six hundred years plainly taught, and unto which many adverse
passages are extant in the Monuments of Antiquity, also which is repugnant to
sense, and common reason, and has no apparent utilitie, ought not to be
believed to be effected by any man whatsoever, but rather to be abjured, and
renounced: But Audito nomine Transubstantiationis, tanta inter recentiores
aliquos Scholasticos de natura illius exorta fuit controversia, utquo magis se
extricare conati sunt, eo seipsos majoribus difficultatibus implicarunt.
Vasques in 3. Thom. Tom. 3. Disp. 183. cap. 1.
such is the Doctrine of Romish Transubstantiation; Therefore it ought not to
be believed to be effected by any man whatsoever, but rather abjured, and
renounced.


Gent. Well; by that, which you have delivered, I am convinced to be of Doctor
Andrews judgment, De Hoc est, firma fide tenemus quod sit, de hoc modo est
(nempe Transubstantiato in corpus pane) de modo, quo fiat ut sit, sive per in,
sive con, sive sub, sive trans, nullu^ inibi verbum est, and quia verbum
nullum, merito a fide ablegamus procul; inter scita Scholae fortasse. inter
fidei Articulos non pronimus. Doctor Andrews. Bishop of Winchester, Contra
Apol Bellarm. cap. 1. page 11
believing firmly, that the words of Christ are true, and, in the sense he
meant it, to be his body; but for the manner, how it is his body, seeing there
is not one express word, I dare not make it a matter of faith; rank it we may
amongst the Nicities of Schools, but not amongst the Articles of our Creed.
Therefore you may proceed to the fourth Article.


The Fourth Article.
And I do also believe, that there is not any Purgatory.

Minist. THIS is symbolical, and concentrick with the two and twentieth Article
of our English Confession, wherein it is said, that The Romish Doctrine of
Purgatory is a vain Fiction, Quod fuerit divina institutio non possit
manifest probari; quia non constat ex Sacris Literis, neque ex Conciliis.
Nugnus. Addit. in 3. part. Thom. q. 20. Art. 3. Dif. 1.
grounded upon no Testimonies of Scripture, but contrary to the word of God;
and the Apology of the Church of England, which says, That It is no better,
then a blockish, and old wife's device.


Gent. Here, me thinks, that I may cope with you with better success, then
formerly; for Purgatory is so far from being a vain fiction, and old wife's
device, that it mounteth high upon the Wings of Antiquity. Saint Augustine,
who lived in the fourth Centurie, and may be styled The Standard Bearer of the
Fathers, makes August. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 6^. cap. 68. ad Dulcitium,
Quaest. 1. De fide, and openbus, cap. 16. De Civitate Dei. lib. 12. cap. 26.
often mention of it.


Minist. Your Argument in form is this* That, which Augustine makes often
mention of, is no vain fiction; but a creditable verity: Augustine makes often
mention of Purgatory.

I first deny your Proposition: for all, that Augustine makes frequent mention
off, is not creditable verity, and void of fiction; he insists often upon
Infants damnation, that die without Baptism, of the Eucharist to be given to
Babes, that Sine fide etiam quae videntur bona opera in peccatum vertuntur.
August. De fide, and operibus.
all Works of Infidels are sins, which the Concilium Tridentinum merito
damnavit Omnia Infidelium opera esse peccata; etiamsi gravem habeat authorem
Augustinum. Maldonat. Comment. in Matthew. vii. 18.
Romists deny. In the Bull of Pius Quartus, by the Oath their foreman has
taken, all Priests, and Jesuits are sworn, not to receive, or interpret the
Scriptures, but according to the uniform consent of Fathers; Saint Augustine is
but one, Aristoteles, Ethic. lib. 1.
(...).

Secondly, to your Assumption; Saint Augustine, in the pretended places,
mentions Purgatory, not as a creditable verity; but as a doubtful opinion,
for thus he writes to Laurentius, August. ad Laurent. cap. 67.
Tale aliquid etiam post hanc vitam fieri, incredibile non est, and utrum ita
sit, quaeri potest: Some such thing as Purgatory to be after this life, is not
incredible, and whether it be so, or no, it may be a Question. And to
Dulcitius, Quod spiritus defunctorum ignem transitoriae tribulationis
inveniant, non redarguo, quia forsitan verum est. August. in 8. Quaest ad
Dulcitium.
That the spirits of the dead find a fire of transitory tribulation, I
reprove it not; for perhaps it is true. And in his Civitate Dei, Quis sit ille
modus, aut quae sint illa peccata, quae ita impediunt perventionem ad regnum
Dei, ut tamen sanctorum amicorum meritis impetrent indulgentiam, difficilimum
est invenire, pericalesissimu^ definire, ego certe usque ad hoc tempus, cum
inde satagerem, ad eorum indaginem perventre non potut. Aug. De civitate Dei,
lib. 21. cap. 27.
The manner how, and what sins they be, which so let a man from coming to the
Kingdom of God, that they not withstanding obtain pardon by the merits of holy
friends, it is very hard to find, and very dangerous to determine, certainly I
my self, not withstanding my Study, and Travail taken in this behalf, could
never attain to the knowledge of it. Thus you see, how Saint Augustine is
pendulous; These crochets, and quavers, Whether there be any such thing, as
Purgatory after this life, or no, it may be a Question, Perhaps it is true, As
much as I think, I cannot tell, I could never attain to the knowledge of it;
make no full consent, or perfect Music in matters of Faith: But, what if these
Sentences be forged, and interfoisted into Augustine's Works? Ludovicus Vives,
a Romish Rabbie, and therefore not partial on our behalf, confesses, that in
ancient Manuscripts of several Universities, and Monasteries, he could not
find them; and it is no wonder, seeing Erasmus, Melancthon, Oecolampadius,
Possevinus, in Select. Bibl. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Possevinus, Crastov. in Bello Jesuit.
Crastovius, Rainolds, in lib. De Idolol. Roman.
Doctor Rainolds, Doctor James, and Felkmanus have discovered so many
Forgeries in this one Father, who, unless Saint Augustine contradicts
himself, there is no probability, those Sentences ever dropped from his pen;
for in his Hypognosticks he maintains, there are but two places after bodily
Dissolution: The first place, says he, the Catholic faith by Divine authority
believes to be the Kingdom of Heaven; The second place the same Catholic
Faith believes to be Hell, where all Apostates, and whosoever is without faith
of Christ, shall taste everlasting punishment; as Tertium locum penitus
ignoramus; imo nec in Seripturis sacris invenimus. August Hypognost. lib. 5.
for any third place, we are utterly ignorant, neither shall we find in holy
Scriptures, that there is any such. And again Non est ullus locus medius, ut
possit esse, nisi cum Diabolo qui non est cum Christo. August. De peoca merit.
and remiss. cap. 28.
There is no middle place for any to be elsewhere, then with the Devil, who is
not with Christ. Thus you have Augustine's mature, and settled resolution, with
the Juncto of the Catholic Church, in traverse, and countercheck to his
private scruple, if his.


Gent. The Doctrine of Purgatory was not in traverse, and opposition to the
Quidam nullas poenas, nisi purgatorias, volunt esse post mortem. August. De
Civitat. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 13.
whole Catholic Church; seeing Origin, whom Perkins places in the year 230.
avouches it.


Minist. All, that Origin avouches, is not Catholic Doctrine for, amongst many
errors, he proclaims ^ general Jail-deliver of all Devils, and damned
Spirits, and converts Hell ^^ self into a Purgatory. Besides Origen's Purgatory
has no affinity, or alliance with your Romish.

First, Your Purgatory is pretended to be immediately after death: Origen's
after the Resurrection.

Secondly, Yours only of the Soul: Origen's of the Body also, as well as the
Soul.

Thirdly, Yours only of some few, that die in venial sins unsatisfied:
Origen's of all; though eminent Saints, and Martyrs.

Fourthly, Yours only of a purging fire in an higher vault of Hell: Origen's
of that universal fire, that shall dissolve the Heavens at the last Trumpet,
joined with the Sacrament of Baptism: for these are his words, Vt ego arbitror,
omnes nos necesse est venire in illum ignem, etiamsi Paulus aliquis sit, vel
Petrus. Origin. in Psalm. 36. Homil. 3.
I suppose, that all we must come into that fire, yea, although it be Paul, or
Peter: and, Ego puto, quod post Resurrectionem ex mortuus, indigebimus
Sacramento elu^^^e nos, atque purga^te: nemo enim absque sordibus resurgere
poterit, neque ullam puto posse animam reperiri, quae universis statim vitiis
careat. Origin. in Lucam, Homil. 14.
I think, that, after the Resurrection from the dead, we shall need the
Sacrament of Baptism to wash, and purge us; for no man can rise again without
filth, neither do I think there can be any soul found void from all manner of
sin.


Gent. But, though Origin was mistaken, Purgatory, as stated by the Roman
Church, has been received as an ancient Tradition.


Minist. Your own Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, writing against Luther, was more
modest, and ingenuous; for he confesses, that De Purgatorio apud priscos nulla,
vel quam rarissima sicbat mentio, sed and Graecis, ad hunc usque diem, non est
creditum Purgatorium esse: legate, qui velit, Graecerum ^^crum Commentarios, and
nullum, q^^ ^^m opinor, vel rarissma (...) Purgatorio sermonem inveniet. Sed
neque Latini somulomnes, a^ sensi^^ hujus rei veritatem concepe runt. Cum
itaque Purgatorium tam sero cognitum, atque receptum uni versae Ecclesiae
suerit, quis jam de Indulgentiis mirari potest, quia in pr^^^ipiis nascentis
Ecclesiae nullus fuerit earum usus. Roffens. Contra Luther. Art. 18. p. 496.
Amongst the Ancients, there was either none, or very seldom, mention of
Purgatory; and that the Greeks, to this very day, do not believe it, and
whosoever shall read their ancient Monuments, or Commentaries, so far as he
sees, shall find very seldom mention of Purgatory, or none at all; and the
Latins, in the Western Church, did not receive the truth of this matter
altogether, but by little, and little; neither indeed was the faith, either of
Purgatory, or Indulgences, so needful in the Primitive Church, as now it is.
Here you see, he affirms five things, whereof every one overthrows your Romish
subterranean Gulf. First, That There is no mention of it amongst the Ancients.
Secondly, That the Greeks deny it, till this day. Thirdly, That it was late
before the Latins received it. Fourthly, That they received it by little, and
little. Fifthly, That the faith of Purgatory was not needful in the Primitive
Church. Durand Durand. 4. d. 20. q. 3.
is of the same judgment, professing, that Sancti Ambrosius, Hilarious,
Augustinus, Hieronymus, minime de eis loquuntur, St. Ambrose, Hilarie,
Augustine, Hierom, spoke nothing of them; [Purgatory and Indulgences.] And
Alphonsus a Castro, Alphons. Castro Contr. Haeres. lib. 8.
Inter omnes res, de quibus in hoc opere disputamus, nullae sunt, de quibus
vetusti Scriptores minus dixerint, apud priscos nulla mentio Indulgentiarum; Of
all things discoursed in this work, ancient Writers speak nothing less, then of
Indulgences, or Popes Pardons, for purgatorial punishment; for the Ancients
make no mention of them. With them concurs De Indulgentiis nihil express
habemus ex dictis antiquorum Doctorum, vel modernorum. Antonin. Summa Moral.
page 1. tit. 10. cap. 3.
Antonine.


Gent. But the Ancients make frequent mention of Prayer for the dead, which
necessarily infers our Catholic Doctrine of Purgatory, and Indulgences,
received from the Apostles.


Minist. That Purgatroy, and Indulgences were received from the Apostles, is as
true, as that St. Peter said Mass in Rome with a golden Cope, and triple Crown;
and is a conclusion, that has no dependence on your premises; which are
Quoties affertur pro vera causa, quod vel nulla est, vel tantum causa per
accidens, aut dissimilis effectus. Fasciculus Praecept. Logic. page 224.
fallacia non causae, ut causae, assigning that for a reason, which is no
reason, For St. Ambrose, Dionysius, and Epiphanius gave four other reasons,
besides Purgatory (of which they never dreamed) for praying for the dead.

First, A continuation of the same affection toward them dead, they had
living. Secondly, Their imperfect bliss in soul, without the body, and
Fellow-Saints. Thirdly, Imperfection, in comparison of Christ. Fourthly, A mere
thanksgiving for their departure in the true faith.


Thus St. Ambrose, in his Oration Panegyrica pro Theodosio, and Valentiniano.
Ambros.
Funeral Orations, made at the Funerals of Theodosius, and Valentinianus, two
Emperors, rejoiced for their sakes, that they had already attained eternal
felicity, yet prays, that God would grant them their desired rest, in regard of
their bodies, and communion with all Fellow-Saints. St. Basil, and St.
Chrysostom, in their Liturgies, make solemn Orisons thus; Offerimus tibi
rationalem hunc cultum pro in fide requiescentibus Majoribus. Patribus,
Patriarchis, Prophetis and Apostolis, Praeconibus, and Evangelistis,
Martyribus, Confessoribus, etc. praecipue vero pro suavissima, immaculata,
supra omnes bonedicta Domina Dei para, and semper-Virgine Maria. Basil. and
Chrysostom.
We offer, O Lord, unto thee, this reasonable service for them, that rest in
faith, our Elders, our Fathers, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, the
Preachers, the Evangelists, the Martyrs, the Confessors, etc. specially for
the most holy, without spot, blessed above all, our Lady, Gods Mother, and
ever-Virgin Mary. St. Cyprian (...). Cyprian. lib. 3. Epist. 6.
also says, Sacrificamus pro Martyribus; We make Sacrifices of prayers, and
praises for the Martyrs. Yet the Romists themselves will not conclude hence,
that the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Preachers, Evangelists, Martyrs,
Confessors, and the blessed Virgin Mary, were all in Purgatory.


Gent. But there are authentic Scriptures for Purgatory; how dare we then
abjure, or disbelieve it?


Minist. Now you speak something to the purpose, if your Assumption were true;
for Chrysostom. Contra Gentes.
(...). The holy Scriptures given by inspiration (says Athanasius) are of
themselves sufficient for the discovery of truth. Bring but one clear place for
Purgatory, and you win the Goal. But your own Champions disclaim such Weapons.
Durand says, Nec Scriptura express de iis loquitur. Durand. 4. Did. 20. q. 3.
Scripture speaks nothing of Purgatory, and Indulgences. Antonine says, Nihil
express habemus in sacra Scriptura. Antonin. Summa Moral. p. 1. Tit. 10. cap.
3.
We have nothing expressly of them in holy Scripture. Alphonsus a Castro says,
Nulla res, quam minus aperte sacrae Scriptura prodiderunt. Alphons. a Castro,
Contr. Hares. lib. 8.
There is nothing, of whom Scripture speaks less plainly. Else why should
Roffensis acknowledge the Latin Church discovered it lately, and that by
little, and little. The Greeks have no glimpse of it yet. Whitak. Contra. 1.
cap. 5. Quaest. 6.
If it were revealed in Scripture, Scripture was the same, and as clear in
Primitive, and succeeding times, as now. Besides, Bellarmine, Lindan, and other
Bigots of your Faction, marshal Purgatory amongst Traditions, which are, as
your Doctor Kellison Doctor Kellison. Survey, lib. 8. cap. 3.
describes them, an opinion, or Custom of the Church, not written in holy
Scriptures, but delivered by the hands of the Church, from time to time. With
whom consents Bellarmine, saying, Bellarmin. De verbo Dei, lib. 4. cap. 2.
Traditions signify that Doctrine, that is not written by the first Authors
in any Apostolic Book.


Gent. There is express Scripture, 2 Macchab. xii. 44. for praying for the
dead; a reconciliation for the dead, verse. 45. that they might be delivered
from sin: which inforces Purgatory.


Minist. First, The Jews, from whom Christians received the Canon, with Origin,
Cyprian, Hierom, Augustine, Melito Bishop of Sardis, Eusebius, Epiphanius, deny
that Book to be Veteris Testamenti libros meditare duos and viginti, tu itaque,
cum sis filius Ecclesiae, non transgredieris illius terminos. Cyril. Catech. 4.
Canonical Scripture, and therefore from it can nothing be concluded. The
Church (says St. Hierome Maccabaeorum libros legit Ecclesia, sed eas inter
Canonicas Scripturas non recipit: legit ad aedificationem plebis, non ad
authoritatem Dogmatum confirmandam. Hieron. in Prafat. lib. Solom.
reads the Books of Macchabees, but receives them not amongst Canonical
Scriptures; reads them for edification of the people, but not for confirmation
of the Authority of doubtful Opinions. Else one might from thence, with the
Circumcelliones, digest that mistake, that Self-murder is lawful, from that
unnatural act of Razias commended, 2 Macchab. xiv. 41. as Heroical.

Secondly, Admit the Authority were authentic, Purgatory will not follow from
prayer for the Dead; there are many other reasons assigned, as it formerly
hinted. And whereas it is said, He made a Reconciliation for the dead, that
they might be delivered from sin; the meaning is, that the living might be
delivered from the plague, or punishment deserved by that profanation, or Sin,
that was committed by them, which are dead: and this will neither infer
Purgatory, nor any Popish Error.


Gent. Scriptures also, that are undoubtedly Canonical, make for Purgatory.
Matthew. xxv. 26. Agree with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way
with him, lest at any time the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Officers, and thou be cast into prison; verily, I say unto
thee, thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing.


Minist. He must be a good Chemist, that can extract the fire of Purgatory
hence.

First, The words are symbolical, which by Bellarmine's Convenit inter nos, and
adversarios, ex solo literali sensu peti debere argumenta efficacia. Bellarm.
lib. 3. De verbo Dei, cap. 3.
Confession are not argumentative. For Arguments (says he) can only be drawn
from the literal sense.

Secondly, Saint Augustine Donec solvas novissimum quadrantem. miror, si non
eam significat poenam, quae vocatur aeterna. August. De sermon. Dom. in monte,
lib. 6.
here by prison understands Hell, not Purgatory, and parallels with that place
of the Psalmist, Psalm cx. 1. Sit thou on my righthand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool; and that of the Evangelist Matthew. i. (o) In illis sunt,
quae cu^ libris Canonicis pugnani, vel (...), vel (...), vel aperte falsa, 1
Macchab. vi. 2. Macchab. 14. 2. M. 12. Bucan. Institut. Theol. p. 37.
25. He knew her not, until She had brought forth Her first begotten Son;
where the first implies not that, after Christ's Enemies were subdued, He
should sit on God's right hand no longer; nor the latter helps the Inference
of Helvidius, that, after our Savior's Birth, Joseph knew his Wife. Saint
Augustine therefore concludes, Donec significat non finem poenae, sed
continuationem miseriae. August. supra locum.
that (till) in this place signifies not an end of pain; but a continuance of
Misery. Thou shall (says Hugo Semper solves, nunquam persolves. Hugo ex
Remigio.
out of Remigius) be ever paying, yet never satisfy. Which exposition Calvine,
and Bucer, and Musculus, do not only (q) Ostendit debitum solvendum, sed non
debitorem solvendo. Piscator. in Matthaeum, v. 26.
embrace; but Anselm, and Beda, Aquinas, and Gorram, Ammonius, and Avendado,
Maldonat, and Jansenius, with I know not how many of their own Consorts: now
the sequel would be prodigious, The damned souls in Hell shall never fully
satisfy, therefore there is Purgatory, cujus contrarium est verum.


Gent. Christ says Matt. xii. 32. Whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost,
it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this World, neither in the World to
come; implying, that there is a remission, or pardon, in the World to come.


Minist. None ever held a remission, and pardon of Sins in the World to come,
but Origin, Origenes ipsum Diabolum, atque Angelos ejus post graviora pro
meritis, and diuturniora supplicia, ex illis cruciatibus cruendos, atque
sociandos sanctis Angelis credidit. August. De Civitate Dei, lib. 21. cap. 17.
who with his misericordes Doctores believed, that the Devil himself, and his
Angels after great, and long punishment suffered for their wickedness, shall be
delivered from their torments, and shall be placed in Heaven with the Holy
Angels of God; and that Origin in Epistola cap. 6. lib. 5.
Christ should descend into Hell, and be crucified again for them, for whom the
preaching of his former Death, and Passion was not prevalent. Romish pretended
Purgatory, and Indulgences pleads not for a remission, or pardon of Sins, but
only of temporal punishment due to Sins unsatisfied. So, conformable to Aquin.
Quodlib. 2. artic. 66. and 1, 2. Q. 47. art. 3. 4. Cajet. Opusc. Tom. 2. q. 4.
Aquinas, and Cajetan says Zerula, Per Indulgentiam non remittitur culpa
peccati, nec poena aeterna mututur in temporalem; sed solae temporalis
remittitur tota, vel pars. Zerula, De Indulgentiis,, lib. 1. cap. 11.
By Indulgence is not remitted the Fault of Sin, neither is an eternal
punishment changed into a temporal; but only the temporal is remitted whole,
or part. But admit, pardon of Sin were in Purgatorie's jurisdiction, how is it
gathered from these words, It shall be forgiven him neither in this World, nor
in the World to come. Amongst the Logicians, Ex meris Negativis Syllogismus est
vitiosus, ut Aristoteles prolixe repetit cap. 4, 5, 6. primi Priorum.
two Negative Propositions are not wont to conclude an Affirmative; it is an
Hebraism by way of exaggeration, intimating it shall never be forgiven; for so
Saint Mark iii. 29. in aequivalent Terms expresses the same thing, (...). It
is said Romans viii. 38. Neither things present (that is of this Life,) nor
things to come (that is of the Life to come) shall separate us; none gathers
hence, that they, that are in Christ, shall be separated from his Love in the
World to come; but it is an emphatical expression signifiying, They shall never
be separated.


Gent. But the Apostle Saint Paul speaks expressly of Purgatory-fire, 1 Cor.
iii. 15. If any Man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss; but he
himself shall be saved, yet so as by Fire.


Minist. You are like them, that think the Bells ring whatsoever they fancy; or
the Pythagoreans, that had so molded their imagination to Numbers, that they
found them in every thing. You are so possessed with this Lunacy of Purgatory,
that Kitchin-fire, Elementary-fire, Hellfire, yea Metaphorical fire must serve
to kindle your Vtopian-Forge. Erasmus, in his Annotations upon this place,
says, Erasmus, Annot. supra locum.
It is a vain thing, to interpret it of Purgatory, seeing it is here meant far
otherwise. Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom. supra locum.
with the Greek Scholies, understands it of Hell. St. Augustine, August. De
Fide, et operibus, cap. 15, 16. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 69. De Civitate Dei,
lib. 21. Octo quaestiones ad Dulcit. q. 1. Supra Psalm. xxix.
and Saint Ambrose discover it to be only a Symbolical, or Typical fire, and
that by it is only meant the Word, Spirit, and Afflictions, which, Mal. iii.
2. like a Refiner's fire, or Fuller's soap, shall try every Man's Doctrine,
whether it be Sound, or Heterodox; and is such a fire (as they find it
rivetted in the Text) which is common both to the Good, and Bad Builder,
whether fundamental, or praeterfundamental, which is not pretended for
Purgatory. Peter Martyr, Josias Sinlerus, in Oratione, De vita, and morte Petri
Martyris Vermilii.
Governor of the Neapolitan College of Saint Peter, at Spoletum, reading his
usual Lecture (as it fell out) upon this Chapter, coming to those words, He
shall be saved, yet as by Fire, in conformity to Saint Augustine, and the
Ancients, interprets it of a Metaphorical, not Purgatorial fire; because it was
common both to Saints, and Reprobates: whereupon he was interdicted to proceed
any further, which occasioned his more diligent search into Antiquity, (which
he found against Purgatory, and other Popish points) and consequently his
Reformation.


Gent. But nothing, that is defiled, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Men, when they die, are not perfectly pure, and sanctified; therefore it is
requisite, before they enjoy the presence of the Lamb, and eternal bliss, that
they have their purgation.


Minist. We have our Purgation, not by the natural energy of any Creature, as
Fire, Water, but by the moral, and spiritual influence of the Blood of the Lamb
applied by faith; 1 John 1. 7. The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
Sin. The Holy Scripture teaches us expressly, that all spiritual redemption is
Vult docer^ Apostolus legem veterem per Christum abolitam esse, totamque ejus
obligationem cessare, introducta lege Christi. Estius.
immediately wrought by the blood of Christ. Hebr. i. 3. When he had by
himself, (...) purged our Sins; Coloss. 2. 15. Triumphed over them in himself,
(...). whereupon Saint Cyprian says, Sanguis tuus, O Domine, non quaerit
ultionem, sanguis tuus lavat crimina, peccata condonat. Cyprian De passione
Christi.
Thy blood, O Lord, seeks no revenge, thy blood washes our Sins, and
pardons our Trespasses. And Saint Augustine, Valeat mihi ad perfectionem
liberationis tantum pretium sanguinis Domini mei. Augustine. in Psalm. xxv.
Let only the price of the Blood of my Lord avail me to the perfection of my
Delivery. And whereas Purgatery-mongers restrain these, and the like places, to
the stain, and eternal guilt of Sin; the Apostle, Colloss. 11. 14. Lex enim
judicabat nos reos, dum non praestabamus quod praecip^ebatur, unde etiam dicit
Chirographum ipsum fuisse contrarium nobis: hoc Chirographum delevit Christus,
quia ejas beneficio non amplius tenemur lege. Adam Sa^bo^.
affirms, that Christ bletted out, (...), the handwriting of Decrees
contained in the Law, that was against us, and took it out of the way: But the
temporal punishment of Sin is contained within the latitude of the Law, Levit.
xxvi. 14. Deuteronomy. xxviii. 15. therefore Christ Jesus our Savior immediately, and
by himself, and not mediately, and the passions of Saints, or Purgatory-fire,
wiped out, and removed out of the way the malediction of temporary punishment,
as well as the guilt of eternal.


Gent. But Sins cannot be washed away, but by long tract of time, and pain in
Purgatory.


Minist. There needs no tract of time to them, that truly by faith lay hold on
the infinite merits of Christ. Isaiah, liii. 5. By his Stripes we are made
whole. Revel. xiv. 13. Blessed are the Dead, that die in the Lord, even so says
the Spirit; for they rest from their Labors, and their works follow them: he
says not, They shall be in Purgatory, but they rest from their Labors. Revel.
vii. 16, 17. They shall hunger no more, they shall thirst no more; for the
Lamb, which is in the midst of the Throne, shall lead them (not into Purgatory,
but) into the lively Fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes. Whereupon St. Augustine says, Quando aliquis se converterit
ad Deum. prorsus illi omnia dimittuntur. August. De Verbo Dom: ^erm. 59.
Whenever any man turns himself unto God, all things are utterly forgiven
him; let no man be doubtful, lest any thing happily be not forgiven. And St.
Chrysostom engages thus in the Person of God, Ego fide jubeo, si quis nostrum
recedat a peccatis ex animo, and vere promittat Deo, se ad illa non rediturum,
nihil Deum requisiturum ad satisfactionem. Chrysostom. De B. Philogonio.
I will stand bound in God's behalf, if any of us forsake his sins with all his
heart, and make true promise unto God, he will no more return unto them, that
then God shall require nothing else to satisfaction. St. Cyprian says, In
eodem articulo temporis, cum jam anima festinat ad exitum, and egrediens ad
labia expirantis emerscrit, poenitentiam clementissimi Dei benignitas non
aspernatur, nec sera est, quae vera est. Cypr. De Caena Dom.
In that very moment of time, even when the Soul is ready to pass, and is even
at the lips of the Party, ready to yield up the spirit, the goodness of our
merciful God refuses not repentance, and whatsoever is truly done, is never
too late. St. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Genes. Homil. 27.
Neque uno die, neque brevi hora. The Thief on the Cross had not a day, no not
an hour, before he was with Christ in Paradise.


Gent. But, though the guilt of sin be remitted to the penitent, yet is a stain
inherent to the soul, which must be purged by satisfactory punishment, or
Indulgence before the last Judgment.


Minist. After bodily dissolution there is neither purgation, nor satisfaction;
for as the Tree falls, so it lies; as death leaves us, so judgment finds us.
Joh. v. 24. He, that hears my Word, and believes on him, that sent me, has
everlasting life, (...), and comes not unto judgment, but is passed from death
unto life: whereof St. Augustine renders reasons consonant to analogy of
faith, August. in Apocal. Homil. 11.
Qualem invenit Dominus, cum hinc vocat, talem and judicat; As our Lord finds
a man, when he calls him hence, even so he judges him. Qui in hac vita non
plac^^erit, habebit quidem poenitentiam in futuro saeculo de malis suis, sed
indulgentiam in conspectu Dei non inveniet; quia etsi erit ibi stimulus
poenitudinis, nulla tamen erit correctio voluntatis. August. ad Petr. Diac.
cap. 3.
Who in this life shall not please God, shall in the World to come, have
repentance for his sins, but pardon in the sight of God he shall not find; for
although there shall be there the pricks of repentance, yet there shall be no
amendment of the will. Olympiodorus seconds him, saying, In quocunque loco de
prehenditur homo, cum moritur, in eo gradu, atque ordine permanet in aeternu^.
Olympiodor. in Eccles. cap. 9.
In what place, or state soever a man shall be found, when he dies, in the
same state, and degree shall he remain for ever.


Gent. How then came Purgatory, and Indulgences to be so generally received; if
they have no ground from Scriptures, nor uniform consent of Fathers?


Minist. That they have neither ground in Scriptures, nor uniform consent of
Fathers, is already demonstrated, and by your own confessed; and therefore
wants that infallible mark of Catholic Doctrine, given by Vincentius
Lyrinensis, Vir centius Lyrinensis Adversus profanas novationes haeresium; page
646. he requires the Marks of Catholic Doctrine, Universality, Antiquity, and
Consent, or Succession.
In ipsa ecclesia Cathelica magnopere curandum est, ut id teneamus, quod
ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est; In the Catholic Church, we
must have an especial care, that we hold that, which was believed every where,
always, and of all. But Purgatory was not believed every where; for says
Nilus, Nilus de Purgatotio, Catholica Traditio. quaest. 16.
We know, that the Eastern Church does not believe it: and Roffensis, Roffensis
contra Lutherum, Art. 18.
Graecis usque ad hunc diem non est creditum; The Greeks believe no I urg^t^ry
till this day. Not always; for (says the same Roffensis) de Purgatorio apud
priscos nulla est mentio; The Ancients make no mention of Purgatory. And
Marcus, Bishop of Ephesus, in the Apology of the Greeks to the Council of
Florence, begins, Marcus Ephesians. in Graecorum Apol. de igne Purgatorio ad
Concilium Florentinum.
Whereas our Fathers had delivered unto them many Visions, and Dreams, and
other wonders concerning the everlasting punishment in Hell; yet none of them
had declared any thing concerning the temporary fire of Purgatory. Not of all,
for the Muscovites, Cophites, the Abissines, the Georgians, and Armenians, the
Syrians, and Chaldeans, that are subject to the Patriarchs of Antioch, and
Babylon, from Cyprus, and Palestina until the East-Indians, never made
discovery of this newfound Land of Purgatory: Cardinal Cusanus, and the
Deputies of the Council of Basil, in the year 1438. do sufficiently manifest
the Opinions of the Greek Church, wherein the Grecians began their Disputations
in this manner. (...), etc. (...). Marcus Crus. in Turco-Graec. page 186.
A Purgatory fire, and a punishment by fire, which is temporal, and shall at
last have an end, neither have we received from our Doctors, neither do we
know, that the Church of the East does manifest it. And from these, and the
like Progositions, they make this peremptory conclusion, (...). Ibid.
For these Reasons therefore, neither have we hitherto affirmed any such thing,
neither will we at all affirm i^.


Gent. Whence then had Purgatory its Original, if it have neither Universality,
Ecclesiastic Antiquity, nor Succession? such a great fire (as it is pretended)
could not be kindled from a small spark.


Minist. It had its first spring, and rise from the Heathens; Plato Plato in
Timaeo.
made discovery of it amongst the Grecians; St. Augustine August. De Civitate
Dei, lib 7. cap. 7.
amongst the Pagan Romans, who had a Sacrifice, called Sacrum Purgatorium, a
Purgatory Sacrifice; they probably borrowed it from Homer; he communicated his
fictions to succeeding Poets: hence Quid negotii est, haec Tocta^um, and
Pictorum portenta convincere. Cicero, Tusculan.
those Fables arise of Hercules delivering Theseus; Orpheus his Wife Eurydice;
Aeneas his visit of his Father Anchises. The manner whereof Virgil, who was
Homer's Imitator, expresses.

Virgilius, Aeneid. 6.
Quin and supremo cum lumine vita reliquit,
Non tamen omne malum miseris, nec funditus omnes
Corporeae excedunt posts; penitusque necesse est
Multa diu concreta modis mollescere miris.
Ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt; aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad v^ntos; aliis s^b^ gurgite ^^as^o
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igne;
Quisque suos patitur manes. And Claudian;
Quos ubi per varios annos, per mill figuras
Egit Laethaeo purgatos flumine, tandem
Rursus ad humanae revocar primordia formae.

Gent. How came this Heathenish, and Poetical Figment traduciary to Christians?
It is not probable, they should intermingle their Fables with Divine verity.


Minist. Corruption was introduced, and Divine Oracles contaminated with humane
Traditions three ways.

First, By retaining some relics of former Superstitions; for when Pagans
were converted Christians, Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem Testa
diu. Horat.
the Casket still relished of the precedent Liquor. Constantine Eusebius in
Vita Constantini.
the Emperor, when a professed Christian, continued the Plutarch. in Numa
Pompil.
Heathen Office of Pontifex Summus, with other remainders of Idolatry.

Secondly, The People's Credulity, and the Clergie's policy; for whereas
Cardinal Cajetan tells us, Indulgentias dari tantum de impositis poenitentiis.
Cajetan. Opusc. Tom. 1. tr. 8. q. 1.
Indulgences at the first, were only given after penance imposed; the manner
how, is described in the Nicene, and Ancyran Council. Ancyr. Council. 1. Nic.
Burchard. lib. 19. and Gratian. Did. 12. cap. Presb.
Councils, thus, Council. Anc. Can. 5. Nic. 1. Can. 11.
After grievous crimes, men were put to grievous penances; it fell out
sometimes, that it was thought convenient, that penance should be mitigated;
which favor the Bishops, and Priests, invested with jurisdiction, had
authority to grant; at length, they began to redeem them with mo ney: by
little, and little, Superstition took so deep root, that the common people
began to think, that if they did not perform, or redeem them, while they lived,
they could not die in peace. The Romish Higlers took advantage of this, and
affrighted them on their Deathbeds with exquisite tortures to be endured
hereafter, if not ransomed by themselves, or friends: hence it was a common
opinion in the days of Albert. 4. Did. 12. Art. 17.
Albertus, and Gand. Quodlibet. 15.
Henricus de Gandavo, that Popes Pardons, and Purgatory were only pious
frauds. So Altisiodorus expressly; Dicunt quidam, quod relaxatio non valet,
quantum Ecclesia promittit; sed facit, ut ex^it^ntur fidcles ad dandum, and
decipit eos Ecclesia. Altisiodor. Sum. lib. 4. De relap.
The end of Indulgences is, that the Faithful may be excited to give, and the
Church deceives them.

Thirdly, Satan, having got Videtur dicendum, quod valet ad tot annos. ad quot
secundum divinam ordinationem pro peccatis praeteritis haberet sustinere in
Purgatorio, si ante indulgentiae consecutionem in gratia decessisset. Viguer.
Institut. cap. 16. sect. 6. verse. 22.
this hint, drove on the design by Frater Justus. qui defunctus fuerat, nocte
quadam fratri suo Germano Copioso per visionem apparuit, quem cum vidisset,
inquisivit dicens, Quid est frater? quomodo es? cui respondet, Nuncusque male:
sed jam modo been habet quia hodie communionem recepi. Gregor. Dialog. lib. 4.
cap. 55.
Apparitions to the living, in the shape, and persons of the Dead; telling
them, they were scorched in Purgatorial Flames, and not to be delivered from
thence; but by Popes Pardons, Pilgrimages, Masses, Oblations, Prayers for the
Dead, and other Superstitious superstructures, which this subtle Serpent
builded upon this foundation. Hence, as some Geographers for proving of a Vide
Tabulam M^reat. universam.
black Magnetic Rock, many hundred miles about, directly under the Northern
Pole, sends us to Gyraldus Cambrensis, he to a Priest of Norway; the Priest to
an Oxford Magician, who was carried thither to see it by the Devil: So the best
Romish proofs for their subterranean Purgatory come by many deductions from the
same Author, as appears by the diverse Apparitions they so confidently
allege for it. The result of the whole epitomized is this; That, which is not
grounded upon Scripture, and can justly plead neither Universality, Antiquity,
nor Succession; but had its spring, and rise, from Poetical Fictions, People's
credulity, Priest's avarice, Satan's subtlety, ought not to be believed, but
rather abjured, and renounced; But such is Purgatory: Therefore it ought not to
be believed, but rather abjured, and renounced.


Gent. Well; I clearly perceive, there is no Purgatory, but in a man's
Imagination, with which Lunacie I have been vexed these many years; but I thank
you for delivering me out of it, and desire you to proceed to the next Article.


The Fifth Article.
And that the Consecrated Host, Crucifixes, or Images, ought not to be
worshipped, neither that any Worship is due to any of them.

Minist. THis Article innovates nothing, but is synonomous, and, without any
considerable alteration in effect, the same with the twenty second of our
English Confession, wherein it is said, That the Romish Doctrine of Veneration,
and Adoration, both of Images, and Relics, are grounded upon no warrant of
Scripture; but rather contradictory to the Word of God.


Gent. There is some difference; for in the present Article there is no mention
of Relics; in that of the English Confession, none of the Consecrated Host;
which seems to me distinct things, and requires a distinct manner of handling:
Therefore, I beseech you, begin with the former, that the consecrated Host
ought not to be worshipped.


Minist. They are coincident, and the handling of them will fall in together;
for the consecrated Host, and Images, are in this distinguished; that the
former represent the Prototype by a Divine, the latter only by a humane
institution: but both concenter in this, (which is essential to the Question)
that they are but signs, or Creatures at the best, and so not adorable: we have
been long since taught of St. Augustine, Ea demum est miserabilis anima
servitus signa pro robus accipere. August. De Doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 5.
That it is a miserable servitude of the Soul, to take the signs instead of the
thing signified.


Gent. But Christ calls the consecrated Host his Body; and Theodoret tells us,
Intelliguntur ea esse, quae facta sunt, and creduntur, and adorantur.
Theodoret. Dialog. 2.
The Mystical signs are understood to be those things, which they are made, and
so they are believed, and are adored.


Minist. In what sense the Consecrated Host is the Body of Christ, you have
heard in the Article of Transubstantiation; your own quoted Theodoret, (if you
desire it) will give you further satisfaction; for an Heretic having avouched
(as you do now) That Symbola Dominici corporis, and sanguinis, aliae quidem
sunt ante invocationem Sacerdotis, sed post invocationem mutantur, and aliud
fiunt. Respondetur. Signa mystica post sanctificationem non recedunt a natura
sua, manent anim in priori substantia, and figura, and forma. Theodoret.
Dialog. 2.
The Sacraments, or signs of Christ 's Body, and blood, are one thing before
the blessing of the Priest, but after the blessing they are changed, and made
other things: Theodoret answers no; For the mystical signs after the blessing
(of the Priest) depart not from their own nature, for they remain in their
former substance, figure, and form; the same Bread, and Wine, remains as
before, are understood, and believed as before; but he adds, They are also
adored; his meaning is, They are reverenced, or honored: for Theodoret was a
Father of the Greek Church, who adore not the Sacrament till this day, yet
would speak reverently of it, as St. Augustine does of Baptism, saying,
Baptisma ubique est veneramur. August. Epist. 164.
We honor, or adore Baptism, wheresoever it be. I hope the Romists will not
gather hence, that Baptism must be worshipped: It was the Counsel of
Anastasius, that Dominica verba at tente audiant, and fideliter adorent.
Athanas. De Cons. Did. 1. Apostolica.
Men should deligently hear, and faithfully adore the Words of God; yet Papists
themselves give no divine Worship to sacred Oracles: we may reverence, and
admire the Eucharist, with Venisti ad Altar vidisti Sacramenta posita supra
Altar, and ipsum quidem miratus es creaturam; tamen creatura solennis, and
nota. Ambros. De Sacr. lib. 4. cap. 3.
St. Ambrose, yet give no divine Worship to it; as the Wise men did the Stars,
Cognoverunt hanc stellam esse, quae hominem, Deumque signabat, sed adoraverunt
parvulum. They knew (says St. Ambrose) (g) Ambros. in Lucam. lib. 2. cap. 2.
this was the Star, that signified him unto them, that was both God and Man,
but they adored the little one, and not the Star.


Gent. But why may we not worship the Consecrated Host, seeing it signifies,
represents, and exhibits Christ, who is to be worshipped?


Minist. Because there is no worship due to it, either by Divine Institution,
or otherwise, that is free from Idolatry. For as Theophilus, being sometimes
demanded, Wherefore he would not adore the Emperor, as the manner was then,
with divine honor? made answer thus, Quia non est ad hoc institutus Imperator,
ut adoretur; sed ut legitimo honor honoretur. Theophilus contr. Autolycum.
lib. 1.
Because the Emperor is not appointed to that end he should be worshipped; but
that we should give him that honor, that to him appertains: so the Sacrament
was not appointed to be worshipped, but reverently to be received by Faith.
And, as St. Augustine says of the anointed Pillar, so we may say of the
consecrated Bread, Non sic posuit Jacob lapidem acutum, ut veniret, and
adoraret; alioqui Idololatria est, non significatio Christi. August. in Johan.
Tract. 7.
Jacob did not erect the anointed stone to the intent to come, and to adore it;
otherwise it were Idolatry, and not a signification of Christ. Sulpitius
Sulpitius in Vita Martini.
relates of St. Martin, that when the Devil appeared unto him, and demanded
Worship, telling him, he was Christ, the holy man refused, saying, I cannot
tell, whether thou be Christ, or no; unless I see Christ in the same shape, and
form he was crucified in upon the Cross, I will not adore him in any wise. So
we, knowing not any warrant, that Christ is essentially, and substantially in
the Sacrament, dare not worship it; for in all the Scriptures, and holy
Fathers, we have neither commandment to force us, nor Quis tam stultus, ut id,
quod vescitur, credat esse Deum? Cicero. De natura Deorum.
example to lead us thereto.


Gent. If adoration of the Host be disowned both by Scriptures, and ancient
Fathers; how was it introduced into the Church, or when began it?


Minist. Extravag. De caiebrat. Missar.
It is a thing lately devised by Pope Honorius, about the year of our Lord,
1226. afterward increased by the new solemn Feast of Corpus Christi day, about
the year of our Lord 1264, and that by Pope Vrbanus: and last of all, confirmed
for ever by multitudes of Pardons in the Council of Vienna, by Pope Clement the
Fifth, Cleme ^. lib. 3. Tit. 16. ^^pite Si Dominum.
Anno 1310. The Church of Asia, and Graecia, never received it until this day.
The matter is weighty, and cannot be attempted without imminent danger to the
soul; for says St. Hierome, Dum Sacramenta vielantur, ipse, cusus Sacramem a
s^nt. vi^l^^ur. Hieron, in Malac^. cap. 1.
While Sacraments are abused, God himself, whose Sacraments they are, is
dishonored. To give the honor of God to a creature, that is no God, is
manifest Idolatry; and all Idolaters, (says St. John, Apocalyp. xxi. 8.) shall
have their portion in the Lake, that burns with fire; and brimstone.


Gent. But, admit adoration of the Host in particular was introduced within
these few Centuries; yet worship of Crucifixes, and Images in general, is
acknowledged by Protestants (as Andrews in Respons. ad caput 18. Perronii.
Doctor Andrews, Casaubon. in Exercitat. Baronii; ad Annum 24.
Casaubon, and Montacutius in Respons. ad Higham, and Appello Caesarem.
Montague) to be very ancient.


Minist. Imagerie is twofold; either Veneration largely taken; which signifies
an external regard, and reverence of Pictures, such as is given to Churches,
sacred Vessels, and Ornaments of sacred places; and this Hoc nemo nostrum
dicit, Non esse colendas, nec ullo modo; suo modo coli probamus, velut
Imagines, sed non religioso cultu. Junius advers. Bellarm. De Imag. cap. 11.
Junius, with the former quoted Authors, confesses to be both ancient, and (in
their judgment) innocent: Or Adoration properly taken, which signifies an
internal submission of soul to the acknowledging of some excellency; an outward
expression of the body by kneeling, kissing, censing, holding up the hands.
Worshipping of Images in this manner, by religious adoration; either primary,
or secondary, absolute, or respective, is not acknowledged to be ancient, or
Calick Doctrine, practiced by Primitive Fathers: But, on the contrary, it is a
superstitious Dotage, and remainder of Paganism, as Cornelius Agrippa, a
Papist, confesses, saying, Qui quidem corruptus mos Gentilium, and falsa
religio, cum ipsi ad Christi fidem converti caeperunt, nostram quoque
Religionem infecit, and in nostram Ecclesiam simulachrae, and Imagines,
multaque pomparum steriles ceremoniat introduxit; quorum, etc. Cornelius
Agrippa, De vanitate Scientiarum.
The corrupt custom of the Gentiles, and false Religion, when they began to be
converted to the faith of Christ, infected also our Religion, and introduced
into our Church, Pictures and Images, and many barren pompous Ceremonies,
quorum nihil omnino fuit apud primos illos Christianos, whereof there was not
any thing among those primitive Christians.


Gent. Cornelius Agrippa in this, as in other Points, acts the part rather of a
Satyrist, then of a true Casuist; what reason had he thus tartly to inveigh
against introduction of Images?


Minist. He might, and we have sufficient reason.

First, The Canon of the Old Testament is diametrically opposite to
Image Worship; Exodus xx. 5. Levit. xxvi. 1. Deuteronomy. v. 9. Psalm. cvi. 9. Isai.
xxviii. Micha. v. 13. that the best-learned among your Romish Rabbis are
forced to confess, it was prohibited to the Jews. The Angelical Doctor says*
Prohibitum est in veteri Lege, ne Imagines flerent ad adorandum. Aquin. 3.
Sent. Did 9. q. 2.
The making of Images to be worshipped was interdicted in the Old Law. The same
is affirmed by Alexand. Hales pa. 3. q. 30. m. 3. Art. 3.
Alexander Hales, Albert. 3. Did. 9. Art. 4.
Albertus, Bonavent. 3. Did. 9.
Bonaventure, Marsilius, Gerson, Abulensis, and vouched by the modern
Schole-men; to wit, Soto, Corduba, Cabrera, Palacius, Tapia, Oleaster, amongst
whom the Jesuit Vasques shall bring up the Rear; who declares, That Lege veteri
non fuisse vetitam omnem similitudinem, aut effigiem quomodocunque; sed omnem
cultum, and adorationem ipsius, atque adeo quoque omnem Imagmem, seu effigiem
modo accommodato adorationi erectam, aut constitutam. Vasques, De Ador. lib. 2.
Dis 4. cap. 6.
In the Old Law, every Image, and Portraicture was not forbidden; but every
Worship, and Adoration of Images: and therefore every similitude, or
representation erected, or constituted by way of application to Adoration, was
prohibited.

Secondly, The Brazen Serpent was a figure of Christ, John iii. 14. was formed
by God's Commandment, Numb. xxi. 9. yet the worship thereof, being (as Vasques
Vasques, De Ador. lib. 2. Dis. 4. cap. 5.
says) cultus, qualem etiam imaginibus defer nos consuevimus, no other, then
such as Romists use toward their Images, was unlawful; 2 Kings xviii. 4.

Thirdly, The Scriptures of the New Testament, neither expressly, nor by
consequence, maintain the worship of Images; neither is there in all the
Apostles Doctrine, any abrogation of the negative Precept, delivered to the
Jews, concerning the worship of Images; and therefore the same Law is Morale
simpliciter, quod omni tempore, and ab omnibus servandum est. Alexand. Hales,
4. q. Art. 1.
moral, and obliges Christians, as it did the Jews.

Fourthly, The worshipping of Images was not practiced, or held lawful by the
Primitive Fathers, as Cassander Quantum veteres, initio Ecclesiae, ab omni
veneratione Imaginum abhorruerunt, declarat unus Origenes adversus Celsum.
Cassand. Consult. De Imag. and Simulachr.
gathers out of Origin against Celsus; and Gregory the Great, six hundred years
after Christ, condemned the same; for, writing to a Bishop, he uses this
Suasive, Gregor. lib. 7. Epist. 109. lib. 9. Epist. 9.
Tua fraternitas ab earum adoratu populum prohibere debuit; Your Brotherhood
ought to hinder the people from worshipping of them; and adorare imagines
omnibus modis devita, avoid the worshipping of Images by all means. The Council
of Frankford seven hundred, ninety; and fourscore years after Christ, opposed
the Definition of the second Nicene Synod, concerning worshipping of Images, as
Ado says, Ado, Chron. atatis 6. fol. 181.
Pseudo-Synodus, quam septimam Graeci appellant, pro Imaginibus adorandis
abdicata penitus; The false Synod, which the Greeks call the seventh, for
worshipping of Images was wholly disclaimed. And our Historian, Carolus, Rex
Francorum, misit librum Synodalem ad Britanniam, in quo libro multa
inconvenientia, and verae fidei contraria, maxim imagines debere adorari, quod
omnino Ecclesia Dei execratur. Roger Hoveden. Annal. part. 1. page 232. col. 2.
Roger Hoveden, though a Papist, informs us, that Charles, the French King,
sent a Book of the Synod to Britain, in which Book, many Inconveniences, and
contrary to the true faith, were asserted, especially, that Images ought to be
adored, which (says he) the Church of God altogether execrates. And this was
done, even with the authority of the Pope; for, says Cassander, Cassander,
Consult. De Imagine.
Cum Legati Romani Pontificis interfuerunt, etc. When the Legates of the Bishop
of Rome were present, by uniform consent of Fathers, that Synod (the second
Nicene) so far as it judged Images to be adored, was condemned, as contrariant,
not only to Scriptures, and the ancient tradition of Fathers, but also to the
custom of the Roman Church.

Agobardus, the Bishop of Lions, who lived (as Ado says) about the year 815,
in his Book De Picturis, and Imaginibus, avers, that Nullus antiquorum
Catholicorum unquam eas colendas, vel adorandas existimavit, nemo se fallat,
quicunque aliquam picturam, vel fusilem adorat statuam non exhibet cultum Deo,
etc. Agobard. Bibliothec. Patr. edit. Colon; Tom. 19. p. 598.
None of the ancient Catholics thought that Images were to be worshipped, or
adored; and delivering his own judgment, he says, Nemo se fallat, etc. Let no
man beguil himself, whosoever worshippeth any Picture, or carved Statue,
neither honors God himself, nor Angels, or Saints, but Idols.

Fifthly, Many modern Pontificians have condemned the worship of Images;
according as the same was practiced by the vulgar, and maintained by Aquinas,
and other prime Scholemen. Holcoth says, Holcoth. in dibr. Sap. cap. 13. page
524.
Nulla adoratio debetur Imagini, nec licet aliquam Imaginem adorare; No
adoration is due to an Image, neither is it lawful to worship any Image.
Cassander writes in this manner, Sanioribus Scholasticis displicet sententia
Thomae; qui censeat imaginem eadem adoratione colendam, qua res ipsa colitur.
etc. Cassand. Consult. De Pictur.
The Opinion of Thomas Aquinas, who holds, that Images are to be worshipped,
as their samplers, is disliked by sounder Scholemen: and they affirm, that it
is not very safe, unless it be qualified with favorable interpretation; among
these is Durand, and Holcoth. Gabriel Biel reports the Opinion of them to be
more sound, which say, that an Image neither as considered in it self
materially, nor yet according to the nature of a sign, or Image, is to be
worshipped. Peresius Ajala says, (m) All Scholemen, (n) Omnes fere Scholastici
in hoc sunt, quod imago Christi, and Sanctorum adorari debent, etc. neque
Scripturam, neque traditionem Ecclesia, neque communem sensum Sanctorum, neque
Concilii generalis determinationem aliquam adducunt. Peers. De Trad. part. 3.
De Imag.
in a manner, hold, that the Images of Christ, and the Images of Saints, are to
be worshipped with the same adoration, that their samplers; but they produce,
so far as I have seen, no sound proof of this Doctrine, to wit, neither
Scripture, nor Tradition of the Church, nor consent of Fathers, nor the
determination of a general Council, nor any other effectual reason, sufficient
to persuade believers.


Gent. But we find, that the Crucifix, or the sign of the Cross was in great
esteem amongst the Ancients; as was presented in a Vision to Ezekiel, where God
commanded one clad in white, to imprint the Letter Tau, which (St. Hierome
Hieron. Comment. in Ezekiel.
says) amongst the ancient Hebrews represents the Cross, in the forehead of
every mourner, Ezekiel. ix. In conformity to this, when Constantine, Eusebius,
Ecclesiast. Histor. libr. 1. cap. 9.
the Emperor, had marshalled his Army to encounter Maxentius, he beheld in the
Sky the sign of the Cross of a glorious splendour, and heard a voice, (...), In
this overcome. When Sozomen Tripartit. Histor. lib. 9. cap. 29.
Julian the Apostate, had deserted Christianity, and sacrificed to Idols, drops
of rain, as they marched, formed in his, and his Soldiers Garments, the
effigies of the Cross. Ruffinus, Ecclesiastic. Histor. lib. 10. in fine.
When the Jews attempted to build the Temple at Jerusalem, by Julian's
encouragement; they being driven from that design by Tempests, and
Earthquakes, indelible Characters of the Cross were imprinted on their Cloaks.
Socrates, Histor. Tripart. lib. 9. cap. 29.
In the Temple of Serapis, (...), Hieroglyphical Letters were found engraven in
stone, representing the figure of the Cross.


Minist. What will you gather hence? If you affirm, that either de facto they
did worship the Cross; or de jure they might, or ought to have done it; you
will find no History for the one, nor any reason for the other. We acknowledge
there are Stories extant, when Jews, and Pagans blasphemed him, that died upon
the Cross, the figure thereof was either wonderfully imprinted, or wonders done
thereby: but any Argument drawn from thence to prove the adoration of it will
as well conclude the worship of Moses his Rod, Elizeus his Bones, Paul's
Napkin, and Peter's shadow. The Brazen Serpent serves for an instance
unanswerable; which, though set up by God, miraculously curing the sting of the
fiery Serpent, enjoined to be kept for a Monument; yet, when adored, was Quando
Ezekias ipsum confregit, quod videret ei incensum adoleri; cum tamen in
memortam praeteriti beneficii a Deo accepti in populo illo servaretur, non ideo
fecit, quia existimaret a populo pro Deo coli, and adorari; sed quod aliquem
cultum, qualem etiam Imaginibus defer nos consuevimus. Vasques, De Adorat.
lib. 2. Dis. 4. cap. 5.
justly by Ezekias demolished, and broken in pieces. Grant all these Stories
should be true; That the Letter Tau, in Ezekiel's Vision, should represent the
Cross; That Constantine saw the Crucifix in the Air; That the Soldiers Coats
were stained with the Cross under Julian; That Crosses were burned, or stained
in the Jews Garments at Jerusalem; That the Hieroglyphical Letters, bearing the
form of the Cross, were found in the Temple of Serapis in Egypt: It will
demonstrate no more, (as St. Chrysostom Mors Christi apud Judaeos maledicta,
apud Gentiles abominanda, etc. Chrysostom. De laudibus Pauli. Homil. 4.
expresses) then that the death of Christ, which among the Jews was held
accursed, among the Heathens was accounted abominable; might be rendered
honorable every where by these miraculous Prodigies.


Gent. Tertullian. Apologetico, cap. 16. Ecclesiastic. Histor, lib. 11. cap.
19. authore Ruffino. Historia Tripart. lib. 1. cap 9.
The Christians of Alexandria, when they had pulled down the Arms, and
Monuments of Serapis, caused the sign of the Cross to be painted in the same
place. Constantine enjoined the same to be painted in all his Flags, and
Banners of War, to be stamped in his Coins, and Moneys; to be pourtrayed in his
Arms, Escutcheons, and Targets: of which the Divine Poet, Libr. 1. contra
Symmachum.
Aurelius Prudentius, makes mention.

Christus purpureum, gemmanti textus in auro,
Signab at Labarum: clype^rum Insignia Christus
Scripserat, ardebat summis crux addita Cristis.

Minist. But neither the Christians of Alexandria, nor Constantine, worshipped
the Cross; nor does your Divine Poet so much as fain any such thing, which you
were to prove: we yield, Princes did then (as now) paint the Cross on their
Imperial Banners: Labarum, Cassidor. lib. 1. cap. 9. Tertull. in Apologetico.
amongst the ancient Romans, was the Imperial Standard, richly wrought with
Gold, beset with precious Stones, carried before the General of the Field, as
witnesses Sozomen, Sozomen. lib. 9. cap. 4. Aelianns Spartianus.
(...). The one of the Standards, which the Romans call Labarum; in this the
Cross was wrought, or pourtrayed. To which Gregory alludes, encouraging
Christ's Soldiers, saying, Christum belli socium babuisti, cujus Labarum
insigne gestasti, ipsam dico vivificatricem crucem. Gregor. ad German.
Patriarch.
Thou have had Christ thy fellow-Souldier, whose Ensign, or Banner thou have
carried, I mean that enlivening Cross. This Standard Constantine so blazed with
the Cross, as the Romans.
Heathen Emperors had done before with the Minotaur, and Eagle. And, though
Eusebius says, that Eusebius in Vita Constantini, Orat. 1.
Constantine (...), used this Cross, as a preservative of his safety; yet
Nicephorus Nicephor. lib. 8. cap. 32.
makes it appear, his confidence was only in Christ, not in the material
Cross; for he caused these words to be engraven in the Cross, (...), Jesus
Christ conquereth, and not the Cross: as St. Ambrose stories his Mother Helena,
to have done before him; Invenit titulum, Regem adoravit, non lignum utique;
qui his Gentilis est Error, et vanitas impiorum. Ambros. in Orat. f^^ebri
Theodosii.
She found the Title, but she worshipped Christ the King, and not the wood; for
(says he) that is an Heathenish error, and the vanity of the wicked.


Gent. Eusebius Eusebius Caesatiens. cap. 14.
reports, he saw in Caesarea Philippi an Image of Christ in Brass, as also of
the Woman, which he cured of the bloody Issue; which when the Apostate Julian
had taken down, and erected his own Statue in the place thereof, it was cleft
in pieces with Thunder, and Lightning from Heaven. Therefore apparently great
reverence is to be exhibited to Crucifixes, or the Image of Christ.


Minist. I will answer Eusebius with Eusebius, who avoucheth not one word of
worshipping, but the contrary; for having declared, that the Phoenicians, being
Heathens, and hearing the strange Miracles, that had been wrought by Christ,
and his Apostles, made these Images in honor of him, only out of Heathenish,
and vain Superstition: his words are these, Nec mirum est veteres Ethnicos,
beneficio affectos a Servatore nostro, ista fecisse; nam and ipsius Christi
imagines coloribus ductas, and servatas vidimus: (...). Eusebius. Caesar. lib. 7.
cap. 17.
It is no marvel, that the Heathens, receiving such benefits of our Savior,
did these things; for we have seen the Image of Christ drawn in colors, and
preserved; and it may well be thought, that men in old times, being not yet
removed from the Superstition of their Fathers, used after this sort to
reverence them by an Heathenish Custom, as their Saviors. Whereby it is plain,
that the use of Images came not from Christ, and his Apostles; but from the
Superstitious Custom of the Heathens; neither were these in that age set up in
any Church, but in the open street; for an Herb grew at the feet thereof.
Julian, out of inveterate malice to Christ, took down his Image, and set up his
own in the place thereof, to affront the Lord of Life; therefore it was darted
with a Thunderbolt from Heaven, as an ominous presage of his ensuing ruin,
who prodigiously wounded, and throwing out handfulls of blood, cried out,
(...). Thou have conquered, O Galilean. This will infer, that Julian was
punished for dishonouring Christ; but will not prove, that Images were then set
up in Churches, much less, that they were adored: for about that time the godly
Emperors, Valens, and Theodosius, gave out this Proclamation throughout all
Christendom; For as much as we have a diligent care in (i) Cum sit nobis curae
diligens in rebus omnibus supernt numinis religionem tueri, signum Salvatoris
nostri Christi nemini concedimus, coloribus, lapide, ^liave materia fingere,
sculpere, aut pingere; sed quocunque reperitur loco, tolli jubemus, gravissima
poena eos mulctando, qui contrarium Decretis nostris, and imperio quicquam
tentaverit. Constantinopol. Council. Petrus Crinitus, lib. 9. cap. 9.
all things to maintain the Religion of the most high God, therefore we suffer
no man to fashion, to grave, or to paint the Image of our Savior Christ either
in colors, or in stone, or in any other kind of Metal, or matter; but
wheresoever any such Image shall be found, we command it to be taken down,
assuring our Subjects, that we will most straightly punish all such, as shall
presume to attempt any thing contrary to our Decrees. And before this time, it
was Arnobius his Plea against the Gentiles, Accusatis nos, quod non habemus
Imagines, and altaria; non est dubium, quin religio nulla sit, ubi est
simulaehrum. Arnobius Contra Gentes, lib. 2. page 214. Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Ye accuse us, that we have neither Images, nor Altars; out of doubt, where
there is any Image, there is no Religion.


Gent. But suppose Images, and their worship be interdicted by Scriptures,
Fathers, and ancient Councils; yet they are consequent out of the Principles of
Nature, and Christianity; for an Image is a distinct, and lively Pourtraicture
of some visible, and corporal thing, by its very aspect exciting the beholders
to compassion. Thus Virgil Virgil. Aeneid. 2.
brings in Aeneas weeping at the sight of a painted Table, discovering at
Carthage the Trojan Wars: Ovid Ovid. Epist. 13.
personates Laodamia comforting her self with the waxen Image of her Husband
Protesilaus in his absence. Appian Appian. De bellis Civilibus, lib. 2.
emblazons the manner how the Friends of Julius Caesar brought his Statue in
the same bloody Garb, as he was wounded in the Senate, thereby making a deeper
impression upon the Roman Citizens, to revenge his death, then the most
eloquent Oration could have done.


Minist. Your Argument (if any thing seemingly to the purpose) in form sounds
thus:

That, which has a natural inclination to move compassion, ought to be adored;

But such are Images.

Your Proposition is manifestly false; and your Assumption may be questioned.
And whereas you describe an Image a lively Pourtraicture of some corporal, and
visible thing; I demand how this can be affirmed of the Images you make of God
the Father, and the Trinity, which are incorporeal, and invisible? Clemens of
Alexandria is so far from avouching an Image to be a lively Portraicture; that
the says, (...). Clemens Alexand. (...).
It is a dead matter, formed by a Work-man's hand; but we use (says he) no
Image made of sensible matter, but such only, as is perceived by
understanding. But, methinks, you are brought to a great dearth, when, for lack
of other matter, you are forced to produce Heathen Historiographers, and Poets,
who (as Athenaeus (...). Athenaeus.
says) have liberty to say, and do what they please. That Story of Terence,
Suspectans tabulam quandam pictam, ubi inerat pictura haec, Jovem quo pacto
Danae misisse aiunt quondam in gremium Imbrem aureum, egomet quoque id spectare
cepi. etc. Terent. in Eunucho.
in Eunuchus had been as concentrick to your purpose, where in the Picture
Chaerea, seeing Jupiter in a Golden shower descending into Danae's Lap, was
encouraged to deflowre the Virgin committed unto his charge. I grant, Images do
oftentimes vehemently move the mind diversely to sundry affections. So Salust
testifies, that Quintus Maximus, and Publius Scipio, were inflamed with
Nobility of courage to advance themselves to like adventures, when they beheld
their Ancestors Images. But every thing, that may delight, or move the mind,
is not therefore Quantum autem visibilia noceant ad invisibilia capienda, et
quantum amor corporearum rerum, etiam bonarum, ad spiritualia contemplanda,
ipse Dominus demonstrat, dicens, Ego veritatem dico vobis, expedit vobis, ut
ego vadam; si enim non abiero, non mittam eam ad vos. Agobard. lib De pict. and
imag. Tom. 4. Bibliothec.
meet for the Church of God, much less adoration. God's House is the House of
Prayer, not of gazing. Therefore the ancient Lacedaemonians would not suffer any
Image, or Picture, to stand in their Council-House, lest the Senators minds
thereby should be drawn from instant employments to extravagant imaginations.
That Counsel of the Wise man is conceived Canonical, though the Book be
Apocryphal, Wisd. xv. 5. Aspectus imaginis dat insipienti concupiscentiam; The
sight of an Image in the unwise stirs up concupiscence.


Gent. Christ, to whom all adoration, and worship is due, became truly, and
verily man; as visible, and a spectable, as any other man, and consequently, as
imaginable, that he may be figured by an Image, no less truly, and distinctly,
then another man. That Story in Eusebius of Publius Lentulus is well known, who
sent a perfect Description of our Savior to the Roman Senate.


Minist. Conclusions borrow their strength from the Premises; but these your
Premises have no power to enforce the controverted Conclusion: for, although
Christ be true Man, and suppose Divine Providence had permitted a true
Transumpt to have been taken in his lifetime upon earth, truly resembling the
Prototype, and transmitted till our times without alteration; yet his painted,
or carved Image wants evident, and undeniable right to represent him: because
such right presupposes Divine Institution. The same represents him, and stands
for him only by humane imagination; but religious Worship must have a more
sound, and certain foundation: otherwise we must say to Papals, when they are
thus prodigal in giving Christ's honor to Idols, (...), John iv. 22. Ye
worship ye know no^ what: as appears by Cum Idolum non suerit, id est cujusque
Dei falsi, and alieni simulachru^; sed Ephod, id est, unum de Sacramentis
Tabernaculi, quod ad vestem Sacerdotalem pertinet, quomodo fornicationem
Scriptura dicat populi istae sequentis, atque venerantis? Ideo scilicet, quod
praeter Tabernaculum Dei, ubi erant ista, qua sibi fieri jusserat Deus Israel,
extra simile aliquid fieri fas non erat. Aug. q. 41. supra librum Judicum, page
415.
Gideon's Ephod, Judges viii. 27. And, if it should be granted, that artificial
Images did represent, figure, or teach Christ Jesus by divine Institution, as
fully as the Books of Holy Scripture, or as the Internae imagines multo
perfectius representant ipsum exemplar, quam imagines externae. Cabre^. 3.
Quaest. 25. Art. 3. v. 28.
inward Conceits, or Images of the mind; yet it were inconsequent to infer,
that the same were therefore to be worshipped in such manner, as Papals
require. They were indeed to be used with reverence; but reverent using, and
adoration are diverse actions.


Gent. We ascribe no divine honor to the Image, but to the samplar; as when we
reverence, or do honor to the Image, of Christ, it is only Christ himself,
that we adore with latria, or divine worship.


Minist. Your own eminent Doctors, and Schole-men are Biassed another way.
Aquinas says, Cum Christus adoretur adoratione Latriae, consequens est, quod
ejus Imago sit adoratione Latriae adoranda. Aquin. 3. q. 25. Art. 3.
When Christ himself is adored with divine honor, it is consequent, that his
Image is to be adored with the worship of Latria. Picus of Mirandula says,
Picus Mirand. Apol. q. 3.
Crux Christi, and imagines sunt adorandae Latria eodem modo, quo ponit Thomas;
The Cross of Christ, and Images are to be worshipped in that manner Aquinas
sets down, that is latria. Henriquez, a Jesuit says, Henriquez, Sum. Theol.
Mor. lib. 8. cap 32.
Some do evil, in denying, that it is meet to preach to the common people, that
the Image of Christ is to be adored with divine Worship. Suarez has these
words, Dicendum ergo primo est, fieri recte posse, ut Prototypon in Imagine,
and Imago cum Prototypo, uno actu adoretur, atque hoc modo posse Imagine^
Christi adorari Latria. Suarez in 3. Tom. 1. Did. 54.
It may rightly be, that the Image, and the Prototype may be adored with one
act, and in this manner the Image of Christ may be adored with Latria. Vasques
says, Vasques, De Ador. lib. 2. Dis. 8. cap. 14. n. 385.
If an Image be taken formally, as it exercises the act of an Image, that is
for the very Samplar in the Image, and for the Image, as it contains the
Samplar, and is as it were animated by it, then, without doubt, we must say,
that true Latria in spirit is exhibited unto it. Jacob de Graphiis has these
words, Jacob. de Graphiis, Decis. Aur. p. 1. lib. 2. cap. 2. n. 15.
We are to worship every Image with the same worship, wherewith the Samplar is
worshipped, to wit the Image of God, or Christ, or sign of the Cross, (as it
brings the Lord's Passion into our mind) with the worship of Latria. This
same is affirmed by Paramo, De orig. Inquis. lib. 2. Tit. 3. cap. 8. n. 9.
Ludovicus Paramo, Puiol. De Ador. Dis. 8. Sec. 6.
Bernardus Puiol, Petig. Sum. 3. Sent Did. 9. q. 1. Art. 3.
Franciscus Petigianis, Petrus de Cabrera, Azorius,, Lucius Lamas, Thomas
Elysius, Arch. Rubeo, Thomas Bustus; and though some of these Authors use
wire-drawn Distinctions to qualify the harshness of their Assertions, they are
(as Bellarmine Per se, per accidens; Absoluta, and respectiva; Propria,
impropria; Proprie, Analogice. Bellarm.
professes) so subtle, and intricate, ut ipsimet viz intelligunt, nedum
populus imperitus; That they themselves scarce understand them, much less the
Ignorant Vulgar.


Gent. I never relished their Judgment, who give divine honor to Images. Our
Savior's Check to Satan controles that, Thou shall worship thy Lord God,
(...), Matthew. iv. 10. him only shall thou serve with (Latria, or) divine
honor. Nay, the Second Council of Nice forbids it, which, you say, first
introduced Image Worship; Though our Zonaras in Leone Isaurico.
Doctors affirm, that Leo Isauricus, before that Council, opposed it, and so
Iconolatria was more ancient.


Minist. Qui creaturam adorat, etiamsi in nomine Christi id facit,
simulachrorum cultor est. Clemens Romanus, Recog. lib. 5. page 71, 73.
You do well to disrelish not only Divine honor, but all honor, that is
given to Images, not grounded on Divine Revelation, whereby God is robbed of
his honor. Adorare imagines omnibus modis devita, says Gregory; Take heed how
thou worship Images any way. We do not say, that the Second Nicene Synod
brought in Iconolatry, or worship of Images simply; but, by defining the same
to be necessary, and by appointing the practice thereof to be received
universally; for we acknowledge, that the Israelites worshipped molten Images
in Dan, and Bethel; and the Scholars of Simon Magus worshipped Images, as
Eusebius Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 13.
stories it. The Irenaeus, lib. 2. cap. 24.
Gnostics worshipped Christ his Image; and Marcellinus August. De Haeres. 7.
Haeres.
worshipped the Images of Jesus, and Paul: The Marsilians Gregor. lib. 7.
Epist. 109.
also, or people thereabout, worshipped Images in the days of Serenus; but all
these were condemned of Superstition, and Idolatry, by the Catholic Church;
and the Second Nicene Synod was censured, and the Definition thereof resisted
by that of Francoford, and contrary to that of Helleboris, Contra quod scripsit
Albinus Epistolam ex authoritate divinarum Scripturarum mirabiliter affirmatam,
illamque ex eodem libro, ex persona Episcoporum, and Principis, Regi Francorum
attulit. Roger^s Hoveden.
Against which also Albinus wrote an Epistle, marvellously confirmed by the
authority of divine Scripture, and carried the same to the French King together
with the Nicene-Synodal Book, in the name of Bishops, and Princes.


Gent. How then were Images, and their Adoration introduced at the first, if
they were Plants the Heavenly Father planted not.


Minist. St. Hierome Argento, and auro decoravit illud, ut fulgore utriusque
materiae decipiat simplices; qui quidem error ad nos transivit. Hieronymus in
Hieremiam, lib. 2. cap. 10.
tells us, it was from the Heathens, which adorn their Images with Silver, and
Gold, that by the shine, and splendor of both these Metals, they may deceive
the simple, which error, says he, is now crept in amongst us, that be
Christians. Athanasius says, Athanasius Adversus Gentes.
(...). The invention of Images is of evil, and not of good, and the thing,
that has an evil beginning, can never be judged good in any thing, as being in
all respects, and altogether evil. St. Cyprian says, Ad defunctorum vultus per
imagines det^nendos expressa sunt simulachra, inde posteris facta sunt sacra,
quae primitus fuerunt assumpta solatia. Cyprian. De Idolorum vanitate.
Images were first drawn, thereby to keep the countenance of the dead in
remembrance, upon occasion thereof things grew at length unto holiness, which
at the first were taken only for solace. Council Nic. 2. Artic. 6.
Gregory, the Bishop of Neocaesarea says, Gentilitas inventrix, and caput est
imaginum; Heathenism was the first deviser, and head of Images. Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 17.
Eusebius, speaking of the Images of Christ, Peter, and Paul, says, that it is
(...) by observation of an Heathenish Custom; for with such Images they
honored them, whom they thought worthy of honor. Saint Augustine says,
Augustine. Contra Adamant.
Simulant se favere simulachris, quod propterea faciunt, ut miserrimae, and
vesanae suae sectae etiam Paganorum concilient benevolentiam; They would seem
to favor Images, which thing they do, to the intent, to make the Heathens to
think the better of their most miserable, and lewd sect. For, according to
Verentur ne Religio vana sit, si nihil videant, quod adorent. Lactan. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
Lactantius, They are afraid their Religion should be in vain, if they see
nothing, that they may worship. Hence (if you have nothing further to object) I
conclude,

That, which is contrary to Scriptures, Ne facias adversus legem similitudinem
aliquam. nisi and ibi Deus jusserit, and tu imitare Mosen. Tertul De
Idololatria.
Fathers, and all venerable Antiquity, had its ground from Paganism; and
condemned Heretics, and is plain Idolatry, ought to be renounced, Idem Deus
and lege vetuit similitudinem fieri, and extraordinario praecepto Serpentis
similitudinem edixit. Tertul. supra.
and abjured.

But such is worshipping of the consecrated Host, Crucifixes, Images;

Therefore it ought to be renounced, and abjured.


Gent. I have spent my whole stock of Objections concerning this, and I am
ready to entertain your Discourse touching the next Article.


The Sixth Article.
And I also believe, That Salvation cannot be merited by Works.

Gent. THis is contrary to the Canon of the Council of Trent, wherein it is
defined; Si quis dixerit, Hominis justificati bona opera ita esse dona Dei. ut
non sint etiam bona ipsius justificati merita; aut ipsum justifica^um bonis
operibus, quae ab eo per Dei gratiam, and Jesu Christi meritum, cujus membrum
vivum est, fiunt, non vere mereri augmentum Gratiae, vitam aeternam, et ipsius
vitae eternae, si tamen in gratia decesserit, consecutionem, atque etiam
gloriae augmentum, Anathema sit. Council. Trident. Sess. 6. Can. 32.
If any shall say, that the good works of the justified man are so the gifts of
God, that they be not also the good merits of him, that is justified; or that
the justified man by his good works, which he does by the grace of God, and
merit of Christ Jesus, whose lively member he is, does not truly merit the
increase of grace, eternal life, and the consecution of the same eternal life,
if he shall depart hence in Grace, and also the augment of glory, let him be
accursed. And this is consonant to the ancient Fathers, in whose writings no
Term is more frequent, then that of Merit.


Minist. Though it clash with the Definition of your Novel Trident Conventicle,
yet it is agreeable, not only to the eleventh Article of our English
Confession, and the Homily of Justification, but to Scripture, and all reverend
Antiquity. And, albeit the Word [Merit] be sometimes used by the Ancients, yet
never with approbation in your sense: for the name of Merit is taken in two
Notions;

First, Properly, strictly, and univocally, Romans iv. 4. Deuteronomy. vii. 10.

Secondly, Improperly, largely, and aequivocally, Eccles. xvi. 15. The first is
termed, by Scholemen, Merit of Condignity. The latter, Merit of Impetration, or
Cengruity. If you maintain Merit according to the first acceptance, then out
of all question, the Doctrine of Merit is not Catholic; for St. Hierome says,
Nee aff^rmare licet (...) nostra ex aequo Dei gratiae, et misericoratae
re^^^nd^re: alioqui perper^m dixisse^ Paulus Romans xii. Non sunt condignae
passiones. Hieron. supra Ephesians. 2.
It is not lawful to affirm our Merits equally to answer the grace, and mercy
of God; for then Paul had spoken amiss, saying, Romans viii. 18. I account the
sufferings (Martyrdoms) of this present time not to be worthy of the glory to
be revealed. And St. Basil avoucheth, That Manet requies sempi(...) ^lio^, qui
hac vita le(...) certaverunt, non ^^^^uam de^i^^^^ operibus (...), sed ob
munifi(...) Dei gratiam, in (...) speraverunt, exhibi(...). Basil. supr. Psalm.
c^i^.
Eternal rest abides for them, that have lawfully striven, not as merit, or due
debt to be rendered to their works, but for the grace of the most bountiful
God, in whom they have trusted. If it be only Merit of congruity, and
meetness, you maintain, we acknowledge it sometimes the Language of the
Fathers: but they meant no more by Mereri, to merit, but Impetrare; to obtain,
or impetrate, seeing they apply it to wicked, and graceless men: as St.
Augustine says, (...). et alia vitae (...) ^^^oe^^um accipere (...) non per^^
(...) reg^u^ Dei. Au(...) Dei. (...) 24.
(d) These, and the gifts of this life, certain worshippers of Devils have
merited to receive, who pertain not to the Kingdom of God. This acceptance is
so far from being advantageous, that it countermines your design.


Gent. But our Authors tells us, that you extenuate the value of the price of
our Redemption, not making it sufficient to give inward sanctity, and purity to
men's souls, nor to raise the good works of God's Children to a due proportion
with their reward.


Minist. No Christian Church ever prized the oblation, and Merits of Christ,
more highly, and religiously, than we, Hebr. x. 14. Ephesians. v. 2. Acts iv. 12.
John i. 29. and we firmly believe the Mirabilis Passio tua, Domine Jesu, quae
pastiones omnium nostrum propulsavit, propitiata est omnibus iniquitatibus
nostris, and nulli unquam pesti nostrae invenitur inefficax. Bernard. 4. Heb.
Pentecost.
inestimable price, and virtue thereof for man's redemption, sanctification,
justification, and glorification, 1 Cor. i. 30. and in particular, we believe
expressly, and contrary to our Adversarie's accusation, that the same is Itse
Christus est os nostrum per quod Patri loquimur; oculus noster, per quem Patrem
videmus; dextra nostra, per quam Patri offerimus; omnia haebemus in Christo: si
vulnera curare desideras, Medicus est; si febribus aest^as, fons est; si
gravaris iniqua sententia, justitia est: si indiges auxilio, virtus est; si
mortem times, vita est; si teneb a f^gis, lux est; si coelum desideras, via
est: si alimentum quaeris, cibus est. Ambros. lib. d. Isai. cap. 8.
all-sufficient to justify a sinner in the sight of God, and to give true, and
inherent Sanctity, and purity to men's Souls, and actions; First, in this life,
sanctity, and purity secundum statum viae, according to the condition of man's
wayfaring state: Secondly, in the life to come sanctity, and purity of perfect
righteousness without error of sin. And we believe, that the Sacrifice of
Christ upon the Cross effects all this, both by way of merit, and influence,
Romans vi. 1, 5. John xv. 1. yet for all this, it does not raise our works to
that sublime pitch, as condignely to merit salvation, at the hands of God; as
Pontificians say, God were unjust, if he did not condignely reward our works,
which even your own Durand condemns as temerarium, and blasphemum, a rash,
and blasphemous Assertion.


Gent. Bellarmine Bellarm. De Justify. lib. 4. cap. 1.
says, that ye hold good works, reipsa, and simpliciter mortalia peccata, in
deed, and simply to be mortal sins; bona non nisi nomine, and secundum quid, to
be virtuous only by extrinsecal denomination.


Minist. That Bellarmine unjustly calumniates us, may appear from the twelfth
Article of our English Confession, wherein it is said, That Good works are the
fruits of Faith, and follow Justification, are acceptable unto God, and
accepted in Christ. With which agrees Melancth. Corp. Doctr. Tit. De bouis
operibus, page 20.
Melancthon, and Beza, Quaesi. and Respons. in Opusc. Tom. 2. page 676. Rucer,
and alu in Colloquio Ratisbonensi, page 313.
Beza, who profess in their Treatise of this question, That Although the works
of Regenerate persons are not so perfect, and good, as that they are able to
merit Eternal life; yet they are truly good, because they proceed from the Holy
Ghost, who purifieth the heart by faith, and because God is glorified by them,
and we our selves receive excellent fruit by them.

For first we believe, that Apologia Ecclesiae Anglicanae testatur, Bona opera
necessaria esse Christiano ad salutem. Rainold. Apolog. These. page 263.
Good works are necessary to salvation, and that all men, that will be saved,
must carefully apply themselves to the practice, and exercise thereof; which is
St. Augustine's golden Aphorism, Augustine. De Spiritu, and litera, cap. 14.
Praecepta Legis tam sunt salutaria facienti, ut, nisi quis ea fecerit, vitam
habere non posset: Divine precepts are so necessary, that none can have
salvation, but he, which observes them. Tit. iii. 8. Joh. xv. 2, 8. Hebr. xii.
14. Apoc. xxii. 8.

Secondly, God rewards good works of his bounty, and grace with benefits
spiritual, and temporal, Genesis xxii. 16. Luke vi. 35. yet so, as Marsilius
says, Talis est obligatio Creaturae ad Deum, quod quanto plus solvit, tanto
plus tenetur. Marsil. 2. q. 18. Art. 14.
The more debt he pays unto God, the more he is indebted.

Thirdly, In giving the reward, he considers the mind, and quality of the
doer; the integrity, measure, and quality of the work; 2 Cor. ix. 6.

Fourthly, The reward is certain, and infallible, yea more certain, says St.
Non ita fidere debemus his, quae in manibus habemus, and videmus, ut
promissionibus Dei. Chrysostom. Genes. Hom. 55.
Chrysostom, then any temporal benefit, which man presently enjoys in the
World. Genesis xxii. 16.

Fifthly, There is in all good works a dignity not of desert, or aequiparance,
either in respect of God, of whom we can deserve nothing, or in respect of the
reward; but only of grace, divine similitude, goodness, and honor, Phil. iv.
8. So Pererius; Praeter debita gratitudinis, quae nemo satis exsolvere Deo
potest, ea quoqu debita, quae divino prae cepto persolvere tenemur nemo
perfect persolvit. Perer. in Genes. vi. p. 5 Dis. 5. n. 148.
Besides the debt of gratitude, which none can sufficiently pay to God, no man
also can perfectly pay those debts we are bound to discharge by divine precept.

Sixthly, The reward of good works is called a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy
iv. 8. because it is bestowed on them, which exercise Righteousness, and in
regard of their righteousness: but merit of condignity, and righteousness are
diverse things, as appears in Angels, and Infants, which have righteousness,
and are crowned with glory, and yet they do not merit, as is declared in the
Council of Colen, Apposita est nobis corona justitiae Dei quia justu^ est, ut
reddat, quod r^s^piscentibus promisit, non quidem ex debito, sed ex gratia.
Enchirid. Council. Colon.
A Crown of the righteousness of God is laid up for us, it being just he should
give that, which he promised to penitents, but not of debt, but of grace.

Seventhly, The ancient Fathers maintained no merit of condignity, but by merit
(as is formerly glanced) they understood impetration by any means; sometimes
without a man's privacy, or knowledge: as Saint Ambrose says of St. John,
Ambros. Sermon. 53.
Tantam gratiam nascendo meruit; He merited so much grace in (or at) his Birth.

Eighthly, Hujus vitae justitia non consistit in perfectione virtutum, sed
remissione peccatorum. August. De Civitate Dei, lib. 19. cap. 27.
The prime part of man's righteousness consists not (as Saint Augustine says)
of perfection of virtues; but remission of sins. Thus you see, we cut the
chanel even between Scylla, and Charybdis, giveing good works their guerdon, or
due Encomium, but not merit of salvation, which is Christ's peculiar.


Gent. Catholics themselves hold, that no work is meritorious with God of its
own nature; but, to make the same meritorious, many graces are required, and
those most divine, and excellent.


Minist. Your Rhem. Annotat. in Hebr. vi. n. 4.
Divines of Rhemes so far extenuate Christ's merits, and advance man's, that
they affirm good works are meritorious, and, without any qualification, the
very cause of Salvation, so far, that God should be unjust, if he rendered not
Heaven for the same. And Bellarmine adventures to say, That Non est temerarium.
nec blasphemum, sed pium, and sanctum dicere. Deum fore injustum, si non
servaret promissa. Bellarm. De Justificat. lib. 5. cap. 16.
It is neither rash, nor blasphemons; but pious, and holy to assert, that God
were not just, if he kept not his promise, that is of rewarding merits. And
whereas you pretend Romists hold not works simply meritorious of themselves,
but in complexion with many exquisite Graces; it implies a contradiction: for
that, which is of merit, is not of grace, but of debt, and divine grace does
not elevate virtuous actions, by adding unto them a force of meriting, but
only by making them susceptible of a free, and liberal reward, and by placing
them in the state, and order of causes impetrant, or dispositive conditions.
This Andradius clears, saying; Paulus cum demonstrare statuisset Abraham side
fuisse justificatum, and non ex operibus, hac una potissimism id ratione
efficit, Ei, qui operatur, me ce; non imputatue secundum gratiam. sed secundum
debitum; ergo si justitia Abrahae esset operum, illius merces sa^e debitum
potus quam gratia dici debuisser. An^^^^. Orthod. Explic. lib. 6. page 518.
Paul, when he would demonstrate Abraham to have been justified by Faith, and
not by works, effected that principally by that one reason. To him that
works, reward is not imputed according to grace, but according to debt
therefore if Abraham's righteousness was of works, his wages ought rather to be
called a debt, then grace. But what are those divine graces, that are required
to make works meritorious?


Gent. They are seven, whereof the first is Divine preordination, by which Man,
and his actions are ordained by God to a supernatural end, otherwise not
seisable.


Minist. By Divine preordination virtuous Actions have reference (not of
desert, but of disposition, and instrumental tendency) to beatitude, or the
last supernatural end; as Saint Bernard says, Si proprie appellentur ea, quae
dicimus nostra merita, spei quaedam sunt seminaria, charitatis incentiva,
occultae praedestinationis indicia futurae felicitatis praesagia, via regni,
non causa regnandi. Bern. De lib. Arbitr.
If we do not nickname those things, that are called our Merits, they are
certain Seminaries of hope, incentives of Charity, discoveries of hidden
predestination, presages of future Felicity, the way to the heavenly Kingdom,
but not the meritorious cause of reigning. But what are your other Graces?


Gent. The second is the grace of Redemption, by Christ, whereby God gives us
the inestimable Treasure of his Son's merits.

The Third is the grace of Adoption in Baptism, whereby we have God for our
Father, Christ for our head, the Holy Ghost for our Paraclete, who works in us,
making our works meritorious.


Minist. The grace of Redemption purchases for us the influence, and
inestimable efficacy of Christ's merits both for pardon of Sins, and the new
Creature; but that Christ's merits makes man's actions meritorious, and that
his Satisfactio est redditio ejus, quod debetur secundum justitiam. Johannes de
Coloma, Quaest. Magistrate. q. 363.
satisfaction enableth man to satisfy God's justice, is as unsavory an
Inference, as if one should say, Christ has redeemed us by his passion, and he
communicates to us the grace of Redemption; Therefore he makes us Redeemers.
The grace of Adoption it is true in Baptism makes the regenerate partakers in a
sense of the divine nature, and communicates divine rays from the distinct
Persons in the Trinity, yet makes not the works of man so qualified condignely
meritorious: for the divine persons work according to a certain degree, and
measure of grace, and not according to the fullness of power, or as an elicitive
cause: Alioquin (says Vasques) sequeretur nostra opera esse infiniti valoris;
Otherwise it would follow, that our works were of infinite value; Cum opera
nostra non alia ratione tribuantur Christo tanquam capiti mystico, nisi quia ab
eo accipimus gratiam, justitiam, and auxilia omnia, nequaquam autem sicut,
eliciente illa, fit ut minime accipiunt dignitatem, neque dignitatis
incrementum a Christo, sed solum a persona ipsa eliciente suam dignitatem
justitiae, and sanctitatis: alioqum sequeretur nostra opera esse infiniti
valoris. Vasques, 1. 1. Dis. 214. cap. 7.
seeing our works upon no other account are attributed unto Christ, the
mystical head, but that we receive grace of him, righteousness, and all aids;
but in no wise as the cause elicitive, it falls out, that they cannot receive
their dignity, nor increase of dignity of Christ, but only of the person,
that acts them, according to the dignity of his righteousness, and sanctity,
from whom (as Bonaventure Bonaventur. 3. Did. 20. q. 4.
evidenceth) vitium humanae originis nunquam separatur a carne peccati, the
fleshly stain, traduciary from original sin, can never be separated. And our
Adversaries, that pretend to so much acuteness, might know, that the Persons in
the Trinity in effecting our adoption concur not as simply Pro exclusione
virturis mediae in eodem genere causarum secundarum, and in hac significatione
sola causa proxima est immediata. Keckerm. System: Log. page 148.
immediate, but remote; not as total, but partial; not as univocal, but
aequivocal; not as natural, but voluntary causes, dispensing graces according
to the necessity of the receiver, and the wisdom, and good pleasure of the
donour. But it is neither necessary for men, nor stands with the good pleasure
of God, to receive power of meriting properly; seeing it is most honorable for
God to bestow life eternal freely; Non est volentis, nec currentis, sed
operantis Dei.


Gent. The fourth grace, requisite to make works meritorious, is prevenient,
and adjuvant; whereby our actions are sublimed to a supernatural pitch, above
humane capacity.

The fifth is the grace of merciful Indulgence, whereby God exacts not of us in
rigor what he might by the title of Religion, the title of Justice, the title
of Gratitude; but is content, that we make use of our good works, for the
gaining of glory.


Minist. It is granted, that the will of Man by preventing, adjuvant, and
subsequent graces produces works supernaturalin their kind, yet so as it is
principium vulneratum, wounded with sin, and soyled with many imperfections; We
know but in part, Romans vii. 18, 19. Gal. v. 17. Heb. xii. 1. Whence Tertullian
professes, that In optimis nonnihil est pessimi, solus enim Deus sine peccato.
Tertul. De Anima, cap. 23.
In the best men there is something of that, which is worst, for only God is
without sin. Hereupon it is consequent, that regenerate men cannot challenge a
reward by merit of debt, because they offend in many things, James, iii. 2.
according to Gregorie's Magni viri licet jam magna vitae charitate luceant,
aliquas tamen peccati nebulas, velut quasdam noctis reliquias trahunt. Non de
meis meritis confidens, ut me salvum facias supplico, sed de sola misericordia
tua praesumens impetrare, quod non de meritis meis spero. Gregor. in 1 Psalm.
poenitent.
Litany, I supplicate (says he) that thou would save me, not as having
confidence in mine own merits, but presuming to obtain of thy mercies alone,
which I hope not for mine own merits. And for your grace of Deus hoc in
mercedem imputat, non quod justis nobis debeat; sed quod misericors est, and
pius. Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. Homil. 23.
merciful Indulgence, whereby it is said, God exacts not what he might by the
Titles of Justice, Religion, and Gratitude; it dismantles, and sets on fire all
your former Fabric, as appears by this Dilemma; If God exacteth according to
his due, then (upon your own ground) there is no merit; If he do not in rigor
exact, then this Indulgence for Christ's sake takes away all plea of merit
from us, and casts it upon Christ alone. But what are the remainders of your
graces?


Gent. The sixth concurrent grace, to make works meritorious, is God's free
promise to reward them according to their desert. The seventh, which crowns
all, is the grace of Perseverance to the end.


Minist. First, the promise of God, whereby he obliges himself to confer a
benefit to his people upon their obedience, infers not desert, or merit on
their part. It is your own Durand's Aphorism, Promissio divina in Scripturis
sanctis non sonac in aliquam obligationem, sed insinuat meram dispositionem
liberalitatis divinae; quia quod redditur non ex debito praecedentis operis,
sed ex promissione praecedente, non quidem redditur ex merito operis de
condigno, sed solum, vel principaliter ex promisso. Durand. 2. Did. 27. q. 2.
n. 15.
That, which is given nor from debt of a precedent work, but of a precedent
promise, is not given for the merit of the work condignly, but only, or
principally by promise. God promised to bestow the Land of Canaan upon the
Israelites, and bound himself by Oath, Exodus xiii. 5. yet he gave this good
Land to them, not for their own merits, but of his free bounty, Deuteronomy. vii. 7,
8. And it is Talis dignitas in actu nihil est, nisi acceptatio passiva
voluntatis divina. Leuchet. Quodlib. 17. Art. 2.
untrue, that God has obliged himself by promise to reward the good works of
his Children, according to their deserts; for he rewards them according to
his own bounty, but not according to their desert, yea, he rewards above
desert, (as Gregory Arimine Gregor. Arimin. 1. Did. 17. q. 1. Art. 2.
says), and in part contrary to desert, Psalm. ciii. 10. Which Gregory, the
last of good Popes, and first of bad, confesses, Gregor. Papa. Moral. lib. 9.
cap. 27.
Si, semota misericordia, discutimur, opus nostrum poena dignum est, quod
remunerari praemiis postulamus: If we should be judged without mercy, our works
deserve punishment, which we beg to be recompensed with rewards. And as for the
grace of Perseverance, as it is a necessary condition of glory, Apocal. ii. 20.
so it is of grace, and not of merit, Rom vi. 23. Jer. xxxii. 4. 1 Cor. i. 8.
Psalm. i. 6. So that your seven graces specified are seven Engines to demolish
your Babel of merit; for the Chaldean builders were not more divided, then
these Romish Architects. Dionys. Cistert. 3. Did. 1. q. 2. Art. 3. Marsil. 2.
q. 18. Art. 3. and 4.
Some of them simply, and absolutely deny merit.

Secondly, Some say Bona opera per se spectata non habere condignitatem, and
rationem meriti, sed totam rationem meriti habere petitam ex promissione, and
pacto Deo affirmant Scotus. Gregorius Arimin. Gabriel Orcham; Alphonsus Castro,
Vega, etc. Hi Doctores revera denegant meritum operum, and totam vim merendi
ascribunt operibus Christi. Vasques sup. 1. 2. Disp. 214. cap. 1.
Good works are meritorious, only by reason of the promise, and acceptance of
God; and these also in effect deny it.

Thirdly, Others, (as Cajetan, Soto, and Petigianis) affirm, they merit
condignely by the very nature, and dignity of the work, secluding divine
promise.

Fourthly, Others (as Bellar. De Justif. lib. 5. cap. 14.
Bellarmine Suarez, and Medina) affirm, that Merit of works is founded partly
upon the dignity of the work, and partly upon the promise of God.

Fifthly, Some of them hold, that God rewards according to the rule of
Commutative justice; others say according to Distributive; and others according
to both.


Gent. It seems to me a wonder, that they are so divided; but prodigious, that
any denies merit of salvation, seeing the Council of Trent is so definitive.


Minist. It is neither a wonder, nor prodigy, but a just judgment; seeing it
is contrary to Scripture, Fathers, and your most renowned Scholemen.


Gent. If it be contrary to all these, I shall willingly abjure it, if you
first make me clear demonstration of it, and that in order; first, that Merit
of salvation by works is contrary to Scriptures.


Minist. I shall refuse no pains for your soul's good. The first place of holy
Scripture, wherewith I affront your Tenet, is Romans vi. 23. (...). The gift of
God is eternal life in Jesus Christ our Lord; the gift (not merit) so Arias
Montanus truly languages the word (...) by donation, a free gift; not as the
Rhemists, to extenuate it, by gratia, grace; which is also sufficient for one
purpose. Now upon these words (that we may not be our own Interpreters)
Theodoret descants thus, Hic non dicit mercedem, sed gratiam; est enim Dei
donum vita aeterna: and si quis enim summam, et absolutam justitiam
praestiterit, temporalibus laboribus aeterna in aequilibrio non respondent.
Theod. in cap. vi. ad. Romans
The Apostle says not here reward, but grace; for eternal life is the gift of
God: for although one could perform the highest, and absolutest justice, yet
eternal joys, being weighed with temporal labors, are nothing answerable. St.
Chrysostom thus; Non eundem servat oppositorum ordinem, non enim dicit, Merces
benefactorum vestrorum vita aeterna, sed Donum Dei vita aeterna, ut ostenderet,
quod non propriis viribus liberati sint, neque debitum, aut merces, aut laborum
sit retributio; sed omnia illa ex divino munere gratuito acceperint. Chrysostom.
in Romans vi.
The Apostle observes not the same order of opposites; for he says not,
Eternal life is the reward of your good works; but, Eternal life is the gift of
God; that he might show, that they are not delivered by their own strength, or
virtues; and that it is not a debt, or wages, or a retribution of labors: but
that they have received all those things freely of the gift of God. Origin
thus; Origin. in cap. vi. ad Romans
It was not a thing worthily beseeming God, to give stipends to his Soldiers,
as a due debt, or wage; but to bestow on them a gift of free grace, which is
eternal life in Jesus Christ our Lord. St. Ambrose thus; Ambros. in cap. vi.
ad. Romans
Sequentes peccatum acquirent mortem, ita and sequentes gratiam Dei, id est
fidem Christi, quae condonat peccata, habebunt vitam aeternam. As they, that
follow sin, gain death; so they, that follow the grace of Christ, that is the
faith of Christ, which forgiveth sins, shall have eternal life. Theophylact
thus, Gratiam autem, non mercedem dixit a Deo futuram perinde ac si inquiat,
Non enim laborum accipitis praemia, sed per gratiam, fiunt haec omnia in
Christo Jesu, qui haec operatur, and factitat. Theophyl. in cap. vi. ad Roman.
St. Paul said Grace, not Wages was to come from God; as if he should say, for
ye receive not reward of labors; but all these things are done by grace in
Jesus Christ, who works, and does them. By these Testimonies of the holy
Fathers it is evident, That eternal life is not purchased by desert of man,
That eternal life is not a due debt, a deserved wages, or retribution of man's
labors; but proceeds wholly of the free mercy, and grace of God; That man's
works, weighed in the balance with the joys of Heaven, are nothing at all
answerable to them.


Gent. This Text, and the Fathers gloss thereupon, is as clear, as if writ with
the Sunbeams; produce (if you please) another.


Minist. Observe then Romans viii. 18. I reckon, that (...), the passions, or
sufferings, of this present time, are (...), not worthy to be compared with the
glory, that shall be revealed in us. That, which is not worthy to be compared
with glory, does not condignely merit; but the very passions, martyrdoms of
this present time, are not worthy to be compared with glory; Therefore they do
not condignely merit. Theodoret does lively express this verity in this golden
Apophthegme, Superant certamina coronae, non comparantur cum laboribus
remunerationes; labor enim parvus est, sed magnum lucrum speratur: et propterea
non Mercedem, sed Gloriam vocant ea, quae expectantur. Theodoret. in cap. viii.
ad. Roman.
The Crown outstrips the conflict, the labors are not comparable to the
rewards; for the labor is small, but the gain hoped for is great: and
therefore the things expected are not called Reward, but Glory. And St.
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. imperfect. in Matthew. Homil. 55.
What have we wrought in this World, to merit communion with God in his
Celestial Kingdom? and therefore the Apostle speaks justly, I do not think
the passions of this life condignely worthy of future glory. Anselme has these
words, Si quis pateretur omnes poenarum acerbitates, quae tempore praesentis
vitae susferri possunt, non essent omnes illae passiones dignum meritum ad
consecutionem futurae gloriae, quae, ablato omni velamine, revelabitur in
nobis. Anselm. in viii. cap. ad Roman.
If one should suffer all kinds of torment, which can be endured in this life,
yet would not all those afflictions, or torments, or passions, be a sufficient,
and condign merit to attain the future glory, which when every vail is taken
out of the way, shall be revealed in us. And if any reply, Though not
sufferings, something else may merit salvation condignely; your own Durand
rejoyns, that Inter opera meritoria maxim videntur esse meritoriae Sanctorum
passiones, et tamen illae non sunt meritoriae de condigno. Durand. 2. D. 27. q
2. n. 3.
Amongst all meritorious works the passions of Saints seem to be most
meritorious, and yet they are not meritorious condignely.


Gent. Produce only another Divine Testimony, that in the mouth of two, or
three witnesses, it may be confirmed.


Minist. Ponder well that place, Tit. iii. 5. by the Rhemists themselves
translated thus; Not by the works of justice, which we have done, but according
to his mercy he has saved us by the laver of regeneration, and renovation of
the Holy Ghost: whence we may frame this Argument.

They, which are not saved of works of justice, which they have done, but
according to God's mercy, are not saved by merit of works:

But we are not saved by works of justice, which we have done, but according to
God's mercy;

Therefore we are not saved by merit of works. Anselme, upon the place,
approves this conclusion to be naturally grounded upon the Premises; Then
(says Tunc salvos nos fecit, qui nostris meritis eramus perditione digni, non
enim ex operibus justitiae, quae fecerimus nos, processit haec salus; quia
nulla opera justitiae seceramus, unde salutem meruissemus, sed ipse secundum
misericordiam suam salvos nos fecit, non secundum merita nostra nobis hanc
salutem dedit. Anselm. in Tit. cap. ^ii. ^.
he) did he save us, who by our own merits deserved perdition; for this
salvation came not from the works of justice, which we have done, because we
had done the works of justice, by which we should merit salvation; but he
according to his mercy saved us, and not according to our merits gave he us
this salvation. You may have the Testimony of Dionys. Carthus. in Tit. iii.
Dionysius Carthusianus, and others upon this Text besides.


Gent. No; this is sufficient, proceed to your second reason drawn from the
authority of Holy Fathers.


Minist. I Will begin with Origin, who says, Ego vix mihi persuadeo ullum opus
esse posse, quod ex debito remunerationem deposcat; I do scarcely believe, that
there can be any work, that may of duty require reward: and again, Dicite vos
servos in^tiles; nam etst omnia fecerimus quae praecepta sum, non tamen bonum
aliquid fecimus, nec enim si bona essent, ^essemus mutilos; omne autem bonum
nostrum non proprie, sed abusivo bonum dicitur. Origeno in Matt. Tract. 8.
We are unprofitable servants, for, admit we have done all things, that were
commanded, yet we have done no good thing; for if our doings were good indeed,
then were we not unprofitable, but any good deed of ours is called good, not
rightly, and duly, but by abuse of speech. St. Augustine says, Si Deus vellet
pro meritis agere, non inveniret, nisi quod damnaret; If God would deal with us
according to that we have deserved, he should find nothing, but that which he
might condemn. Saint Ambrose says, Caro contra spiritum, and contra carnem
spiritus concupiscit, nec invenitur in ullo hominum tanta concordia, ut legi
mentis lex, quae est membris insita, non repugnet, propter quod ex omnium
sanctorum persona accipitur quod Johannes Apostolus ait, Si dixerimus quoniam
peccatum. non habemus, nos ipsos seducimus, and vetitas in. nobis non est.
Ambros lib. 10. Epist. 84. Tom. 3.
The flesh covers against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh;
neither can there be found in any man such concord, that the Law, which is
ingrafted in the members, fights not against the law of the mind; and for
that cause St John 's words are taken, as spoken in the person of all Saints,
If we say we have no sin, we decieve our selves, and there is no truth in us.
St: Chrysostom is consonant to St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine, these are his
words, Chrysostom. De compunct. cordis, lib. 2. Tom* 5. col. 592.
Etsi millies moriamur, etsi omnes virtutes animi expleamus, nihil dignum
gerimus ad ea, quae ipsi percepimus a Deo; Though we die a thousand times, and
though we accomplish all virtues of the mind, yet do we nothing worthy of
those things, which we receive of God. As also St. Basil Basil. De humilitate.
Haec est nostra integra, and perfecta gloriatio in Deo, quando propriae
justitiae nos inopes agnoscimus; sola autem fide in Christum justificari; This
is our full, and perfect rejoicing in God, when we acknowledge, that we are void
of any of our own righteousness, and are justified by faith only in Christ.
St. Hierom says, Hierom in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 11.
In Christ, we have boldness, and liberty to come unto God, and trust, and
affiance by the faith of him; not through our righteousness, but through him,
in whom our sins are forgiven. Theophylact says, Servavit nos in aeternum, non
ex operibus, quae fecimus, hoc est, neque fecimus opera justitiae, neque per
haec conservati sumus, sed universam salutem ^onitas ipsius, atque clementia
operata est. Theophylact. in iii. cap. Titi.
He has saved us eternally, not of the works, which we have done; that is,
neither have we done the works of justice, neither are we saved by them; but
his goodness, and his clemency; has wrought our salvation wholly. Saint
Bernard, which saw not all things saw this; Bernard. Sermon. in Annunc. p. 160.
Tom. 1.
Touching (says he) eternal life, we know, that the sufferings of this time
are not worthy of the Glory to come; no, not if one man could sustain all: for
the merits of men are not such, that for them eternal life is due by right; or
that God should do some injury if he gave it not, it derogates from grace,
whatsoever thou ascribes to merit; I will have no merit that excludes grace,
meritum meum miserationes Domini, my merit is the mercies of God.


Gent. These are more, then sufficient, let me hear, what you can say to your
third reason taken from the testimony of your best approved Catholics, and
renowned Scholemen; clear this, and I, for my part, shall confess, we are
(...), self-condemned.


Minist. I will begin with your Angelical Doctor Aquinas, who says,
Manifestum est, quod inter Deum, and hominem est maxima inaequalitas, in
infinitum enim distant, totum, quod est hominis, bonum est a Deo, unde non
potest hominis a Deo esse justitia secundum absolutam aequalitatem, sed
secundum proportione^ quandam, etc. ideo meritum hominis apud Deum esse non
potest. Aquin. 1. 2. Quaes. 114. Art. 1.
That it is manifest, that between God, and man there is exceeding great
inequality, as which do differ in infinite, all the good, that man has, is of
God: wherefore man's Justice received of God cannot be according to absolute
equality, but after a certain proportion, to wit, as much as either works
according to his condition; now man has the measure, and condition of his
virtue from God, and therefore man's merit cannot be with God, etc. Velosillot
says, that Velosillot. Advert. in 8. Tom. August Quaesit. 13.
Scotus also negat meritum de condigno, and tenet quod ultra gratiam tale opus
acceptatur ad gloriam, Scotus denies merit of condignity, and that the work of
the faithful is accepted even, beyond grace to glory. Brulifer says; Brulifer.
2. Did 27 q. 6.
No man in this life, admit he were pure, and perfect, can merit heavenly glory
condignely. Waldensis charges it with the Pelagian Heresy, to affirm, that
God, according to the measure of meritorious works, shall reward a man so
meriting, and reputes him the more R^puto saniorem Theolog^^ fideliorem
Catholicum, and Scripturis sanctis magis concordem, qui tale moritum
simpliciter abnegat, and cum modificatione Apostoli, and Scripturarum con^^dit,
quia simpliciter quis non meretur regnum coelorum, sed ex gratia Dei, aut
voluntate largitoris. Waldens. De Sacrament. t. 1. c. 7. nu. 5.
sound Divine, more faithful Catholic, and more concording with holy
Scriptures, which simply abrenounceth such merit, and with the modification of
the Apostle, and Scriptures, yields that no man simply merits the Kingdom of
Heaven; but that it is of the grace of God, or the will of the giver. Durand, a
famous Schole-Doctour, is of the same judgment, saying, that Meritum de
condigno invenitur inter homines; sed non est hominis ad Deum: quod patet,
qutae quod redditur potius ex liberalitate dantis, quam ex debito operts, non
cadit sub merito condigni stricte, and proprie accepto: sequitur, quod si quis
dicat, quod. quamvis Deus non constituatur nobis debtor ex altquo opere
nestro, etc. Durand. in 2: Sent. dis. 27. q. 2. in med.
Condign merit is found among men; but it is not between God and man: which
hereby is clear; because that, which is rendered rather of the liberality of the
giver, then of the debt to the work, falls not under condign merit, properly
so called. If any say, that if God become not our debtor, by reason of our
work, yet he is made our debtor, by reason of his promise, which the Scripture
expresses: That answer is of no force, for two reasons;

First, Because God's promise in the Scriptures does not sound to any
obligation, but insinuates the mere disposition of God's liberality:

Secondly, Because that, which is given, is not given for the debt arising of
the work, but of promise, that went before; not that it is rendered for the
condign merit of the works, but only, or principally for his promise sake.
Thus far he. Dominicus Soto, a zealous Monk, and famous Popish Writer, tells
his Colleagues roundly, that No man is able to make condign satisfaction for
his sins, nor by condign merit attain eternal life; for thus he says, Soto De
Natura. and Gratia, lib. 3. cap. 6. page 138.
Perfect satisfaction is that, whose price, and value, proceeds wholly from
the Debtor, without either preventing, or intervening grace of the Creditour,
so as the voluntary reddition be of that, which is equivalent, and not
otherwise due; but so no man is able to perform. Dionysius Carthusianus says,
Non ex operibus justitiae, quae fecimus not. id est, non propter merita nostra,
quae nulla fuerunt; sed secundum suam misericordiam salvos nos fecit a
potestate Diaboli, and reatu aeterni tormenti merito suae conversationis, and
passionis. Dionys. Carthus. in Tit. iii.
Not of the works of righteousness, which we have done, that is, not for our
merits, which were none at all, because we were subject to the forenamed sins;
but according to his mercy, has he saved us from the power of the Devil, and
guilt of eternal torment, by the merit of his holy Conversation, and Passion.
Andreas Vega says, Vega, Opusc. Quaest. 4.
that many other Schole-men, to wit, Gregor. Arimin. 1. d. 17. q. 1. Art. 2.
Gregory Arimine, Marsilius, Burgens. supra Psalm. xxxv
Paulus Burgensis, Eckius, Centur. De Praedest.
Eckius, Dionys. Cister. lib 3. Sent. d. 1. q. 2. Art. 3.
Dionysius Cisteriensis, Pighius, Ferus, and in a manner Vasques, do all with
one consent, reject the Romish Doctrine of merit of condignity: and why may not
I say all besides, seeing they daily pray in the Litany of their Mass, In
sanctorum nos consortium non aestimator meriti, sed veniae, quaesumus,
largitor, admit; Admit us into the fellowship of Saints, not weighing our
merits, but for thy mercie's sake? The Elixar extracted is this;

That, which is derogatory to the allsufficient merit of Christ, and is
contrary to Scriptures, Fathers, and (for the very horridness thereof) to the
Popish Scholemen themselves, ought to be abjured.

But such is the merit of salvation by works.

Therefore it ought to be abjured.


Gent. I abjure them willingly in the Language of St. Bernard, Bernard in
Psalm. Qui habitat.
totum est meritum meum, si totam spem meam ponam in Domino: This is all my
merit, to put all my hope in the Lord. Now (if you think fit) proceed to that,
which in order is


The Seventh Article.
And I do sincerely testify, and declare, that the Pope, neither of himself,
nor by any authority of the Church, or See of Rome, or by any other means, with
any other, has power, or authority to In sacra Historia nunquam deprehendimus
Pontifices, aut Sacerdotes dejicisse Reges; at Reges e diverso Pontifices, and
Sacerdotes in ordinem redegisse videmus: Quin and in orb Christiano
Justinianus Imperator per Bellisarimum prius removit Silvestrum deinde Vigilium
Romanos Episcopos. Petrus Martyr. in lib. 1. Reg. cap. 2.
depose the chief Magistrate of these Nations, or to dispose of any the
Countries, or Territories thereunto belonging, or to authorize any foreign
Prince, or State to invade, or anoy him, or them.

Minist. THis is consonant to the The Apology, cap. 6. Division 7. 8.
Apology of the Church of England, the thirty seventh Article, and the Oath of
Supremacy, which all Romanus Pontifex nullam habet jurisdictionem in Anglia
Artic. 37.
excluded the Pope's usurped power, justly out of these Nations; And in this
Article, we may observe three things at least implied;

First, That the chief Magistrate of these Nations is supreme.

Secondly, That the Pope has no power over him.

Thirdly, That he can neither lawfully excite foreign Princes against him, nor
depose him from his Dominions, nor collate them upon others, either by his own,
or any borrowed power.


Gent. Before you condescend to these particulars, tell me what is the reason,
why it is inserted in this Article, Papa nec per seipsum, nec per authoritatem
aliquam Ecclesiae, sedisve Romanae nec per ulla alia media, cum quibuscunque
alits, aliquam potestatem habeat aliqua dominia in alium transferendi, aut
alicui Principi ex raneo authoritatem concedendi, ut ipsum, ejusve dominia
molestet. Juramentum fidelitatis.
That the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church, or See
of Rome, or by any other means with any other, has power, or authority to
depose, had not the first been sufficient?


Minist. You must call to memory that distinction of Bellarmin, De Ecclesiae,
lib. 3. cap. 2.
Bellarmine, concerning a fourfold Church.

The first Essential, which (says he) is a Company of men professing the same
faith, and acknowledging the Bishop of Rome to be Vicar of Christ upon Earth.

The second Representative, an Assembly of Bishops in a general Council,
representing the whole body of the Church.

The third Consistorial, made up of the Pope, and his Cardinals, termed by the
Sorbonists, Curia Romana, the Court of Rome.

The fourth virtual, the Pope himself, who is pretended eminently, and
virtually to comprise the power of all the rest. The Glossa supra Gratian.
causa. 24: q. 1. c. arrecta.
Gloss upon Gratian ascribes this transcendent, superlative authority to the
essential Church, or Congregation of the Faithful; Bellarm. De Council. and
Ecclesia, lib. 1. cap. 18.
Bellarmine to the Representative Church, or a general Council lawfully called;
Defensio pacis, part. 2. cap. 2. Matsil. Patavinus.
Marsilius Patavinus to the Consistorial Church, or the Pope, and his Conclave;
Per Ecclesiam intelligimus Pontificem Romanum, qui pro tempore Ecclesiae
naviculam moderatur, and Ecclesiam Papam interpretari non abnuo. Gretzerus, cap
10. lib. 3. De verbo Dei.
Gretzerus, the Jesuit, to the virtual Church, which is the Pope only. This
Roman Vertumnus turns himself into all these shapes; sometimes urging the
deposition of Princes in his own name; sometimes of his Consistory; sometimes
of a general Council; sometimes of the Catholic Church; these words are used
to exclude all the pretenses.


Gent. All these pretenses will vanish, and come to nothing, if you can make it
good, that Princes, and chief Secular Magistrates are supreme, and independent
within their Territories.


Minist. This Proposition, that Princes, and chief secular Magistrates are
supreme, and independent within their Territories, and consequently (which is
the second Thesis) that The Pope has no power over them; I shall make good,
first by Scripture, secondly by Fathers, thirdly (as applicable to us) by the
Annals, and Gests of this Nation.

First, By Scriptures, that Papal jurisdiction is not supreme by Divine
Institution; but that Princes are invested with it by divine, civil, and
natural right; which Gregory, the Great, a Roman Pope, confesses, saying,
Nullus pradecessorum meorum, Pontificum Romanorum, Vniversalis Episcopi nomen
sibi assumpsit; quod si assumpserit, typhus esse dico arrogantia, vocabulum
superbum, novum, pompaticum, perversum, ssultum, temerarium, superstitiosum,
profanum, impium, sceleratum, nomen singularitatis, nomen erroris, nomen
hypocriseos, nomen vanitatis, nomen blasphemiae, eumque, qui se appellaverit.
aut appellari desideraverit illo arrogantissimo vocabulo, in clatione sua
Antichristum praecurrere, illiusque quietam, and gratam usurpationem fidei
universalis Ecclesiae calamitatem esse. Gregor. lib. 4. Epistol. 60.
None of the Roman Bishops, my Predecessors, assumed to himself the name of
Universal Bishop, and, if any man else assume the same, I say, it is a swelling
of arrogance, a proud, novel, pompous, perverse, temerarious, superstitious,
profane, and impious Title, a name of singularity, a title of error, a word of
vanity, and blasphemy, and whosoever takes upon him, or desires this arrogant
title, by this exalting himself he is a forerunner of Antichrist, and if he be
permitted to usurp the same, it will prove the bane of the faith of the
universal Church. Thus far Gregory.


Gent. This zealous acknowledgement of so learned, so pious a Pope, is very
prejudicial to their cause; but let me hear Scriptures.


Minist. When the Kingdom, and Priesthood were divided in Moses, and Aaron;
Moses, the civil Magistrate, exercised a supremacy over Aaren, the High Priest,
not only in causes Civil, but Ecclesiastical, whom he reproved, Exodus xxxii.
21. for making the golden Calf; and in his time, the breach of the Sabbath, by
gathering of sticks, was punished by the civil Sword, Numb. xv. 31. Joshua, a
Prince, no Priest, succeeded Moses in his charge, and by this Commission,
Joshua, v. 2. he circumcised the Sons of Israel, erected an Altar of Stone,
Jos. viii. 30. Read the Law Jos. viii. 32, 34. did execution on him, that
concealed things dedicated to Idols; Jos. vii. 24, 25. caused the people to put
away strange Gods, and renewed the Covenant between God, and the people; Jos.
xxiv. 23, 25. David's whole study was well for causes Ecclesiastical, as Civil,
after he had freed Israel from all enemies, then did he compose 1 Paral. xvi. 7.
Psalms to be sung by Asaph, and his Brethren; then did he set 1 Paral. xxiii.
orders in the Temple, appointed 1 Paral. xxiv.
Priests, Levites, 1 Paral. xxv.
Singers, and other 1 Paral. xxvi:
inferior Servitours, and assigned to them their 1 Paral. xxvii.
dignities, courses, and offices. Solomon by this commission built the 1 Kings
vi.
Temple, and 1 Kings viii.
dedicated it, deposed 1 Kings ii. 35.
Abiathar the High Priest, and placed Sadock in his room. I hope this is
matter, and argument of express Supremacy. Asa took away 2 Paral. xiv. 3, 4,
etc.
altars of strange Gods, the High Places, and groves; He put down his 2 Paral.
xv. 8, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Mother, because she had made an Idol; He took an 2 Paral. xv. 13.
Oath of Judah, and Benjamin (which may be paralleled with this Oath) that
whosoever would not serve the LORD, and abjure Idolatry, should be slain.
Jehoshaphat sent his 2 Paral. xvii. 6, 7.
Princes to reform Religion in the cities of Judah, and with them Priests, and
Levites: himself went from 2 Paral. xix. 4.
Beer-sheba to Mount Ephraim, and brought the people again to the God of their
Fathers; He 2 Paral. xix. 8.
set of the Priests, and Levites, and chief of the families of Israel, for the
Judgment, and causes of the LORD, 2 Paral. xxix. 3. 4, 5.
Ezechias his execution of supremacy, even over the High Priest in this kind,
is famous, he opened the doors of the House of the LORD, and brought the
Priests, and Levites in, He 2 Paral. xxix. 30.
commanded them to sanctify themselves, and offer burnt-offerings, which they
did according to the 2 Paral. xxx. 1, 6, 12.
King's commandment. Here Priests are obedient to the King's Injunction, even
in their own Duties, and Charge: He commanded the Levites to praise God with
the words of David; There he enjoined a Liturgy, He commanded all Judah, and
Israel to keep the Passover. Here is (as Saint Augustine says) omnia cum
imperio, all for the civil power; He 2 Paral. xxxi. 2.
appointed the course of Priests, and Levites by turns, He 2 Paral. xxxi. 1.
took away the high places, broke down the Images, and brake the 2 Kings xviii.
4.
Brasen-Serpent, made by Moses, because the people burned Incense unto it.
Manasses that had set up Altars, Groves, and Images before his captivity; after
his 2 Paral. xxxiv. 3, 4, 19, 30, 31, 32, 33.
repentance he took away the strange Gods, and the Image, that he had put in
the house of the Lord, and restoring the worship of God, commanded Judah to
serve the Lord. The last instance I will produce is that of Josias, who purged
Judah, and Jerusalem from 2 Paral. xxxv. 1, 2, 3, 10, 18.
high places, Groves, and Images, he gathered all Israel, read the Law, renewed
the Covenant, compelled them to serve the Lord, kept the famous Passover, and
reduced the Priests, and Levites to their courses set by David, and Solomon: I
suprasede the allegation of any further evidence of this kind; seeing the
Jesuit Salmeron confesses, that In Veteri Testamento sub lege naturae, vel
Mosis, summi Sacerdotes Regibus subdebantur. Salemron in Tractatu 63. De
potestate Ecclesiastica, and Saeculari.
In the Old Testament, under the Law of Nature, or Moses, the Highpriests were
subject to Kings.


Gent. But I have known others of our Allen. Defens. Angl. Cathol. cap. 8.
Catholic Doctors preferring the High-Priest's Crosiar before the King's
Scepter, and for their warrant, alleged these examples out of Scripture 2
Paral. xxvi.
first of Azarias the High Priest, who, accompanied with fourscore other
Priests, magnanimously assaulted King Vzziah smit with leprosy, because he had
burned Incense to the Lord, drove him out of the Temple, according to the
Levit. xiii.
Levitical Law, sent him out of the City, and deposed him from his Kingly
authority. Bellarm. lib. 5. De Roman. Pontif. cap. 8.
The other example is of Jehoiada, who, whilst he was executing the Priest's
office, commanded Queen Athaliah to be slain, because she countenanced the
worship of Baal, and substituted Joash King in her place. These are Presidents
of Highpriests (or Papal authority) over Princes.


Minist. These two Histories being truly understood, make nothing for
advancement of Papal above Civil power; but rather give it a deadly blow: for
first, the Scripture says not, that Azariah assaulted Vzziah the King, or that
he violently forced him out of the Temple; for he was forced by the hand of
God, when the leprosy arose in his forehead: And whereas Azariah, the
High Priest' with the rest of the Priests, is said 2 Paral. xxvi. 20. festinato
illum templo expulisse, to have thrust, and also hastened him to go out,
Josephus Joseph. Antiq. Judaic. lib. 9. cap. 11. quem sequitur Cajetanus in 2.
Paral. xxvi. Visa lepra, Sacerdotes Regem leprosu^ ad festine egrediendum
monent.
interprets it a persuasion only by words, not any compulsion by deeds:
whereof Chrysostom gives the reason, saying, Sacerdotis est tantum arguere,
liberamque praestare admonitionem, non movere arma, non clypeos usurpare, non
vibrare lanceam, nec arcum tendere, nec jaculum mittere: sed tantum arguere,
and libera^ praestare admonitionem. Chrysoft. De verb. Isaiae, Hom. 4.
It is the Priest's office only to reprove, and freely admonish; not to move
arms, not to use shields, not to shake lances, not to bend a bow, or throw a
dart: but only to argue, and freely to reprove. Neither did Azariah depose
Vzziah from his royal authority, which he retained till death; for a Kings xv.
2. he was sixteen years old, when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty two
years in Jerusalem; for he was sixty and eight years old (as Josephus Joseph.
lib. 9. Antiquit. cap. 11.
relates) when he died. And, though he was 2 Kings xv. 5. 2 Paral. xxvi. 21, 23.
shut up according to the Law, and his Son Jothan substituted, as Lieu-tenant
under him, to oversee the King's house, and judge the people of the land; yet he
arrogated not to himself the reins of government, till Vzziah slept with his
Fathers.


Gent. You have given a satisfactory answer to this of Azariah; but, methinks,
that of 2 Kings xi.
Athaliah is more intricate, and entangled with more difficulties.


Minist. The Answer of both is alike easy; which I shall clearly discover unto
you, if you will be pleased to remember first, when 2 Kings xi. 1, 2.
Ahaziah, the Son of Joram, and King of Judah, was dead, his Mother Athaliah,
slew all the royal seed, except Joah, the Son of Ahaziah, whom his Aunt
Jehosheba, the Wife of Jehoiada the Priest, had privily hid for the space of
six years in the house of the Lord: then 2 Paral. xxiii. 1, 2, 11.
Jehoiada, not as High Priest, but as the King's Uncle by affinity, and his
guardian; nor he alone, but the Captains of hundreds, the Levites gathered out
of all the cities of Judah, and the chief of the Fathers of Israel brought out
Joash, the King 's Son, and put upon him the Crown, admitting him In regnum,
quod ei tam jure haereditario, tum ipsius Dei consilio debebatur adscivisse.
Andreros.
into possession of that Kingdom, which was his own by right of inheritance,
and God's decree. Lastly, When Joash was thus invested with royalty, Jehoiada
the High Priest, commissioned with his authority, 2 Paral. xxiii. 14.
brought forth the bloody Vsurpress Athaliah, and sentenced her to death, as a
condign punishment for her cruelties.


Gent. I am convinced, that they that prefer the Mitre before the Diadem, that
is Papal before Princely power, have no countenance from the Old Testament: is
it disowned also by the New?


Minist. If Civil Magistrates before the coming of Christ exercised supreme
authority, both over Priests, and people, as subject to them; it is not
probable, that Christ took it away, or impeached it in the least: which Saint
Augustine proclaims in the Name, and person of Christ, Audi circumcisio, audi
praputium, audite omnia regna terrena; Non impedio dominationem vestram in hoc
mundo, regnum menon est de hoc mundo sed celeste est. August. Tract. 115. in
Johan.
Hear circumcision, hear uncircumcision, hear all Kingdoms of the earth; I do
not hinder your dominion in this World; my Kingdom is not of this World, but is
celestial or spiritual. And St. Choysostom declares that Christus leges suas
non ad hoc induxit, ut policias everteret; sed ut melius institueret. Chrysostom.
Hom 23. in xiii. ad Romans
Christ did not introduce his Laws for this end, that he might overthrow
States, and Governments; but that he might better instruct them. Now among all
the divine Aphorisms of Government registered in the New Testament, that of
Saint Paul is most solemn. Romans xiii. 1. Let every soul be subject (...), to
the higher powers, that is, those that carry the Sword, to whom tribute is due;
so that your Jesuit Pererius is forced to acknowledge, that Augustine,
Chrysostom, and almost all the Ancients understood Paul to speak here only of
secular power; Every soul (says Saint Omnis omnino anima, etiamsi Apostolus
sit, si Evangelista, si Propheta, quisquis tandem fuerit. Chrysostom. in xiii. ad
Roman. cui Theodoret. Theophylact. Oecumenius assentiuntur.
Chrysostom) whether it be Apostle, or Evangelist, or Prophet, or whosoever He
shall be, (Pope, or Patriarch) (...), must be subject. Which Paul confirms by
his own example, standing at Caesar's judgment seat, of whom (says Acts xxv.
10.
he) (...), I must be judged: and no wonder, seeing Christ John xix. 11.
himself paid tribute to Caesar, and confessed, that Pilate, the President of
a little Province, had power over him given from above. And Saint Peter, who
exhorts his fellow Presbyters to 1 Pet. v. 2.
feed the flock of God, admonishes them also to 1 Peter ii. 13.
submit themselves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether it be
to the King, (...), as supreme.


Gent. I see the New Testament, also is clear for civil Princes Supremacy; yet
one scruple troubles me, how Sheep should be superior to their Pastors; even
civil Princes, who are also Sheep, are commanded, Heb. xiii. 17. to obey them;
that have the rule over them, and submit themselves; for they watch for their
Souls. Whereupon Saint Ambrose says, Nihil in hoc saeculo excellentius
Sacerdote, nihil Episcopo sublimius reperiri. Ambros. De dignitate Sacerd. cap.
3.
There is nothing more excellent in this world, then a Priest, nothing higher
then a Bishop. How can these things agree?


Minist. Well enough; for Princes, and Presbyters are mutually Pastors, one to
another in diverse respects; which Saint Chrysostom lays open; saying, Oves
Pastor magna potestate cogere ad perferendam morborum curationem queat, quam
non sustinent sponte; easque ad feracia, and tuta pascua compellere, si vagae
depascantur sterilia, and abrupta loca. Chrvsost. lib. 2. De Sacerdotio.
A Pastor can compel his Sheep with great power to submit to the cure of their
diseases, which willingly they would not, and drive them to fruitful, and
wholesome Pastures, when they stray to barren, and infectious places. Thus
secular Princes are styled Pastors by a borrowed Speech; because they gather
their Subjects (whether Clergy, or Laity) into order by coercive, and external
power, and fear of punishment. But, says the same Episcopi, and Presbyteri,
homines, and rationales Christi oves, suadendo, non vim afferendo commovere
debent, ut se curari sinant. Chrysostom. ibid.
Chrysostom, Bishops, and Presbyters, which are Pastors of Souls, ought to
work upon men, as the reasonable sheep of Christ, by persuasion, not by
compulsion, to suffer themselves to be cured. Thus the Bishop of Rome has
only a persuasive, but no just coercive power over his own Italian flock; much
less over these Nations, which are no part of his charge.


Gent. But Salmero, Gregorius de Valentia, Bellarmine, Suarez, Sa, Richeomus,
Heissius, and Antonius Sanctarellus have proclaimed to the world the contrary
Doctrine; whereof the last, in his Treatise Of Heresy, and the Pope's power,
affirms, That Papae, ac Christi unum esse tribunal; Papa jus, and potestatem
habere in spiritualia simul, and in omnia temporalia, and in eo de jure divino
esse utramque potestate^. nec eam modo in aedificationem, sicut Apostolis data
fuerat, sed etiam in destructionem; adeoque Papam etiam sine Concilio posse
Imperatores, and Reges non tantum propter Haeresin, etc. regno privare. Anton.
Sanctarell. Tract. De potestate Summi Pontificis.
the Pope, and Christ have but one Tribunal; That the Pope has right, and
power both in Spiritualities, and all Temporalities, and to claim both powers
by Divine right, not only for Edification, as the Apostles did, but for
Destruction; and therefore the Pope, even without a Council, may depose
Emperors, and Kings, not only for Heresy, Schism, or any other crime not
tolerable to the people; but also for insufficiency, and that their persons are
unprofitable, etc. with much moreof the same leaven.


Minist. It is true, which Seneca says, Nullum facinus caret Exemplo; No
wickedness is so abominable, but it has some President: as this Diabolical
Doctrine has the patronage of the Jesuits; yet that it was disrellished, and
detested even by the Romists themselves, appears in that, as soon as the Book
of Sanctarellus was brought into France, the University of Paris, and
especially the College of Sorbone, publicly condemned, and proscribed by a
sharp Decree the Jesuitical Doctrine, as Parisiensis Academia, etc.
praescripsit, veluti exitialem, ac pestilentem, cum sit falsa, nova, erronea,
verbo Dei contraria, schismati occasionem praebens, supremae Regum authoritati
a Deo solo dependenti derogans, regnorum, statuum, rerumpublicarum eversiva,
subditos ab obedientia, and subjectione, avocans; and ad factiones, rebelliones
seditiones, and Principum parricidia excitans. Alphonsus de Vargas, page 118.
destructive, and pestilent, and detestable; and that it was new, false,
erroneous, contrary to the word of God, giving occasion of Schism, derogating
from the supreme authority of Kings depending on God alone, disturbing public
peace, destructive to Kingdoms, States, and Commonwealths, withdrawing
Subjects from obedience, and subjection, stiring them up to rebellions,
seditions, and murder of Princes; and I may add contradictory to Scriptures (as
is already demonstrated) and also all the ancient Fathers.


Gent. That this Decree of the University of Paris, and the Doctors of Sorbone
is consonant to Scripture, I make no scruple; let me hear what the Primitive
Fathers say to this Point; which is the second proof, you promised.


Minist. I will only give you a few of many, that (...), you may discern
Hercules his whole Dimensions by his foot. Tertullian, speaking of Imperial, or
Civil power, says, Colimus Imperatorem, ut hominem a Deo secundum, and
quicquid est a Deo consicutum, sold Deo minorem. Tertul. ad Scapulam.
We honor the Emperor, as a man second to God, obtaining of God whatsoever he
has, and inferior to God only, (not the Pope.) Opatus says, Optatus, lib.
3. contra Parmenianum.
Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus, qui fecit Imperatorem; Above the
Emperor there is none, but only God (not the Roman Prelate) that made the
Emperor. Saint Chrysostom, speaking of the Emperor Theodosius, says, Non
habet parem supra terram, summitas, and caput omnium supra terram hominum.
Chrysostom. Homil. 3. Ad populum Antioch.
He has no Peer upon earth, the height, and head of all men upon earth;
therefore of the Romish Bishop. Saint Cyril, writing to Theodosius the Younger,
says; Cyril. Epistol. ad Theodosium praefixa libro, adversus Julianum.
Vestrae Serenitati nullus status est aequalis; There is no state, (therefore
not the Romish Hierarchy) equal to your Sovereignty. Agapetus affirms of the
Emperor Justinian, Agapetus, Paraenet. number. i. number. 21.
Eum hominem quolibet sublimiorem habere dignitatem, That His dignity was more
sublime then any other man's; Non se habere in terris quemquam altiorem, That
He had no man upon earth (therefore not a Priest sitting in the Roman Vatican)
higher then himself. This was the continued Doctrine of the Church in
Primitive, and pure times; for betwixt Optatus, and Agapetus, were well nigh
two hundred years. Pelagius first of that name; Bishop of Rome, five hundred
years after Christ, salutes Childebert, King of France, with this submissive
language; Quanto nobis studio, and labor satagendum est, ut proferendo
suspi^ionis scandalo obsequium confessionis nostrae Regibus ministremus, quibus
nos etiam subditos sanctae Scripturae praecipiunt. Epistol. 16. ad Chil^eb.
apud Bin. Tom. 2. Council. page 6^3.
How studiously, and painfully ought we to endeavor, that we may avoid the
suspicion of scandal, to perform obedience to Kings meet for our (Christian)
profession, to whom the holy Scriptures commands even us (the Bishops of Rome)
to be subject. And Gregory the Great, who sat in the Roman See six hundred
years after the Incarnation, piously confesses, That Potestatem supra omnes
homines Dominorum suorum pietati caelitus da^um esse; utrobique quod debui
exsolvi, qui and Imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro Deo quod sensi minime
tacui. Gregor. lib. 2. Epist. 61.
Power was given from Heaven to his Lords, the Emperors, over all men; in
which universal Catalogue he also compriseth himself, Ego jussioni vestrae
subjectus; I also subject to your command; and that not out of fained humility,
but conscience, and duty; for he subjoyns, On both sides I have discharged my
duty, who both performed obedience to the Emperor, and concealed not what I
thought for God's cause. This Holy Mount was not touched for nine hundred years
after the Passion, during which time Princes kept their power, and jurisdiction
unimpeached over the Roman Prelates, sometimes deposing them from their
Episcopal charge for impurity of life, as Reversus est Otho Romam, ut Papam
Johannem corriperet, quod plurimorum criminum reus ageretur: proinde sceleris
sui conscius sibi Pontifex ob metum Othonis profugit. Carrion, Chror. lib. 3.
page 190.
Otho the Emperor ejected John the Twelfth for his wickedness, and Necromancy.


Gent. But this Emperor Otho was crowned by John, and performed an Oath of
Fealty to him; therefore some think he was unjustly deposed.


Minist. He was crowned by him, and Forma Juramenti extat 63. Distinct. capite
Tibi, Domina.
swore Fealty, but, as Carrion, the Historian, says, Carrion, supra.
Otho hic primus est Imperator, qui Pontifici juramentum praestitit: This Otho
was the first Emperor, that ever was sworn to the Pope. Therefore it was a
just judgment, that he should be ejected for this usurpation first attempted
nine hundred thirty eight years after Christ whereas all Romish Prelates had
been ever subject to the Emperor before.


Gent. You have made good, according to promise, both by Scriptures, and
Fathers, that Civil Princes de jure ought to have, and de facto have had power
over the Bishop of Rome, till the tenth Century, let me hear your third proof
taken from the Tangit illam pervetustam quaestionem, an Anglia sit Feudatoria
Papae. Franciseus de Sancta Ciara page 33^.
Annals, and Gests of this Nation, as applicable to us.


Minist. De regione libera, per chartam lugubrem, ancillam fecit, and
feudatoriam summo Pontisici. Matthaeus Paris.
Matthew Paris, and Matthew Westminster, two Popish Chroniclers, both witness,
that King John in the twelve hundred, and thirteenth year of Christ, made
England, which was a free Nation, to be subject, and in fee to the Pope, by a
sorry Charter. The occasion why, and the manner how, this was performed to the
Pope's Legate Pandolph, our Historians Stow. Chronicl. page 243. Cogshal.
are pregnant; This continued not long, e're his Son, Henry Henricus ejus
silius in Concilio Lugdunensi huic reclamavit, and praecipue Episcopus Can
natiensis. ut testatur Walsingham ad annum 1245. and postea Cancellarius
Angliae, Episcopus Eliensis, in publicis regni Comitus, consenti^ntiius tribus
ordinibus parriae reclamavit, non obstante privata sponsione Johannis, ut
testatur Harpsfield ad saeculum 14. cap. 5. imo et armis se a temporali
jurisdictione Papae desensuros protestabantur.
the Third, in the Council at Lions, reclaimed it, and especially the Bishop of
Canterbury, as Walsingham witnesses in the year 1245. and afterward it was
revoked, and cancelled at the instigation of the Bishop of Ely, Chancellor of
England, by act of Parliament, the three orders of the Nation, Lords Spiritual,
Temporal, and Commons, generally consenting, notwithstanding John 's private
promise; and protestation made, That they would defend themselves by force of
arms from the temporal jurisdiction of the Pope. Here you may observe three
things,

First, That it was above twelve hundred years after the Incarnation, before
the Papal power was manifestly attempted to be obtruded over Princes in this
Nation.

Secondly, That King John out of weakness, without his lawful Council, being
embroyled with the Barons War, was the first, that basely submitted unto it.

Thirdly, That it was protested against, as unlawful, in a Provincial Council,
and revoked by an act of Parliament, with a National engagement to maintain the
ancient rights by force of arms.


Gent. When then began the Bishop of Rome to be so rampant, as to invade
Imperial rights, and to trample their Diadems under his feet, or to attempt
their deprivation?


Minist. Above a thousand years after the Ascension. Then Gregory the Seventh,
alias Hildebrand, Tandem in hane catastrophem abi^t haec Traegoedia, quod
Caesar ipse a summo Pontifice non est excommunicatus solum, sed et reliquis
Principibus mandatum est, ut Imperatorem alium designarent. Carrion. Chronic.
page 202.
about the year one thousand seventy three, deprived Henry the Fourth of his
Imperial power, and conferred it on Rodolph, Duke of Suecia, sending him a
Diadem with this Inscription; Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho.

Lego. and relego Romanorum Regum. and Imperatorum gesta, and nusquam invenio
quenquam eorum, ante hunc, a Romano Pontifice excommunicatu^, vel regno
privatum. Otho Frisingens. lil. 9. cap. 35.
I have read, and read again, (says Otho Frisingensis, a grave Historian, who
lived in the succeeding age) the gests of Roman Kings, and Emperors, and never
find any of them, before this Henry, excommunicated by the Roman Bishop, or
deprived of their Kingdom.


Gent. What was the issue, and event of this? for God is oftentimes seen in his
Judgments; Seneca. Medaea Tragoed.
Raro antecedentem scelestum Deseruit pede poena claudo. Wickedness is attended
commonly with signal judgments proportionable.


Minist. By the tragical ends of those prime agents, who had a hand in
confederating against this Emperor, Roman Prelates might be discouraged from
such attempts for the future, if their hearts were not feared with more then
Pharaoh's hardness; for Rodolph, whom, by the instigation of Gregory, some
Princes of Germany had chosen Anti-Emperour, having, in battle against his
liege Lord, lost his right hand; by reason of which, and other wounds, when he
was about to give up the Ghost; Abscissam dextram intuitus ad Episcopos, qui
forte aderant, graviter suspirans dixit; Ecce! haec est manus, qua Domino meo
Henrico fidem sacramento firmavi. Uspergensis, anno 10^0.
looking upon his hand, that was cut off, he spoke unto the Bishops, and
standers by, with a grievous groan; Lo this is the land, with which I swore
fealty to Henry my Lord, as Vspergensis has it. And Hildebrand himself, while
he was busied about deposing the Emperor, was by the Votes, and suffrages of
his Romans, ejected from the Popedom, and brought to extreme misery, and
calling to him one of the Cardinals, whom he loved more intimately, then the
rest, he confessed (as Sigebert In extremis positus ad se vocavit unum ex
Gardinalibus, quem mulium diligebat prae caeteris; and confessus est Deo, and
sancto. Petro, and teti Ecclesiae, se valde peccasse in Pasiorale cura, quae ei
ad regendum commissa erat, and, suadente Diabolo, contra humanum genus iram,
and odium concitasse. Sigebert. Anno 1084, 1085.
says) to God, and St. Peter, and the whole Church, that he had greatly
sinned in his Pastoral charge, which was committed unto him, and by the
persuasion of the Devil had stirred up wrath, and hatred against mankind. And
this crime (says Otho Frisingensis) of Hildebrand deposing Henry, like a
whirlwinde, or tempest striking all things down before it, Tot mala, tot
schismata, tot animarum, ouam corporum pericula involvit, ut solum ex
persecutionis immanitate, ac temporis diuturnitate ad humanae miseriae
infelicitatem sufficeret comprodandam. Otho Frisingens. 1. ^. ^. cap. 33.
involved so many miseries, so many Schisms, so many perils both of souls, and
bodies; that it alone by the barbarousness of the persecution, and the
continuance thereof, were sufficient to prove the infelicity of humane misery.


Gent. This truth is written in so clear Characters of Scriptures, Fathers, our
own Historians, and sealed with signal, and stupendous judgments, that I am
convinced, and I wonder that more of our profession are not, touching this
Article.


Minist. You heard the University of Paris, with the Sorbonists, condemned
Sanctarellus, Read the Bishop of Rochester, De potestate Papae, cap. 8. qui
multos citat autores.
and there are many more besides them, that hold this negative; to wit, The
Pope by virtue of his office has not any power, or authority, to depose
Princes, or to dispose of their crowns, or lives, for any cause, crime, end, or
good whatsoever. So that (I think) I may safely conclude, That, which is
contrary to Scripture, ancient Fathers, the Annals, and Gests of our own
Nation, has been attended with signal judgments, Qui Summi Pontificis omne de
re qualibet judicium temere, ac sine delectu defendunt, eos sedis Apostolicae
authoritatem labefactare, non sovere, non firmare. Cand. lib. 5. Quaest. 5.
and is disclaimed by moderate Papals themselves, ought to be abjured: But such
is the Popish pretended power to depose the chief Magistrate, etc. Therefore it
ought to be abjured. But we shall have this more fully discussed in the next
Article, which is,


The Eighth Article.
I do sincerely testify, and declare, That the Pope has not any authority to
discharge any of the people of these Nations from their obedience to the chief
Magistrate, or to give license, or leave to any of the said people to bear
Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence, or hurt to the persons of the
said chief Magistrates, or to the state, or government of these Nations, or to
any of the people thereof.

Minist. BY reason of cruel Positions, and practices of Jesuits, in the year
one thousand five hundred eighty two it was made high Treason, Si non vis esse
obnoxious Caesari, noli habere qu^ sunt mundi; si habes divitias, obnoxious es
Caesari. Ambros. in Lucam, lib. 9. cap. 20.
to dissuade any Subject from Dices, Quid mihi, and Regi? quid tibi ergo, and
possessioni? per jura Regum possessiones possidentur. August. in Johan.
Allegiance to their Prince; and from the Religion, that was established in
England. This Article intends the Abjuration of that, which was then enacted as
treasonable.


Genesis What difference is there betwixt this Article, and the former? it is not
obvious to me easily to distinguish between them.


Minist. They are principally differenced in this, that the former Article
excluded the Pope's authority to excite any foreign power to annoy, depose the
chief Magistrate of these Nations, or to dispose of his Territories. This
disclaims the Pope's power to arm Subjects against their Sovereign; or, being
disobliged by him from their obedience, to move commotions, seditions, or
rebellions.


Gent. Does the Pope arrogate by his pleni-potentiary power to stir up any
foreign Prince against another, and collate their Dominions upon them?


Minist. Yes; Papa Johannes nonus, conspiratione facta cum Gallorum Regibus a
Germanis Imperii Majestatem studebat transfer in Carolum Calvum, deinde in
Ludovicum Balbum, ejus filium: sed Imperium per vim retinuerunt Germani.
Carrion, Chronic. page 179.
Pope John the Ninth atempted (though in vain) to translate the Roman Empire
from the Germans to the French; and first collated the Diadem upon Carolus
Calvus, and afterward upon Ludovicus Balbus his Son, Kings of France: He
encouraged, at the last, Sicut Zacharias transtulit imperium a Graecis ad
Teutonicos; ita nos possumus illud transfer ab Alemannis ad Graecos. Carrion,
Chronic. page 179.
Lewis, Son to the French King, to raise arms against John King of England. In
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Paul the Fourth being Pope,
Sebastianus Martignius could hardly be persuaded from entering England with a
thousand foot, and some horse; afterward he stirred up the Duke D'Alva against
her, and promised (if need were) to go himself in person against England, and
engage the goods of the Apostolic See. It were too tedious to relate the
Stories of the Scottish Queen, the Duke of Norfolk, Stucklie, James
Boncompagno, Bastard-son to Gregory the Thirteenth, Squire, Babington, Parry,
Lopez, Tyrone, the intended Invasion in Eighty eight by Pererius Guzmannus Duke
of Medina, the Gun-powder-Treason, to invade, or embroil this Nation; as Bishop
Carlton Thankful Remembrance of God's Mercies, by G. Carleton, Bishop of
Chichester.
has faithfully discovered at large, to whose Book I refer you.


Gent. I perceive by these Histories, Ecce! in potestate nostra est, ut demus
illud cut volumus: propterea constituti sumus a Deo super Gentes, and regna; ut
destruamus, and evellamus, aedificemus, and plantemus. Dictum Adriani
Frederico. Aventinus in Adriano iv. 1154.
Popes have been Incendiaries to stir up one Prince against another, for
advantage of their Roman Jurisdiction; have they been as busy to unrivet the
obediential tie of people to the chief Magistrate?


Minist. Yes; you cannot but have heard of their pragmaticalness also herein,
that Cornelius Agrippa, one of your own, says, Cornelius Agrippa. De vanitate
Scientiarum, cap 6. ex Camatensi.
Legati Romanorum Pontificum sic debacchantur in Provinciis, ac si ad
flagellandam Ecclesiam Satan egressus sit a facie Domini; The Pope's Legates
keep such Revels, and Rackets in Kingdoms, and Countries, as if Satan were sent
abroad from the face of the Lord, to scourge the Church. Witness that Ipsam
pratenso regni jure; nec non omni, and quocunque dominio, dignitate,
privilegioque privatam praecipimus, and interdicimus universis, and singulis
Proceribus, subditis, and populis, ne illi, ejusque monitis, mandatis, and
legibus audeant obedire: qui secus egerint, eos simili Anathematis sententia
innodamus. Bulla Pii Quinti.
Bull of Pius Quintus, fastened by that Ardelio Felton, upon the Bishop of
London's Palace-Gate, wherein he makes it known, that he had deprived Queen
Elizabeth from the right she pretended to have in her Kingdoms, and also from
all, and every her authority, dignity, and privilege; charging, and forbidding
all, and singular Nobles, Subjects, and people, that they adventure not to obey
her, her Monitions, Commands, or Laws, upon pain of his Grand Anathema, or
Curse.


Gent. They pretend great reason for this; for In Concilio Lateranen si sub
Leone Decimo, Sess. 10.
Stephanus, Bishop of Patrica, in our Laterane Council said; In Papa est omnis
potestas supra omnes potestates tam eoeli, quam terrae; All power is in the
Pope above all powers, as well of heaven, as of earth; and in the Ceremoniary
it is written, Ceremoniat, lib. 1. cap. 2.
Moderatio Imperii Romani pertinet ad Papam, Dei vices gerentem in terris,
tanquam ad eum, per quem Reges regnant; The Government of the Roman Empire
belongs unto the Pope, being God's Vicar on earth, as unto him, by whom Kings
rule. Johannes Andreas compares the Pope to the Sun, and the Emperor to the
Moon, and, by Mathematical Proportion, makes him seventy seven times greater,
then the greatest Prince. Abbot Panormitan says, Plenitudo potestatis sisperat
omnem legem positivam. Panormitan. Extravag. De constitut. cap. 1.
His. fullness of power passes all positive Laws.


Minist. It is true; your modern Court Parasites have fawned upon the Pope with
such Blandishments of fullness of power; yet (as Baldus says) this plenitudo
potestatis est plenitudo tempestatis, fullness of power is fullness of tempest,
or disorder. And your own barbarous Gloss confesses, Imperator in Temporaelibus
habet potestatem a solo Deo, and imperium fuit, antequam Apostolus esset.
Extravag. De Majoritate, and Obedientia.
The Emperor in temporal things has his authority, (not from the Pope, but)
from God only, and the Emperor was before the Apostles were. The Emperor
Ludovicus the Fourth asserted his own right thus, Mea potestas non pendet a
Papa, sed a Deo immediate: and vanum, quod dici solet, Papam non habere
superiorem. Paralipomena Uspergensia in Ludovico iv.
My power has no dependence of the Pope, but immediately of God alone, and it
is a vain tale, that they say, The Pope has no superior. Johannes Major, your
own Colleague, says, Bonifacius Octavus multum apparenter definivit, quod
Romanus Pontifex est supra Reges in Temporalibus, quod tamen oculatissimi
Theologi dicunt esse falsum. Johannes Major, 4. Sent. 20. q. 2.
Pope Boniface the Eight has defined many things with great show of reason,
that even in temporal causes the Pope is above Princes, but I may tell you
(says he) the wisest Divines say it is false. And your Romish Ceremoniary, you
so confide in, declares to the world, Ante Carolum Magnum neminem Imperii
Romani coronam ex manu Romani Pontificis Romae suscepisse; That before the
Emperor Charles the Great (that is for the space of eight hundred years after
Christ) no man ever received the Crown of the Roman Empire at Rome, by the
hands of the Bishop of Rome. Therefore Bernard, though an Abbot, living in the
mists of Popery, tells Pope Eugenius without mincing, Esto, ut alia quacunque
ratione tibi vendices, non tamen Apostolico jure, nec illud tibi dare, quod non
habuit, Petrus potuit. Bernardus, De Consideratione ad Eugenium. lib. 2.
Be it, he may claim this pretended right by some other means, yet by
Apostolical right he cannot claim it, neither could Peter give him that right,
he never had.


Gent. But to your Testimonies (which I approve) be pleased to add some
reasons, why the Pope has not any authority to discharge any of the people of
these Nations from their obedience to the chief Magistrate.


Minist. The reasons are two;

First, Colimus Imperatorem ut a Deo secundum, and quicquid est a Deo
cousecutum, solo Deo minorem. Tertull. ad Scapulam
The chief Magistrate receives his authority only of God, and may acknowledge
none above him within his Territories, but God.

Secondly, The Ty, or Obligation, whereby people are obliged in Duty to the
chief Magistrate is perpetual, indissoluble, and may not lawfully be broken.

The former will be pertinent to this Article; the latter will fall in; in the
next. And that not only primitive Fathers, and Protestants, but even moderate
Papists maintain this Doctrine, appears by those Primo, Rex statum suum non
nisi a Deo, and gladio suo debet recognoscere. Secundo, Rex solum Deum,
mortalem vero neminem, in regno suo superiorem agnoscit. Tertio, Papa non
potest nec Regem, nec regnum ejus supponere Interdicto, seu Sacris interdicere,
nec subditis relaxare Sacramentum fidelitatis ei debitae propter quamcunque
causam, and occasionem. Alphonsus de Vargas, page 123.
three Articles, agreed upon by the French Parliament at Paris, and subscribed
unto by the Sorbonists, and other Divines.

First, That the King, (or chief Magistrate) ought to hold his state of none,
but God, and his Sword.

Secondly, He acknowledges only God, but no mortal man, superior in his
Kingdom.

Thirdly, That the Pope cannot interdict, or excommunicate the King, or his
Kingdom, or absolve his Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance, for any cause, or
pretext whatsoever.


Gent. Make good your former reason (which you say pertains to this Article)
That the chief Magistrate receives his authority only of God, and may
acknowledge none above him within his Territories, but God.


Minist. The latter Branch of this Proposition, That the chief Magistrate may
acknowledge none above him within his Tertories, but God alone, is partly
proved already; but that all scruple may be removed, I will add two Texts of
Scripture more, with the Fathers descant upon them, and then proceed. The
former, 2 Samuel xii. ii. where the Prophet Nathan, having convinced David of his
murder, and adultery, and using this Preface, Haec dicit Dominus, Thus says
the Lord; only (as Leo Haec dicit Dominus, monuit Regem Davidem, ut per
poenitentiam peccata sua expiaret, non tulit in eum sententiam, quae, tanquam
Adulter, and Homicida, juxta Legem morti addiceretur. Leo Quartus. 2. q. 7.
cap. Non si competenter.
says) admonished him to expiate his sins by repentance, but passed no
sentence upon him, that, as a murderer, or adulterer, according to the Law, he
might be put to death. Hence we may collect, if Nathan a Prophet
extraordinarily commissioned by God, was not empowered to sentence David, the
chief Magistrate, or stir up his Subjects against him; much less may a Roman
Prelate (...), put his sickle into another's harvest, and out of his Diocese
molest Princes, Potentates, and States.


Gent. Perhaps, Nathan, who was an extraordinary Prophet, had an extraordinary
dispensation to spare David, who was an extraordinary Prince.


Minist. No; the other Text I shall produce, relating to the same History,
overthrows that; which is Psalm li. 4. Tibi soli peccavi; Against thee, thee
only (says David unto God) have I sinned. St. Ambrose gives the reason; Rex
utique erat, nullis ipse legibus tenebatur humanis; neque enim Reges ullis ad
poenam vocantur legibus, tuti imporii potestate; homini ergo non peccavit, cui
non tenebatur obnoxious. Ambros. in Apolog. Davidis, cap. 4. lib. 2. ep. 7.
He was (says he) a King, or supreme Regent, and so subject to no Law of man:
for Princes, being freed by Royal Prerogatives of Imperial power, are not
punishable by humane Laws; he therefore sinned not to man; to whom he was not
subject. With him agrees Euthymius in these words; Cum sim Rex, and te solum
commissorum a me scelerum judicem habeam, tibi soli peccasse videor; hoc est,
tibi soli judici subjicior: caeterorum enim omnium ego Dominus sum, and ob
potentiam meam licere mihi videtur, quaecunque libuerit. Euthym. in Psalm. li.
Seeing I am a King, and have thee only my Judge over my sins, I seem to sin
only to thee; that is, I am subject only to thee, as to my Judge: for I am
Lord over all others, and in regard of my power, and Majesty, whatsoever
pleases me, seems to be lawful for me. Lyranus his Note is concentrick with
the former; Lyranus in Psalm. li.
Tibi soli peccavi, scilicet tanquam Judici, and punire potenti; peccaverat
enim contra Uriam, and alios occasion hujus interfectos; tamen, quia erat Rex,
non habebat Judicem superiorem, qui posset eum punire, nisi Deum: To thee only
have I sinned, that is, to say, To thee only, as to my Judge, and to him, that
can punish me; for he had now sinned against Vrias, and others, whom he caused
to be murdered by that occasion; yet because he was a King (or supreme
Magistrate) he had no superior Judge, that could punish, or control him, save
God alone. With these accord Saint Hierom, Arnobius, Cassiodorus, Beda,
Didymus, Cyril, and Nicetas.


Gent. Perhaps all the Ancients brought in their verdict, that none of his
Subjects were competent Judges to punish, or control him; this makes nothing
against the Pope's jurisdiction.


Minist. It makes against all alike, especially any pretended authority above
Supreme Magistrates, which even your Ordinary Gloss upon this Psalm confesses,
saying, Rex, omnibus superior, tantum a Deo, puniendus est. Glossa Ordinaria in
Psalm. li.
The King, or Regent, is above all, and he can be punished by none, but by God
alone. If that suffice not, hear a Roman Cardinal, to thee only (says Tibi
soli, quia non est super me alius, quam tu, qui possit punire: ego enim sum
Rex, and non est aliquis, praeter te, super me. Hugo Cardinalis in Psalm. li.
Hugo) because there is not any above me; but thy self alone, that has power
to punish me; for I am a King, and so besides thee is none above me. And, if my
Sophister with Bellarmine shall say, There was none above Kings under the Law;
but now his Holiness of Rome is above Emperors, and Dynasts, under the Gospel:
Gregory, himself a Roman Pope, shall decide the controversy; for thus he
writes to the Emperor, Ego quidem, jussioni vestrae subjectus, eandem legem
per diversas terraru^ parts transmitti feci; and. quia lex ipsa omnipotenti,
Deo minime concordat, Ecce! per suggestionis nicae paginam serenissimis Dominis
nuntiavi Vtro^^ ergo quod debui exsolvi, qui and Imperatori obedientiam
praebui, and pro Deo quod sersi minime tacui. Gregor. lib. 2. Epist. 61. cap.
100.
I being your subject, and at your command, have caused the same Law to be sent
through diverse parts of the Land, and because the Law it self does not accord
to God's will, behold! I have signified so much unto Your Majesty by my
Epistle, and so I have discharged my duty in both respects; as having rendered
mine Obedience to the Emperor, and have not concealed what I thought in God's
cause.


Gent. Nothing is more clear, then this, yet Pope Adrian thus advanced himself
above the Emperor Frederick; By means of us (says Imperator per nos imperat,
unde habet imperium nisi a nobis? ecce! in potestate nostra est, ut demus illud
cui volumus. Aventinus, lib. 9. page, 616.
he) the Emperor has his Diadem; for whence has he his Empire, but of us?
behold! it is in our power to bestow the Empire upon whom we list.


Minist. Emperors, Kings, and all Chief Magistrates by what title soever they
be called, receive their authority only of God, not of any Roman Priest: which
is the former branch of the Proposition, I engaged to prove. It is I (says
Psalm, lxxxii. 6.
God) not any Creature, that have said, Ye are Gods. It is he, Daniel, iv. 32.
the most High, that rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to
whomsoever he will. Job. xxxvi. 7.
It is his omnipotent hand, as the Vulgar Edition has it, qui Reges collocat
in solio, places Kings upon their Throne, Proverbs, viii. 15.
by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. He, that said by Nathan, to
David, 2 Samuel xii. 7.
I have anointed thee King over Israel. He, by whom Solomon confesses he was 1
Kings, ii. 24.
established, and set on the Throne of David his Father. In whose name the
Prophet Ahias said to Jeroboam 1 Kings, xi. 31.
I will give unto thee ten Tribes; who challenges Psalm, xxi. 3.
Crowns, Psalm. lxxxix. 20.
Anointing, Scepters, and 2 Paral. 9. 8.
Thrones as his peculiar, and styles them 2 Samuel xiv. 17.
Angels of God, and Psalm, lxxxii. 6.
Sons of the most High, whom he empowers.


Gent. But it is said, 1 Samuel xi. 15.
All the people went to Gilgal, and there they made Saul King before the Lord;
And, 2 Samuel ii. 4.
The men of Judah, and Elders of Israel anointed David over Judah, and Israel:
how then received they their authority from God?


Minist. 2 Samuel v. 3.
The Elders of Judah, and Israel anointed David, not as Masters of the
substance, but of the ceremony; not making him, but declaring him to be King,
whom by 1 Samuel xvi.
special command God had designed before. And Saul was first anointed by the
Lord 1 Samuel x. 1.
Captain over his inheritance, chosen immediately of him by lots, as Matthias
Acts, i. 26.
was; so that he had all his jura regalia from God, not the people; who are
also said to have 1 Samuel xi. 15.
made Saul King, because they approved the election made of God, and admitted
him into the Constituere Regem est Verbum tertiae Conjugationis, quod cum
esserat duplicem actionem, proprie significat facere tenare, and regnate est
regiam exercere potestatem; quasi diceret, Fecerunt, ut regiam potestatem
exerceret. Jesuita Pineda, De rebus Solomonis.
possession, and administration of the Kingdom; whom the Sons of Belial
impiously by contempt had rejected. For the Jews had a special command, Deuteronomy.
xvii. 15. to set him King over them, whom the LORD their God should choose.
And, as in spiritual things 1 Cor. iii. 7.
Paul may plant, Apollos water, yet it is God, that gives the whole increase;
So it is his sole act to set on high whom he pleases, though the votes, and
suffrages of the people may be subservient, and obediential instruments.


Gent. But Government, and Principality sometimes descends by Succession, or
are conferred upon victorious Commanders, as Trophies of their Conquests
lawfully achieved; how then are they immediately conferred of God?


Minist. Order of Succession, and victorious event of lawful war, are only
qualifications preparative, or concomitant to the Investiture of Government:
but are not the principal, or conjunct cause of it, as heat, cold, moisture,
dryness, with the Crasis, or Temperature, that crises, of the mixture of them,
are dispositions prerequisite in an organized humane body, to the receiving of
the Soul; which (as Saint Augustine Creando infunditu^, and infundendo creatur.
Lombard. 2. Sent. Distinct. 17.
says) is created by Infusion, and infused by Creation; but are not the causes
of Creation, or Infusion of it: for that is God's peculiar Prerogative, qui
format animas in medio eorum. Even so that of constituting Rulers, and
Governors: as Tertullian says, Inde ille potestas, unde spiritus. Tertul. in
Apologe^. cap. 30.
Thence is their power, from whence is their Spirit, or Soul; and Irenaeus,
Cujus jussu nascuntur homines, ejus jussu constituuntur Principes. Irenaeus,
lib. 5. Contra Haeres.
By whose command men are born; by the same power are Princes, or Governors,
made, which is only Gods. This the Romish Extravagants approve, determining,
that Imperator non habet gladium a populo, sed imperium est a solo Deo.
Extravag. De Majoritate, and Oledientia. Did. 96.
The Emperor has not his Sword of the people, but the Empire is only from
God.


Gent. I see it perspicuously evident by Scriptures, Fathers, and Imperial
Constitutions, that Chief Magistrates receive their Authority only of God; and
that, None is above them within their Dominions, but God. What say the ancient
Laws of our Nation to this?


Minist. Bracton, who executed the office of Lord Chief Justiciarie for twenty
years together under Henry the Third, treating of the ancient rites, and
customs of England, says, that Sunt sub Rege liberi homines, and servi, ejus
potestati subjecti. and omnes quidem sub eo, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum
sub Deo. I^emque r^^sus; Si ab eo peccatur (cum Bre^e non currat contra ips^m)
locus erit supplicationi, quod factum suum corrigat, and emende^, quod quidem
si non fe^^rit, satis erit ei ad poenam, quod Dominum expectet ultorem: nemo
enim de factis suis praesumat disquirere, ^ou^^o minus contra factum suum
venire Bracton. De lege and consuetudine Ang^^^^. lib. ^. cap. 8. number. 5.
Under the King are Freemen, and Servants, subject to his power, and all are
under him, and he under none (therefore not the Pope of Rome) but only under
God; and, i^ he offend, seeing no Brief can issue out against him (much less, a
Romish [f] This is to be understood, either in relation to the Pope only, or
of them, which are alsolutely supreme in legislative, and executive power,
whether Monarchs, Optimates, or Senate, which is to be referred to the Laws of
every Nation; as His Majesty is supreme with us, both in legislative, and
executive power.
Bull) there is only place for Supplication, that he would correct, and reform
his Error, which if he will not do, it is sufficient punishment for him, that
he must expect, God will revenge; for none may presume, (therefore not the
Pope) judicially to enquire into his actions, much less to make insurrection
against him.


Gent. I understand, that not only the modern, but ancient Laws of this Nation
are against Papal Jurisdiction, if not expressly, yet consequently: but, at this
present* you need not fear his annoying the Chief Magistrate, State, or people
of this Nation,


Minist. There was never more cause of fear, then now, and, unless you
dissemble, you must confess, the Regno privare, atque etiam interficiendos,
atque populos subjectos, relaxato juris jurandi vincul^, potestate eorum
eximere, atque ab obedientia, and sidei debito liberare, and ipsum regnum
alteri Principi donare, and armis invadendum, sibique subjugandum permittere:
Regem a Papa, sive Haeret cum, sine alias viti^s^m, au^ inu^^lem judica^um, ac
propterea per sententiam ejus, velut superioris regni, jure privatum, jam jus,
and authoritatem imperandi amisisse, nec ultra Regem esse, sed Tyrannum. and a
quovis de populo occidi posse: Clericos etiam nequaquam ulli Regum esse
subditos, ac propterea nullam ab eis laesae Majestatis crimen commi^^^, etiamsi
rebellionem in Reges molia^^ur, and monitis, atque exemplo populos rebellare,
and obedientiam, fidelitate^, tribulu^, and omnia obsequia Principibus negare
do^e^t: Apostolos Regibus de facto tantum, non etiam de jure subjectos f^i^se
Sanctarel. apud Alphonsum de Vargas, page 117, 118.
Brood of Ignatius Loyola were never more active, then now at this present.
That Romish Argus in the Apocalyptical Beast, full of eyes, he rides upon, is
intensly vigilant to widen the breaches, he has made, taking advantage of our
distractions:

-- haud tanto cessabit cardine rerum. I will give a glance of his attempts in
this kind, since Queen Elizabeth's Inauguration. In the fourth year of Her
Reign, Arthur Pole of the Race of George Duke of Clarence, and Fortescue, his
Brother-in-Law, conspired by an army in Wales to proclaim the Queen of Scots.
Pope Pius the Fifth in the year 1569. sent out an Excommunication against her,
absolving all her Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance. By him, and the King of
Spain, the Duke of Norfolk was excited to stir up what Forces he could, and to
join with the Earls of Northumberland, and Westmerland, who were seduced by
Nicholas Morton, a Priest sent from his Holiness. The same year Johannes
Mendoza was sent out of Spain to inflame the Rebellion begun in Ireland, by
Edmund, and Peter Botelers, Brethren to the Earl of Ormond. In the year, 1570.
Don John of Austria, disappointed of the Kingdom of Tunis, practiced secretly
with the Pope the overthrow of England. Gregory the Thirteenth promised a
Cruciata, (as was used in the Holy Wars) if the Spaniard, and Stukeley (an
Englishman, whom he had furnished with men, and ammunition) would turn their
Forces against England. Sanders, and Allen, two Popish Priests, with Power
Legantine, a consecrated Banner, and Letters of Commendation came to Spain,
from thence to Ireland with three Ships, and a few Soldiers to stir up
Commotions. In the year 1580. these Emissaries, House, Main, Nelson, Sherwood,
Campian, Parsons, all Romish Priests, taught, that Queen Elizabeth was an
Heretic, and therefore worthily deposed. The Jesuits by their seditious Libels
encouraged Summervile, and Arden to attempt the Queen's death, Anno 158^. And
Bernardinus Mendoza, the Spanish Ambassador, was thrust out of England, for
secret Conspiracies against the State. At Venice, Parry, a Doctor of Civil
Law, had communication with Benedictus Palmius, a Jesuit, who recommended him
to Campegius, the Pope's Nuncio, and Campegius to the Pope; so that Letters of
Credence were sent to him by the Cardinal of Come, and he excited to attempt
the Queen's death by a Stab, which they called special service for the
Catholic cause; which he consented unto, having got a plenary indulgence by
Ragazonius, the Pope's Nuncio, Ballard, a Rhemish Priest, persuaded Babington,
with Chernock, and other of his Accomplices, to assault Her Majesty; commending
the Scots, who had lately intercepted their King at Sterling; and Gerard the
Burgonian, who killed the Prince of Orange. In the year 1587. Sir
Aribespinaeus, the French Ambassador, would have persuaded one Stafford, a
young Gentleman, to take away the Queen's life. Pope Sixtus Quintus sent
Cardinal Allen into Flanders, and renewed the Bull of Pius Quintus, and Gregory
the Thirteenth, to encourage the Spanish Armado to invade England in Eighty
eight. Doctor Lopez, the Queen's Physician, was hired by the Romish Rabbis
for fifteen thousand Crowns to poison Her. Whalpool, a Jesuit, in confession
imposed upon Squire to poison the Queen's Saddle; which he attempted
accordingly. Tyrone, by the instigation of the King of Spain, and the Pope,
moved the Irish Subjects to Rebellion. Watson, and Clark, two Romish Priests,
persuaded Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and others by surprising
of King James in the first year of His Reign to force him to a Toleration in
Religion. Father Creswell, a Lieger Jesuit in Spain, Don Pedro Frankesa,
Secretary of State, and the Duke of Lerma, did all negotiate with the Pope, and
his Cardinals for the advancement of the Powder Plot: and all upon this ground,
Solus Papa est Dominus Temporalium; ita ut possit auferre ab alio quod alias
suum est; and tenet factum ejus, licet peccet: sed Praelati caeteri, and
Principes non sunt Domini, sed Tutores, Procurator^^, and Dispensatores.
Johannes de Parisiis, De potestate Regia, and Papali, cap. 5.
That Princes, being Heretics, or excommunicated, may be deposed; their
Subjects disobliged, and all the sinews of Government disjointed; if the Pope
send out his Bull to bellow against them.


Gent. I utterly detest, and abhor these, and all such Machinations, as
pernicious, and destructive to Church, and State.


Minist. You will not only detest them, but the very Ground, and Basis, upon
which they are founded; if you considerately, and conscientiously weigh the
next Article, which is


The Ninth Article.
And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure
their damnable Doctrine, and Position, That Princes, Rulers, or Governors,
which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may, by virtue of such
Excommunication, or Deprivation, be killed, murdered, or deposed from their
Rule, or Government, or any outrage, or violence done unto them by the People,
that are under them, or by any other whatsoever, upon such pretense.

Gent. WHat differs this Article from the former? what Acts, or Objects in them
are remarkably distinguished?


Minist. The two former dismantled the Pope's power justly to arm either foreign
Princes, or homebred Subjects, against their Native Sovereign: This abjures
those Heretical Principles, upon which this practical Doctrine is bottomed.


Gent. What are those Principles, which sustain the Superstructure of all the
Romish Hierarchy, and Grandeur?


Minist. Their name is Legion, because they are many. First, That Constituti
sumus a Deo super gentes, and regna, ut destruamus, and evellamus, and
aedificemus, and plantemus, Aventin. lib. 6. page 636.
The Pope is placed by God over Nations, and Kingdoms, that he may destroy, and
pluck up, and build, and plant. Whence (as Matthaeus Hieromonachus (...).
Matthaeus Hieromonachus.
has it) The Consistorial Conclave gave in Decree, and Commandment to all
Lords, and the Senate of the Empire, That the Bishop of Rome, and the
Successor of St. Peter chief of the Apostles, have authority, and power in all
the world, more then that of the Empire is; and, That he be honored, and
worshipped more then the Emperor; and, That he be Head of the four Patriarchal
Seats; and, That things, appertaining to the right Faith, be of him judged, and
determined.


Gent. Where do they lay the ground of the proof of this Doctrine? whether upon
Divine Oracles, or Imperial Decrees, and Constitutions?


Minist. Some challenge it from Divine Revelation, which you have heard refuted
by Scripture, Ancients, and Romists themselves. The most father it upon the
Donation of Constantine. So expressly your own Champian, Doctor Harding; The
first Christian Emperor Constantine the Great, being fully instructed of the
godly, and learned Bishops of the time, thought good by his Imperial
Commandment, and Decrees, to confirm, ratify, and for his own person to yield
unto blessed Sylvester, then Pope, and to his Successors, Bishops of Rome, the
same Authority, and Superiority, not only over Bishops, and Patriarchs; but
also Power, and Honor higher, and greater, then that of Kings, and Emperors.


Gent. What think you of this Donation, or Charter of Constantine? Johannes de
Parisiis, says, Volunt aliqui, quod, ratione hujus doni, Papa est Imperator,
and Dominus mundi; and quod potest Reges instituere, and destituere, sicut
Imperator. Johannes de Parisiis, De potestate Papae.
Some are of opinion, that by force, and virtue thereof, the Pope is the
Emperor, and Lord of the world; and that hereby he has power both to set up,
and also to put down Kings, as an Emperor.


Minist. Because my thoughts are not so authentic with you; I will tell you
what your own chief friends, Schole-men, Historians, and Canonists think.
Platina, Cardinal Cusanus, Marsilius Patavinus, Laurentius Valla, Antonius
Florentinus, Otho Frisingensis, Hieronymus Paulus Catalinus, Volaterranus,
Nauclerus, Capnion, Mallinaeus, and others have discovered the forgery of it to
the world, as ashamed of such a fiction. I will alledg one, or two, in place of
many. Cardinal Cusanus confesses, that Donationem Constantini diligenter
expendens, reperi ex ipsamet scriptura manifesta argumenta confictionis, and
faelsitatis. Cusanus. De concordantia Catholica, lib. 3. cap. 2.
while he advisedly weighed this Donation, or Grant, of Constantine (whereby
the Pope challenges all his temporal power) even in the penning thereof he
found manifest tokens of false-hood, and forgery. And in Gratian, the Pope's
own Register, it is found only in the Palea, and not in the Original allowed
Text; and in many old Books, that have no Gloss, it is not found; and in the
Gloss upon the same it is noted thus, Palea ista non legitur in Scholis, in qua
continetur Privilegiu^, quod Constantinus concessit Romanae Ecclesiae;
scilicet, ut Primatum inter omnes Ecclesias obtineret. Gratian. Distinct. 98.
Glossa, eodem loco.
This patch is not read in the Schools, wherein is contained the Privilege,
that Constantine, the Emperor, granted to the Church of Rome; that is, that
the said Church should have Sovereignty over all Churches. Pope Pius the
Second, himself, says, Dicta Palea, Constantinus, falsa est. Pius in Dialogo.
It is false: which Felinus his Canonist further declares, saying, Invehit
contra miseros Legistas, qui laborant in disputando, an valuerit id, quod
nunquam fuit. Felinus, De Majorit. and Obedientia.
He inveighed earnestly against the poor Lawyers, for that they take such pains
to reason, whether that thing may be good, and available in Law, which never
was made. And those Authors, who own the truth of it, disclaim the lawfulness
of it, avouching, that In vita Sylvestri. Johannes de Parisiis, cap. 22.
In donatione illa audita est vox Angelorum, in aere dicentium, Hodie venenum
effusum est in Ecclesiam; At the time of the confirming, and passing of this
Donation, there was a voice of Angels heard in the Air, This day poison is
poured upon the Church.


Gent. Enough of this; tell me in order the other Romish Principles, upon which
Papal Transcendency leans.


Minist. The second is, That His triple-Crowned Sovereignty has a direct power
to depose, and instate Princes; and that Romish Catholics are obliged to
assist the Pope in the execution of his sentence of decrowning chief
Magistrates, and translating their Crowns. Which is falsely fathered upon Pope
Zachary the First; but indeed is no elder, then Pope Gregory the Seventh, a
brand of Hell, and it was ripened by many of his Successors, and fomented by
sundry Parasites, and Assassines of Rome, and by Carerius, De potestate Romani
Pontificis, lib. 2. cap. 3. Boskier, Legate. Aposiol. con. 14. page 35. Baron.
Annal. Tom. 11.
many Moderns (as Marta, Simancha, Baronius, Bosius, Carerius, Paulus Cararia)
defended; of which Gratian gives an instance, Zacharias Regem Francorum non tam
pro suis imquitatibus, quam pro co, quod tantae potestati erat mutilis, a regno
deposuit. Gratian. cause. 15. quaest. 6. cap. Atius.
Pope Zachary deposed the King of France, not so much for any Delinquency of
his, but that he was not competently qualified to manage such a power.


Gent. The novelty of this, with other reasons you have formerly given, speaks
sufficiently the unlawfulness of it: what is the next?


Minist. The third is pendulous with show of limitation, and mitigation, to
wit, The Pope has an indirect power limited, and circumscribed by many
cautions, and provisions in deposing Princes. This is maintained by Bellarmin.
De Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 1. 6. 7. 8. Gretser. Defens. Bellarm, De Pontif.
Victoria, De potest. Eccles. quaest. 2. Cajetan. Apol. cap. 13.
Bellarmin, and may seem (for manner of speaking) to be more moderate, then the
former; but in weight, and consequence is equally false, and pernicious: for it
has the same effects, yielding authority to Popes to depose Princes, when the
same appears to themselves reasonable, and for the benefit of the Roman
cause. Then says Si quid tale accidat Spiritualis potestas potest ac delet
coercere Temporalem omni ratione, ac via, quae ad id necessaria vidibitur.
Bellarm. De Romano Pontifice, cap. 6.
Bellarmine, the Spiritual power may, and ought to curb the Temporal by all
means, and ways, which may seem conducible to that end. It armeth also Subjects
to rebellion, and enemies to mischief, and it provideth, that regal, or supreme
Magistracy shall depend upon Papal discretion, and devotion Thus the cunning
Jesuit brings water in the one hand, and fire in the other; saying, Quantum ad
personas, non potest Papa, ut Papa, ordinary temporales Principes deponere
etiam justa de causa, eo modo, quo deponit Episcopos, id est, tanquam
ordinarius Judex; tamen potest mutare regna, and uni auferre, atque alteri
confer, tanquam summus Princeps Spiritualis; si id necessarium sit ad
animarum salutem. Bellarm. De Romans Pontif. lib. 5. capp. 6, 7.
As to the persons, the Pope, as Pope, cannot ordinarily depose temporal
Princes, though the cause be just, after that manner, as he deposes Bishops,
that is, as an ordinary Judge; yet he can change Kingdoms, and take from one,
and collate upon another, as the Chief Spiritual Prince, if it shall be
requisite for the health of Souls. But the most malignant venom is yet behind
in the sting: for, says he, quod Christiani olim non deposuerunt Neronem, and
Dioclesianum, and Julianum Apostatam, and Valentem Arrianum, and similes, id
fuerat, quia deerant vires Temporales Christianis; That Christians formerly
deposed not Nero, and Dioclesian, and Julian the Apostate, and Valens the
Arrian, and such the reason was, because Christians wanted temporal forces. To
these three pestilential Principles, all the Romish Doctrine, that relates to
deposing, or annoying of Princes, may be reduced.


Gent. Are these Doctrines generally maintained by Catholics, or an aspersion
fastened upon them for some few? or who are they, that foment them?


Minist. That they are not maintained by all, I have hinted to you already, and
shall happily more fully hereafter. If the Disease be not hectical, but of a few,
that asperse the rest, you may more rationally abjure them, which is the scope
I aim at: but you shall find, that the maintainers, and fomenters of them, are
neither few, nor inconsiderable. I Will instance in two, or three: By a drop you
may discern the saltness of the Ocean. Baronius says, Non eos homicidas
arbitramur, qui, adversus excommunicatos zelo Catholicae matris ardentes, eorum
quoslibet trucidasse contigerit. Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. Anno 1089.
We judge not them murderers, who, enflamed with a zeal of their Catholic
Mother against excommunicated persons, shall chance to kill any of them.
Alvares Pelagius says, that, Apud illum reside^ Regalis, sive Imperialis
dignitatis plenitudo, cui de jure competit imperium transfer. Sicut nullus
fidelis dubitat, quod Christus fuerit Rex, and Sacerdos, and Rex coeli, and
terrae, etc. sic nullus Catholicus dubitare debet, quin summus Vicarius
Generalis in terris pariter utramque habet potestatem, imo uon long abesset ab
Haeresi contrarium affirmare. Alvares Pelagius De planctu Ecclesia, lib. 1.
Art. 37.
With the Pope resides the fullness both of Regal, and Imperial dignity, who
has lawful power to translate Empires. And, as no Believer doubts, that Christ
was both King, and Priest, King of Heaven, and Earth; so no Catholic ought to
doubt, that the chief Vicar General upon earth has both powers, Spiritual and
Temporal, it would not much fall short of Heresy to affirm the contrary.
Bosius says, Bosius, De Ecclesiae signis, lib. 7. cap. 4.
In quo elucescit authoritas Papae, qui potest justis de causis, vel sine
culpa, ab aliis in alios jura maxima, qualia sunt imperia summa, decreto suo
transfer. Herein appears the authority of the Pope, that he can for just
causes, or when there is no fault, transfer by his greatest interests, as chief
Empires. Augustine ab Ancona says, August. ab Ancona, Sum. de Eccles. Quaest.
1. Art. 1.
Immediata potestas jurisdictionis omnium Spiritualium, and Temporalium est
solum in Papa; All power of Spiritual, and Temporal jurisdiction is only in
the Pope.

It seems to me a prodigious Tenet, to hold, The Pope has power to depose, and
translate Empires for no fault, as well as for condign causes. But what are
the principal causes, they assign?


Minist. Bosius Quatuor causas habemus, ex quibus Papa, and Episcopi possunt
regna illis quidem auferre, his vero adjudicare; quarum prima est, in scelere
aliquo admisso posita, quae multis exemplis illustra^i potest: secunda est, in
socordia: duae postremae recipient aetatem ad regendum in eptam; and
tranquillitatem communem Reipublica Christianae. Bosius, De signis Ecclesiae,
lib. 17. cap. 4.
assigns these four, for which the Pope, and his Cardinals may take Kingdoms,
and Dynasties from one, and adjudge them to another. The first is, If they be
wicked, or guilty of heinous crimes, and this (he says) may be illustrated by
many examples. The second is sloathfulness, or want of activity in Government.
The third is Childhood, and decrepid old age, unfit for the managery of
State-designs. The fourth, if it be inconsistent with the public tranquillity
of a Christian Commonwealth. I shall demonstrate, in the last Article, these,
and all of the like nature, to be insufficient to produce such an effect.


Gent. But whether was ever this Doctrine of deposing excommunicate Princes,
and arming their Subjects against them, countenanced by any Synod, or Council?


Minist. Never of any of the ancient Ecumenical Councils, or Provincial
Synods; for they abhorred it. Nay, even the present Jesuits seem to make a
semblance of the detestation of it; for the In virtute obedientiae commendatur
Provincialibus, ne in sua Provinciae quicquam, quacunque occasion, aut lingua
evulgari patiantur a nostris, in quo de potestate Summi Pontificis supra Reges,
Principesque, aut de Tyrannicidio agatur. Ex Epistola, Pub. Claudii, Dat. 1614.
2. August.
General of their Order has given in command to his Provincials, that they
should not suffer within their respective Provinces any thing to be published
upon any occasion, in any Language, wherein it should be treated of the power
of the Pope over Kings, and Princes, or of deposing, or murdering of Tyrants:
yet Bellarminus contra Ba^claium enumerat Synodos Beneventinam sub Victore iii.
Placentinam sub Urbano ii. Romanam sub Paschali iii. Coloniensem sub Gelasio
ii. Rhemensem sub Calixto ii. Lateranensem sub Innocentio iii. etc.
Bellarmine, the Jesuit, recites diverse modern, and novel Synods, to wit, the
Beneventine under Pope Victor the Third, the Placentine under Vrbane the
Second; of Colen under Gelasius the Second; of Rhemes under Calixtus the
Second; of Literan under Innocent the Third; whereof all (says he) have
exalted the Pope 's Temporal Sovereignty above the chief Civil Magistrate's.


Gent. Have they ever been checked for this Doctrine? has it passed in the
latter times for Catholic, without control?


Minist. No; for you have already heard, how the Sorbone Divines, and others
disrelished it; and the Parliament at Paris sentenced those dangerous Positions
of Sanctarellus: and you may further take notice, that the Jesuit Suares his
Book Contra sectam Anglicanam was condemned at Paris in France, and burned by
the hand of the Hangman; and because they were promoters of such pestilent, and
seditious Principles, the whole Retinue of Loyalists were banished out of the
Dominions of the Venetians, and out of some other Countries professing Romish
Faith. Mariana, the Jesuite's work De institutione Principis, wherein he
maintains Regicide, is censured by many Romists. I will present you with a
few of his poisoned Dishes, and then leave it to the judgment of your own
Pal^te. For thus he plays the Panegyrist, and Encomiast or Parricide, and
Regicid^; Henricus, eo nomine Tertius, Galliae Rex, jaceat manu Monachi
peremptus, medicato cultro in viscera adacto; Jacobas Clemens inter^ctus, and
vulnera, impense laetabatur: scilicet, caeso Rege, ingens sibi nomen fecit. Ab
omni memoriae consideramus, in magna laud fuisse, quicunque Tyrannos perimere
aggressi sunt. Et salutaris cogitatio, ut sit Principibus persuasum, si
Rempublicam oppresserint, si vitiis, and foeditate intolerandi erunt, ea
condition ^ivere, ut non jure tantum, sed cum laud, and gloriae perimi
possunt. Mariana, De Rege. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Henry the Third of that name, King of France, was slain by the hand of a Monk,
the poisoned Knife being sheathed in his bowels; James Clemens, the Actor, in
the midst of stripes, and wounds, exceedingly rejoicing, that he had made
himself so eminently famous by killing of the King: for (says he) we consider,
that time out of mind they have been highly commended, who attempted to kill
Tyrants. And it is a wholesome Meditation for Princes, to persuade themselves, if
they shall oppress the Commonwealth, if they shall be vitiously intolerable,
the condition of their life is such, that to murder them is not only lawful,
but praiseworthy, and glorious. Thus far he.


Gent. Truly I cannot otherwise censure this Doctrine, then King James is
reported Joseph Hall, Epist. 5. Decad. 1.
to have done that Book of Lipsius concerning his Ladies of Halle, and Zichem:
for when he had well viewed it, and read some passages, he threw it to the
ground, with this censure; Damnation to him, that made it, and to him, that
believes it.


Minist. You are not singular in this censure; for the whole Parliament at
Paris (though Papists) professed the same in the Subscription to those three
Positions in opposition to Sanctarellus, touching the (impeached) authority of
Princes; and that Se malitiosam, and pestiferam de Regum authoritate
Sanctarelli Doctrinam detestari, ac paratos esse diversam sententiam, velut
veram, quacunque occasion, vel sanguinis, vita que impensa, confirmare. Quam
quidem sententiam nostram improbare nemo potest, nisi qui Christi praecaptum
simul and exemplum improbet; nisi Martyribus, cum rebellare possent, modestiae
gloriam eripiat, and crescenti Ecclesiae ignaviam exprobrare velit, quod numero
fortior ferrum Imperatoribus, quo saeviebant, non extorserit: Ea siquidem est
non Christianorum, sed Haereticorum contumacia, qui vel levissimo metu
Religionis ad arma concurrunt, leges calcant, jura violant, and a Deo ordinatae
potestati, qua possunt via, resistant. Alphonsus de Vargas, De Stratagematis
Jesuitatum, page, 119, 121.
they were ready to defend the contrary thereof, as true, upon every occasion,
even with their blood, and loss of life: and give their reason, because none
could dislike their judgment, which did not withal dislike the precept, and
example of Christ, unless they would take away the glory of modesty from
Martyrs, when they had power to wage War; and would upbraid the Primitive
Church with cowardice; which, being stronger, and more in number, might have
extorted the Sword from persecuting Emperors, when they raged. But that is the
malepert peevishness of Heretics, not Christians, who for the least fear of
Religion fly to Arms, trample Laws under foot, violate Statutes, and, with all
their might, resist the power ordained of God.

The result of the whole is this;

That Doctrine, which is contrary to Scriptures, Primitive Fathers, ancient
Councils, and is disclaimed by all moderate Papists themselves, ought to be
abjured.

But such is that Jesuitical Doctrine, that Princes, Rulers, or Governors,
which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may, by virtue of such
Excommunication, or Deprivation, be killed, murdered, or deposed from their
rule, or government; or any outrage, or violence may be done unto them by the
people, that are under them, or by any other whatsoever upon such pretense.

Therefore it ought to be abjured.

Which you will more cheerfully do, if you consider the next Article.


The tenth Article.
And I do further swear, That I do believe, that the Pope, or Bishop of Rome
has no authority, power, or jurisdiction whatsoever, within England, Scotland,
and Ireland, or any, or either of them, or the Dominions, or Territories
belonging to them, or any, or either of them.

Minist. YOu are here enjoined to abjure no more, then what all Ecclesiastics,
or Clergy were enforced formerly to subscribe unto; for it is expressed in the
thirty seventh Article of our English Confession, that The Supreme Magistrate
in this Kingdom of England, and the rest of his Dominions, has the chiefest
power, to whom the supreme Government of all States of this Kingdom, whether
they be Ecclesiastical, or Civil, in all causes, pertains, and neither is, nor
ought to be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction; Romanus Pontifex nullam habet
jurisdictionem in hoc regno Angliae. Confessionis Anglicanae A^^^^. 37.

Anglia non est Feudatoria Papae. Harpsfield.


The Pope, or Bishop of Rome, has no jurisdiction in this Kingdom.


Gent. The Canonists, or Pope's Pages of Honor, say otherwise, enfeoff^ng
their Master with the Extravagant. De appellat. Ut debitus. in Glossa.
possession of all the World. One says thus; Extravagant. De staetu Regularium
periculos. in Glossa.
Dominus Papa est Ordinarius omnium hominum; Our Lord, the Pope, is the
Ordinary, or Bishop of all men. Another says, Extravagant De poena Felicis, in
Glossa.
Papa totius mundi obtinet principatum; The Pope has the Principality of all
the World. Another says, Extravagant. De concessione Praebendae, and Ecclesiae
non vacantis; Quia diversitatem ab.
Papa, etiam cessante negligentia Praelatorum, potest confer Beneficia totius
orbis; quia ipse est Ordinarius totius mundi: Though there be no default, or
negligence in any Bishop, yet may the Pope bestow the Benefices of all the
World; for that he is the Bishop of all the World. Therefore, when the chief
Deacon investeth, and enrobeth the Pope at his Consecration, he says unto him,
Ego te investio Papatu, ut praesis urbi, and orbi; I invest thee with the
Popedom, that thou may rule both the City and the World: if the World, then
England; which presupposes he has jurisdiction in these Nations.


Minist. It is true, that Sycophants have given, and modern Popes have taken
such jurisdiction to themselves; resembling Antiochus, King of Syria, who
styled himself a (...). Hieronymus in Daniel. cap. iii.
God; and the Emperor Domitian, who used to assign his Proclamations with this
Elogie, Dominus Deus vester Domitianus. Suetonius in Domitiano.
Your Lord God Domitian; the Emperor Caligula, who called himself the Deum
Optimum Maximum, and Jovem Latialem. Pomponius Laetus.
best, and most mighty God, and the great God Jupiter of Italy; Sapores, the
King of Persia, who entitled himself the Brother of the Sun, and Moon;
Manichaeus, the Heretic, who called himself the Holy Ghost, as did that
Arabian Impostour, Mahomet; Simon Magus, who obtained that esteem with the
ancient Romans, that they erected him a Statue with this Inscription,

Eusebius, lib. 2. cap. 13.
SIMONI SANCTO DEO, In the honor of Simon, the Holy God. So Potestas Papae est
major omni alia potestate creata, aliquo modo se extendens ad coelestia,
terrestria, and infernalia ut de ea verificari possit quod dictum est, Omnia
subjecisti sub pedibus ejus. Antonin. in Sum. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5.
Antoninus, Archbishop of Florence, gives the Pope greater power, then any
other power, that ever God made, which after a sort even stretches it self to
things in heaven, things in earth, and things in Hell, so that of him that
saying of the Prophet David may be verified; Thou have made all things subject
to his Feet. But of this Luciferian Ambition, and inordinate Usurpation, many
Pontificians themselves have complained, amongst whom Franciscus Zabarella,
Cardinal of Rome, avers, that Ex hoc infiniti secuti sunt errores, quia Papa
occupavit omnia jura infertorum Ecclesiarum, and nisi Deus succurrat statui
Ecclesiarum, universa Ecclesia periclitabitur. Franciscus Zabarella.
Thereupon have ensued infinite Errors; for that the Pope has invaded the
Rights of all inferior Churches, and, unless God help the state of the
Churches, the universal Church is injeopardy. The learned Lady, Anna Daughter
to the Emperor Alexius, and Irene, in her Greek Story writes thus, Anna in
Historia Graeca.
The Pope is Lord of the whole world, as the Latins think, and speak of him;
(...), for this is a piece of their ambition.


Gent. What then was the Pope confined to a peculiar Diocese, beyond which,
without Usurpation, he could not extend his Phylacteries?


Minist. The ancient learned Fathers evermore bounded, and limited the Pope
within his own particular Jurisdiction. Ruffinus says, Romanus Pontifex
suburbicavarum Ecclesiarum solicitudinem great. Ruffinus, Historiae Ecclesiast.
lib. 1. cap. 9.
The Fathers in the Council of Nice appointed the Pope to oversee the Churches
of his own Suburbs; these our Nations are not within his Suburbs. Athanasius
says, Roma est Metropolis Romanae ditionis. Athanasius Ad solitariam vitam
agentes.
Rome is the Mother Church (not of England, or the whole world, but) of her own
particular Romish jurisdiction. The Bishops, in the Council of Rome, writ thus
to the Bishops of Illyricum, Sozomen. lib. 6. cap 23.
It is convenient (...), that all the Bishops, which be within the jurisdiction
of Rome, accord together. Flavianus, Patriarch of Constantinople, writes thus
to Leo, Bishop of Rome; Dignetur Sanctitas vestra indicare impietatem
Eutychetis omnibus Episcopis sub Beatitudine vestra degentibus. Inter Epistolas
Leonis, Epist. 9.
Let Your Holiness vouchsafe to make known the wickedness of Eutyches to all
Bishops, that live under you; not to all the Bishops through the world. Saint
Hierom, speaking of the use, and order of the Church of Rome, objected against
him, says, Quid mihi profers unius urbis consuetadinem? Hieronymus ad Euagrium.
What alledgest thou against me the Custom of one City? So much he abridgeth
the Pope's Jurisdiction, that he extends it not to the circumference of the
world; but restrains it to the Confines of one City: because Hieronymus
adversus Vigilantium.
Non solum unius urbis, sed etiam totius orbis erant Episcopi; They were the
Bishops not only of one City (as Rome) but of the whole world. Gennadius,
together with the Council of Constantinople, writes thus to the Bishop of
Rome; Curet Sanctitas tua universas tuas. Custodias, tibique subjectos
Episcopos. Gennadius Ad omnes Metropolitanos, and ad Papam Romans
Let Your Holiness see unto (not all the world, but) all Your own charge, and
such Bishops, as be subject unto You.


Gent. But these were but the Speeches of private Doctors, not of any general
Council, whose Definitions if you can produce, I shall submit.


Minist. It was the Definition of the Council of Constantinople; That Definimus
sedi Constantinopolitanae paria jura, and privilegia cum sede veteris Romae.
Council. Constantin. 2. cap. 36.
The Sea of Constantinople (...), should have the Rights, and privileges equal
with the Sea of Rome. And that Vt liquidius appareat Papam non imperare aliis
omnibus Episcopis, legatur sextus Canon Synodi Nicenae, quo diserte
praecipitur, ut aliis Ecclesiis Alexandrinus, aliis Romanus, aliis Antiochenus
praesit, ut non liceat alteri alterius Provinciam invadere. Nilus De Primatu
Romani Pontisicu.
it may well, and plainly appear, that the Pope has no power, or government
over other Bishops, Nilus bids us read the sixth Canon of the Nicene Council,
where it is expressly commanded, that the Bishop of Alexandria shall have rule
over certain Churches, and the Bishop of Rome over certain, and the Bishop of
Antioch likewise over certain, (...), and that it shall not be lawful for any
one of them to invade the Jurisdiction of another. Whereupon it was declared by
the Emperor Justinian, that Ecclesia urbis Constantinopolitanae Romae veteris
Praerogativa laetatur; The Church of the City of Constantinople enjoys the
Prerogative of ancient Rome. And, that none may think this is spoken of the
Churches, and not of the Bishops thereof, Nicephorus says, Romano, and
Constantinopolitano Episecpo ex aequo paria sunt and dignitatis praemia, and
honorum jura. Nicephor. lib. 12. cap. 13.
The title of dignity, and right of honor given to the Bishop of Rome, and the
Bishop of Constantinople are one, and equal. Whereupon Pope Liberius, as if he
were inferior, writes in this submissive style to Athanasius, Bishop of
Alexandria Epistola Liberii ad Athanas.
Quaeso, ut huic confessioni subscribas, ut ego securior efficiar, and tua
mandata inhaesitanter obeam; I beseech you to subscribe to this confession,
that I may be out of doubt and do your Commandment without delay.


Gent. I perceive, that the Bishop of Rome is not the universal Bishop, which
Gregory disclaimed in himself, and reproved in John, Bishop of Alexandria; yet
the Catholic Church was divided into those four Patriarchates of Rome,
Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, with whom Jerusalem had shared; were
not we of this Western part of the World under the Roman Patriarchate, and so
subject to the Bishop of Rome?


Minist. No; for at the Council of Nice, when this division of Patriarchates
was made, England neither was, nor ever had been under the Romish jurisdiction;
But the Metropolitan here was accounted alterius orbis Patriarcha, a Patriarch
of another World. This Nation received the Christian faith the second year of
Claudius, as you have heard, the forty fourth year after the Incarnation, by
the ministry of Simon Zelotes, Simon Zelotes, peragrata Mauritania, and
Afrorum regione, praedicat Christum tandem in Britannia, ubt crucifixus,
occisus, and sepultus est. Dorotheus in Synopsi.
and others, nigh an hundred, and fifty years before Constantine, in whose time
the Council of Nice was held, which distinguished the Patriarchs jurisdictions.
And the Romish jurisdiction was never attempted to be imposed upon the Church
of Britain, till three hundred years after, that Augustine the Monk labored
with sword to force it upon them; that (as Galfridus Monumothensis Mill
ducenti coruns, in ipso die martyrio decorati, regni coelestis adepti sunt
sedem. Galfrid. Monumothens. lib. 8. cap. 4.
says) a thousand, two hundred Religious men, or Students were in one day
honored with Martyrdom, and obtained a seat in the Kingdom of Heaven; and
Erant septem Episcopatus, and Archiepiscopatus religiosissimis Praesulibus
muniti, and Abbatiae complures, in quibus grex Domini rectum ordinem tenebat.
Galfrid. ibid.
seven Bishoprics, and an Archbishopric possessed with many Godly Prelates,
and many religious houses, in which the Lord's flock held the right religion,
were heavily persecuted, and by degrees subjugated to the Roman slavery: yet so
as Stow. Chronic. page 91.
Augustine received from the free Charter of King Ethelbert (not Pope Gregory)
the City of Rex dedit licentiam praedicandi, and manisionem in Civitaete
Dorovernensi (id est, Cantuaria) quae imperii sui totius erat metropolis. Beda
Histor. lib. 1. cap. 25.
Canterbury, and the ruins of a demolished Church, which he repaired for his
Cathedral, and dedicated it to our Savior.


Gent. It is confessed then, that England, and the associated Nations, and
Dominions, were once subject to the Pope's jurisdiction: how came he to be
ejected, and loose possession?


Minist. As was said of Pope Boniface, Captus est Bonifacius Octavus, and in
carcere periit, atque hinc est, quod dicitur de eo; Intravit ut Vulpes,
regnavit ut Lupus, mortuus est ut Canis. Carrion. Chron. page 228.
that he entered as a Fox, tyrannized as a Lion, died as a Beast; So the
insinuation of Papal jurisdiction into these Nations was subtle, the
continuation tyrannical, and the ejection disgraceful; of which I will give you
a glance, referring you for the more exact, and particular discovery hereof to
our National Annals, and municipal Laws.

First, The insinuation was subtle, taking advantage of the superstitious
devotion of Ina, King of the West Saxons, and in a manner, Monarch of England;
who having builded the College of Wells, and Abbey of Glastenbury, before
resignation of his royal dignity, and retiring to Rome, caused Peter Pence to
be paid to the Pope.

Secondly, The continuation was tyrannical, as appears by the Gests of Stow,
Chronic. page 204, 206, 207.
Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, who, with other Bishops, and Barons,
having abjured the Pope's usurped jurisdiction, at least in part, appeals, and
repairs to the Court of Rome for an absolution, creating King Henry the Second
Daniel, History of Henry the Second.
many troubles; at length restored to his Episcopal See, by the mediation of
Pope Alexander, and Lewis of France, and continuing his turbulency, was slain
by William Tracy Baron of Brayns, Reignold Fitz-urse, Hugh Morvilt, and Richard
Briton, Knights; whereupon the Nation was Interdicted, the King excommunicated,
and not absolved without corporal penance. And, though Pope's Bulls were
rampant in times of weak Princes, or those, that were embroyled with civil
Wars, as King John, and Henry the Third; yet those, that were magnanimous, and
victoriously successful, shaked them off with contempt; as Edward the Third,
who in the fourtieth year of his reign, The King commanded, that Peter's pence
should no more be gathered, or paid to Rome. Saint Peter's pence is the King's
alms (observe, not the Pope's due) and all, that had twenty penyworth of goods,
should pay that penny at Lammas. Stow, Chron. page 461.
commanded that Peter -Pence should be no more collected, or paid to Rome.

Lastly, The ejection of Papal jurisdiction out of England was disgraceful:
for, Stow, Chron. page 1003.
in the twenty sixth year of the reign of Henry the Eight, it was enacted by
Parliament at Westminster, that the Pope with all his authority should be clean
banished out of this Realm, and that he should be no more called Pope (which
title he (i) Gesta Abbat. Sancti Albini. Regist. Monast. Sancti Albini. John
Bale. Onuphrius, Giraldus Cambrensis.
borrowed of Jupiter) but Bishop of Rome, and that the King should be reputed,
and taken as supreme moderatour of the Church of England, having full authority
to reform all errors, heresies, and abuses thereof, with the appendage of
First Fruits, Tenths, all spiritual Dignities, and Promotions, annexed to his
Royal Dignity.


Gent. Can you vindicate this from extraordinary rigor; That the Pope's
jurisdiction confessedly possessed, and enjoyed so many Centuries, should be
wholly ejected in one day out of all these Nations? especially Ireland, the
regiment whereof was conferred upon Sanderus in Secta Anglicana.
Henry the Second by Pope Adrian the Fourth, conditionally to hold it of him.


Minist. That the Pope could give that, which he never had, is a Paradox both
in Logic, and Politics. Lunatic Thrasilaus Athenaeus.
claimed all the Athenian Ships. The Cham of Tartary challenges to be Master
both of substance, and ceremonies to the whole Universe. Therefore haing dined
himself, he causes a Trumpet to be sounded, that all other Princes through the
World may dine. Henry Plantagenet The Kings etc. with other Princes, and
Bishop, submitting themselves, and theirs to the King of England, and his
successors, building him a great Palace at Dublin, where he held his
Christmas. Stow, Chron. page 207.
completed that conquest over Ireland, which was begun by Strongbow, Earl of
Strigule; not holding it of the Pope, (as the Jesuit Sanders pretends) but of
God, and his sword; for Giraldus Cambrensis, Radulph Cogshall. Gervasius Dorob.
the King of Conach, Devuntius King of Cork, Morice King of Me^th^ he King of
Vriel, Duvenald King of Ossery, Duvenald King of Limerick, with other Princes,
and Bishops, submitted themselves unto him, and his Successors, not by virtue
of the Pope's Charter, but his prevailing army.


Gent. But I am not yet satisfied, how the Pope could be lawfully dispossessed
of that, which he had so long possessed.


Minist. The Pope's pretended jurisdiction is claimed either by Divine right,
or humane: according to both claims, even by the Principles of your own
Scholemen, and Canonists, he was lawfully dispossessed.


Gent. How was he lawfully dispossessed, if his jurisdiction was claimed by
divine right? that seems improbable.


Minist. Supposing, but not granting, that Antichristian Principle, that the
Pope's universal jurisdiction was by divine right, your own Sancta Clara
confesses, Substractio ab obedientia non sedis Apostolicae, seu authoritatis
annexae illi sedi, quantum est ad actum primum seu signatum, sed solum quantum
ad actum exercitum, id est in quantum exercetur a tali persona, cui pro tempore
commissa est seeds illa. Franciscus De Sancta Clara. page 335.
that Substraction, or withdrawing from obedience annexed to the Apostolic
See, according to the actus exercitus, as it is so qualified, or is exercised
by such a power, to wit Heretical, or Tyrannical, is lawful. And for proof of
this he quotes Gerson, once Chancellor of Paris; who affirms, Hoc etiam
practicum est per quoscunque Reges, and Principes, qui sese substraxerunt
abobedientia eorum, quos isti, vel illi judicabant esse Summos Pontifices: quae
tamen substractiones approbatae sunt per sacrum Constantiense Concilium,
quaedam express, quaedam implicit, vel aequivalenter. Gerson.
that It was practiced by all Kings, and Princes, who withdrew themselves from
the obedience of those, whom they acknowledged to be Popes; which withdrawings
nevertheless were approved by the holy Council of Constance, some expressly,
some impliedly, and equivalently; Conclusum est per Concilium Turonense
Principem posse ab obedientia Papae sese subducere, ac subtrahere pro tuitione
tantum, ac defensione jurium suorum temporalium. Concilium Turonense.
as also a Synod of Turon in France, wherein it was concluded, that a Prince
may withdraw himself from obedience of the Pope for safeguard, and defense of
his temporal rights. And, if a Prince may withdraw from obedience, for defense
of his temporal rights; how authentic a commission had our Princes, when both
temporal, and spiritual rights were at the Stake? The Church notoriously
corrupted both in Doctrine, and Manners; Rome, that Apocalyptical Babylon, and
the Romish Hierarchy Antichristian, as is formerly evidenced.


Gent. You have made this clearer then I imagined; if Princes, and Nations may
withdraw themselves from Papal obedience, even supposing their jurisdiction
were by divine right, much more, if the claim be but from humane grounds,
conquest, consent, pact, prescription, or the like.


Minist. You say right; for it will follow a majore ad minus, from the greater
to the less; but the Pope's claim of jurisdiction in England was from none of
these, but was insinuated by subtilty, continued by usurpation, and enforced by
tyranny. For Harpsfield does unanswerably demonstrate Legibus autem nostru^
fuisse concessum jus nominandi, and providendi de Beneficiis, testatur post
alios Harpsfield, Saculo 14. fuisse etiam aliam consuetudinem immemorialem ex
privilegio ortam causas Clericorum cognoscendi, patet ex decisione Rotae, 304.
Sancta Clara, page 330.
Supreme Magistrates of this nation in all Ages to have enjoyed the right of
nomination, and provision of Benefices, and taking cognizance of the causes of
the Clergy. Which even Suarez proves to be their just interest by divine, and
natural right, seeing Cui conceditur regnum, necessario omnia censentur
concessa. sine quibus regnum gubernari non potest: regnum vero gubernari non
posset, nisi Principes hac potestate potirentur etiam in Clericos. Suarez, lib.
3. De primatu Summi Pontisicis.
Wheresover God collates a Kingdom, he collates also all things necessary for
the managerie thereof, and without which, government cannot be duly
administrated; but government cannot be duly administrated, unless Princes
have a power in reformation of the Church, to be exercised even over the
Clergy: which was wholly obstructed, while the Pope dispensed his exorbitant,
and apocryphal jurisdiction, till the Supreme Magistrates by the consent of the
three orders of the Kingdom were necessitated to reassume that (s) Cajetanus,
De potestate Papae, cap. 27.
tyrannidi resistendi potestatem, quam jure naturali, and gentium habent etiam
in rebus Ecclesiasticis, power of resisting Tyranny, which Cajetan confesses
they have even in Ecclesiastical affairs both by the Law of Nature, and Law of
Nations.


Gent. Seeing then in your sense the Bishop of Rome is an Usurper; tell me what
you conceive he holds by divine right; what canonically, or by humane
indulgence lawfully conferred; what by tyranny, and usurpation: for this
discussion will give great light to the point in hand.


Minist. I will digest this into Propositions, which are all, or the most of
them demonstrated in the foregoing discourse.

First, That all the Apostles were equal, according to that saying of Saint
Cyprian; Hoc erant caetari Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti
and bonoris, and potestatis. Cyprian. De simplicitate Praelatorum.
The rest of the Apostles were the same that Saint Peter was, all endowed with
the same fellowship, and power.

Secondly, It cannot be proved by Scripture, that Peter was ever at Rome.

Thirdly, The Bishop of Rome succeeded neither Peter, nor any of the Twelve, in
the Apostolic Charge.

Fourthly, The Bishop of Rome was primatively but equal with other Bishops.

Fifthly, Bishops are essentially distinguished from Presbyters but, at the
most, in original power to ordain, and exercise of spiritual Jurisdiction
indeterminately: which is Saint Hierom's determination, In divinis instituendis
quid potest Episcopus facere, quod non Presbyter, excepta ordinatione? Hieron.
What can a Bishop do in divinis instituendis, in instituting, or executing of
divine things, which a Presbyter may not do; except Otherwise in distinction of
order, and Jurisdiction, Irenaeus justly calls Episcopacy Traditionem
Apostolicam toti mundo manifestam.
Ordination?

Sixthly, The Bishop of Rome's Jurisdiction at the first was indefinitely over
Christians, in, or about Rome.

Seventhly, It was by the Indulgence of Constantine, that the Roman Diocese
was further extended, which St. Hierom at the least meant in that Curb;
Noverint Episcopi se magis consuetudine, quam dispositionis Dominicae veritate,
Presbyteris esse majores. Hieron. in Epist. ad Titum.
Let Bishops understand, that they be greater then Presbyters more by Custom,
and prescription, then by verity of divine Ordinance.

Eighthly, More by custom extensive, not denying Superiority of order, and
jurisdiction, intensive.
It was humane Councils, not any divine Authority, that distinguished the
Church into Patriarchates, conferring that of the West upon the Bishop of Rome;
which Aeneas Sylvius, afterward Pope, confesses; Ante Concilium Nicenum
quisque sibi vivebat, and parvus respectus habebatur ad Ecclesiam Romanam.
Aeneas Sylvius, Epist. 188.
little respect was had to Rome before the Council of Nice.

Ninthly, It was by humane Institution, that for Unity, and Peace sake, the
Bishop of Rome had Priority of Order in General Councils.

Tenthly, His claim of universal Jurisdiction was usurped, and unlawful: So St.
Hierom, Si authoritas quaeritur, orbis major est urbe, ubicunque fuerit
Episcopus, sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, ejusdem
est meriti, ejusdem Sacerdotii. Hieron. ad Euagrium.
If we seek for authority, the world is bigger then the City of Rome;
wheresoever there is a Bishop, whether he be at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at
Constantinople, or at Rhegium, he is of like worth, of like Priesthood. Gregory
the First disclaimed the Title of Universal Bishop in himself, saying, Nemo
praedecessorum meorum hoc profano vocabulo usus est. Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 38.
None of his Predecessors used such a profane Term; and checks the Bishop of
Constantinople for it, saying, Quid tu Christo universalis Ecclesiae capiti in
extremi judicii dicturus es examine, qui cuncta ejus membra tibimet conaris
Vniversalis appellatione supponere? Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 38.
What answer will thou make unto Christ, who is indeed the Head of the
Universal Church; at the trial of the last judgment, that thou go about
under the Name of Universal Bishop to subdue all his Members unto thee?

Eleventhly, The Pope had no jurisdiction in this Nation for the first six
Centuries:

Twelfthly, Austin, and his fellow-Monks were the first Seminaries of it, who
introduced it by blood, and superstition.

Lastly, Bonifacius Tertius magna contentione obtinuit a Phaca Caesare, ut
sanciretur Romanus Pontifex Oecumenicus, and summus Episcopus totius Ecclesiae
Christinae. Ab eo tempore nunquam desierunt Romani Pontifices conari pro
dignitate, and potentia sua augenda. Carrion. Chron. page 161.
It is justly excluded out of these Nations, as inconsistent with civil
Government, and destructive to the peace of Church, and State.


Gent. All this seems to be probable, and you have given such evident
Demonstration of the particulars, that I know not what to reply.


Minist. Then I may safely conclude; That, which has no ground in Scriptures,
Fathers, or ancient Councils, was not known for six hundred years after the
Incarnation, was introduced with blood, and superstition, and maintained with
Tyranny, and is inconsistent with civil Government, and destructive to peace of
Church, and State, ought to be abjured: But such is the Pope's pretended
jurisdiction in these Nations; Therefore it ought to be abjured.


The Eleventh Article.
And all Doctrines in affirmation of the said Points I do abjure, and renounce
without Equivocation, mental reservation, or secret evasion whatsoever, taking
the words by me spoken, according to the common, and usual meaning of them.

Gent. WHat new matter presents it self to be abjured in this Article? all
Doctrines in affirmation of the Points in question were renounced before.


Minist. The ten former Articles (as was premised in the beginning) comprised
the rem, or matter to be sworn, or abjured; The two last contain the modum, or
manner of abjuration; being undistinguishably the same with that of the Oath of
Supremacy, which concluded thus; Haec omnia plane, ac sincere agnosco, and juro
juxta expressa verba pera me hic prolata; and juxta, planum, and communem
sensum, and intellectum eorundem verborum* absque ulla aequivocatione, aut
mentali evasione, aut tacita reservatione quacunque, Andreros.
I acknowledge, and swear all these things plainly, and sincerely according to
the express words by me here uttered; and according to the plain, and common
meaning, and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or
mental reservation, or secret evasion whatsoever.


Gent. I beseech you therefore give me a distinct Survey of this Article.


Minist. I shall anatomize it for you; First, Here is the action, which is
Abjuration, or Renunciation. Secondly, The (...), how it must be abjured; and
that either negatively,
First, Without equivocation. Secondly, Without mental reservation. Thirdly,
Without secret evasion.


Or affirmatively; Taking the words by me spoken, according to the common, and
usual meaning of them.


Gent. I desire a more distinct discovery of these in order, for satisfaction
of Conscience; Therefore tell me first, what it is to abjure, or what an Oath
is.


Minist. An Oath is an Invocation, or calling upon God, whereby we petition him
as the only Searcher of the Heart, that he would bear witness to the Truth,
and punish the Jurour, if he wittingly deceive; or it is a Juramentum est
Petitio Divini Testimonii ad nostri Testimonii veritatem confirmandam. Amesius
in Medulla Theologiae.
Petition of the Divine Testimony for Confirmation of the Truth of our
Testimony: So that in this Oath of Abjuration the Jurour, or Party deposed,
Proprie vero Juramentum est Invocatio Det, qua petitu^^^t^is, tanquam untcus
cordium inspector, restimonium det veritati, and jurantem puniat, si sciens
fallat. Ursinus in Corpore Orthodoxae Doctrinae.
petitions God, as the only Diver into the Heart, that he would bear witness
to the truth of his renouncing all Doctrines, and practices therein contained;
and punish him, if he play the Hypocrite, or dissemble. And in this (as in most
of other Oaths) Sex quaedam Juramentum praestat: nam primo Deum superiore^
agnoscit, Apostolus enim (ad Hebraeos sexto) ait, quod Homines per majorem sui
jurant. Deinde eundem veracem, and constanti side praeditum profiteatur, a qua
deficere non possit. Tertio, Eum rerum omnium scientem, and arcanorum omnium
conscium, and quem nihil lateat, asseverat, quod ad Divinae Majestatis
commendatione^ c^^fert. Quarto, Humanae fidei vindicem, and veritatis inter
homines Patronum, and assertorem commendat; qua laud nulla major ab homine
potest exspectari. Denique, Dilectionem, and amorem in Deum commendat. Addi
etiam postremo posset, Debitum honorem exhiberi Deo. Rangolius, Commemar. in
lib. 1. Regum, page 1201.
six things pertaining to Religion are filed;

First, The Jurour acknowledges God for his Superior; for Heb. vi. 16. (...),
Men verily swear by the greater.

Secondly, He confesses God to be true, and veracity to be so essential to
him, as he cannot be without it.

Thirdly, He asseveres, that God knows all things, and that he is privy to all
secrets, and from him nothing is hid; which conduces to the Glory of his
Divine Majesty.

Fourthly, It commends God, as the Vindicatour of man's fidelity, if he speak
truth; the Revenger, if hely; and appeals unto him, as the patron, and
Assertour of Verity amongst men; which is the greatest honor can be exhibited
from the Creature to the Creator.

Fifthly, It commends the parties love, and zeal toward God.

Sixthly, It presents due honor, to his Divine Majesty, (as Saint Hierom
Hieronymus super Matthaeum. cap. V.
says) He, that swears, either reverenceth, or loves him, by whom he
swears; and Aristotle Aristoteles, primo Metaphysic. cap. 3.
says, (...), An Oath is the most honorable thing, that pertains to
Religion.


Gent. But what necessity is there of this solemn Oath? Would not separating
our selves from the Roman Church, and conjoyning with yours, be a signal
expression of our conformity, without abjuration?


Minist. In no wise, for there is a Aquinas, secunda secundae. Quaest. 89. Art.
4
conditional necessity at the least of Oaths, since our prevarication, and fall
in Adam; because after sin man lost even that credence, that ought to be given
to his bare Testimony, and that credit, that otherwise ought to be given to the
Testimony of others: for this cause (as Rangolius Rangolius in lib. 1. Regum,
cap. xiv. page 1201.
says) quoniam vacillat humana fides, and incerta pendet spes promissorum, ob
humani ingenit levitatem, idcirco Deus testis adhibetur, ut and tuto
praeteritis, atque praesentibus credere possimus, and futura absque angore, and
sollicitudine expectare; Because man's credit is staggering, and the hope of
promises is uncertainly pendulous, by reason of the fickleness of humane
disposition, therefore God is used, as witness, that we may safely give credit
to things present, and past, and expect future without anxiety, and trouble.


Gent. They, that make no conscience of lies, will not scruple an oath, nor
shrink at perjury; so that of some this Camel of Abjuration will be swallowed
without straining.


Minist. An Oath is a most sacred kind of Ty, which by a certain secret
Religion, and impression of Divine fear, obliges so strictly the very hearts,
and inward senses of man; that the greatest part of mankind, though otherwise
hardened, and stiffned to other crimes, yet trembles, and relents at the
violating of an Oath. Oftentimes (says Saepijsime homines, de quarum adulterio
suspicantur, ad jusjurandum provocant conjuges suas; quod utique non facerent,
nisi crederent etiam illas, quae non timuerunt adulterium, timere posse
perjurium; quia and revera nonnullae impudicae, quae non timuerunt illicit^
concubitu viros suos fallere, iisdem viris, quos fefellerunt, timuerunt Deum
testem fallaciter adhibere. August. Contra Mendac. ad Consent. cap. 21.
Saint Augustine) men, who suspect their Wives of Adultery, provoke them to an
Oath, which they would not do; unless they believed even those, that feared not
Adultery, would fear Perjury; because it is evident some unchaste Dames, that
scrupled not to injure their Husbands by unlawful Copulation, trembled to call
God falsely to witness, or make him their Compurgatour, who was conscious to
their guilt. Therefore the Apostle says, Hebr. vi. 16. (...). An Oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife; especially if it be without
Merito Dei testimonium invocatur ad veritatem confirmandam; quia ille est summa
veritas, qui nec fallere, nec falli potest. Amesius, Medulla Theologiae. page
203.
Equivocation, which is the (...), or manner required.


Gent. Seeing the form, or life of this Oath consists in the manner of
Abjuration, tell me what Equivocation is?


Minist. Fallacia Aequivocationis est, cum quis utitur vocabulo ullo ambiguo,
and sumit in duplici sensu, cum videri vult sumere in uno tantum. Cracanthorp.
Logic. page 469.
Equivocation (which Sophisters call Graeci ejusmodi Cothurnos vocant (...),
quales pleraque sunt responsa Daemonum. Keckerman. System. Logic. page 555.
(...)) is an ambiguous, or doubtful speech, which may be taken in two senses;
the speaker subtly meaning one thing, and the hearers innocently apprehending
another.


Gent. Will you be pleased to give me some instances hereof; and tell me who
was the first Author of it?


Minist. As God is the Author of truth, and swearing in Justice, and Judgment:
so Satan of lies, and equivocating Perjury. In which Amphibologies the Enemy of
mankind (either because he knew not the event, or had an intention to deceive)
gave forth his Oracles at Daphne, and Delphos. Croesus, King of Lydia,
consulting that impure Shrine, whether his warlike advancing with the
Babylonians against Cyrus should be successful, received this Answer,

Croesus, Halin penetrans, magnam pervertet opum vim;

Croesus, entering Halis, shall destroy a great mass of wealth; which he
apprehended of the enemies, but it fell out to be his own. Pyrrhus, King of
Epire, received this Riddle from the Pythian Priest,

Quod dedit Pyrrho, Regi Epirotarum, open Pythii Sacerdotis, Aio te, Aeacide,
Romanos vincere posse. Cicero. 2. De Divinatione.
Aio te, Aeacide, Romanos, vincere posse:

Which may indifferently be construed two ways; I affirm, That thou Pyrrhus may
conquer the Romans, or, that the Romans may conquer thee: he took it in the
former sense, and was deceived. Albertus, Duke of Placentia, was courted into
security with this Aenigma; Domine, sis securus, inimici intrabunt terram tuam,
and subjicientur; which he interpreted thus, Sir, you may be secure, your
enemies shall enter your Land, and shall be subjected unto you; but the Jugler,
by accenting it Domi ne sis securus, inimici intrabunt terram tuam and
subjicient (...).
otherwise, meant thus, You may not be secure at home, the enemies shall enter
your Land, and set all on fire. Hieronymus Moronus, Counselor to the Duke of
Millain, advising with this Arch Sophister, whether he might safely go with his
Embassage to the Emperor's Camp, was answered; Ibis, redibis, non eris
captivus; which he understood thus, Thou shall go, return, not be captive: but
the sad event proved, that the Comma was to be placed after non, Ibis redibis
non, eris captivus.
Thou shall go, not return, be a captive. Nay, so cunning a Sophister is the
Devil, that, for all the Pope's infallibility, he sometimes by equivocating
deceives his Holiness: for Sciscitabatur Sylvester Secundus Diabolum quamdiu in
Pontificatu victurus erat, responsum habuit, quamdiu non celebraret in
Jerusalem; gavisus valde est Papa; nam Hierosolymam omnino non proficisci
decretum erat. Quum quarto Pontificatus anno Romae ad Ecclesiam S. Crucis, qua
in Jerusalem vocatur, celebraret, and Daemonis aquivocationem, and fatalem
diem sibi adesse miser intellexit. Platina in Vita Sylvestri Secundi; and
Martinus Polonus, Anno 1007.
Sylvester the Second, demanding of the Devil, (with whom he had frequent
conference) how long he should continue in the Popedom, he received this
Answer, As long as he did not officiate, or celebrate, the Mass at Jerusalem:
at which the Pope rejoiced; for he resolved never to go to Jerusalem, when as
in the fourth year of his Popedom he was officiating in Rome, at the Church
Sanctae Crucis, which is called Jerusalem, he understood Satan's Equivocation,
and that his fatal day was at hand.


Gent. I have oftentimes heard, that Satan sometimes uses such equivocating
Paralogisms, and Amphibolies to deceive men; but, I hope, no Christian imitates
that subtle Serpent in this.


Minist. Too many; for this was the fraudulent dealing of the Hac fraud
Arriani olim usi, Nicena, dicebant, fides, sen quae Niceae decreta fuit,
amplectenda est: Haec nostra est Nicena, and Niceae decreta; Ergo amplectenda;
scilicet Arriani aliquot Episcopi, tempore Ariminensis Concilii, Niceam
contenderant, ibi Synodum habent, and Ariminensm fidem Niceae confirmant, and
sic fides eorum Nicena vere fides erat. Conventiculi scilicet illius Niceni;
sed non illa, quae 318. Patribus in Oecumenico Concilio declarata erat.
Socrates, lib. 2. cap. 29.
Arrians, in the time of the Council of Arimine, who, being to subscribe to the
Nicene Creed, repaired privately to Nice, and there kept a secret conventicle,
decreeing their own faith, and calling it the Nicene faith; fallaciously
arguing thus, The Nicene faith is to be embraced; but this, which we hold
(denying the Deity of Christ) is the Nicene Faith; and so it was, but not of
that lawful Ecumenical Council of Nice, which was celebrated by three hundred,
and eighteen Fathers, but a private act of their tenebrizing there. When
Gurnay, and Matrevirs, Keepers of Edward the Second, then in durance at
Berkley-Castle, demanded of some of the Peers, whether they should secretly
murder Edward; Tarleton, Bishop of Hereford, cunningly contrived this equivocal
resolution; Edvardum occidere nolite timere, bonum est: which, as by him it was
accented, they rightly Englished thus, To kill Edward do not fear, it is a good
thing. But, when the Tragedy was ended, by altering one Edvardum occidere
nolite, timere bonum est.
Comma, he excused himself, pretending he meant thus, To seek to shed King
Edward 's blood refuse, to fear I count it good.


Gent. This is a Diabolical cheat, and he were a Devil incarnate, and no
Christian, that would invoke the divine omnisciency to the truth of his
Testimony, knowing he did equivocate, and dissemble with God. What do you mean
by mental reservation?


Minist. Mental reservation is a secret reserve of the mind, whereby a man
cunningly winds himself from all engagement of assertion, or promise, and acts
the Jugler so, that when we think he is fast, he is loose. This Stratagem is as
frequent with the Jesuits, as Equivocation. To give you a few instances. A
Loyalist perhaps will not scruple to abjure the Pope's Supremacy over the
Catholic Church, to wit, with this reservation, in the interregnum, or vacancy
between one Pope, and another. He will abjure the Church of Rome to be the true
Church, to wit, in Julius Cesar's time. That there is not any
Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, with this reserve, if
it be consecrated by a Layman. That there is not any Purgatory, with this
mental caution, after the Resurrection. That Crucifixes ought not to be adored,
to wit, of the two Thieves. That Images ought not to be worshipped, to wit, of
Heathen Gods. That salvation cannot be merited by works, with this reservation,
If they be done before conversion. This was the imposture of that infamous
Arrius ille infamis Hareticus dejerasse fertur, qui quaerenti Imperatori. number
vellet Nicenae fidei, quae ipsius Haeresin de abnegata Christi divinitate
damnaverat, subscribere; continuo se facturum respondit. Poscente vero
Imperatore (quod fidem ejus quodammodo suspectam haberit) ut in ipsius Synodi
verba juraret, confessionem quandam Haereticam, and suam composuit, eamque
subsignatam sinu abdidit ac tum demum cogitatione in hanc, quam ipse secum
habuit, intenta, juravit se vere, and ex animo sul scripsisse. Socrates, Histor.
Heretic Arrius, who, when the Emperor enquired whether he would subscribe to
the Nicene Creed, which condemned his Heresy of denying the Divinity of
Christ, he forthwith answered, he would. And the Emperor requiring (because he
suspected his fidelity) that he would swear in the very words of the Synod it
self; he subtilely composed a certain Heretical confession of his own, and
having sealed it, hid it in his bosom, and his mind being intent upon that,
which he had hid there, he swore, that he had subscribed truly, and from his
heart; and so, in his own conceit, eluded the sacred^ty of his Oath.


Gent. This is more horrid, then the former, and ought not only to be abjured
in Religion, but exterminated out of humane society. What do you mean by the
third secret evasion?


Minist. Secret evasion intended here is any shift, either suggested by Satan,
or contrived by a man's self to disoblige, and disingage himself from this
Oath. Such was the evasion of him, Ille, qui cum triginta dierum essent cum
host pactae induciae, noctu populabatur agros, quod dierum essent pactae, non
noctium induciae. Ciceto, lib. 1. Officiorum.
who, when a Truce of peace was covenanted with the enemies for thirty days,
spoiled all their fields by night, because the Truce was made for days, not
nights: Romani deceperunt Antiochum, cum quo pacti erant de dimidio navium
reddendo, singulas naves dissecuerunt, and cujusque navis dimidium reddiderunt.
Valor. Maximus.
of the Romans, who indenting with Antiochus, to restore him half his Navy,
divided all the Ships in the midst, rendering him the half of every one, and
so disenabled him of all for any service: of that Cicero, lib. 1. Offic.
perfidious Soldier, who, sent from the Carthaginian Army to Rome upon parole,
bound by an Oath to return; when he had gone a few furlongs from the Camp,
returned, feigning he had forgot something; thinking, that, by this means, he
was disingaged for further performance: of the Sabinis proditae portae per
vigilem, nec dolo; sed puella pretium rei, quam gerebant in sinistris,
petierat: dubium, elypeos, an armillos; illi, ut fidem solverent, and
ulciscerentur, clypeis obruere. Lucius Florus, lib. 1. page 10.
Soldiers to Tarpeia, who betrayed the Roman Capitol into the enemies hands,
bargaining to have that, which they carried upon their left hands for her
Treason (meaning the golden bracelets) now the enemies, when they were
admitted, did cast not their Bracelets only, but their Bucklers also upon her,
through the weight whereof she was pressed to death.


Gent. We may say with Cicero, Decipere hoc quidem, non Jurare est; This is to
deceive, or forswear, not to swear: how then ought an Oath to be in justice,
judgment, and verity; for so the Prophet Jeremie says, Jer. iv. 2.


Minist. That is expressed in the affirmative part of the (...), or manner of
Abjuration; Taking the words by me spoken according to the common, and usual
meaning of them. For (says Religio juramenti tanta est, ut nullam admittat
aequivocationem, aut mentalem reservationem; interpretanda sunt verba juramenti
in foro conscientiae ad sensum jurantis, si simpliciter, and candide egerit,
sin minus ad sensum ejus, quem fallere volunt, aut cui juravit: in foro autem
externe verba jurantium accipienda sunt, ut vulgo intelliguntur. Amesius.
Medulla Theolog. page 164, 166.
Amesius) the Religion, or tie of an Oath is so sacred, that it admits of no
equivocation, or mental reservation; but the words of abjuration are to be
interpreted in the Court of Conscience, according to the meaning of him, that
swears, if he deal plainly, and heartily; if not, according to the meaning of
him he would deceive, or to whom he has sworn. But in foro externo, or the
Judicature of men, words of them, that swear, are to be taken as they are
vulgarly understood. And Isiodore Isiodor. Hispan. Sent. lib. 2. cap. 21.
gives the reason, Quacunque verborum art, quisque juret, Deum tamen, qui
conscientiae testis est, ita hoc accipere, sicut ille, cui juratur, intelligit;
With what craft, or cunning of words soever any man can swear, God, who is
witness of our conscience, so takes the words, as he, to whom we depose, or
swear, understands them: which the Heathen Romans knew by the glimmering
light of nature, when they condemned their own Citizens to perpetual slavery in
the brazen Mines, for falsifying their Oaths, and equivocating with their
enemies. And Marcus Regulus, Ad supplicium redire maluit, quam fidem hosti
datam fallere. Cicero, lib. 1. Offic.
though he knew he was to undergo exquisite tortures, would rather return to
Carthage to his deadly enemies, then violate his Oath.


Gent. I, for my part, had rather die a thousand deaths, then perfidiously to
dissemble with God, who searches the heart, and tries the reins. Therefore I
shall ingenuously, and sincerely abjure, if you can but with like success clear
the next Article, and some other scruples.


The Twelfth Article.
And I do believe no power derived from the Pope, or Church of Rome, or any
other person, can absolve me from this my Oath; and I do renounce all Pardons,
and Dispensations to the contrary: So help me God.

Gent. IS it usual for the Pope, or Church of Rome to absolve men, that have
deposed, from solemn Oaths? or out of their plenary power to grant Pardons, and
Dispensations from Oaths? for I am not much versed in this History.


Minist. You have heard how Pope Pius Quintus Proceres, subditos, and populos
dicti regni, ac cateros omnes, qui illi quomodocunque juraverunt, ab juramento
hujusmodi, ac omni prorsus dominii, fidelitatis, and obsequii debito, perpetuo
absolutos; praecipiens, and interdicens universis, and singulis Proceribus,
subditis, populis, ne ejus mandatis, and legibus auderent obedire sub poena
Anathematis. Bulla Pii Quinti, Anno Elizabethae 12. 1570.
pronounced, that all, whosoever, by any occasion, had taken the Oath of
Allegiance, or Supremacy unto Queen Elizabeth, were for ever discharged of such
their Oath, and also from all fealty, and service, which was due to her by
reason of her Government, commanding, and interdicting all, and singular
Nobles, Subjects, and People, not to be obedient to her Mandates, and Laws,
under pain of his great Anathema, or curse. And Friar Sigebert confesses it to
be one of your novel Roman Heresies to Docent populum, quod malis Regibus
nullam debeant subjectionem, and licet eis Sacramentum Fidelitatis fecerunt,
nullam tamen debeant fidelitatem, nec perjuri dicantur, qui contra Regem
senserint: imo, qui Regi paruerit, pro excommunicato habeatur; qui contra Regem
fecerit, noxa injustitiae, and perjurii absolvatur. Sigebert. Anno 1088.
teach the people, that they ow no subjection to wicked Princes; and that,
although they have taken the Oath of Fealty, yet do they ow them no Allegiance,
neither are they perjured, that think ill against their Supreme Majesty; yea,
he, that obeys the King, or Supreme Magistrate, is reputed an excommunicate
person; and he, that takes part against him, is absolved from the crime of
injustice, and perjury. From this Diabolical Principle, it was, that Pope
Boniface the Third absolved Phocas from his fealty to the Emperor Mauritius;
Pope Zachary assoiled Pipine, and other Frenchmen of their Oath of Allegiance,
and fidelity made to Childerick King of France; Caesar a Summo Pontifice non
est excommunicatus solum; sed and reliquis potentioribus Principibus mandatum
est, ut Imperaterem alium designarent. Carrion. Chron. lib. 3. page 202,
Pope Hildebrand, or Gregory the Seventh, dispensed with Rodolph, Duke of
Suecia, for his Oath, he had taken to the Emperor Henry the Fourth, his liege
Lord. Histories are as full of such examples; as the Deserts of Arabia of
Quicksands, or dangerous wild Beasts.


Gent. There are very few Catholics, but are convinced, that Bishops of Rome
have transgressed in the frequency of their Absolutions, and misapplication of
their Pardons, and Dispensations; yet this prejudices not the Papal power to
grant Absolutions, and Dispensations, when there is just cause.


Minist. There can be no just cause for absolving Subjects of their Oath, and
ty of fealty to their Sovereign, for the reason formerly assigned, that I
engaged to insist upon in this last Article; which was, Vinculum illud officii,
quo majestatis suae subditi ad ipsum teneantur, perpetuum esse, solvique sine
piaculo non posse. Andreros
The Bond, and Obligation, whereby people are obliged in duty to their chief
Magistrate is perpetual, indissoluble, and may not lawfully be broken; In so
much, as it is grounded upon the fifth Commandment, and so the Law of Nature,
which even your own Angelical Doctor acknowledges to be out of the reach of
Papal absolution, or dispensation, as being Natural jus ab exordio rationalis
creaturae nec variatur tempore, sed immutabile permanet. Aquinas, 1. 2. Quaest.
94. Art. 5.
immutable from the very beginning of the rational Creature; and that moral
Commandments are such, as they are altogether Praecepta Decalogi sunt omnino
indispensabilia. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 100. Art. 8. in Decreto, Did. 5.
indispensable by any power.


Gent. What if Supreme Magistrates be Tyrants, Infidels, Heretics, Apostates,
or Renegadoes from the truth, may not the Pope absolve their Subjects from
former Oaths, and Engagements? To what end serve those Arrows of Dispensation,
Excommunication, the Seal of Confession, if they may not be levelled at such
Marks?


Minist. Even Tyrants, Infidels, Heretics, Apostates are so harnessed with the
Panoplie of the Law of Nature, and the Moral Law, that they are impenetrable by
these pretended Papal Darts, maugre the Romish Conclave; which I shall
demonstrate in order. First, Tyrants are shot-free, as appears by Saul, who
injuriously hunted David's Soul, sought his life, 1 Samuel xxiv. 12. 1 Samuel xxii.
23. who was faithful amongst all his Servants, 1 Samuel xxii. 14. recompensed him
good for evil, 1 Samuel xxiv. 18. who commanded Doeg to fall upon the Priests of
the Lord, and slew fourscore, and five persons, that did wear a linen Ephod;
and smote Nob, the City of the Priests, with the Edg of the Sword, both men,
and women, children, and sucklings, 1 Samuel xxii. 18, 19. with a conflux of many
other crimes, which importuned the Lord to revenge; yet David, though no
private man, but designed to a Kingdom, and General of the King's Army, durst
presume of no dispensation from the High Priest to disingage himself to Saul,
when he had him at an advantage; but, out of tender touch of conscience, cried
out, when his Servants pressed him to lay violent hands upon him, The LORD
forbid, that I should do this thing unto my Master, the Lord's Anointed, to
stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the LORD.
Which signal Loyalty, presidential to all Posterity, Optatus elegantly
describes, saying, Occasionem victoriae David habet at in manibus, incautum,
and securum adversarium sine labor poterat jugulare, and sine sanguine, and
constictu multorum, poterat bellum mutare in caedem; and pucri ejus; and
occasio sua debant, ad victoriam opportunitas hortabatur, stringere jam
caeperat ferrum, tree jam caeperat armata manus hostium in jugulos, sed obstabat
plena divinorum memoria mandatorum: hortantibus se puerts, and occasionibus
contradicit, tanquam and hoc diceret, Sine causa mr, Victorit, provocas,
frustra me in triumphu^ invitas, vole^am host^^ vincere, sed prius ost divina
praecepta serva re; non (inquit) mutam manum in Vnctum Domini: repressit cum
gladio manum, and dum timuit o'cum, servabat inimi^um. Optatus, lib. 2.
Adversits Parmenianum.
David had the opportunity of victory in his hands, he might have slain his
unwary, and secure Adversary without labor, have changed War into Slaughter
without Blood, and Skirmish of many; both his Servants, and the occasion
persuaded, the opportunity encouraged to Victory; now he began to draw his
Sword, now his armed Troops began to make at the Enemies throats: but the
perfect Remembrance of God's Countermand did hinder; he checks his Servants,
and occasions, that egged him on, as if with this Soliloquie; O Victory, thou
causelessly provokest me, th^^ invitest me to triumph in vain, I am willing to
conquer mine Enemy, but more willing to observe the precepts of the Deity; I
will not (says he) lay mine hand upon the Lord's Anointed. He plucked back his
hand with his Sword, and, while he feared the Oil, he preserved his Enemy.


Gent. David, and Saul lived under the Law; it may be pretended, that the
Bishop of Rome, the Evangelical High Priest, has more superlative Power, then
the Legal High Priest had.


Minist. A pretense indeed, but groundless; for the Apostle Saint Paul bids
every Soul be subject (...), to the higher Powers; which was then the
Tyrannical Emperor Nero, and his Commissioners. Tertullian advises to submit
to the Emperor Severus, who was the Severus quinta post Neronem severissima
Persecutione Ecclesiam excruciavit. Anno Christi 205. Orosius, and Baronius.
fifth Persecutour of Christians after Nero; for, having declared, that Male
velle, male facere, male dicere, male cegitare de quoqudin ex aequo vetdri;
quod in neminem licet, co forsitan magis nec in ipsum, qui per. Deum tantus
est, licere, hoc est, Imperatorem, Tertul. Apol. 1. cap. 36.
we are interdicted by the word to do evil, speak evil, think evil of any, he
gathers, that we are much more interdicted to act any of these things against
him, who is so highly advanced by God, that is, the Emperor Severus.


Gent. But if Tyranny does not discompose the Ligatures of obedience of
Subjects to their chief Magistrates; some think, that Infidelity joined with
Tyranny arms the Pope's Bulls, and Anathemas against such exorbitant Rulers.


Minist. No; Infidelity joined with Tyranny, much less alone (which is the
second thing) is ineffectual as to this purpose. The two forementioned
Emperors, Nero, and Severus (to whom the Apostles, and Fathers persuade
Subjection) were not only Tyrants, but Heathens. Saint Peter, from whom the
Pope challenges his exorbitant Jurisdiction, writing to his Countrymen, the
Jews, dispersed through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
exhorts them to carry themselves as Multis ante Claudium annis, Pompeius
Magnus eas (scilicet Pontum, Galatia, Cappadociam, etc.) in Provinciarum formam
redegerat. Sigonius, Comment. in lib. 2. Sulpitii.
free; not as using their Liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the
Servants of God; fearing God, and honoring the King: 1 Pet. ii. 16, 17. Now
who was this King, when Peter wrote this Epistle? Petrus. priorem Epistolam
suam conser psit, imperante Claudio. Baronius, Tom. 1. Anno 45.
Claudius the Emperor, for (as Appianus Appianus, Praefat. Historiarum.
says) the Roman Emperors were (...), Kings in all their actions. This
Claudius was both a Persecutour, and a Pagan; so cruel by nature, and
bloody-minded, (as Suetonius Claudius natura saevus, and sanguinarus, tormenta
quaestionum, poenasque Parricidarum coram exegerit, salutatoribus scrutatores
semper apposuit, and quidem omnibus, and acerbissimos; Gladiatorum (quos forte
prolapsos jugulari jusserat) expirantium facies cum voluptate solitus est
intueri: libidinis in foeminas profusissimus fuit; libertis, and uxoribus tam
misere ad dictus, ut compendio cujusque horum, vel etiam studio, ac libidine,
honoris, exercitus, impunitates supplicii largitus est. Suetonius, capp. 22,
23, 24, 25.
says) that he took Examinations on the Rack, exacted Murderers to be executed
in his presence, appointed Scrutatours, and Spies to observe all private
conferences; was a delightful Spectatour of the appaled countenances of dying
Sword-players; profusely libidinous toward women, slavishly adicted to
Ganymedes, and Catamites, that he conferred Honors, and Privileges of Immunity
upon them, that had studied the compendious art of Sodomy, and could
methodically teach it others: yet the Apostle persuades obedience, and
subjection to such a Pagan, such a Persecutour, such a prodigious Monster of
mankind.


Gent. But some conjecture, that this obedience, and subjection exhibited by
Christians, to Pagan, and persecuting Emperors, was extorted, and pumped out
of them by violence, and coercive power, not freely presented, and of a willing
mind.


Minist. Their conjecture is groundless; for Saint Paul, writing to the
Romans, who lived either under the same, or a worse Emperor, Nero, commands
every Soul to be subject to the higher powers; Romans xiii. 1. not only for
anger, (that is, force, or fear) but for Conscience sake; because it is the
ordinance of God, and they are the Ministers of God; Romans xiii. 5. which is the
same he elsewhere presses, that we should obey our Lords, or Masters, out of
singleness of heart, as desiring to please God, not men; Colos. iii. 22. Ephesians.
vi. 5, 6. Whereupon Justin, who lived in the year 150, in the name of all
Christians saluteth the Emperor Antoninus, who was both an Infidel, and a
Persecutour, saying, Nos solum Deum adoramus, and vobis in rebus aliis laeti
inservimus. Tertul. Apologia 2. ad Antoninum Imperat.
We worship God only, and cheerfully serve you in all other things. To which
St. Augustine subscribeth, professing, that Potestates, quae sunt, a Deo
ordinatae sunt: (...) est, ut Gentilem in potestate tamen positum
honorificemus; licet ipse indignus sit, qui Dei ordinem tenens gratias agit
Diabolo: potestas enim exigit, quia meretur honorem. Augustine. Quaest. ex Vet.
Test. cap. 35.
The powers that are, are ordained of God: hence it is, that we honor a
Gentile, placed in authority; although he be unworthy, who, being God's
Vicegerent, and representing him, gives thanks, or sacrifices to the Devil,
yet the power requires obedience, as being ordained of God.


Gent. But if Infidelity be ineffectual; because Christians were with patience,
and prudence, to wait for the Conversion of Jews, and Pagans; yet may not
Heresy, and Apostasy unrivet the Ty of Obedience, from Subjects to their
Supreme Magistrates? Some think, that for this purpose God has set the Bishop
of Rome over Nations, and over Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to
destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant; Jer. i. 10.


Minist. That only concerned Jeremy, an extraordinary Prophet, upon an
extraordinary occasion: that in a spiritual sense only; not any legal Priest,
or Evangelical Presbyter. Therefore we never read, that any Roman Bishop
encouraged the Primitive orthodox Christians to renounce the authority of
Constantius, Valens, and Valentinianus the Younger, who were all Heretical
Emperors, Fautours, and Fomenters of Arrianism. And, as relating to Julian,
who was not only an Heretic; but an Apostate from the whole known truth,
Saint Augustine gives us a true Historical Character of him, and those times;
Was not Julian (says Julianus nonne exti^^ Apostata, iniquus Idololatra? tamen
milites Christiani servierunt huic Imperatori infideli, and quando dicebat,
Producite aciem, ite contra istam gentem, statim obtemperabant. Augustine. in
Psalm. cxxiv.
he) an Apostate, unjust, an Idolater: yet Christian Soldiers served this
unbelieving Emperor; and when he said March on, advance against such a Nation,
they presently obeyed: and that even when they wanted no competent force for
resistance, the greatest part of Julian's Army being Christians, as appeared at
his death, for when the Soldiers had unanimously made choice of Jovinian to be
their Emperor, and he refused, being a Christian, to rule over Heathens, and
Pagans, Omnes una voce confessi sunt se esse Christianos. Ruffinus, lib. 2.
Hist. cap. 1.
They all confessed with one voice, that they were Christians. Therefore it is
not credible, that so numerous an Army, and so victorious, obeyed an Apostate,
because they were overmatched by him, and not able to resist; but rather (as
St. Augustine Subjectos fuisse propter Dominum aeternu^ Domino Temporali.
Augustine. in Psalm. cxxiv.
says) They were subject to their Temporal Lord, for their Eternal Lord's sake.


Gent. But some say, If the Bishop of Rome had absolved them from their
Sacramentum militare, or Soldier's Oath, whereby the Romans were usually tied
to their Generals, they might have been dispensed withal for Subjection.


Minist. Praecepta secundae Tabulae cominent ordinem justitiae inter homines
observandae, ut scilicet nulla fiat indebitum, and cuilibet reddatur debitum:
secundu^ enim hanc rationem sunt intelligenda praecepta Decalogi; and ideo
praecepta Decalogi sunt omnino indispensabilia. Aquinas. Prima Secunda, Quaest.
100. Art. 8.
The Law of Nature, Moral Law, and lawful Oaths admit of no dispensation. If
the High Priest, or any pretended power had interposed, when David said, I have
sworn to keep the judgments of thy righteousness, they could not have made void
that solemn Oath: proportionably, if any Christian, in pious imitation of
David, shall out of conscience swear inviolably to observe those commandments
of not committing Adultery, of obeying Parents, and Magistrates; the Pope's
Dispensations are so far ineffectual, that whosoever, presuming upon his
Absolution, should adventure to violate them, would be found guilty both of
Rebellion, and Adultery. Therefore Durand confesses, Olim Papam dispensando
errasse; That the Pope has formerly been mistaken in his Dispensations: as
when Emmanuel, King of Portugal, was dispensed withal to marry two Sisters:
Ferdinandus, King of Naples, to marry his Aunt; Catharine, Queen of England, to
marry two Brothers. Pope Martin the First gave Dispensations to marry with a
natural Sister, against which even Antoninus Reperitur Papa Martinus
dispensesse cum quodam, qui contraverat, and consummaverat Matrimonium cum
quadam ejus germana Anton. 3. part. Tit. 1. cap. 11.
a Popish Archbishop, exclaims.


Gent. But, if not Papal Dispensations, may not the Anathema of Excommunication
(whereby they are rendered as Publicans, and Heathens) unbrace the Ty of
Subjects to their Sovereign.


Minist. Bellarmine, the late Romish Cardinal is bold to broach this pestilent
Doctrine; saying Si ergo Princeps aliquis ex Ove, aut Ariete fiar Lupus, id
est, ex Christiano fiat Haereticus, poterit Pastor Ecclesiae eum arcere per
Excommunicationem and simul jubere populo, ne eum sequantur, ac proinde privare
eum Dominio in subditos. Bellarmin. lib. 5. De Romano Pontif. cap. 7. col. 824.
If any Prince, of a Ram, or Sheep, become a Wolf, that is, of a Christian
become an Heretic, the Pastor of the Church may cast him out by
Excommunication, and at once command the people not to follow him, and
thereupon deprive him of Dominion over his Subjects. But the Holy Ghost speaks
another Language; as knowing that Excommunication, though denounced for
contempt of the Church, makes not one worse, then an Heathen; now the Apostles,
St. Peter, and St. Paul (as is formerly evidenced) seriously exhorts us to
perform obedience to Pagan, and Vnchristianed Princes. The same therefore is as
due to Christian Magistrates, when excommunicated. And, if we consult the
Romish erroneous Oracles themselves, we shall find the resolution given from
their own impure Shrines; that Aquinas, in Sap. Quaest. 23. Tolet. Instit.
Sacerd. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Excommunication neither exempts Servants from the dominion of their Masters,
nor Children from observance to their Parents. Supreme Magistrates are Lords;
their Subjects, Servants: so David styles Saul his Lord, and himself his
servant; 1 Samuel xxiv. 11. They are Fathers, their people are Children: so King
Hezekiah calls the Priests (who were spiritual Fathers to their charge) his
Sons; 2 Chronicles. xxix. 11. Deborah was a Mother in Israel, Judge. v. 7. But, for
the most part, the Pope's Excommunications are unjust, and always relating to
these Nations, where he has no jurisdiction; and his Canon Law tells us, Qui
illicite alium excommunicat, scipsum, non illum condemnat. Quaest. 24. Art. 3.
Comperimus rubri.
He, that unlawfully excommunicateth another, condemns not the party, but
himself. And St. Augustine, Quid obest homini, si eum de illa tabula delere
velit humana ignorantia; quem de libro viventium non delet iniquae conscientia.
Augustine. Ad Clericos Hipponenses.
What is a man the worse, if humane ignorance raze him out of the Book of the
Church, whom an evil conscience wipes not out of the Book of life.


Gent. Are then the chief Rulers of these Nations no whit impeached by the
Pope's Excommunications? nor the People privileged by his Absolutions, and
Dispensations?


Minist. Our chief Rulers are no more impeached by Papal Excommunication, then
Christ, and his Apostles were, when they were cast out of the Synagogue by the
chief Priests; then the faithful Christians were, when they were excommunicated
by Diotrephes, who first claimed Papal Primacy, 3 John 9. It is
fore-prophesied, that Antichrist shall excommunicate all them, that will not
adore the Image of the Beast, Rev. xiii. 17. Quid sibi velit emendi, and
vendendi Interdictum, jam ante ostendi; nempe Papalem excommunicationem notari,
in quam qui incidunt, reliquorum civium consuetudine, and commercio arcentur.
Mede, Comment. Apocalypt. p. 213
for by prohibition of buying, and selling, there is meant Papal
Excommunication; into which censure whosoever fell, were driven from all
commerce, and fellowship with other Citizens. So that Canon of the Lateran
Council set forth against the Waldenses, and Albigenses, signally prohibits,
under the penalty of the great Anathema, Ne quis eos in domo sua, vel terra
tenere. vel fovere, vel negotiationem cum iis exercere praesumat. Tomo 4.
Council. edit. Romae. page 37.
That none should presume to keep them within their Precincts, or harbor them
in their houses, or negotiate, or traffic with them. The Synod of Tyron does
the like, Ne receptaculum quisquam eis in terra sua praebere, aut prasidium
impertive prasumat; sed nec in venditione, aut emptione, aliqua cum iis
communio habeatur. Apud Reverend. Armachan De Successione Ecclesiae, page 239.
interdicting all to afford them any shelter, or receptacle, to supply them
with any relief, or have commerce with them in buying, and selling. Neither are
the people more privileged by the Pope's Absolutions, and Dispensations to
attempt disloyalty; then the Soldiers, and Jewish rabble were to crucify
Christ, by the High Priest's delivering him up unto Pilate.


Gent. But, if neither Papal Excommunications, Absolutions, or Dispensations
privilege the Laity from subjection to their Sovereign; yet some conceive, that
the holy Seal of Confession exempts Sacerdos Dei vices sustinet, nec aliter,
quam ipse Deus, humiles, ac devotas peccatorum confessiones audiat. Aquinas, in
Sap. Quaest. 11. Art. 1.
Priests from former Oaths, or Engagements: because they are bound by their
order, and the Laws of the Church, to conceal whatsoever is disclosed unto them
by Auricular Confession, though it should tend to the prejudice, and ruin of
Princes.


Minist. That pretended Canon and Law of the Church, is no ancienter, then
Innocent the Third, being one of the Constitutions inserted in the Omnis
utriusque: De poenitent. and remission.
Decretals. But, admit it had antiquity, and authority of the whole Church, it
amounts to no more, then an Ecclesiastical Ordinance, which must veil Bonnet to
the Moral Law, which provideth by all means the safety, and security of Supreme
Magistrates; which those French Priests knew well (though of the Romish stamp)
when they discovered unto their Prince treason, made known unto them only by
Auricular Confession; whereupon the Plotters were executed, and they for their
Loyalty rewarded. Nobilis quidam Normannus cum propositum habuisset Regem
Franciscum occidendi, consilium illud suum Fratri cuidam Minoritae inter
confitendum aperuit; qui rem totam ad Regem detulit, qua Judicilus Curiae
Parisiensis communicata, reus ipse capitis damnatus est; Sacerdote, qui
denuntiaverat, nulla violati Sacramenti poena ab Ecclesia mulctato. Bodinus,
lib. 2. De Republica. cap. 5.
A Nobleman of Normandy having confessed to a Minorite Friar, that he had a
purpose to murder the King of France, of which he repented, and received
Absolution; yet so, as the Friar discovered all to the King: which being
examined by the Judges of the Court of Paris, the Nobleman was sentenced to
death, and the Friar honorably dismissed without Misprision, or Irregularity.


Gent. But, if no power derived from the Pope, or Church of Rome, can absolve,
or grant Pardons, or Dispensations from Oaths, is there no other power can do
it? for it is further asserted in this Article, Nor any other person can
absolve me from this my Oath.


Minist. No single person can; nor any society, or corporation (who
interpretatively in Law make a person) can absolve, or dispense with an Oath,
that Subjects have justly made to their chief Magistrate; while, according to
the intention of the Legislative power, it was obligatory. In that the People
of Athens, and Sparta were discharged from obedience to their Princes, and
Governors, it was because the Areopagites had the chief legislative, and
executive power in the one, and the Ephori in the other; as the Senate of
Venice has over their Dukes at this present. But where in the fundamental Laws
of any Nation one person (whether Emperor, Sultan, King, or by what Title
soever) is declared Sovereign, or Supreme Magistrate, as the King with us, and
subject to no superior Legislative, and executive power; all Dispensations,
and Absolutions from Oaths, that were taken to such a Prince, are in vain. That
confession of Henry the Third was declared by a succeeding Parliament to be
unlawful, and extorted by force; That Liceat omnibus de regno Nostro contra Nos
insurgere, and ad gravamen Nostrum opem, and operam far, ac si Nobis in nullo
tencantur. 15. Parliamento Henrici Tertii, Londini ordinat. inter Record.
Civitatis Londinensis Charta Originalis sub Sigillo.
It might be lawful for all his Subjects to rise against him, and to annoy him
with all their power, as if they were tied in no bond of Allegiance unto him.
Sed vela reprimam; I love not to launch into this tempestuous Sea; it is enough
for our purpose, to know in general, Non minorem injuriam Deo faciunt,
potestatem de Regibus judicandi, quam ipse sibi soli reservavit, ei
praeripientes, quam Regibus ipsis, solius Dei judicio subjacentibus: magna
metiam injuriam faciunt fidei, qui eam putant salvam esse non posse; nisi Regum
jus pereat, and gentium jura subvertantur. Parisiensis Academia, as proprie
Sorbonicum Theologorum Collegium, apud Alphonsum de Vargas.
that no Papal, or any other subordinate power can absolve from Oaths legally
taken to the Supreme Magistrate; leaving it to the discussion of the
Fundamental Laws of every Nation in particular, who are Supreme Magistrates, as
the King is, doubtless, here. But, if neither the Pope, nor his Conclave, nor
any inferior Priest, by delegated authority from them, can dispense with this
Oath of Abjuration (which I think is the purport of this Article) you may rest
satisfied.


Gent. I am fully satisfied in this, and all the precedent Discourse, if one
inconvenience be met withal, which is this; If the Ty, and Oath of Subjects to
their Sovereign, be so sacred, and inviolable, that no Papal, or other
subordinate power can dispense with it; if Supreme Magistrates turn Tyrants,
and make havoc of Church and Commonwealth, what remedy is left?


Minist. Persecuting, and Idolatrous Princes, like Nero, and Julian, may
project the ruin of the Church, but in vain; because Christ has builded it
upon a Rock, against which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail; Matthew. xvi. 18.
Oppugnare possunt, expugnare non possunt. The only defensive, and offensive
Weapons we have against such raging Monsters, are Prayers, and Tears; bewailing
our sins, which have exposed us to this calamity, and importuning him, in whose
hands the hearts of Kings are as Rivers of water, that he would turn them,
Prove. xx. 1. You may remember the visible Church, before the Incarnation, was
confined only to the Nation of the Jews; who, while they were under the
captivity of the Persian King, a Decree went out, by the procurement of Haman,
to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish all Jews, both young, and old,
little children, and women in one day; Esther iii. 13. Thus una litura, with
one wipe, the whole Church was to be blotted out; now At quid illi? non
seditionem movent, non ad arma convolant, non Assuerum, aut Hammanem veneno
tollendi consilium capiunt, non ad libertatem suam vindicandam Sicartos
quaerunt, and parricidines* Andreros.
what course take the people of God to countermine such an Hellish Plot? They
move no seditions, take up no Arms, contrive not the death of Haman, suborn no
Assasines to vindicate their liberty by blood, or poison: Haec panoplia, this
is their whole Magazine; in every Province, whither soever the King 's
Commandment, and his Decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and
fasting, and weeping, and wailing, and many lay in Sackcloth, and Ashes;
Esther iv. 3. that they might humble themselves under the mighty hand of God,
and divert his heavy wrath, ready to be executed by the merciless hand of the
Barbarous Tyrant. And, under the Gospel, Primitive Christians have followed the
same president; for, when Julian the Apostate had projected the extirpation of
the Christian name (as Gregory Nazianzene Cum Julianus Apostata totius
Christiani nominis cladem, atque internecionem minaretur, inoibitus, atque
repressus est Christianorum lacrymi^, quas multas multi prof^derunt, hoc unum
adversus persecutorem medicamentum habentes. Nazianzen. Orat. i. in Julian.
says) He was hindered, and repressed by the tears of Christians, which many
in abundance poured out; having this only remedy, and Preservative against the
Persecutour. As often therefore, as any shall find themselves ready to be
swallowed up of the deluge of Persecution issuing from the hand of Supreme
Authority, it is the counsel of Ad patrocinium clementiae Dei humiliati
confugiant, and puras manus levantes ad Dominum, devotis precibus stagellum,
quo asstiguntur, avertant; Peccata enim delinquentium vires sunt T^rannorum.
Sarisb. lib. 8. cap. 23.
Sarisburiensis (a man, who lived in the thick mists of Popery) with humility
to fly for Sanctuary to the Divine protection and lifting up of pure hands to
the Lord by devout prayers to divert his scourge, that afflicts us; for the
Sins of Transgressors are the Arms of Tyrants.


Gent. But what, if after many tears, and prayers, and addresses to the Throne
of Grace, God shall leave us under the scourge?


Minist. That is the only remedy in this case (not any Papal Dispensation)
which St. Augustine of yore spoke of: The rod (says Sentitur virga peccatorum
super sortem justorum, sed non in aeternum; veniet tempus, quando unus
agnoscetur Deus, veniet tempus, quando unus Christus, in claritate sua
apparens, congreget ante se omnes gentes, and dividat eos, sicut dividit pastor
haedos ab ovibus: oves ponet ad dextram, haedos ad sinistram; and videbis ibi
multos servos, and subditos inter oves, and multos Dominos, ac Principes inter
haedos, and e contra. Augustine. in Psalm. cxxiv.
he) of sinners, is felt upon the back of the righteous, but not for ever; the
time will come, when one God will be acknowledged, the time will come, when one
Christ, appearing in his brightness, shall gather all Nations before him, and
divide them, as the Sheepherd divides the Goats from the Sheep; he will place
the Sheep on his right hand, the Goats on his left. There you shall see many
Servants, and Subjects among the Sheep; many Lords, and Princes amongst the
Goats: and again many Lords, and Princes amongst the Sheep, and many Servants,
and Subjects amongst the Goats. If all humane relief be denied us, look for a
Crown of Martyrdom to be reveiled that day, when all tears shall be wiped from
our eyes; till then wait with patience, leaving vengeance to him, whom it
concerns to repay, and take not the Sword out of his hand, or use inordinate
means, as Papal Excommunications, Pardons, Absolutions, or Dispensations with
Oaths, much less popular Insurrections.


Genesis Well, Sir, by the demonstrative clearness of your Arguments, I am
convinced of the legality of this Oath of Abjuration, as also of Allegiance,
and Supremacy; and am willing to conform to the Doctrine, and Discipline of the
Church of England, especially under so gracious a Sovereign, who is truly the
Defender of the Faith.


Minist. You have reason to say so, if you consider his Restoration; which was
more then miraculous; his Constancy, which renders him a Confessor; his
Sufferings, a Martyr; his Piety, and unparalled Virtues, which make him a
peerless Paragon of the present Age, and a President unimitable to posterity:
whose Sacred Majesty God long preserve.


(...).
FINIS.

