THE CRAFTY WHORE: OR, The mystery and iniquity OF BAWDY HOUSES Laid open, In a
dialogue between two SVBTLE BAWDS, wherein, as in a mirror, our CITY-CVRTESANS
may see their soul-destroying Art, and Crafty devices, whereby they Ensnare and
beguile Youth, pourtraied to the life, By the PENSELL of one of their late,
(but now penitent) CAPTIVES, for the benefit of all, but especially the younger
sort. Whereunto is added DEHORTATIONS from LUST Drawn from the SAD and
LAMENTABLE Consequences it produces.

Ite, sed a stimulo carnis Venerisque cavete;
Cauta est, atque dolis andique plena Venus.
Vel prodesse volo vel delectare --
LONDON: Printed for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms, at the lower end of
Chancery Lane, near the Inner Temple-Gate, in Fleet- (...)

depiction of a scene from a bawdy house (brothel) Sold by Henry Marsh, at the
Princes Arms at the Lower end of Chancery Lane, nere the Inner Temple Gate in
Fleetestreet;

R. Gaywood fecit.


The Authors Preface to his Countri-men,
Worthy Sirs,
WEre there in this our native and noble Country England, no such creatures,
(alias Devils incarnate) as Bawds and Whores, (of all sorts) it would have
been a vain thing in me, to have wrote of this lascivium et dolosum pecus, and
therein to have admonished you to shun them. Or could out magistrates have been
so prevalent, as were Justinian, and Theodosius, in the extirpation of these
unprofitable Drones, it would not only have saved me this labor, but would
also have prevented the ruin of many rich and ancient families. But since even
strangers take notice (upon record) of the levity of our nation, and that we
have too too Apishly imitated the French, I not only tacitly grieved at it; (
-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse, et non potuisse refelli.)
but resolved to try what good I could do, by showing you the vildnesse and
perniciousnesse of those, who make it their sole livelihood to commit
whoredom; and by representing to you the manner of their cheates, how they
allure with words, entice with gestures, nodds, amorous and petulant glances,
etc. you may be admonisht to avoid and beware of the like. It was not any self
pleasing conceit that did put me upon this work, but to discharge my
conscience, was I willing to let all men see the vitiousnesse and sowlnesse of
the lives of all Curtezans (either private or common) represented to your view
in the relation of the life of one Thais, and one Antonia, alias one Bawd and
one Whore; yet two grand mysteries of inquiry. I hope you will by this book
learn to shun those Locusts, who still employ their time in destroying the
young plants of this land, to this purpose was this treatise intended.
Wherefore I here forewarn all those that are resolved to follow their Lusts and
debauchments, not to read it, least they pervert the sense, and so turn that
which otherwise might be good, in it self, into Poison. I do ingeniously
confess, that some expressions may be somewhat dissolute and wanton (and
therefore it is, that I forbid dissolute persons to read them) because they are
the representatives of such persons, words and actions, and therefore I hope
the easier to be excused, but still I shall firmly believe that they are not
capable to corrupt and vitiate any's chaste thoughts, but rather by it render
the odiousness of lascivious speeches and behavior in it is proper defiled
colors. Likewise hence you may see their folly, and learn from thence to know
that that is not true and real pleasure which such deboist spirits adjudge so,
but that which is to be found in modesty virtue, and honesty. I have herein
done as your Physicians do with their bitter pills, that is gild them, to
invite their patients to swallow them. I have by similitude shown something by
the outside, which seems delightful and pleasant, but within there is nothing
but unreprovable reprehensions and accusations of vice. -- Licuit semperque
licebit
-- Dicere de vitijs.
It lawful was of old and still shall be
To speak of vice --


Had I acted the part of a severe Satyrist, the rigorousnesse of my title would
have deswaded men from reading further: whereas by being comicall, I may (simul
et semel) both please and reprove. -- Ridentem dicere verum,
Quid vetat? --
(...) by living dissolutely, riotously, and lasciviously, my excuse is
evident. However condemned I know I shall be by some narrow spirits, whose
chief understanding lies in their bare sense, that can look no further, then
the literal meaning, but had they the capacity to break the shell of these
fables, they may find such truths as are not commonly published in Print, and
they shall evidently perceive how pleasure and instruction walk hand in hand;
and that there are mingled sacra profanis, I hope not profain'd. Some will ask
perhaps why I entered on this subject? I shall answer first that I might be in
some employment; because there is no greater cause of falling to those vices,
and that company I advise you to shun, then idleness, whereof there is no surer
care then business. In the next plact I did it, because having tried and
having suffered by these sin selling Traders, I might stand as a Beacon, to
forewarne you to beware how you come near them.

Experto credi Richardo. I may say what Marius in Seneca, Quae illi audire et
legere solent, eorum partim egomet vidi, and so I am willing to be helpful to
my countrymen, out of a fellow feeling, as was a Lady I have read of, who being
a Leper, built an Hospital at her own charge for all those that were Leprous.
I have (in writing my observations) imitated Zisca, a valiant Captain, who
commanded that after his death there should a Drum be made of his skin, as
thinking that the noise thereof would terrify his enemies, being so terrible to
them whilst he lived. Now as for the subject, I cannot think that envy it
self can find fault with it, since the holy Prophets wrote thereof, as also
Solomon described their gestures, fawnings, allurements, with all the rest of
their crafty deallings, and soul destroying ways: I shall forbear to mention
many centuries both of Phylosophicall and divine Authors, that have wrote of
Bawds, Whores, Panders, etc and their acts. What mischief this sin of lust has
done in the world, both modern and ancient Authors have sufficiently declared,
and besides our diurnall experience, the holy Scripture does make it evident:
As Gods bringing a deluge on the world for the commission of fornication by
Seth with the daughters of Cain. For this sin was the whole tribe of Benjamin
almost extinguish't: for one sole adultery of David what a slaughter did God
bring on his people by the plague, and famine, and sword. Again how many Kings
have been disthron'd by this wanton sin, as Tarquinius, Claudius, Hanniball,
Marcus Antonius, etc I really believe, there is hardly a vicious act committed,
or downfall of any man's estate, which had not it is original from lust. What
better thing then can I be employed in, then by endeavoring to kill this hydra
that has killed so many, or at leastwise discover to men its den, that thereby
they may not come near it, unless they will be guilty of self murder. By
this monster, I mean all loose women, but especially common Whores, whom I
advise you not to cheapen unless you intend your damnation to be the price:
not only so, but if you use their company, they will likewise be your bodily
undoing. For as they are for the most part fair, so are they witty and crafty;
out of all arts have they sucked the poison of their craft, so that it is almost
impossible to be undeceived in their company. I can speak this by experience
as having been often cheatted in the rottenness and deceitfullnesse of these
female commodities, and therefore I may the better be your pilot to keep you
from splitting against their Seylla and Caribdis. I may tell you that I have
been as petulant as others, and I have been heretofore so far from apposing
that generally beloved thesis of enjoying pleasure, as that I rather studied
how I might be an assector and promotor of that doctrine; but now experience
has reformed my judgment; so that I can now look on a handsome woman, with as
little ardour as upon a well proportioned statue, which that you may so do,
shall be the continual prayer of him: who is

Your Countryman.

A DIALOGUE Between ANTONIA And THAIS.
ANTONIA, I would willingly hear by what means, and for what ends your Mother
and you, first arrived at Rome?


THAIS, Since fortune favors me with opportunity, I shall be willing to
satisfy your curiosity in this my Narration. I need not tell you in what
manner we came to this City, since by the way there did nothing occur of
moment; therefore be pleased to understand that as soon as we came hither, we
inquired out what place in the City was most resorted to by Courtiers, and
young Gallants; which as soon as we understood, thither speedily did we
repair, where we met with a Woman, who got her living by letting of Lodgings;
with this Woman we found very good accommodation; what was provided for our
necessary food, was neat and dainty; as for the furniture of our Chamber, it
was both rich and eye-pleasing. Here we continued eight days, before which were
expired, our Landlady had sufficiently loud, blown the trumpet of my
extraordinary beauty, fit composure of body, excellent be haviour, and other
rare both natural and artificial excellencies of soul and body, with which I
was endued; but above all the rest (she being almost blinded with the raise of
my sparkling eye, and rare symetry of my beautiful complexion) I say she
acquainted a Young Spark, a great hunter of City beauties and delights, how she
lodged a Female Creature, that might be termed the Masterpiece of nature.
Presently upon this bare relation, he acquaints others of his associates with
this business, and they their friends, so that in a small time (this disease
being so catching and infectious) there flocked a number of these
Female-mongers before our Lodgings, I presently smelling their designs, and
therefore kept my self extraordinary retired, the more to inflame their
appetites: yet would I stand at the window at such a convenient place that I
might see, yet not be seen; when I saw any young gull to gape and gaze very
earnestly for a sight of me, then would I put my head out of the Casement to
spit down, not discovering to him above half my face, but I would hastily
catch in my head, the more to deceive his eyesight, and cause him to conceive
the more of my honest chastity, so that by this craft, I appeared to be more
virtuous and beautiful. For the eye being hindered from what it eagerly desires
to see, kindles in the affections a fierce endeavor to satisfy themselves in
the pursuit of their enjoyment; By this time there were few of Love's Champions
which had not notice of me; in so much that our House was almost filled with
amorous Visitants; our Landlady in the mean while, made her benefit on this
occasion, for they sufficiently greaz'd her fist to mediate for them. Now did
my Mother begin to bestir her stumps, and being she was a Woman sufficiently
tutored and experienced in Pandarisme, her long exercise in that noble art,
made her a perfect Crafts-Mistresse, wherefore she would pretend sometimes that
suspicion would not suffer her to admit of such variety of Company, and that
she much feared in time, that it might pervert the chaste mind of her only
Daughter; and then would she break out into these expressions. Is it possible
for me a staid Matron to be led away with fair speeches, which may prove the
ruin of my Daughters chastity, and the dishonor of our ancient Family; God
forbid that I should permit any thing that might be the cause of contaminating
her hither to immaculated flower of Virginity; whereas God knows, it was long
since, that I could not be at rest till I had tried and tasted of the sweet
pleasures of concupiscence; I have many times heard, and I accordingly did put
it in practice, that in love affairs, we must make hay while the Sun shines,
or whilst fortune favors; I accounted it a matter of discretion to use that
to day, which I knew not whither it might be offered me to morrow; As soon as
vigorous nature had provokt me to surrender up my Virgin fort, I was willing
(for scare of displeasing her) to let it be taken at the first assault; For I
was very sensible that my Virgin-bud now disclosing it self, delay would but
blow it wider; the longer it was suffered to grow, the sooner it would fade,
wherefore these things and many other, after I had duly considered on, I
thought on no better way, then in my frequent wanton motion to sympathize with
the Heavens in its continual agitation: Well, my Mother (if she thought any of
these Gallants were near enough to hear her) would continue expostulating
with her self; what, shall I regard either their fair speeches or quality?
No, honesty shall be more prevalent with me. Besides, are we not descended of a
noble Progeny? And are we not so sufficiently in fortunes favor, as not to be
destitute of that, of which we may lead an honest life? Many other such
expressions did she use, which did make a wonderful addition both to my
beauty, honesty and nobility. My Lovers being thus captivated by the real and
imaginary splendour of my perfections, continue still their congregations before
my lodgings, every one had the hopes to crop the chief flower of my Garden. At
last I could not resist the motions of my mind, but would sometimes stand at
the window and seem to take wonderful delight in those, that I thought were
most rich and wealthy; as for other Reck shares, as a brave presence, gallantry
of habit, or a nice and quaint gate, who foot it so to a tittle, that it seems
their senses are placed in their feet. I regarded not these things, wealth and
pleasure were the center of my ambition. It Is not bravery or high quality that
Women regard, when with servency of spirit she would take a taste of venereall
pleasures: for it has been experimented, that the freeze Jerk in has afforded
Females as much delighting contentment, as the velvet Coat, Sometimes my
adorers would walk, some times ride in their richest attire before our house,
one while they would complain of their hard fate in denying them a sight of me,
other whiles they would sing.


Ant. Now you talk of songs, I remember a catch one of my Lovers ecchoed forth,
when I was as thou were, It was to this purpose, Omnia quae patior mala si
pensare velit fors
Vna aliqua nobis prosperitate, Dij.
Hoc precor ut faciant faciant me cernere coram
Cor mihi captivum quae tenet hocce, Deam.
If that the Gods shall please to dignifie
Our many griefs with one felicity.
Oh be it this, to me (ye Gods impart)
A sight of her that Captivates my heart.



Thais. When any of them stood under my window, least they should doubt of my
being at home, I would feign a cough, and so spit out at the Casement. Then
would they before I could recover in my head address themselves in such like
complaints, and sole Mistress of my affections, the Idaea of all perfection;
how can it consist with the gentleness of your nature, and softness of
disposition, to be so cruel as to commit homicide, do not be as the wind of
bellows which inflames, though it be cold. All my answers would be nothing but
pleasing smiles, (the usual veil that covers female ignorance) which were
better bonds to shackle them, then the best rhetoric I could pronounce; thus
they adored me as a Goddess, though at a venereall banquet, I say at the Prick
of time. I could be content to be to them a subjected Mortal.


Ant. I do admire at thy wit in that thy tender age.


Thais. It Is but a folly for any one to practice this mysterious art, without
they have wit at will. But to proceed, my Mother now began to study how she
might invest me with gallant apparel, knowing how great an ornament it is to a
comely face, wherefore she (as your Chambermaids use) laid most part of her
patrimony on my back, clothing me in pink color satin slasht, and with very
short sleeves.


Ant. And why with short sleeves?


Thais. Because the smoothness, and whiteness of my skin might be continually
in sight, and felt too if they pleased: My hair being artificially curled was
tied with Ribbands wearing likewise a gold caul; and because it was of a
bright yellow (the right complexion) every hair seemed as a thread of gold to
the optics of my Lovers. My Mother was careful not to omit a day in washing
my face with Mercury water, and other things, which she kept on purpose to make
me fair and my face to shine, as yet we scorned tinctures and paintings, that
lost beauties use. I being thus addressed, did choose such a time to show my
self, when most of my Lovers were present; then would I appear on a sudden to
them at the window, which would so surprise and amaze them, that they were
almost in an ecstasy of joy, and would gaze so on this new appearing star, that
if the eyes had been the instruments of generation, certainly they would have
got me with child.


Ant. But how did you behave your self this while?


Thais. I feigned more chastity then a Nun, more modesty then Penelope: to
which I added a great many gestures and motions so sit for my purpose, as if
they had been before studied decencies, with which I so charmed these
star-gazers, as they seemed as men turned into statues, I had not been here
long before my crafty Mother comes to me (as accidentally) and chides me aloud
with an angry countenance, commanding me to withdraw, and with all charging me
to be more reserved for the furture; I presently followed her, leaving my
gaping Spectators all in sadness for my absence, but he that loved me best,
(that he might be better satisfied concerning me,) knocked at our Door at night,
and there meeting with our Landlady, demanded of her who I was? To which she
readily answered, (being before instructed) that I was the Daughter of an
honorable and wealthy foreign Matron, whose Father had been lately murdered,
for which cause the old Gentlewoman (with this her fair Daughter) was come to
Rome to be revenged on her Husbands Murderers, and that for that very cause,
she brought but little goods along with her, only so much as to accommodate
her whilst she staid here.


Ant. On my word this was a crafty narration.


Thais. My lover proceeded and demanded of her, by what means, he may talk
with this reverend Matron? To which she replied, it was no easy matter, for the
Venetians are very jealous of any action, that but savours of love, as are all
the Italians, who are so jealous beyond measure of their Wives, that they debar
them from all public view, and permit them the liberty to speak with few or
none. I think Sir, that commonly reported story of the Venetian Gentleman is
enough to evidence what I say to be true, who placed a lock upon his Wives
secrets, himself keeping the key when he went forth, to be assured of her
chastity in his absence; And truly they have good reason for this their
jealousy, as I shall show you, if you will give me leave to make some small
digression on their conditions and manners. For as they are for the most part
extraordinary witty, so are they beautiful and modest seemingly. By way of
Proverb, it is said of them that they are Saints in the Church, Angels in the
streets, Sirens in the windows, but are Goatishly wanton in their Houses, which
cannot otherwise be expected, if you consider how carelessly they live, that
they have nothing to trouble them, but that they are troubled with nothing.
They are excellent good Face-monders, they know how to embellish themselves
with all the advantages of Art, as painting, and other sophistical helps to a
fallacious beauty, therefore they have a saying, that if God gives them a good
proportionable stature of body, they will add beauty to it themselves. I have
been something too long in their true character, purposely to make appear how
far this young Lady you inquire after, surpasses all the rest of her Country
Women. Are they seeingly virtuous? She is really so. Are their beauties
sophisticated? Hers is natural, and to conclude what they want of excellency,
she is absolutely Mistress of. Again be not angry with the old Gentlewoman if
she have a smatch of her Countrymens jealous humor, for as it is her nature,
so is it her provident care to have (if possible) Argus his hundred eyes to
watch so precious a pearl; yet for all this he could not choose but ask,
whither I was a Virgin, yes says our Landlady, and one that is so pure, and
devout, that all my business is to repeat Prayers all day, and meditate with
her; whereupon he was so taken with me, as that he earnestly desired to be
admitted into so much favor as to speak with me. But she said that could not
be for the premises after alleag'd. Wherefore he desired that she would
intercede for him, and so departed, which accordingly she did. For on a time
when we are all three together, she began to tell my Mother that there was a
Gentleman both potent and rich, that bore a very great effection for me, who
was able to raise the wheel of my fortune to the highest spoake, therefore
(says she) I shall account it a principal sign of your wisdom and
circumspection, if you will make good use this your proffered good fortune in
contributing some fair help to this his extraordinary affection. It was not
for nothing that this piece of serpentine craft pleaded so stiffly, having been
before well greased in the fist, and my Mother hoping for no less, quickly
condiscended. The Gentleman being thus acquainted with his new happiness,
studied nothing more then how to prepare us a brave collation. At which his
whole discourse to my Mother, was wholly concerning me, beseeching her to
permit him to visit me sometimes, and that she would register him among the
best of her friends. My Mother seemed to consult with her self about this
proposal a long time, and knowing well enough what she had to do, consented
(upon conditions) to his desires. Now my young Gull, thinking he had removed
all obstacles, a night or two after came to me, thinking to have a nights
lodging, and so as a parative, accosts me with protestations, vows and oaths,
as if he intended to reward the loss of my Virginity with a Kingdom. Thus did
he woo me that he might reap the fruit of his expenses, or rather that of my
youth, which he most desired. Well I told him that I should say nothing at
that present without deliberation, and therefore I appointed him an other night
to meet me; the time being come, he (fully assured of his desires) came, having
before given order for a costly supper. The Table being furnished with all
sorts of rare viands, we placed our selves, but I bethought my self before how
to behave my self at it. I did eat very little meat, and drank less wine,
unless it was tempered with water. I complained sometimes that I had
overcharged my stomach, as a Lady did when she had eaten a pested of a lark at
a great Feast, having before well stuffed her belly with good beef and cabbidge.
Supper being ended, the wine he drank began to sparkle in his veins, and my
beauty intoxicating his brains, he could not forbear his amorous
imbracements; wherefore that he might act his manly part with secrecy he led me
to my bedchamber, and so enclosed us both in: and presently in a trice
disrobes himself, (so eager was his panting desire in pursuit of the enjoyment
of its end) and so leapes into bed with an insulting and triumphant joy, and
presently after allures me with an innumerable company of enticements:
Protesting that I was the only person to whom he dedicated his affection, and
that there was no woman in the universe could be richer then his promises could
make me. But all these things were not available to get me to bed to him,
wherefore being impatient, he leapes out of bed and offered to my view a
thousand female alluring gestures (which I must confess the truth had almost
overcome my craft and seeming chastity) and then hugged me and kissed me, but
seeing all these things prevailed nothing, he sought to obtain that by force
which he could not obtain by fair means: wherefore findeing his summons so
forcible, I compounded on condition (for bashfullnesse sake) that he would
turn his head to the wall whilst I disrol'd my self, and then putting out
the candle, I came to bed to him, but withal telling him that I could by no
means yield to commit sin, or derogate from any Ancestors in loosing that long
and safe preserved inestimable treasure; He regarded little what I said, his
mind being Preoccupied in deeper affairs, but incircled me straight way in
his arms, hugging me as the Ape her younglings, yet for all this I held fast
that prerogative which all Women have, and may use in such incounters, let them
pretend what they please; so that my Amorist was like an other Tantalus, though
he held me fast in his arms, yet I would not let his trembling needle touch
that Pole its point stood against with so much vigor. Then he fell a
flattering me, calling me his soul, the delight of his life, the delightful
hope of his expiring soul, and the soul of his future bliss (suffer me says
he) to enjoy that, I have so longed for, let me not dye with thirst, whilst I
am so near the Fountain, with many the like expressions concluded with bitter
sighs.


Ant. How hard was thy heart, and how insensible were thou, certainly had I
been in thy case, I should have even melted at his discourse and gestures; when
I was young, it was but strike, and I presently took fire, I was very free of
my favors, yet I think I lost not by it, for besides money, I had pleasure to
boot.


Thais. I could be content to be of your mind, and make use of all proffered
opportunities to satisfy and content my self, but you must understand I was
wiser at that time then the rest of our Sex, for I preferred profit before that
momentary delight, well knowing that if he had satisfied his desires, he would
not have so much esteemed me, and so have been defective in paying me my
promised reward, wherefore I kept him off at a distance, but it had like to
have cost me dear. For growing furious by my denial, and seeing himself
frustrated of all means, his breast swelled into desperation, and therefore
changed those sweet and heart-melting expressions, into bitter and horrid
threats, swearing withal, that unless I would yield, and that quickly, he
would renounce his former affection, and strangle me in the bed, or stab me
with his Ponnyard, there ready for the purpose, and presently to make good some
part of his threats laid hold ou my throat with both his hands, but feeling the
softness of my body, he was so overcome, as that he, that but even now
breathed nothing but death, forgets what he said, and fell again to his
inticements, hopeing thereby to attain his ends, desiring me with the full bent
of his soul, that I would consider his condition, and put an end to his
torments. But seeing this would not do, he leaps out of bed, and puts on his
clothes, and so endeavored to be gone. Now I being uncertain of what might
follow, I entreated him to return, withal telling him, that I was at his
devotion, and if he pleased, he might consummate his felicity. The foot
returns upon these enchanting expressions, and reenters his former ne^.


Ant. Such speeches from so fair a Creature, are enough to tempt a Saint, to
act the sin of concupiscence.


Thais. But hear what this Novice said, if you fear that the wounding of your
virginity will put you to any pain, take notice, that it is not so much as the
biting of a flea, I that breath the same soul that you do, and am made of the
same flesh, how think you, is it possible then for me to wound you with a
fleshly weapon.


Ant. I confess when I was a maid, I did not fear much this carnal
Instrument, but I found to my sorrow that at first it pained me to the purpose.
Pricking me till it drew blood from me; nor would I ever had to do with it
again, had it not been for the recompense it made me in excess of delight, I
took thereby.


Thais. Yet for all this I would not let him feel that, which he so much
desired to enjoy. Thus past he away the night like a gamster in this, that he
had lost his money and his sleep and time to a bad purpose. Wherefore the
second time he leaped out of bed, and did put on his clothes, and as he was
very sorrowfully looking out of the window, he espied my Mother and Landlady
walking in the Garden. Whereupon he suddenly cries out to them, asking them
what he had done them of hurt, that they should be the means of his torment.
Certainly (says he) I would have found a more mild creature in African denns.
Whereupon my Landlady perceiving by his looks and gestures that he was almost
horn mad, she came to him, and comforted him, saying that now he had
sufficiently prooved her chastity, and might know now how difficult it is to
scale a true virgins fort. In the mean time I arose and put on my clothes, and
so withdrew my self into my closet, leaving them together to consult about
this adventure. But as for my Love, his choler did swell to such a height, that
he swore he would never see me nor the house again, and so departed.


Ant. Surely you lost him then by your obstinate behavior.


Thais. No; I bound him by this the faster to me. For by how much the more the
passionate mind meets with obstacles, (as denials) by so much the more is it
vehement in the prosecution of the complement of its desire. As appears by
this that follows, for he had not been absent above an hour, before in came a
Tailor from him, almost laden with Silks, Purple, and Scarlet Cloth:
commanding him to cut me off, as much of each, as would commodiously invest me,
hoping by this means he might tempt me to crown his desire. Upon the receipt
of this present, I consulted with my Mother, what was best to be done, she told
me that by all these circumstances, it was evident enough, how great his
affection was for me, and that as he had done so much, so surely he would do
more, rather then would lose his expenies and the hope of obtaining his will.
But she advised me withal to be a little more pliable and complacentiall to
him. Then did I go and dress my self in my best attire, knowing that he could
not stay long from me. I was no sooner dressed, but he knocks at the door, and I
with a smiling countenance went half way down the stairs to meet him; where
I declared to him, with the very quint-essence of dissimulation, how smitten I
was to the heart at his bidding adieu, that had it not been for my
bashfullnesse, I had assuredly necalled him. However, now being fully convinced
of my error, I was resolved that on the next night to yield my self up to his
embraces, and that I was willing to endure or suffer any thing for his dear
sake, and withal assured him, that now he was in a capacity to triumph o-over
all his envious Rivalls. This subtle narration I sealed with a long breathed
kiss. Again he takes order for a costly supper, which was prepared of things
both for satisfying hunger, but principally of things that would make us potent
and valiant in loves combats. He could hardly eat any thing, the thoughts of
his future pleasure did so much occupy his senses, wherefore he caused the
table-cloath to be taken away somewhat of the soonest, and so away we went to
bed. I would have deceived him again, had I seen any probability of good in
it, wherefore being not in a capacity to use more slights, I yielded my self
as vanquished: yet I remembered what part I had to act, to wit an unspotted
virgin. Therefore did I much and often complain of the wrong he did me. Ah me!
most miserable wretch that I am, how am I dispoiled of my honor? How shall I
look any man again in the face without blushing? Have I not cause to hate my
self for my immodesty. My Lover thought my complaints were real, therefore to
stop my mouth, he pulled out of his pocket a purse, presents it to me, as a
reward in part for my lost virginity. There was in it about forty pieces of
gold. I seemed to refuse it at first, making him believe, how small that
recompense was in comparison of that pleasure he possessed of mine.


Ant. I should have feared he would not have offered it again.


Thais. I Will assure you I did mistrust it, therefore I accepted it, whereupon
he fell a fresh to the renewing his pleasure with a full career.


Ant. I; but did he not perceive that you had before lost your maidenhead, and
that the token of virginity (which most know) was not there.


Thais. Very good; but do not thou know (silly woman) that few men know what
belong to a virginity, as we of that certainty of being gotten with child?
Besides, had he been so knowing, is it not easy to persuade a credulous man to
any thing? But for fear of all suspicion, my mother had mended it, as well as
she could, by giving me things to contract my Privy Parts, as Cypress, Moschus,
Ramich, with many other things that are astringing. In the morning my Mother
came to see how we did, after our mutual enjoyments, and found us of two,
incoporated into one, so close were we linct together; my Mother gave the
Gentleman the morning salutation, and blessed me with her maternall
benediction. As soon as I saw her, I fell a kissing and hugging my Lover with
vehement affection in my Mothers presence, my Mother began to tell the
Gentleman, that she had that very morning received letters, by which she
understood of a necessity to leave Rome within two or three days. Then
ad^ressing her self to me (said she) Daughter let us as willingly go as our
loving and noble kindred would have us, and so you may lay my aged bones in the
Sepulcher of my Ancestors, there to rest with them. I confess I am loath to
leave this place, neither would I, could I seel my patrimony that is in my own
country, that we might buy with that money, a house here. Presently I
interrupting her, said, that if she was resolved to depart, I was sorry that I
must be disobedient, telling her that was the only way for me to live; No
Mother, know that I must sooner dye, then be deprived of this my only hope of
life and joy of my heart: Then did I embrace him, imploring his assistance with
tears in my eyes. My Cully was so taken with me and my sugared words, that he
forthwith promised before my Mother, that before a day past, he would provide
both a house and furniture for us if we would not depart, and truly he was as
good as his word, for on the morrow he came and discharged our Landlady of what
we were indebted, and coacht us to sumptuous house where all the
household stuff was in the best fashion, befitting a noble Man.


Ant. I cannot but adm^e at the folly of this Man, in spending (...) much on
you, whereas he might have satisfied all his senses at a far cheaper rate.


Thais. O Sister I perceive you do not understand what absolute sovereignty
has Cupids dart over the person it hits; It has wrought such wonderful
effects on some Men, as to cause them to leave the beds of their most fair and
beautiful wives, (a happiness that some would venture their lives for) and
profess love to some silly Kitchen Maid. I believe neither you, nor I, are
rightly able to dive into loves mysteries. This Man (had not his senses been
besotted by me) certainly he might have understood his error and folly, and
my unworthiness; for though those of our profession are for the most part very
beautiful and well-spoken, yet how depraved are our natures, how corrupt and
rotten? how inconstant and deceitful? how do we most hurt them, that we most
seem to love: I tell thee as a secret, that, that Man is most happy whom we
most hate and disdain.


Ant. As for my part I never professed much love to any man in my life, but I had
some extraordinary design on him, you may be sure it was not for his profit;
sometimes when I saw any my lovers to be full of money, then would ^ invite him
to ly with me, and then pick his pockets, other times when he had good clothes,
would I invite him to the like, and being asleep, would I before acquaint some
one of my Ruffians to come and take them from him, awaking him first, that he
might see it was none of my fault, with many other crafty tricks I had to
enrich my self by their ruins.


Thais. The truth of it is, we have no such thing as love or affection, but to
our selves. I never valued how many I utterly undid, if I might but pleasure
and content my self. Nay I have made it a pastime for me to see my Lovers
wound and slay one the other in contestation, who should be most beloved by me,
whereas I loved neither for loves sake. At that very time that this dotard
loved me, I was so provident as to ensnare others likewise. One among the rest
was as foolish as this Man, for once coming to our House, and finding me along,
professed the greatest affection that Man, could possess, alleging that he
should dye, if I did not pity him. After I had considered that this my first
love had spent all his estate upon the matter, and that this other would, and
was able to spend largely and lavishly upon me, then did I begin by little and
little to withdraw my affection from my first Lover, and did seemingly settle
it on the other. My former friend had not only spent his own estate, but that
too of his Creditors, as much as possibly he could get upon trust, so that
being not able to pay his debts, he was banished out of Rome (according to the
custom of the City) and so the Law freed me from farther trouble or
importunity of this prodigal Ignoramus. This second likewise (because I will
not be too tedious) I fleeced of all his substance. I made this my grand maxim,
to proportion the quality of my favors to the quantity of my Lovers crowns.
The next that came was a crafty and proud Spaniard, who was so highly conceited
of his own abilities, that at every step, turning up his mustachio^, he seemed
to spurn the World in contempt. His temper (as is the rest of his Countrymens)
is hot and dry, which makes them prone to leachery; it was that which made him
so beyond measure dote on my face. But because I knew his nature to be beyond
measure jealous, I valued him for nothing but his gold, which he had in good
plenty.


Ant. I have heard that the Spaniard is so jealous, as he will not suffer his
Wife to converse with any, no not stir abroad unless it be to her devotion,
and then not without a spy to watch her actions. This passion (as it is
thought) they borrowed of their neighbors the Moors. For it is enacted as a
Law among them, that it is death for any tosee a Xeriffes wife, and it is death
for his Concubine too, if not at the first sight of a man, she cry not out.
Since I have spoken of the Men, let me but mention a word of the Women. They
are sober, and very loving, of a delicate soft skin, but some thing tawny. They
are extraordinary patient in travail, and very lusty after it, in so much that
they commonly lie in but three days. Again I remembered a Proverb concerning
these men, which made me quite out of concept with them. For it is said the
Spaniard is at enmity with Venus. Vt Galiorum penes sunt exigui tamen oblongi,
sic Hispanorum, et breves et exigui. Therefore the French have got the start of
them in that instrument, though neither of them can boast of their sufficiency.
This Man (I say) I permitted to use me at his pleasure, (as long as he was
worth any hing, but he becoming a Bankrupt, I turned him off. Thus lived I,
excluding none that could give any thing worthy the receiving. By this time I
became an excellent proficient, being extraordinarily improved in so short a
time, so that I became absolute Mistress of my art, or rather Professor whole
troops of young heirs, well monyed to me, but sent them away empty. I could
antificially take from one, and give to the other, and in the end deceive them
both. If I observed any had ribbands or good Handkerchiefes, I could have the
boldness to take them by violence as my tribute or their forfeitures. If I
took notice of any thing that was of a greater value, I would take occasion to
praise it or the workmanship, and if upon this they did not bestow it on me,
then would I use my natural confidence in asking them for it. Before they left
me at any time, I would make them engage for another set and speedy meeting,
and to make them the more desirous of it, I would suggest to them how merry we
would be then? what ravishing delight we would mutually enjoy, etc. When we
met, then would I consider what I wanted to complete my felicity in the
enjoyment of the pleasing of all my senses. Whither some costly or rare dish,
wine, or music, all which would I quickly obtain by persuading them it was for
their greater delight, and credit.


Ant. Now I consider what a fool I was at sixteen years old; age enough to
have made me more wise for my profit and pleasure. For though I was skittish
enough, yet I was very reserved. Whilst I lived under my Fathers wing, there
was a young Gallant professed himself my servant, though I loved him entirely,
yet did I speak worst of him I loved best, and appeared ever before him with a
sober and strange countenance. But now hear the extremity of my folly. For once
getting me in a good humor, and a convenient place (and he being a cunning
warrior) knowing right well, that a Fort is easier to be taken in one corner
then in an other) there (I say) he assaulted my seemingly impregnable Castle,
and took it. Ever after (the greater my folly) I could entreat him, that
entreated me before. I that before locked and barred my chamber door, did now
grease the hinges thereof, that my Father might not discover us by its
creaking. So great an impression did this first enjoyment make, that I
delighted altogether in extremes. And herein is the Proverb verefied; that
winsing colts, when once well broken, they prove excellent good Hacknyes, you
may kill but not ^yre them.


Thais. Then I was of an other temper. For I could not be contented with these
bare things; Seeing, speaking, kissing, no nor feeling, (which are but
preparatives.) But my appetite prompted me on to a more near and free enjoyment
of: those delights, this Prologue put me in mind of. But to go on with my
story; the next Amorist I captivated was a quick witted, yet harebraind
Frenchman, he was very vehement in his affections, as he is precipitate in all
his actions. He came very Apishly and lightly clad to me, which did too much
demote his buffonny, and incontinency. He thoughtwhen he came to me to get up
and presently ride, thinking he had to deal with one of his own
Country-women, with whom at the first fight a Man may be acquainted, and at the
first acquaintance, he may obtain the favor of a private entrance. At your
first interchange of speech, with them they will be as familiar, as if a man
had been bred and born with them, and be so full of chat, as if they intended
never again to be silent. They are generally as light in carriage as in habit.
That is the reason the King of France has such a multitude of subjects, but
most of them poor, because a great many of them Bastards. Thus have I
uncharacterized Monsieur and his Madam. This Sieur des les Foutours, thought me
to be some silly novice, and accordingly would have put a trick upon me, but he
was made know experimentally the Proverb was true that says, that the Italians
are wise before an action, the Dutch while they are acting, but the French when
a thing is done, and so his wisdom is to small purpose. After (as he thought)
he had sufficiently gained my affection by his promises and expenses, he was
very importunate with me to go to France with him, (but he intended to tell me
before we should come thither) which proposal after I had many objections
cleared by him, I condescended to: But (as my good fortune was) I was told his
design by one of his corrivalls, wherefore to bring about happily my intended
purpose, I seemed to take no notice of his plot, but would be often discoursing
of our voyage, at length I perceiving that the time drew near for our
departure I came to him and told him, that my clothes were at pawn, and
unless I did speedily fetch them, they would be forfeited, whereupon he
greedily answered my demands with a good sum of money, believeing that the
merchant would pay him again with interest for so rare and beautiful a
creature: Two days before we we to go, I told him my house-rent likewise
must be paid, which he did at large, according to agreement between my Landlady
and himself. Now seeing I had no more pretenses to get money of him, I removed
my lodging, and so left this Pigg-wiggin in the lurch.


Antonia. Since I perceive you traded with so many nations, pray what Country
man was the next that came.


Thais. He was an Englishman, of a comely feature, and of a graceful and
magnanimous aspect, who was both brisk and fair, gallant and courteous, active,
sprightfull, and cheerful: I confess I had not heart to gull this man as I
would, for if there was any love within me, it was for him; I was not a little
proud at this conquest, considering how far English-women excel all Nations,
in the excellencyes both of mind and body, that if you would make a complete
body (according to the Proverb) choose a Dutch-womans lower parts, the
Frenchmans middle, but above allan English head to crown the rest; as they
excel in beauty, so do they in their prerogative: though they for the most
part are very insensible of its worth, we are enough sensible (to our sorrow)
for I think really that proverb would be experimentally true, if there was a
bridge over the narrow Seas, England would not be capacious enough to contain
the women of Europe that would flock thither.


Ant. I perceive you have read much.


Thais. That was not the greatest part of my study, yet by it I was willing to
understand the various natures of men, that I might the better put in practice
what I had read. This my noble lover spent very freely upon me, and in me; so
that I may say, till now, I never knew what it was to be an Epicurean: We lived
a long time very jovially together, till (a pox on it) a pocky business
disturbed our pleasures; for it seems he was amorous of other women, (or they
of him) as well as my self: Among whom he got a terrible clap, and so
communicated the malignity of it to me, which so pepered us both in a short
time, as that we sympathiz'd with the zodiac, having on our bodies (as the
sign of this foul disease) the Cancer.


Ant. What can he expect less, who pertakes of the nature of a Dog, in this,
that he takes his pleasure with every Bitch he meets, perhaps one that he never
did, nor ever shall see again, with whom many times he may learn more of the
Pockey art in one hour, then by being moderate, he may in seven years.


Ant. And truly (Sister) I believe she is paid home in the same coin that
makes her -- a stable for every Ass to litter in, sometimes she may meet
withal a Running Nag. Certainly there is nothing that renders our Sex more
odious, then seriously to reflect on their actions in Bawdy-Houses. Modesty
that should be a Woman's glory, is here hence banished; nothing but what is
lascivious and wanton must be entertained there. In this place may a man find
vice so set forth to the life, that if the sight thereof will not deter him
from committing this sin, I know not what will.


Thais. For all thy preaching, I really think that it was not thou that left
first this bitter-sweet fin, but it did thee, and I think thou do wish well
to it still. As for my part though I smarted soundly (the poisonous quality of
which foul disease being not yet out of my bones) I say for this sin of
Lechery, yet couldI not leave it, nay I was so accustomed to it, that it proved
a second nature to me, if I had fasted but two days from it, it was as bad as
four days, living on bread and water. As long as my beauty lasted, and was not
impaired, I had Customers enouw for my Ware and Commodities. At this time I
ensnared a young Merchant in my Pit fall. I countenanced him the more, because
wealthy and not well knowing the getting of his money, and so by that, be the
freer to spend it. What money he lent me, I paid him in kindness, as in lying
with me at his pleasure. But I (finding that by his often employment, his love
grew cold) consulted with my self how I might raise his former love and
estimation to the same height, and after deliberation I found no way better
then to affect the Man with jealousy. Wherefore I caused my Pimp toget ready a
couple of Pheasants, a couple of Partridges, and a couple of crammed Capons,
just about the time that my Love and I should be at dinner, giving him
instructions what to say. At the time appointed, he knocked at the door, and I
commanded him to be admitted, then did he come and present the Foul with a low
obeisance to me, saying, Madam my Lord Don Alonzo de Monte Turco, has sent
this small remembrance of that great affection he bears you, desiring you to
eat them for his sake. Whereupon I seeming to be much troubled, said to him,
Pray tell your Master that I thought he had sufficiently known that I am
engaged too far to the Gentleman, not to accept of his courtesies, and I for my
own part thought he had more of virtue, then by these and such like means to
seek to violate the chaste purposes of honest Matrons, and so thus tell him.
Then did I kiss and hug may Merchant, making him believe that he was the sole
loadstone of my affections, which he did as readily believe for a truth, as I
was willing at any time to tell a lie for my own profit. He was so taken with
this may feigned constancy, that the next day he clothed me in rich new
apparel.


Ant. How strangely was this fool deceived. For that Woman that prostrates her
self to every one, cannot truly love any.


Thais. Seeing him so bravely deluded, I farther told him, that I had rejected
seven Counts and Lords (before this Spanish Don) and all for his dear sake.
When he at any time lay with me, then would I laugh heartily, saying I cannot
choose but pity a young Gentleman that waits my comeing now in such a place,
an other in such a place, whom I have all purposely deceived that they might
not interrupt our pleasures. The fool was so over-joyed at it, that he doubled
my pension, and rewarded my affection with several rich gifts. Now was it high
time to feign my self with child. Therefore I continually would pretend to
have qualmes come over my stomach, if I did eat any thing, I would vomit it
up. I would complain I had lost my taste, all sweet things seeming bitter to
me. At length I would eat nothing but what was extraordinary rare and dainty;
sometimes I would long, you may be sure not for very common things. NOw he
concluded I was with child, and his belief was confirmed by an affirmative
judgment of a Dr. of Physic whom he asked; at which he was not a little joy'd.
Now was his whole mind taken up in providing Godfathers, and all things
necessary for my lying in. Neither was there any thing (that I but named) which
I had not. I think if I would have had one of his eyes I should, rather then to
have miscarried. When I thought I had sufficience of both goods and money, then
did I cause my Mother to go to him, and with a sad countenance tell him, that I
fell by a mischance and had miscarried, and with all that I was very ill upon
it. He was like to run distracted upon this ill news. And being not able to
rest quiet, he came to me that we might mutually condole the loss. When I
thought I had lamented enough, I began to comfort him by the hopes of having
another, and so at last he rested quiet. A little after this, there was a
bragging Soldier did often visit me, so furious he was that his very sight
would have frightened a Woman. This Rhodomontado, or Hobgoblin Soldier having
inricht himself by Plunder, thought no place better to spend his ill gotten
goods in, then in my House. After we had spent some part of his money in riot
and pleasure, I bethought my self, how I might have the other part ^or my
proper use. And thus it was, I appointed an Hector to come and demand of me ten
pieces for linen cloth I bought of him, at such a time when this amorous
Thraso was with me. He comes (as fortune would have it) when we were in the
midst of our dalliances, and requires of me this ten pound, I presently told
him he should have it, whereupon I bad my Maid fetch it out of such a Trunk,
and so gave her a false key, after a little while, she came to me, and told me
that she could not unlock it. I seeming to be very angry, asked her whither like
a baggadge she had spoiled the lock? and so went my self with my Lover, but
neither of us could open it, whereupon I desired him (rather then to break open
the lock) to lend me ten pieces, which he did pay to my Hectorian
Linnen-draper. Now did I pretend that I had left the right key at a Neighbors
House, whereupon I told him I would go and fetch it, and so repay him his
money. But I staying somewhat long (according as I intended) he would have
broken open my Trunk; Now my Maid a subtle young Whore, perceiving his intent,
cried out, thieves, thieves, the Neighbors hearing it, ran into my house,
seaz'd on the fellow in the action, and sodragg'd him to Prison, who I think by
this time is gone to Hell in a string.


Ant. Now I remember I served a Country fellow as bad a trick; for coming into
this City, and having not usually seen extraordinary beauties, it chanced the
first he could affect, was my self; whereupon, that he might court me nobly,
he sold his Vineyard, amounting to a hundred pound, which was his whole estate;
I seeing the money, I pretend to like the man wonderfully, praising him, and
protesting to him, that his handsomeness and good qualities, had so conquered
my heart, as that I was very willing to be his obedient wife. The Man hearing
this, buys all sorts of household stuff immediately, not sparing any cost,
either to delight the eye, or voluptuously to please the palate. So that in a
short time his Money was almost consumed. Now to rid my hands of him, I did
cause my Champion (which I kept for such purposes) to come when my Lover was
with me, and pretending to be his Rival, draws upon him, making a pass or two
at him, but giving him liberty enough to fly, if he so pleased, which he did
very willingly, the other calling after him, saying that if ever he found him
there again, he would make him meat for Crow's; and I think he was so
terrified at these menaces, that I never saw him after. Thus have I made one
nail drive out another, and so serve my own ends by both.


Thais. When my Lovers at any time came to sup with me, I would be very
careful not to want either Cards, Dice, or Tables, or some other Game, to
cheat these fools of their moneys: for I was well versed in all the arts of
Gaming. Having supt, I would ask them to play a Game at Cards, for a
Sack-Posset, Sweetmeats, or the like: But I would not play unless they played
likewise for dry Money. At which I would very often be a very great winner; for
to draw on some well-feather'd Goose, I would wilfully lose, but to be sure I
would at last suck his pockets dry. Notwithstanding, they would at other times
adventure to play with me, for Gamsters can as well abstain from playing, as a
Woman can turn constant and faithfull^ But still they had the same bad
success.


Ant. But I do not a little admire, how thou could give content to such a
number of men? whereas no doubt many of them, had the same desire to enjoy
thee, in one and the same night.


Thais. I brought I to pass easily enough, first for my pleasure sake, for
what Woman is so affectionate, a^ to be satisfied with one Man. Surely it would
require the strength of Atlas shoulders, and Hercules his back, to stand to so
hard a task, as the satisfying of the amorous emotions of a lustful Woman.
And secondly for my very great profit; for by contenting them all, all of them
inricht my purse. Having given me his dose of pleasure; with whom I lay in bed
withal, I would complain of some pain I could not lie quiet for, and so
rising, would go to one that expected me, after I had done with him, I would
pretend I must go ease nature, and to enjoy another; nay many times I would
admit of the presence of one of my Lovers, whilst an other lay sleeping by me.


Ant. In good faith I could never be so confident and bold, fear injecting
into my mind a hundred obstacles. But this I did on a time, when all my Lovers
were feasting and drinking at my house, in the midst of our jollity, I
seemingly fell sick of a desperate disease, falling immediately into a swound:
Every one flocks about me immediately, assisting me in the best way he could.
My Maid she ran away for a Doctor (whom I had before acquainted with my
intended plot) he came in very great have, and presently felt my pulse. but I
^old him I had more need of the help of a spiritual Physician, and thereupon
I fetched a deep sigh. Upon this he (taking notice of a conple that were
extraordinary busy about me) called them aside. telling them that I was a Dead
Woman, unless some pery precious things were gotten for me. Every one upon
that strove who should expend most. I cannot remember half the medicines he
prescribed, of very small worth, but told them, that they were nothing but
dissolved pearls, and most precious Arabian unguents. And to finish the ever
told them all, that unless he could have ten pieces of Gold (at the least)to
dissolve for a Cordial for me, all that he had done before was in vain.
Whereupon, instead of ten pieces, every one gave singly ten. Thus did my Doctor
heal me to the contentment of my Lovers, and the profit of our selves. I had
skill to inchant my Lovers to me, far beyond the art of either Philosophers,
Chemists, Astrologers, nay Negromancers; far beyond that foolish thing of
making a Candle of Man's Grease, Herbs dried in the shade, Nails of the dead,
or any other Magical incantations. I would but kiss and embrace my Lovers, or
let them anoint themselves with a precious Balm I have, they presently became
so stuppefied, that they did as much adore as affect me.


Ant. Since (Sister) it is our trade, why should not we be as subtle in it as we
may. Many times you know we meet with losses: as some fellows come, and eat
and drink with us very freely, and when the reckoning is to be paid, they
swear they left their Money at home, and therefore we are enforced to trust
them, other times we are carried abroad by hectorian blades, and are either
stripped of what is valuable, or left as a pledge for the reckoning. Ill gotten
goods seldom prosper.


Thais. My chiefest gain came in by Servants; for as many of them knew not the
getting of what money they had, so were they as willing to part from it; all
the care they took, was to get time to spend what they had gotten. I would be
sure to take notice of what profession each was of, and so accordingly would I
proportion my demands. I would hug, kiss, embrace and flatter the Milliner out
of Ribbands, Hoods, Scarfes, and Gloves: The Goldsmiths I would promise a
nights lodging for either Rings or a piece of Plate, and to be sure I would get
something of every one; if I found any of them to be wary, I would lay him
down one half for his Commodity, with a promise to pay him the other half,
within such a time, though I never intended to do it, knowing well he could
take no rigorous course against me, for fear of my discrediting him to his
Master. One above the rest, did I cheat extraordinarily. He was so choleric,
as it was impossible for any one to be more; in so much, that if a Fly did but
settle on his nose, he would thunder out his execrations o me; and then again
his passion being over, he would cringe to me like a Water-spaniell, and
withal make a reparation by gifts, for the wrong he had done me in words.
Sometimes in his angry fit, I I would rise up from him, and sit down by
another, protesting never to be friends with him more, (and this many times
would happen by my own provocation on purpose) on the next day he would be sure
to send in good store of provision as forerunners of his coming, which were
his surest peacemakers, and then after bestowing on me a ring, bracelet or the
like, we would kiss friends. And this was his best way, for thou know
(Sister) the malice and hatred of a woman is implacable, it rages more, then
the Pox in the bones.


Ant. Prithee don't put me in mind of that body tormenting disease.


Thais. I had almost forgot, that thou have been infected with that plague,
therefore pardon me.


Ant. How can thou forget that, which thou thy self have felt so sensibly.
Besides is it possible for us that are continually in these hot skirmishes, to
come off without being wary as another, yet could not avoid the blow, and so
great a one it was, that at this very hour I feel the smart of it, though it
was ten years since. It has carbonadoed my flesh, putrified my bones, shook
of my hair, and it has raised the very foundation of the bridge of my nose;
besides the loss of my hair and the infection of my breath. Surely its
occupation partakes much of a Barberchyrurgion, for a man need neither Shaver,
nor Tooth-drawer, that has but the Pox for his companion. It should likewise
have a smatch of the Alchymist, for it will in a short time decoct all the
money out of a man's Pocket, be it never so deep.


Thais. Some say, that the Father of this disease was a French Man, if so, then
I am sure the Mother of it is lust, and as of that, so of most of all the vices
in the World. So that I cannot see upon what grounds we should love it for,
since it brings little pleasure with it, but an abundance of grief, pain and
anguish of spirit. Its very natural property is to suck out the very
heart-blood of Mankind.


Ant. Why do thou so inveigle against it, since thou do both use it, and
solicit others to embrace it likewise.


Thais. Since lust is my profession, I am afraid I shall come to extreme
poverty, if I please not my amorous Customers in that sort of Ware they deal
in. Though for my own part, I now grow weary of it by too much use. Nay even
when my Lovers are busied about the action, I hardly think on it, for my mind
is either busied about some one of my friends, whom I must shortly cheat, or
about himself in cunningly picking his pocket. If he perceived my theft, I
would put it of with a jest, telling him he should next time for it have a
passage in Venus Boat gratis, which would please the fool for the present, but
he found oftentimes his expectations crossed, for I would not suffer him to open
my Lock without his silver Key. But now I shall tell you a merry trick I did
put upon three Men at once. There was one a Painter and two Cutlers, which were
extraordinarily amorous of me, but at great enmity one with the other as
rivalls. I studied with my self at a time how I might make my self sport at
their harms, and thus it was. I appointed these three severally to visit me
all on one and the same night, and much about one time, yet neither knew, but
that they should enjoy my company solely, none being present. The first that
came at the time appointed was the Painter, who finding me all alone, was
exceedingly rejoyc't at his good fortune, and without delay falls about my
neck, kissing and hugging me, (as the Divle hugged the witch) and would have
done more but that I told him, there was time enough for us to sport and weary
our selves. It was not long before one of the Cutlers knocks at my Door
likewise; whereupon pretending to the Painter that I knew him by his voice, to
be my Uncle, I persuaded him to hide himself in my Closet. Upon this I
admitted my Cutler, who seeeing an opportunity of privacy was on fire to
exercise his weapon, but I did put by his thrust, by telling him I expected my
cousin immediately; but I told him I could quickly shift him of, and then I
should be very willing to make a pass or two with him. I had no sooner spoke
the words, but the other Cutler knocked at door, if I should have done
according to their expectations, I think I should have had enough of trying
weapons. My second I persuaded to hide himself, and so I admitted the third,
who came in like a good sword man, saying with a furious look (enough to have
scared an Owl) O that I had now but some one of my Corivalls to glut my Sword
with their blood. Now was my rival the Cutler here, I would send him as a
token to Vulcan to blow his Forge; Were the Painter here I would quickly
dispatch him to the Stygian lake to draw Pluto's grim countenance, besides
farther mischief that I would do him. At which words both of them, (as being
touched in the point of honor,) sally out upon him, and he (thinking that his
bombast words had conjured them thither, or Devils in their shapes) speedily
attempts to fly, but making more haste then good speed, tumbled down the
stairs headlong. As for the assailants, (anger so pricked them on to speedy
revenge) that both striving who should go down the stairs to revenge himself
first, they both fell down to the bottom together. Now did this hot encounter
renew, and (as valiant Cowards) because they could not fly, the door being
shut, there was a sad fight, blood issuing in abundance from them all. At
length the Constable (hearing a great noise at that time of the night, breaks
open the door, and seazes upon my bloody Combatants, and so carries them to
prison, where I make no question they were forced to surrender up their fury
upon dishonorable terms, and were forced to live peacibely for the future.


Anit. I cannot but laugh to think on this pleasant adventure.


Thais. Now (dear Sister) having past as it were through my nonage, let me
tell you some of my arts and devices that I used in the meridian of my days,
having been too much wearied by Fortunes tossing and hurling me up and down,
I bethought me how I might live a more staid and stately kind of life. And thus
it was I pretended (and so gave it out accordingly) that I would now bid adiue
to the world, by sequestring my self in a Nunnery from its rumors and manifold
troubles, wherreupon I all on a sudden pulled down my Tapistry hangings, and
with all moderated my diet to a meal a day. I likewise clothed my self in a
mean habit, stripping my self of my neck-laces, rings, golden chains, and
all the rest of my ornaments. I sequestered my self from all company, not
permiting my dearest friends to speak with me. All my ambition now, was to be
accounted religious, and therefore to the life, did I counterfeit the lives of
the Saints. Now was the City filled with the rumor of my conversion: all my
fear was that they would no more call me Thais, but penitent Mary Magdalene.


Ant. But how did you dispose of all your goods on this occasion?


Thais. All my precious things I did hide in a friends house, things of lesser
vallew, I distributed as alms to the poor. Now seeing a convenient time, I
sent for all my friends and lovers, and after I had looked very sadly on each
particularly, I craved all their pardons in general for the sins of my youth,
I had committed with them, devoutly casting up my eyes to Heaven, I invoaked
pardon from thence; after which I spoke after this manner to them, with weeping
eyes. I now am resolved (my quondam dear friends) to bid you and the World
good night, hoping to bid you all in Heaven good morrow. My conscience having
been wrought upon by the commemoration of Christ's sufferings, enforced me to
leave these soul-destroying sins of the flesh, and betake my self to a holy
life, and this upon very good grounds, if you consider, that if we live not
well here, we shall never enjoy happiness hereafter. Nay if we do consider and
think on it, yet if we endeavor not to obtain it, his salvation is hopeless.
Therefore whilst I live here, I will so behave my self that I may not doubt
of salvation horeafter. I have learnt that by my contemning of riches, I shall
be rich; by contemning of glory, injuries, rest, and earth, I shall be made
glorious, and a conqueror, I shall gain rest, and find Heaven, and then in a
rapture, I pronounced these Verses; Rouse up my soul and let not lustful
fires,
Take of thy thoughts from Heavenly desires.
Sore up aloft, and let the Earth seem unto thee,
But as black spot of iniquity.
Now I Am resolved to cloister up my self
From riches, pleasures, and all Earthly pelf.


Then did I tell them by what means I commenc't convert, which was by reading
the story of Mary Magdalene. And to conclude, I told them that I was resolved
to do and suffer any thing in this life, to be exempted from those everlasting
burnings of Hell fire in the life to come. Thus did I preach at least an hour
to them, at which some were grieved for the loss of my presence, others were
grieved, because they could not seem so virtuous and good as I. The time being
come that I must go to the Monastry, all my friends accompanied me thither. And
by the way, some would praise God that he had called me to a better life;
others, that God had given me the grace to forsake worldly pleasures in my
youth, and flower of my age. I observed one (as I went) to covet to be as near
me as possible, and who seemed to be more sorrowful then the rest; wherefore
as (I thought) I had begun a conquest, so I would finish it on him. Therefore
just as I was going into the Gate of the Monastry, I turned about my head, and
looking upon him with a steadfast and peirceing eye, enough to have moved a
stone, I did shed some tears. The eye (Sister) is Cupids Armory wherein he
stores up his shafts, and standing there oftentimes as a sentinel, seldom
lets an amorous heart escape his darts. My new Lover thought from this action,
that those tears were dropped for his sake (every one is apt to construe a thing
according as he would have it) and from that time plotted how he might draw me
from that retired life. I had not been long there, but he visited me at the
grate, and that very often. At length being not able to hold in his mind any
longer, he declared his intent to me, urging all the persuasions that I ye in
the tongue of Man to draw me out of that place. But I seemin to be outrageous,
asked him whither the Divle ahd sent him as his agent to corrupt chaste
intentions. At this tart answer, he was quite dashed out of countenance, and so
departed. But (as I understood after) all the way he went, he did admire at my
so sudden reformation, and that seeing me so strickt, he really thought now I
had absolutely banished dissolute thoughts, and now he thought I might make a
very virtuous wife. Therefore the next time that he came to me, he desired to
be excused if he had given me any cause of discontent, and in brief told me
that if I would leave that place, and be as willing as he was, to live a
married life, the consummarion of it should be between us in a very short time.
After a little pause on the business, and some reasonings between us, I
consented to his desires, (and indeed the sooner because I was extreme weary
of that kind of life) and so leaving my devotion, I married this Man wealthy
enough.


Ant. I believe that proverb was continual in thy mind, that says, he knows
not to live, that knows not to dissemble.


Thais. Dissimulation is the chief practique part of my life; and therefore
blame me not, if I know how to be pleasing to the eye, though intricate to the
understanding, and be not what I seem to appear, but my countenance shall be
sure to be framed according to the present disposition, so that by different
men's humors I may weave a net for occasion. Much of this feminine policy did I
make use of to wind my self into this married condition I then was in. Then
had I an other part to act, to wit, a sober discreet and modest wife to my
husband, not mattering whether I seemed so to others of my familiars. Now must
you consider me as a stately dame under a conjugall tie, attended on by my
Gentleman Usher, and waiting Gentlewoman lodged and seated in a most stately
and well built house, in which you may be confident I would want nothing, as
long as there was any money to pay for it. My chiefest business was how I
might wear the breeches, and then it would prove no difficult matter to
commence Scholar both to Epicurus and Aristippus, I was of their opinion that
held pleasure to be the Sumum bonum, at least a woman's chief happiness, which
I resolved to enjoy though my body and soul paid for it. My employment was to
drink rich and fragrant Wine, to eat choice victuals, both at Ceres and Venus
tables. At which I imitated not the behavior of some nice finnekin City dames,
that will not speak a broad word, much less eat with a good appetite (but
let us excuse them in private.) When they are at a plentiful dinner, they will
eat and drink very little for good manners sake, forsooth. As for me I
employed all the industry I had to live merrily and jovially, and thought that
little enopugh too, not valewing what people said.


Ant. But how did thou get money to feed and maintain those varieties of
pleasures, thou did enjoy?


Thais. If I found my husband to be in an (Ill) thrifty humor, and so would
not allow me what I desired, I would harken to some young gallants
solicitations, and so dresine my pleasure through my husbands horns, thus you
see he got nothing but a cornuting for his avarice.


Ant. But did he not suspect this wanton carriage?


Thais. No: for when I had been abroad exalting his horn, then would I (when
I come home) cling about his neck, speaking him nothing but sugared words,
which he took for the quintessence of affection, and so (quid pro quo) would
return reciprocal love to me. Cuckolds (according to the Proverb) are the
most loving husbnds. Thus did I by dissembling handsomely, obtain liberty both
to gormondize, to be wanton, and to be prouder. My devotion seldom reached
farther then good apparel, for which cause I would go to Church, to observe
what was the newest fashion, or who had a better gown then my self, and then
go home and be sick till I had it, some body should pay fer't. I could have
wished there had been nothing worn but silk, satin, cloth of Gold, etc. had
it not been for envy to see others as well clad as my self. I would seldom
stir abroad till I had well read my face in a looking glass, that I might
artificially mend the errata's; as if my cheeks were too pale, then would I
add something of the vermilion. Then when I had reviewed it, and found the
faults thereof corrected, I would venture boldly to show this Picture of my own
drawing, by withdrawing the courtains, I mean my hoods. Thus did I trim my
self, as a French cook garnisheth a dish the more to provoke the appetite to
a taste.


Ant. Did thou thus trick up thy self to please thy husband only.


Thais. Noe; yet I would pretend it was for his sake, though my maine aim was
to cause amorous customers to value the more what was within, by the richness
and splendor of the bush. And this I did, knowing that one man alone is not
able to guide a woman's light vessel. You know that when the spur of lust
Pricks us on to a false gallop, it requires a very lusty and experient rider to
set us; many times for all their sufficiency they are thrown. Now that my
saddle might not be empty, it was requisite to have several Horsemen, that
when one is out, the other may be in. I did all that I could to confine my
self to my husband; I very often gave him caudles, cock-broth, lamb-stones,
etc. for Purgation sake. But these wrought so violently with him, that they
left nothing within him; and now as I was a consumption to his purse, so he
fell into the like of his body, and now was it high time for him to repent,
which he might thank me for bringing him to it so soon; though for my own
particular, I sent it to travail; with an intent not to have its company till
I was three score years old. My husband being dead, I followed not the custom
of some widows, that make costly Funerals the sonner to get them husbands.
But I buried him very obscurely; first that I might employ the money to a
better use, as in buying good clothes, living in pleasure, etc. and next that
my husbands so shaddine death might nor be too much divulged as dying so
suddenly. Besides I bad no desire to come under those conjugall (servile)
bones. Were all females of my opinion, no woman should marry without the
approbation of ten Doctors and seven Mid-wives at least, you have not heard so
many stories concerning dilapidations as I have; it makes me even lament with
tears the condition of well wishing women that have the hard luck to meet with
those doe-littles. You may perceive (Sister) that I am a Jewelless, for as I
have good skill in the choice of Stones, so am I never better then when I am
bulied about them.


Ant. But (Sister) I wonder how thou did dissemble thy joy at the death of
thy husband?


Thais. I bid it under my mourning Gown, though I laughed in its sleeve, I
would often fetch a customary sigh, and if need did require, I did weep for
joy. It requires a very discerning wit, to distinguish a Woman's tears. For
sometimes they proceed from sorrow, other times from deceit, and sometimes from
anger, and to be sure they can command them upon all occasions. The time of
mourning being expired, I did cast of those sad weeds, and clothedmy self like
a flourishing spring after a hard and tedious Winter. And now the hot rays of
my beauty being displayed, they did attract Lovers to me like atoms in the Sun
beams, which filled my chamber, as people do a play house.


Ant. Now thou art reduced to the same condition as thou were before marrige.


Thais. It Is true; only with this difference, that I am richer, and more
experienced in the World, and so the better able to act my part in it. Had I
not been inspired with wisdom and cunning even from my Cradle, I could never
have expected to have lived so well at this time. I ever preferred profit before
pleasure, though I often joined them together, otherwise poverty by this time
had been my portion. And that whereas one such as I have (narrowly) escaped the
malice of fortune, a hundred else have rotted of the Pox in an Hospital, or
dyed out of want in some ditch. The fear of which often stings us in such a
manner, as that we should hardly enjoy our selves, were it not for hopes that
our deceits and couzonages will get us estates before that time. Besides we
have hopes of a trade to trust too, which requires a small stock to set up
withal, only two or three Country Girls, a barrel of Beer, and a Gallon or
two of strong Waters. If our trading is but small, we can begin with less, for
you know the Honey-pot may admit of many flies to lick in it; But of this I
shall speak more largely of, when I shall come to depaint the Baude with her
implements.


Ant. Pray (Sister) continue your discourse.


Thais. Whilst now I was a professed Whore again, I endeavored with the utmost
of my craft, to attempt any thing, (what ever it was, and how wicked so ever
the design) that might be any ways beneficial; you may perceive all along my
ambitious mind, for it was my study from fourteen years old to this present,
how I might excel all in our profession, intending no less then to be styled
their Queen. As for all kind of wickedness, I dare outvie them all, though
the simplest of them is too too vild. How many Men have I robbed, cheated and
undone? How many have I caused to be wounded, nay sometimes murdered, besides
beatings and petty-larcenies? Again (which is the chiefest thing) how many
gallons of thrice concocted blood have I extracted, in those many venereall
combats I have been in.


Ant. By the smock of Venus, (God forgive me for swearing) thou art an arch
deceitful Queen.


Thais. If I am so, can you expect less from one that has been experienced in
so long, and forced to use such devices.


Ant. But will thou never repent for these thy wickedness?


Thais. What need I as long as the Pope stands our friends (besides Cardinals
and some of the eminent Clergy) who will speak a good word for us hereafter, he
has given me good hopes by giving me a general pardon for sins past, present,
and to come. So that now I hope my soul will enjoy as many pleasures
Celestial, as my body has Terrestrial.


Ant. This is some part of my present comfort, but I fear me the Pope and all
the rest that tell us fornication is but a venial sin, will sooner open the
Gates of Hell to us then those of Heaven. And now my dream is out, for last
night me thought I was dead, and as I was entering Hell Gates, I saw the Pope as
Porter of the Gate, instead of his triple Crown, he seemed to have a pair of
huge horns, with which he kept out a vast number of his Clergymen that pressed
on him to get in, telling them that the place was so full of them already, that
there would be no room for others, if he permitted them entrance, and so to
make room for me, he fell a pushing with his horns, which made such a sad
slaughter among their beads and crucifixes, as never was the like seen.


Thais. Thou make me to laugh heartily at this thy fantastical dream.


Ant. It were all one if thou weepest because they are as much used by thee,
one as the other, and for as little cause.


Thais. It is very true, for there is nothing so serviceable to our occupation
as laughing and crying, to which must be added lying; which I made use of as
often, as Plow-men eat bred and cheese. By a lie, I got once a brave gold
chain. It was thus, there was a rich coxcomb was even sick for love of me;
this Man to seem the more majestically before me, had borrowed a very rich
gold chain of his neighbor, and he likewise had borrowed it of his Wife. Now
we were at that time he wore it, appointed to see a great show. I easily
persuaded him (because I had a desire to it) to let me wear it at that time.
Away we went accompanied with my necessary implement a Pimp; being come into
the middle of a great crowd, I slipped of my chain, and conveyed it speedily
into my Pimps hand. When I thought he was gone with it far enough of, I made a
hideous cry that I was undone, calling out, stop thief, and because I so well
counterfeited my grief by my tears, my Lover thought I had really lost it,
and so seeing there was no more to be done, but to sit down quietly under the
loss, he suffered me to enjoy the benefit thereof, if I would grant him some
few nights pleasure, which I told him his merit required, if I had not lost his
chain, and thus we compounded the difference. If it may not be troublesome to
you, I shall tell you two or three more such like stories.


Ant. Your stories are so pleasing, that I am sorry the nights approach will
sooner finish your agreeable discourses then I am willing. Therefore not to
loose time pray proceed.


Thais. When I lived at Florence, it happened that an old dry bon'd fellow
fell in love with me. He could not love my beauty more then I did his Purse. He
wished well to veneriall pleasures (as being addicted to them in his youth)
though he could do little. He was fit for nothing but to sleep and snore by a
woman's hot side, lying there like a senseless block. She that marries such a
man may never fear of his being too vigorous and lusty, and so be enforced to
say, it is enough (my Dear) for this time. This old Amorist the day before the
nocturnall combat, endeavors to provoke and stir himself up by embracing,
kissing and feeling me, nay he took many restoratives to strengthen his
nerves. And now thinking he had enabled his body to correspond with his
desires, he went to bed with me, and so prepares himself for a battery. But
alas poor man, as soon as the fight began, his Standard fell just as he was
entering the breach. And no wonder, for this member is as really dead as the
rest of his body is a dying. It serves him, but as the Eunuchs quill for an
aqueduct. Thus you see it is no propitious conjunction, when Saturn is coupled
with Venus. Now least he should leave me unexpectedly by reason of his
impotency, I was resolved to have a good parting blow. Wherefore I told him
that the best way to strengthen his body was to make a good feast, and there at
to eat and drink freely. He was very willing to do it according to my motion.
Upon this I invited most of our society about the City. The banquet was served
up in dishes, most whereof were silver ones, which I had on purpose borrowed of
the old man. After we had most plentifully eaten and drunk, the table cloth
was taken away, but I forgot not to set by four pieces of plate, and so I sent
home the rest. But the old man finding missing so many, was ready to have run
distracted, and in that humor came and demanded them of me. But I told him
that a little after he was gone from my house, a cosen of mine defired me to
lend them her, which I presumed to do upon that mutual affection there was
between him and my self. He being pleased at this, did rest satisfied at that
time; but some while after he demanded them of me again, and then I told him,
I had forgot to fetch them home: the next news I heard, he was dead. It was
joyful news to me for-the gains I received by it.


Ant. I think thou well deservedst what thou had. For my part I think if he
had offered me twice as much, I should hardly have suffered him to come nigh me.
The very thoughts of him even nauseat's my stomach, his stinking breath, his
tisicks, besides his impotency, an insupportable grief to a woman. Again be
has his sally port almost continually open, out of which he thunders at a time
at least a hundred claps, not missing one of the number, and this thunder is
but a forerunner of a shower of rain which will follow, to wit a stinking
liquid humor, etc.


Thais. Now after I had spent the summer of my life in all manner of these kind
of cheates; and debauchments, the autumn thereof began to appear. And now was
it high tune for me to cast the anchour of my own carnal pleasures. For since
I was not able to reform and restore comeliness to my face by Ceruse and
Vermilion, nor make my stinking breath sweet by perfumed comfits, my Lovers
began by little and little to leave me, and therefore I was resolved to make
use of the last means of a livelihood by turning Bawd. Now I confess I was
forced to choose a very ill time to set up in. For our Gallants had learnt by
experience how expensive and dangerous it is to keep a Whore, and therefore now
they went a wiser way to work, viz. by keeping in their houses handsome Girls
which served as Servants by day, but as their Wives by night, and so by
teaching them what it is to lie with a Man, make them turn Whores the sooner,
and so augment the number of our Female traders: there is nothing that damages
our Trade more then the incroachment of private Whores.


Ant. I really believe that thou were the offspring of some profound
Politician, and so in thy generation there was infused with thy natural heat
both craft and wit.


Thais. It is not unlikely, that I am a States Man's Bastard, for I know not my
Father; And this seems the more likely, because (some say) that illegitimates
are Creatures (for the most part) of good complexions and rare features, witty,
and fortunate.


Ant. But what may be the reason of this?


Thais. I conceive it may be thus: questionless it was beauty, or some thing
else that much pleased the person, that caused in him these illegitimate
desires, now when he comes to the enjoyment of them in those stolen delights,
his fancy being heightened, it causes him to act with more vigor and
liveliness.


Ant. You have obliged me much in satisfying me in this point, but if you will
more, pray continue your former discourse.


Thais. Well then, be pleased to take notice that since I am now a Bawd, (as
thou art) let us consider what she should be, viz. of a long time a votaresse
to Venus, and afterward let her serve as a Lamp in capid's School to give
light to Lovers. Such a one you know I was and am. Now the first commodity that
I endeavored to get was some handsome simple Country Girl, and such a one did
I meet with all, both Fatherless and Motherlesse, as fit as might be for my
turn. At first I took her home to me as a Servant to try her natural parts,
but finding her to be both witty and ingenuous, I then looked upon her as my
Daughter, and did make very much of her, that thereby I might persuade her to
what I listed. After she had lived a small while with me, I thought it time to
document her a little; And therefore taking her aside in private, I used very
persuasive arguments to bring her first to chase out of her, Maidenfear and
bashfulnesse; condemning much her niceness, and her useless scruples. Then
did I feelingly represent unto her the pleasures Women enjoy by Men: adding
more over that if she would but dedicate her life to Venus, there should not be
any pleasure, any delight in the World, which she should not enjoy. These
considerations made so deep an impression in her mind, that she resolved
forthwith to be obedient to my desires. Things fadging so well to my mind, I
went on preparing the rest of my implements, viz. Tobacco, Strong Water, Bear,
Ale, and any thing by which I might profit. And that I might be a Bawd of the
right stamp, I filled my Chamber with Limbecks, Vials, and Glasses of all
sorts, with which I prepared confections to clarify the skin, waters to make
the face shine, Paints of all sorts, Lip-salves, Ointments to smooth the face,
Waters for the freckles in the face, with a whole Wardrope of such like slibber
slabbers. I pretended to be a Docteresse, and accordingly gave out, that I
could mend cracked Maiden-heads, I am sure I mended my own so artificially, as
that I sold it seven times, the loss thereof unperceived. I could cure
lovesick Girls of the Green-sicknesse, or side-akings, by causing others
(because I could not do it my self) to administer to them injections and
glisters, a speedy cure. The falling sickness, (because some say it is caused
by a spirit) I cured only with this spell, viz. but crossing the Legs.


Ant. But how did you contrive a way to make this Country beauty known?


Thais. I went to my Markets with her, ( I mean all public meetings)
dressing her so neat and so spruce, that I soon got Chapmen enough for her; For
some of them having much to do with such like Commodities, could tell at the
first sight, she was no adulterate Gem, but an unspotted Virgin; Whereupon I
had daily great resort to my House of these young Gallants, just like a company
of Dogs after a salt bitch. We feasted it every meal, and lived as merrily
as the day was long; And all this they did in hope of cropping of this my
Virgin bud. I kept them all in suspense a good while, to the intent I might
fleece them all, and that they might have the grea er estimation of her.


Ant. But did you not instruct your Daughter, how she should behave her self?


Thais. Yes, I taught her in what manner she should dialogue with her Lover,
how she must ask, or with what grace snatch any thing from him; when to
embrace, when to kiss, when to speak him fair and flattering; and how to keep
him at a distance; I instructed her likewise not to contemn the meanest, nor
be too familiar with the highest, and only to be complacentiall to those from
whom she expected speedy gain. Then I taught her the way how she should
promise, deny, swear, and forswear, lie, cheat, steal, hate, and love
according as she should see good. In a word, I made her understand all the art
and craft of her profession; and truly I will say this for her, that she was so
capable of understanding what I told her, that she became in a very short time
an excellent good proficient, and would have improved her self by every days
experience, had not the fatal Sisters too soon cut asunder the thread of her
life, as you shall hear by and by.


Ant. I pray Sister tell me how she came to her untimely end.


Thais. There were two Sparks, that loved her both entirely well. Ah! the
pillar of my comfort, the stay of my life, with thee are all my hopes and joys
vanished.


Ant. Come, prithee Sister, dry up thy tears for a while, and prosecute her
story.


Thais. I say these two were both of one mind, viz. to purchase her
Maidenhead at any rate what ever. As for my part, I was resolved it should not
be lost, but at a very dear rate. One of them proffered me a good round sum,
which sum because it pretty well satisfied my covetous desires, I accepted, and
granted him leave to pluck this flower, and so appointed him to come at such a
time. The other Gentleman (suspecting his rival had gained me by his gold)
came and offered me a far greater sum then the other, which so shook my fidelity
and honesty, as that I granted him likewise the enjoyment of his desires at
such a time appointed. The time being expired wherein the first was to reap
the fruit of his expenses; He came, and being hardly warm in his Mistrisses
arms, the other came likewise (mistaking his time) and coming into her
chamber, finds his rival fast linkt in his Mistrisses arms so close, as if of
two, they were incorporated into one body. But now see the inconstancy of
fortune, or rather the omnipotent power of God, that did metamorphose our
pleasure and mirth into sorrow, my hopes into despair, and annihilated this my
young pupils wanton deportment by deaths conquering hand. For this other young
Gentleman seeing so an unpleasant sight, fury and despair wholly possessed his
mind, so that drawing his Rapier, he gave them that felicity as both to breath
their lasts together, and so lancht out both into the deeps of Eternity.


Ant. Surely (me thinks) thou should have even hanged thy self out of
despair, for the loss of such fair hopes of a gallant future livelihood.


Thais. It greiv'd me, you must think, but it could not be remedyed: wherefore
now I did summon in all my wits to sit in counsel, which way was best to steer
in. And this did my wit (which was grand in quest) adjudg to be most convenient
for the present, viz. to gain acquaintance with all sorts of Rogues (as they
call them) viz. Plumers, Filers, Cloak-twitchers, etc. and so to permit my
House to be a receptacle or warehouse for all their thefts and fellonies. At
this time I did give out that I was a cunning Waman, or an Astrologer; so that
if any had lost silver Boles, Spoones, or had had their pockets gelt; they
presently repaired to me; whom I promised (upon condition they would reward me)
to restore them their own again: I needed not to observe the stars, as knowing
before certainly to find what was lost. Thus did I become a gainer on all
hands, by being the Patroness, or Harbourer, of all sorts of those that
practiced villainy and roguery. If any of these seemed offended at my immoderate
gains, I would soon flatter or drink him into a better humor, that thereby I
might make these Caterpillars continue to pilfer, steal, cheat, and rob, and
all this was principally to defray the charges of my diurnall debauchments. I
had a great many of such Servants at this present, both Male and Female, all
which I persuaded it was far better to live a short life, and a sweet life,
then to live a long one, and miserable. Somes office was to raise a tumult in
the street by quarrelling, and so to pick the pockets of those that idly gazed
on, or did meddle in bufinesses that did not concern them. Others went to
shops under pretense of buying Ribbands, or a piece of silk, but if they bought
one piece, they assuredly filed an other. Others I had that were Gamesters, who
knew (to their fingers ends) the exact art of carding or dicing, and would
subtly let young Gulls win at first, that they thereby might win all their
money at last. I had many more Sects of Rascals, too tedious to mention; all
which brought me in the tithe of their cheates, every man according to his
employment. But it was not long before I was deprived of this means of living;
for some killed one the other: others were the Gallows tribute, and the rest the
Devil fetched I think, so that now I was enforced to follow my old trade of
Bawdry. Being now left to my self by the untimely death of my friends: I
forsook the City (being not able to suffer the affronts was offered me daily
by waggish boys; some by hooting at me, and throwing up their caps, calling me
old Bawd: others throwing dirt at me, so that my face would usually (when I
went abroad) be as artificially patcht, as the best Lady Errant in the City:) I
say, I be took my self to the Suburbs; now being willing to shelter my self
any where, I was content to hire a poor tottering house, I think it was
formerly a Bawdy House, which if I had been forgetful, would have put me in
mind to bewail the sudden catastrophe and ruin of my former good fortune.


Ant. Sister, The Proverb says true, one cannot eat a Cake and have it too:
if thy extravagant expenses consumed what money thou had, thou could expect
no less then to want what was necessary.


Thais. It Is true: But I had not the grace to consider it. I had not lived here
above a month, before a dangerous sickness seized on my wretched Carcas: the
cause whereof I could impute to nothing more, then the consideration of my
present woeful condition, poverty instead of plenty having the ascendance over
it. Being some what recovered, all that I could get was barely Belly-timber. By
this I did it; I had tricks in store:
I could cut purses, or pick locks: or more,
All Highway Thieves, Hous-breakers, or cutpurses
Flock to my House, as Merchants do to Burses.
Of whom I took my share of goods, etc.



Ant. Thou have not yet forgot thy old vain of riming.


Thais. Neither can I forget my old way of life. Wherefore I intended to lay
hold on the first opportunity to set up again; And I think at that time fortune
took pity upon me, by bringing me into the company (accidentally) of a
Citizens Wife, that had newly given him the slip, that thereby she might with
more fullness and freedom enjoy those pleasures she had so long thirsted
after. At this time I resolved (if I could induce this young wanton to live
with me) to leave of trading my self either in Roterdam, or Middleborough, or
to make use of Aretius lectures any otherwise then to read them to my
Scholars. I knew she would save me the labor of cater-wouling at midnight
under bulks, or of standing sentinel at the corners of streets, with a white
large apron, or of fetching a round to catch night Owls, and so lead them to
some by Lane, Church Porch, or some dark entry, where Joan shall seem to such
Buzards, as good as my Lady. But judge you Sister, if they were not bloody
minded fellows, to ply me with their pot-guns, though I hung up my white flag
of truce, my smock.


Ant. But did thou prevail on this Curtezan to be one of the utensils of thy
occupation?


Thais. It was no difficult matter for me to do it. For first, she was one
that already had learnt prick-song, and knew what it was for one Jack in the
Virgin-h^les to go up, and the other (Gill) to go down. Again, knowing what a
gallant prize she was, I mustred all my wit together to gain her. For nature
had imbellisht her with all attractions and perfections imaginable in our Sex:
only she wanted some maxims of my policy to amuze and captivate her beholders,
a good wit, and a handsome method of subtle discourse, she naturally was
indewed with all. And to speak like one that has read in Romances, in her
voice there was more music then in Amphions lute, or Orpheus harp. Circe is a
mere fable to her transforming, not only the virtuous and precise, but even
the most valiant into her adorers. And now to speak like a Poet; Most Heavenly
face, immortal, and Divine,
Must such perfection now turn Concubine?
Malicious Heaven, why from so sweet a face
Did you exempt her minds adorning grace?
Were I a Man, and should but her epsy
I soon should plunge into captivity.


This Gentlewoman had so much wit as to furnish her self with good store of
money, rings, etc. before she left her husbands house, which I purposed should
furnish us with necessaries in reference to the hiring of a handsome and well
built house, and to serve us to live on, till the fame of her beauty and parts
should invite such customers as might repay what we had expended. After all
things had succeeded as well as we could desire, we wanted yet one thing more,
viz. a servant that might likewise serve for a Doxie of the second rank, that
might entertain those of an inferior rank and quality. A beggar-maide happened
to come to our door for an alms, whom I observed to have a very handsome
face though overshadowed with dirt, and a well proportioned body, this Maid I
thought to be as fit for my turn as might be. Whereupon I took her in, and
new-clothed her, after she had well-wash'd her self, and having served me
somewhile, I told her in what way she must expect to live, if she was my
servant, and with all I told her, if she would consent to it, she should want
nothing that was either profitable or pleasant, silk gowns, she should have for
the very taking up: and then giving her some documents, I soon fitted her for
my trade. I Will tell you a pretty story of a trick she did almost as soon as she
came, which did please me the more, as foreseeing therein her extraordinary
petulant and wanton humor: and thus it was: Being at a play with me, there was
a Jack-Tumbler (as they call him) which showed a great many Hocus tricks, as
those also of activity and agillity of body, which so delighted her as that
coming home she was continually talking of what she had seen. Being in bed
with me, she began in her sleep to mumble something, and then would tumble up
and down: at length she had got her leg over her shoulder, and in striving to
reduce it, she fell over the bed on the flore: at which sudden noise I awoke,
but found my girl missing, neither knew I where to grope for her being it was
midnight. Whereupon I lighted a candle, and coming up to look for her, (good
God never so scared was I in my life) I found her trust up as round as a
football, looking through her legs, as if her head had been placed where her
-- should have been. Now not knowing what to think of it, I called in some of my
neighbors, who came in both Male and Female, and seeing her in that posture,
some thought she had been possessed with the Devil, others this, and some that,
but I am sure we were all of us shrewdly afraid to see so many holes open, and
she staring over them: at length (I being more truly valiant then the rest,
stepped forth and assisted her to remove her leg, which soon dispossessed her of
this Hocus Pocus Devil.


Ant. There was laughing enough (I dare warrant) at this fatal accident.


Thais. I that there was, and too much in a young Lad that stood by, which his
evil sent did too too fowly bewray.


Ant. Had thou but carried about this Girl to show this trick in public,
thou would have had more customers to see it, then those that show a Calfe
with two tails, or a Hogg with eight legs, etc. but the grand question would
be, how thou should be rid of them after they had once seen it?


Thais. Well to proceed, the fame of these two beauties had so increast our
acquaintance, that I repented not of my being Bawd, neither they of their being
prostitutes. For compute you how great our benefit was, if we made our
visitants pay for a pint of wine instead of a quart. And in short, what ever
they sent for out of my house, I would take my tole out of it, before i^ should
come to them: notwithstanding I made them pay soundly for fowling my linen, as
also for candles burnt in their company, nay I would reckon in likewise six
pence at least, for every hour I had lost of my natural rest. Sometimes my
poor Gulls would admire at their great reckonings, which perhaps they tasted of
but one sort of meat served up in several dishes, I mean pipes of Tobacco.
Yet these our immoderate gains may be in some measure excused, if you consider
at what a high rate we live, whither we have trading or not: besides the cost
we are at for paints, perfumes, gay clothes, the rent of a stately house,
though it may be the furniture costs us little, you know how.


Ant. I do so, For I conceive all of our profession, though they use a various
method of gaining, yet the way is all one in effect.


Thais. Now as I told you, though we had a full trade, yet did I make my two
Doxies serve. My Citizens Wife, she was now resolved to admit of none less
then a Gentleman, as thinking it beneath her, since she had forgotten her
common epithet, Mistress, and assumed that which was more honorable, Madam,
which she did make all her Lovers believe as current, though she was the Wife
but of an ordinary (cornuted) tradesman.


Ant. Now thou talkest of cornuting, thou put me in mind of most of our
Citizens. But prithee tell me why is it that they are said to wear By-Hornes,
and not Unicorns.


Thais. The reason (as I suppose) may be deduced from the posture a Man's Wife
lies in, when she is cornuting him, viz. her legs displayed, and not from
the virile instrument that is the causer of it. You may as well ask the reason
why the poor harmless Man should wear them on his head, and not the Wife for
doing the fact: If you consider the Man as the Woman's head, the question is
resolved.


Ant. Thou art still a notable wag. But prithee prosecute thy story of this
City-Curtezan.


Thais. According to her title (when she went abroad) was she both attired and
attended; and with very great respect was she observed at home, when any of her
Lovers was present. Her Man (alias Pimp) stood continually bare before her, and
there was none in the house durst say otherwise then (when she wanted any
thing) what is your Ladyships pleasure, etc? If any Gentleman demanded to see
her, (before admittance) she would be sure to consult with her Glass for the
amendment of the Errata's of her face. She seldom stood at the window but to
entice in some prey, which she could very artificially do by amorous glances,
or by looks, which seen'd as if she languisht for love of the party passing
by. Once when she was standing at the window, there happened to pass by a very
spruce Gallant, who observed her very much, but seeing that her eye could not
prevail on him, she thought on another trick that should, for dropping her
handkercheife out at the window, she aimed it to fall on his head; whereupon
she desired of him that favor as to reserve it till she should come down, and
ease him of his charge. As soon as she appeared at the door, he presented it
to her with great submission: (she had the better opportunity to act this her
plot by his slow, yet stately pace, for he was much afraid of dirting his silk
stockings, and Leg ruffes.) Now after she had courteously thanked him for
that favor, she desired him to walk in, that thereby she might have occasion
to show her further gratefulness, by endeavoring to transcend his
expectations by his welcome. He was not able to refuse so gracious a favor
from so sweet a creature, especially having now his heart conquered by her
all-conquering beauteous perfection. This first visit was the Mother of many
more, so that in a short time, he was her professed lover. Now all his business
was, how he might contrive a means to enjoy her, as being reduced to such a
condition by her agreeable and pleasing conversation, as nothing could please
him with out it, nor reason persuade. If one by reason seek for to suppress.
That heat love gives, the greater is th'excess.



Ant. Yet I must tell you, were I a Man, I should loath a common lip, were it
dipped as deep in vermilion as is Aurora's cheeks, whose color the Sun new dies
every morning: for my part, I wonder at the folly of some Men, that can affect
such a one, that affects none, but for their money, and so Tom Tinker may have
admittance as well as a Gentleman. Besides what pleasure can a man enjoy with
such a one, who has lost the sense of feeling almost in that place, which
should be most sensible, and which is worse (by using it so often) it becomes
no better then a Jakes, for every rascal to disburthen himself therein.


Thais. If you thus interrupt me continually, I shall want time to finish my
narration. Now I say as for her part, her mind was busied in something else,
viz. how she might make a prey of him; (for knowing him to be wealthy) she was
resolved to make him pay dear for sin, if he had a desire to commit it: which
he resolved to do, if money would bring it to pass. And it seems it was that
which prepared his way for him: for he no sooner gave her some angels with a
promise of more, but she presently subjected her self to his pleasure. It was
my hap to be in the room in which they were to be in action, but I could not
choose but smile at a jest she put upon him: It was thus, just as he had
planted his piece to shoot her between wine and water, it seems she had seen
some defect, whereupon said she, poope Mr. Gunner your Linstock is too short,
and therefore I fear you will hardly give fire without burning your fingers:
which he did not much mind, his thoughts being preoccupied about the work. Now
you shall hear how fatal that bout was to him; in reference to which you must
understand, that there was a boisterous Captain which did love her exceedingly;
insomuch that I have often heard him say, nay swear, that he would assuredly
be the death of him, that should utter a word in way of love to her. Now it
happened that this Rodomantado being half drunk, came to my house at this very
time. Seeing him coming in at my doors, I ran up to give them notice there of:
our time being short for the hiding of the Gentleman, she made no more ado,
but put him under her farthingale, which was very large. He was no sooner
conveyed under, but my Captain enters the chamber: His first salutations were a
company of oaths and vows, that if any arm should be so bold to clip her
naked, but his martial arms, he would soon consume it with his rage; let him
be what he will, (says he) there is none dare coape with me that was bred and
born among the thunder and lightning of cannons, that was continually
encountered with bullets, as a Knight of the blade is with drops of rain, or a
shower of hail stones. Now just as he was about to embrace her, he smelt an
unsavory sent; whereupon he swore that my girl had -- her self. But you may
be pleased to understand that this amorist (lying latent under her coats, and
hearing such fatal threatenings against himself) I say fear made him utter
that which was his betrayer. This Captain being now not able to endure such an
affront put upon him, took the boldness to Kick his Love, thinking by that
means to remove her, that thereby she might have an opportunity to cleanse her
self, but in so doing he Kicked his corrival from under her farthingale: at
first he was much amazed, to see her cast her Whelpe in such a manner, but
after he had recollected his senses, he began to discharge his wrath on his
pitiful and all -- corrival in these terms, what is here? an atome; a
stinking worm, that endeavors to with stand and keep back the shot of my
cannons and demi culverins. And now when I am come (after I have made a breach)
to make my entry with my charging pike, and have you treacherously surpised
her fort. Are not her Bulwarks, Trenches, Mines, Countermines, Ditches and
Waterworkes mine, and must you seek a propriety in them? After he had vented
all his fury in this manner against him, in words, he thought good likewise
that his adversary should feel it, wherefore after he had given him some of
that precious unguent, named unguentum baculinum, he tumbled him down the
stairs to provide for his future security. After he had rid himself of all
inconveniences, as he thought, he came to his Mistress fully resolved at least
to try, if he could break a lance with her: But she was not so minded, as
knowing him to be pennilesse, and that seeing there was little benefit to be
expected from his company, she desired him to depart, being an unseasonable
time of night, which he took in such great disdain, as that he became
outrageous, in so much that he did cudgel our coats all round. Whereupon I
advertised the watch (as seeing no better way) who eased us of all further
trouble with him. By this it is evident, what great care we take of them, that
often times spend their whole estates on us.


Ant. As for my part, Sister (it is not unknown unto you) I count it a piece of
wisdom to put of that garment which will be no longer serviceable unto me;
and I think it no less, to be willing to leave the company of a poor
Gentleman for that of a rich one, and so of your niggard or sharke, for that of
a noble and free nature, such as are young hairs, Merchants men, Knights
Errants, etc.


Thais. It Is very true Sister, according to my judgment, otherwise I had not
been so sedalous in forbiding and keeping of unprofitable Hangers on from my
house. For I was resolved none should therein enter, but he should pay tole
before he went out, or offer up something on the altars of Venus that may be
profitable to her servants. But as I was telling you, the manner how I rid my
self of this captain, so let me tell you I could not do it so absolutely, but
that he visited me again: and now seeing that I must of necessity be troubled
with him, I plotted how I might make mine advantage of him. Money I know he had
none, as knowing he had lavishly squandred it away in our company, wherefore in
fair terms I told him that he might frequent our house as often and as freely
as even. But with all I told him, it would be very requisite for him to lay a
side his jealous humor, and comply with those that should pretend love to his
love, helping them to the accomplishment of their Lusts, and assist me to make
them dearly pay for it. I advised him sometimes to officiate as a Pimp,
sometimes as a Hector, othertimes as a husband to cloak her vicious actions. I
soon persuaded him to yield to my demands, after I had epitomized to him the
various ways of our gaining, and pleasure, of both which I assured him be
should be partaker with us. I lodged him in my house to be ready on all
occasions, viz. If any refused to pay Reckoning, he might (with his Com-rogue)
enforce them to it: if any came in over charged with money, he might ease them
of their burden, etc. Had it not been for his assistance, we had mist of many
a gallant prize: to relate all the several cheats, and trappannings we acted
through his means, it would be a thing too tedious for you to hear, and to me
irksome to relate, as now loathing (as I hope you do) my former courses, for
which I shall desire the assistance of the Almighty to help me to repent
seriously for them. Wherefore I say, for brevity sake, I shall only assert one
trick we served a French Gentleman: Which was thus, seeing a country girl I
had standing at the door, he was extremely in love with her; for though she
was borne of poor parentage, yet had she an excelling beauty, which the
neatness and gallantnesse of her habit did much augment. At first to
ingraciate himself into her favor, he did use to send her amorous letters,
and sometimes verses, accompanied with some token (often times) of his love.
Among the rest a copy as I remember was to this effect; which our Champion
seeing, and having drencht his wits in wine, would by all means write an answer
to it for our private mirth; and therefore I shall let you participate of some
of it in the rehersall of the one with the other; 1
Madam, some beauties have the power
To make one lovesick for an hour;
It may be for a day or two:
But so to captivate a heart
That it should never never part
Alone that art remains in you.
Ans.
Some buttocks, Madam, have the power
To -- some four times in an hour,
By Physic some a day or two:
But for to -- to have a tail,
That at all times shall never fail,
One such alone belongs to you.
2
Though other beauties have the skill,
By tempting frowns a heart to kill,
And by degrees a soul undo,
And in a twinkling of an eye,
At once to bid one look and dye:
Madam that art remains in you.
Ans.
Though by degrees some have the skill,
By tempring dung a Jakes to fill,
And so poor Citizens undo:
But so to dung as that at once,
Matter t'afford to build a sconce,
Madam that -- belongs to you.
3
Fair Mistress to your flaming eyes,
A heart I feign would sacrifice,
If I had ere a one in store:
But having lost mine long before.
Well I may wish, sigh and adore,
But for my life can love no more.
Ans.
Ye Privies whence gross vapors rise,
Somewhat from thence I Would sacrifice
But cannot get ought of that store,
Far having dung'd not long before,
I for my life cannot -- no more.


This was the best entertainment his lovesick verses could receive at our
hands; when at any time we received any such fopperies, we made it our pastime
in private to laugh at his folly. We value not a rush Platonic loves
Socratick's that which our five senses moves,
At once to sport in pleasure --



Ant. Surely you were not so respectlesse of your future benefit, as to
disrespect his passion, by your Daughters not sending his letters an answer
some way satisfactory in complying with his affection, or again to jeere at
his poetry in such a manner, as that he should take any notice of it.


Thais. O not for my Daughter used to extol his verses to him above all she
had ever read; to retain him still under her power; and likewise she would
send him letters, which were composed of no hing but indearing expressions of a
tender,jl bn;kkl;affection to him; she used to express her fained love to him,
not only by writing, but like wise in speech and in behavior. One time I
remember when he was with her she fell into a swound seemingly, merely because
she asked him for something of an indifferent value which he refused to give
her; whereupon she presently fell to the ground, first speaking in a lamentable
tune, now I see he has abated his love toward me, for I asked this only to
try his affection. After she seemed to be some what recovered, thus she expressed
her self, which I did put into time; Ah! now undone I am; I feel my heart
For love to break, the greater is my smart.
His falsnesse kills me: now I wish to dye,
That Men's ingratitude, I no more may try.


This simple Frenchman thought what she had said came from the bottom of her
heart, (she expressed her self so handsomely) and therefore presently granted
her desires: and not only so, but vowed to be her perpetual servant and lover;
but as for her part she resolved he should be no longer so then his money
lasted. There was not a day past wherein he saw us not, to his excessive
charge, leaving commonly behind him in money (as our fee) as much as he had
expended in making merry, which we spent jovially for his sake. Lightly it
came, and lightly it did fly,
Whilst beauty lasted, riches could not dye.


Having not a continual spring or mine of Coin, he soon sounded the bottom
thereof, which as soon as we perceived, we bethought our selves of a way to
excommunicate him, which we did thus by the assistance of our sword-man. In the
first place we acquainted him that there was a great Lord in love with his
Mistress whether she would or no, and was so perditly affectionate and jealous
of her, as that he vowed the death of that man that he should find in her
company. Whereupon we advised him to see us seldom, for his own safety sake. He
was forced to submit himself to our wills, but could not for his life make his
own subservient and obedient to reason, but would needs enjoy once more with my
daughter those pleasures, that are only proper to sensual appetites. We being
acquainted of the night he would come, we prepared our devices accordingly, he
came attired in his richest and only garb (as I think) for to my knowledge he
had pawned most of what he had before, for our use, or whither he had borrowed
those rich clothes he wore, (to be the more respected by us) I cannot tell
justly; but sure I am, they had another owner before he departed. Being in bed,
and whilst he laysolacing himself with kisses, etc. so in came our Hector who
personated the Lord whom we feigned to love my Daughter, and I Will say this for
him, he acted a man of that quality to the life. Now was Monsieur in a fad
quaking fit, not knowing what to do, at length he bethought himself to rise
and put on his clothes, and so steal down the stares incognito (for our
titular Lord took no notice of any that was in bed, but did often knock up for
us, to know where his Mistress was, and why she came not to him?) But Monsieur
was in a far sadder case when he could not find his clothes, and no wonder, for
we had laid them up safe before. He was slipped out of bed, but what with fear,
and what with the cold, his teeth did beat alarm in his head, insomuch that
it caused may Lord to withdraw the curtains, and by the light of the Candle
discovered his Apeship, Monsieur Amoreux endeavoring to hide himself behind
the hangings, whereat he seemed to be in a furious rage, damming and sinking
him was the only rhetoric used, and then drawing his sword, swore he would be
the death, first of this inconstant and lustful queen, and afterward he should
take leisure to torture that Rogue which had thus stained his honor; whilst
he was thus swaggering, Monsieur took the opportunity to fly for it, and
coming to the stairs head (thinking this Antagonist was at his heels) made
but one step from the top to the bottom, and so ran to his lodging in his
shirt (which was a long street to it) and at the heels of him followed a whole
regiment of boys, which left him not till he came to his lodging. What with
this disgrace, and what by reason of his poverty, I understood he left Rome, to
try if he could find better fortune elsewhere. Thus have I faithfully related
to you the most memorable passages of my life, and it was for this purpose I
came this day unto your house; and withal to tell you my resolution, which is
absolutely to abandon all these kind of vicious courses I have here related
you, which though they seem to please at first, will assuredly at last either
put an end to his estate or life. As you in part see by this last rehearsed
story of Mounsieur, who being beguiled by the false charms of illicite
pleasures, enjoyed not the happiness he had promised his hurtful thoughts,
but was reduced both to Shame and Poverty: who may serve as a pattern to all
those that delight in such pernicious and dissolute courses, and thereby may
see that they are in the way of hell and damnation, if they do not speedily
step into the path of a righteous and holy life and conversation. As for my
own part I am heartily sorry, that I have thus spent that time which should
have been employed and dedicated to divine worship, in Idleness, Wantonness,
Riot, in perverting others, and in destroying my own soul. Wherefore now I
intend to spend the residue of my life in some remote Cell or Hermitage; where
my heretofore bewitching hairs shall be my sole napkins to wipe those tears
of mine eyes with true repentance for my sins, shall extract from thence, my
lustful and deceitful crimes will I number by my ^ighs and groans; and
finally, fasting shall be to me instead of my former feasting, and so farewell.


Ant. I like this well. But stay; I Will with thee go, and try
If I can so well live, so dye.



FINIS.
A Dehortation from Lust, drawn from the sad and lamentable consequences it
produces.
MY intent by this Postscript, is to teach the Reader, how he may imitate the
Egyptian Nicetas, by sailing by the Scylla of carnal pleasure, and the
Caribdis of incontinency, and yet not endanger the shipwreck of his chastity;
How he may safely drink out of Circes cup, and yet be not metamorphosed into a
Swine; How he may come among the Lotophagi, and yet tarry not with them; How he
may hear the Sirens sweet and harmonions voices, and yet be not enchanted by
them. Now should I allege all that might be said against this lustful vice, to
make you abhor it, this small Treatise would swell into Volumes; wherefore let
your daily experience and observation, by the Pilot to steer your course; or
do but consider the miseries that lust has brought on Men, and perhaps it may
teach you to be wise by other Men's harms; Yet mistake me not, I would not have
you so severe against your selves in striving to be continent, as to imitate
some, that have castrated themselves, others that have blinded themselves,
because they would not behold enticing beauties; or to be so foolishly nice, as
Xenocrates was, who if he saw a beast in copulation, would fly as fast from
the place, as if the Devil was there; or to be as Scipio was, that married a
most beautiful and fair Virgin, and immediately after the celebration of the
nuptials, sent her home to her friends without the enjoying the least fruit of
wedlock; this he did purposely to try how great a conqueror be could be over
his concupiscence: or lastly, to do as Spurina did, who deformed her well
formed face, that thereby she might not be the cause of lustful defires in
any. There are far easier things that I shall prescribe you, for the bridling
of this sinful passion. And to be breife, take them in these two verses: Otia,
mensa, libri, vaga lumina, verba, sodales;
Haec toll, hanc minue, hos muta, haec claude, haec fuge, vita hos.


In the first place, otia toll, be not idle; for that is the fittest season the
Devil has to persuade thee to all wickedness, but especially to lust, which
is the Spring and Fountain of all mischief, and the Mother of most vices; And
therefore in some respect, it were not amiss if Draco's law was in force among
us, that held sloth a capital crime. For to be sure, that Man qui nihil agit
(which does nothing) may be truly said male agere (to do ill.) It Is a thing
equally certain, that he that is idle, is likewise unchaste. Wherefore to
conclude: Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus,
Contempiaeque jacent, et sine luce faces.
Shun sloth, and Cupids bow thou wilt break;
And's torch contemned, will shine but weak.


Next, mensam minue, that is, pamper not too much thy body with delicates; For
nunquam fames adulteria genuit; Adultery was never the Daughter of temperancy.
Chastity lives more secure in low Cottages, then in sublime Palaces. And as
that Trumpet blows louder, when most full of breath, so that body boyles most
in lust, that is most inflamed with wine, dainties, etc. Wherefore if thou ever
intendest to get the victory over thy lust, strive to get the conquest over thy
belly. In the next place, beware of lascivious Books, as Romances, Drolling
Satyrs, wanton Poems, etc. which are too too common in all Languages, which
serve for little else, then to infuse into the Readers mind, at least evil
thoughts, if not impure words and actions. Ovid that grand Crafts-master in
amorous matters advises you; -- Teneros ne tange Poetas.


And yet Schoolmasters (to their greater shame) stick not to teach publicly
his art of loving; or more properly, his art of Bawdry, as also Martial,
Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, which (no doubt) is a great cause of corrupting
youth. Wherefore (I think) it would not be amiss for you to say with the Poet
of old; Ite mali versus animam qui perditis, ite.


Fourthly, vaga lumina claude; Sometimes lust creeps into the soul through a
kiss, or through the ears, but chiefly through the eyes. Hence proceeded that
law of Zeleucus, that punnished adultery by the loss of the eyes, as being the
principal cause of that sinful act. -- Vritque videndo.


Lastly, fuge sodales; I mean only bad companions. He that continually
wallows with Swine in the mire, must expect to be in the same filthy condition.
The Plague cannot be more infectious, then ill manners. For example is ever
more prevalent with mankind, then precept. One scabed Sheep will infect a whole
flock.

-- Sicut grex totus in agris.
Vnius scabie cadit. --
Therefore it is the best way for him, that is not engaged with ill companions
to be very wary of them. Hic niger est, hunc tu Roman cavaeto.


If he is, let him disingage with all expedition, least use make a habit, and a
habit turn to a second nature. They cannot hurt thy body so much by forsaking
them, as they would thy soul by accompanying them. Be of that mind that
Apollonius Thyanaeus was in, when he desired ^he Gods that they would give him
such a discerning mind, as nosse bonos, malos vitare. to know the good, and
shun the bad. Had I had (which I wish you may have) that admirable faculty, I
might not (perhaps) now have been reduced to this deplorable condition I now am
in either to make my self an exile, or be impaled and mewed up between two
walls for ever. I can charge this on none, but such ill company I kept that
brought me to all vicious and irregular courses. As soon as I had let loose
the reins of my will to their pleasue-promising allurements, I soon sucked in
the poison of their ill conditions, and so learnt of them to be as export as
the best of them in the perpetration petration of all manner of wickedness and
debauchments. But I hope what I have said, may be enough to keep you of from
my extravagancies, that thereby you may serenely, and peaceably enjoy your
estates, lives and liberties. O herwise let me tell you, if you will not make
other Men your example, you your self shall be made an example to others. I
fear me, I have made too large a digression, wherefore to return to my
intended discourse to dehort you from all lustful actions, let me put you in
mind of some few tragical examples, as just judgments of God against such,
that have accounted pleasure their chief happiness; and venereall delights,
the Elysium of their desires. The World is full of such Histories, but I shall
insert none but what are of mine own observation. About some ten years since,
(as I was in the west of England) there fell out this mournful tragedy,
occasioned by lust. There was a young Gentleman, (whose name I shall forbear
to register, though I do his crime) who as long as he could keep out wanton
thoughts from infecting his mind, embraced Bellona instead of Venus, and
thought it more honor to erect trophies of Gunnes and Swords to Mars, then to
offer up Virginities on the Altars of Venus. But she being displeased at this,
sent a fair young Gentlewoman to him, that soon converted his noble thoughts
into an ignoble amorous passion: -- Exitus acta probat.


In a short time (giving way to it) this thing called love or lust, so
prevailed with him, that he became as stout and as hot a venereall Soldier, as
he was before a Martial one. And now to appease that Goddess whom before he
had offended, he offered up every year at least an Hecatomb of Maiden-heads to
her: Among the rest he happened on a mean beauty, but such was his raging lust,
as he could not rest quiet till he had erected the banner of his pleasure, on
the tomb of this Gentlewomans honor. Having often times enjoyed his desire
with her, but he at length grew weary of tasting one sort of meat, and so
forsook this, that he might please his sensual appetite with another. At
which she was so enraged, as that she vowed revenge. Thus you see one sin, very
often goes accompanied with many others. This Gentlewoman resolved if she could
not her self, another should not be the Mistress of his affections, for thus
she brought it about: she feined her self very sick; and sent him a messenger,
to desire him to come and see her, before she should bid good night to this
world, having matters of great importance to reveal him. Being come, and
thinking no harm, stoop't down to the bed to hear what she had to say, but
she with a dagger (which she had on purpose with her) immediately stabbed him to
the heart; for which murder, she was publicly executed. Thus you see how just
God is in punishing him for lust, though not for murder but for her being
guilty of both, the last being the cause of the former.

Being in Spain, and seeing a great number of people flock after a very
beautiful Gentlewoman, I inquired what it meant, they told me that that
Gentlewoman was going to be hanged, wherefore being very inquisitive to know
for what cause, I understood it by one that had some relation to her, which I
shall here relate you in brief. In Madrid there dwelt a Gentlewoman named
Nimphidia, who by reason of her birth, wealth, and beauty was very much courted
by most of the gallants of that City. But the coyness of her humor none could
vanquish, but solely Gerhardo, a noble and complete Cavalier; they both so
simpathiz'd in affections, as that they seemed to have but one soul, and
sometimes but one body. It was not long before he had completed his illicite
desires. And now all obstacles being removed they never are at rest, but when
they enjoyed each others mutual society, which ended commonly in lascivious
embraces, which in the end you shall see shall cost them, the price of both
their lives. About this time there was one Velasquez, who seeing her at Church
was extremely captivated by her, in so much that nothing would content him,
till he had revealed, his affections to Nimphidia; which having done, she at
first seemed, very indifferent; but after she had seriously paralel'd her two
Lovers, and finding something more excellent, in Velasquez than in Gerhardo,
she in part yielded her self vanquished, which conquest he completed by his
incessant importunity and sweet behavior. Now does she show her self like the
rest of her sex, by being unfaithful and inconstant; and prefering her will
and pleasure, before her modesty and honesty; she admitted her second Lover to
enjoy the same lustful privileges, as did her first. But yet she thought good
to have two strings to her bow; and therefore would not seem to estrange her
affections, least she should loose those many pleasant hours, she enjoyed with
Gerhardo. On a time Velasquez found this inconstant woman fast chained in the
arms of Gerhardo, which so stirred his jealousy and choler, as that immediately
he challenged him the field. When at first the Devil inculcates into man's mind
revenge, he makes it seem pleasant, but it shall be but as sugared pills,
which afterward prove bitter. And though he tempted this Gentleman to avenge
his lust by murder, yet therein shall he find assuredly, his ruin and
destruction. They both meet at the place appointed, and both of them fight with
equally courageous hearts, though not with equal success, for Velasquez
travising the ground, Gerhardo gave him a thrust on the right side, now finding
himself mortally wounded, resolved to bereave his Antagonist of his life, by
the loss of his own: for rushing fiercely on one the other, they ran each
other through, and so were both slain. thus you see what is the end of those,
that in love take not reason for their guide, and virtue for their sole object.
Lust cannot be more contemned and hated by earth, as it will assuredly be
punished by Heaven. Nimphidia hearing of this sad disaster that befell her
Lovers, ran quite distracted, and being once in the heat of her distemper,
hung her self with her garters tied to her bed post. Here you see the just
judgment of the Almighty; Although these three persons lived a most luxurious
and lascivious life, yet were their ends most miserable, and deplorable, for
all three dyed most desperately, to the future warning of all those that shall
hence forward live exorbitantly. I have heard of another couple whom God
likewise punnished most remarkably, for this lustful sin. It seems the
Gentleman, was an inconstant and leacherous Monsieur, who being at Dover,
happened to lodge in a Gentleman's house, who had a very beautiful Daughter:
who being no so chaste as fair, and behaving her self more wantonly then her
sex required, gave Monsieur, an occasion to tempt her, to concupiscence, by
expressing his affection to her, concluding every sentence with a most ardent
kiss, and which wunne mnore, sometimes he would present her with pleasant
toys, things very prevalent to win maiden-heads. At last she satisfied his and
her lustful desires; which vain Chymeras of pleasure did cost both his and
her life. For after they had glutted themselves with venereall delights, her
belly began to be full of them, I mean she was with child. Her parents
perceiving it, and knowing it was occasioned by this Monsieur, they disclaimed
her, shutting them both out of doors. Monsieur perceiving she was reduced to
extreme poverty, left her to shift for her self. After the fruit is gathered,
the tree stands neglected. Now she sees, that had she had the grace to have
used, not abused that beauty, which God and nature liberally bestowed upon her,
she might have raised, not razed her fortune. But after-wit is seldom good;
yet she had this happiness to be delivered from future shame and misery by
dying in child bed. Now as God was just in punnishing her lus;t, so he was
likewise in repaying Monsieur in the same coin. For as he was returning into
France, he was drowned with all the rest in the ship. Thus God oft-times
rewards the error of our youthful wantonness at least with repentance, if
not with sudden destruction. Wherefore it is a virtue as equally safe for
maids to be modest, as for youth to shun female enticing beauties. I have read
likewise of a Gentleman, who the disorders of his youth having reduced him to
poverty, was willing to undertake the office of a servingman, under a wealthy
old Citizen of Vienna. He was not long in that servile condition, before his
Mistress took an especial affection for him, being a man very comely and
proper, though meanly clad. To which she was the sooner induced by the
incongruity of her husband and her age, he being about threescore, very weak
and impotent, but she not above twenty, plump, fair, and lusty. Her
wantonness soon prevailed to win him to her embraces; which after they had
once commenced, they made it their continual practice to exercise themselves
in venereall skirmishes, the first charge being valleys of ardent kisses. After
they had made several repetitions, of there pleasure in such like lustful
dalliances, it happned that the old Gentleman, was to be absent for a night,
and now she thinking to dedicate wholly that night to Venus, admits her
lustful servant, they were both no notives in the art of loving, and theefore
they omit feeding themselves with gazing on each other, but presently fell to
action; in which encounter (see Gods revenging hand) they both lost their
lives. For the next day the servants came into their Mistresses chamber, and
there found them both dead, lying in a most shameful and beastly manner. I
think the old bawd Celestina, (as the story is) with those two Minions of
Venus, Calisto, and Melibaea, were partakers of a bad fortune; for they all
three suffered, condign punnishments by untimely ends, the one for promoting
and enticing, the other for perpetrating and committing, the execrable sin of
lust; that by these examples, you may see, how much they err, that prefer
momentary delights, before those that are eternal. And how much our judgments
are perverted, that we should sell true rest, for inquietude; happiness, for
miseries; nay even Heaven for Hell. Now this is done, when we make not
chastity, the compass by which we steare our actions, and then it is no wonder,
if we are tossed by billows of this tempestuous world, and cannot arrive to the
haven of our bliss, Heaven.

FINIS.

