THE DOCTRINE OF FAITH.

OR, The prime and principal Points which a Christian is to know and believe.

Handled in sundry SERMONS upon Texts of Scripture selected and chosen for the
purpose.

Wherein the Method of the CREED, (Commonly called The Apostles Creed) is
observed; and the Articles thereof are confirmed, explained and applied, for
the instructing of the ignorant, and the establishing of all in the TRUTH.

BY CHRISTOPHER CARTWRIGHT, Minister of the Word at York.

LONDON, Printed by R. A. for RICHARD LOVVNDES at the Unicorn on Lud-gate Hill
over against Bell-Savage. 1649.

To the Christian Reader.
WHat heretical, blasphemous and damnable opinions have of late years been
vented and published amongst us in this Land, is over-notorious, and but too
well known both at home and abroad: For both the reformed Their words are
presently after cited.
Churches in foreign parts have complained of it, and also we our selves by
public order and appointment have professed March 10. 1646.
solemn humiliation for it: *Surely it is a very sad thing and much to be
deplored, that Protestants who have abandoned communion with the Romish
Babylon, because of those impious and Antichristian Doctrines, that are
maintained in it, should fall themselves to embrace opinions no less
erroneous, yea, indeed more monstrous then those of the Papists, Yea, and that
a Nation should even then be most grossly infected in this kind, when it has
but newly in a most sacred manner promised and professed Reformation: Diverse
years ago when things were nothing so bad in this respect, as since they have
been, the Walachrian Churches in an Epistle sent to the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, set forth the heinousness of the crime that we are guilty of: and
have not we great reason now to be sensible of it, and affected with it? Let
your consciences judge (say they) how all kind of heresies can pass
unpunished, Judicent conscientiae vestra, quomodo omne haercsium genus in^ltum
permitti, multifaria schismatum semina spargi, and profana errorum dogmata
passi^ in vulg^s proferri possint in illa civita^e, quae tam expresso, sancto
and sever^ juramento sesc devinxit ad omnes errores, haereses, schismata e dom^
Dei ejicienda. Ep. praefix. Apoll^.
manifold seeds of Schisms be sown, and profane Doctrines of errors be
commonly vented abroad in that City (yea, in that Nation) which by so express,
sacred and severe an oath has bound it self before God to cast out all
errors, heresies and schisms from the house of God. The consideration of the
growth and spreading of such pernicious errors, moved me in the course of my
Ministry to spend some time in handling the first principles of the Oracles of
God, (as they are called, Heb. 5. 12.) the principal and fundamental points
of Religion, according to the method and order of the Creed, called the
Apostles Creed, wherein they are comprised. This I conceived very requisite and
needful, as a chief means, if not to recover those that are infected, yet to
preserve others from infection: For (as one well observes) a principal way of
fortifying our Mr. Vines Sermon. on the day of humiliation for the growth of
errors, heresies, etc. page 57.
selves against the allurements and assaults of false Teachers, is to be
grounded in the principles, of the Doctrines of Christ, or else we shall easily
be tumbled up and down like loose stones that lie not fast in the building
upon the foundation. The Apostle himself does show, that such as are children
(to wit, in understanding, either altogether ignorant of the Doctrine of Faith,
or not well grounded in it, 1 Cor. 14. 20.) are ready to be tossed to and fro,
and carried away with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; Ephesians. 4. 14. And that such
are soon led captive, who are ever learning, but never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, to wit, a thorough and well-grounded knowledge of it, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. This knowledge is (as woeful experience shows) much wanting in
many: And hence it is, that errors and heresies have so prevailed amongst us,
whilst some through ignorance are circumvented, seduced and drawn away, and
others (though perhaps full of invectives against Sects, yet) have nothing to
allege in defense of truth, or only that which is to little purpose, custom,
example, and the like; whereby it comes to pass, that the Authors and abettors
of error do the more triumph, and such as are ensnared by them, are the most
fastened unto them.

I grant indeed, that it is not Christ in the head, but Christ in the heart;
not a bare notionall knowledge of Christ, but a spiritual knowledge of him,
that will serve the turn. But yet nevertheless Christ must be in the head, or
else he cannot be in the heart; (I speak in respect of such as are of years)
there must be a notionall knowledge of Christ, or else there cannot be a
spiritual knowledge of him: As the Athenians were far wrong, who thought to
worship an unknown God, Acts 17. 23. so are they, who think to believe in an
unknown Christ; That ye may know and believe, said he, Joh. 10. 38. first know,
and then believe. It Is true, (as Austine says) not the quickness of
understanding, but the simplicity of believing does make many safe: Yet
Caeteram. turbam non intelligendi vivacitas, sed credendi simplicitas tutos
facit. Aug. contra Epist. Fundam. cap. 4. Quaenam est ista, quaeso,
simplicitas, nescire quod credas? Hieron. adversus Luciferian.
that of Hierome is no less true, What simplicity, I praey you, is this, to
believe you know not what? Belfarmine himself though in the heat of contention,
and carried away with a spirit of contradiction, he sticks not to say, that
Faith Fides melius definitur per ignorantiam, quam per notitiam. Bell. de
Justif. lib. 1. cap. 7.. Judicium autem. Cognitio apprehensiva praeexigitur
quidem ad fidem, sed non est ipsa proprie fides. Bell. de Justif. lib. 1. cap.
16.. Restat caput. etc.
is better defined by ignorance then by knowledge: yet afterward being in a
more calm temper, he confesses, that an apprehensive knowledge is
pre-required unto faith, though it be not faith it self. Therefore not to speak
now of the impiety of the Church of Rome, that seeks by all means that may be,
to nuzzle people in ignorance, dealing with them as the Philistines dealt with
Sampson, who first put out Judge. 16.
his eyes and made him blind, and then made a slave of him, and abused him at
their pleasure: Not to speak, I say, of this; others there be, who are worthy
to be abhorred of all Christians, in that they so fly unto the Mystery of the
Gospel, as that they quite abolish and annull the History of it; they turn
all that the Scripture does record of Christ into a mere Allegory. And some
again, though perhaps they be Orthodox, and deliver nothing but what is sound
and true, yet are faulty in this, that they think it a sufficient, yea a more
then ordinary preaching of Christ, to have his Name frequently in their
mouths, and in a general way to speak much of him, when as yet they never
show what he is, or what he has done and suffered, nor scarce ever handle any
one Article of FAITH concerning Christ, as if this were too trivial for them
to trouble themselves about, so that many poor souls, though they hear Christ
mentioned a thousand times, yet still remain as ignorant of him, and so as apt
to entertain any false opinion concerning him, as ever they were. For the
instructing of such, as also for the confirming and further edifying of those,
who have more knowledge, these Sermons here presented to public view, may
(thorough Gods blessing) be useful and profitable. This is that, which I aimed
at in the preaching, neither have I any other design in the publishing of them.
I know, these times afford but small encouragement to the Writers, and
publishers of books of this nature. For though we may seem to cross the
Proverb, What have the Muses to do Quid Musis cum Mart? (...) Si literae, non
arma; si arma, non literae. Sic Hebraei test Buxtorfio in praefat. More Neb.
with Mars? The pen and the pike seldom find room in one place, Yet (alas) so
it is, either new Occurrences, or new Opinions are the things, which now most
look after: that which is sober, serious and solid, will find but few that will
regard it. But he, who is wisdom it self, does tell us that wisdom is
justified of her children, Mat. 11. 19. And he, who was as wise as any mere
mortal, says, A wise man will hear, and will increase learning, Prove. 1. 5.
And again, Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a
just man, and he will increase learning, Prove. 9. 9. Some are apt to mind not
so much the matter, as the man, not so much what it is that is spoken, as who
it is that speaks it. What ever proceeds from some, shall be applauded; and
what ever proceeds from others shall be slighted. But as the Jewish Doctors
say well, Look not on the can, but on that which is in it. A preposterous
(...) Ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas? Tertul. de Praescript.
cap. 3.
and perverse course it is, in stead of judging the author by the work, to
judge the work by the Author. But (I fear) I exceed the bounds of an Epistle;
I will add no more but, The Lord, who is the God of truth, Isai. 65. 16. and
the God of a^ grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10. by his word and Spirit lead us into, and
keep us in all sanctifying and saving truth. So I rest, Thine to serve thee in
the Lord,

Febr. 22. 1649. Chr. Cartwright.

THE FIRST SERMON.
HEB. 11. 6. He that comes unto God, must believe that God is.
FAith and a good conscience are two things which it concerns every one to
have, and to hold, Holding faith and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Faith
has the precedence that must go before, without a right and sound faith there
can be no good conscience, Male vivitur, si de Deo Aug. de Civ. De^, lib. 5.
cap. 10.
no^ ^enet^reditur, (says Augustine) Where there is not a right faith
concerning God, there will be exorbitancy in the conversation.

In this Chapter, out of which the Text is taken, we have a large Encomium, or
commendation of faith, and a clear demonstration both of the necessity, and of
the efficacy of it: that nothing can be done without it, Without Faith it is
impossible to please God, v. 6. that nothing but may be done by it; this is
proved by a cloud of witnesses throughout the Chapter.

Faith is taken two ways: 1. There is fides quae creditur, faith which we
believe, the object and matter of Faith; thus is faith to be understood, Jude
v. 3. That you should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered
unto the Saints. 2. Fides qua creditur, Faith whereby we believe, the grace of
faith inherent in the soul, the act whereof is to believe; thus is the word
taken, Romans 1. 17. The just shall live by Faith, and Jam. 1. 6. Let him ask in
Faith; and so in many other places this is the proper acception of the word,
though the other acception be not unusual.

The object of Faith is God, and whatsoever is revealed by God; Secret things
belong unto the Lord our God, but things revealed unto us, etc. Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
The first thing concerning. God to be believed, is as the Text does tell us,
that God is, He that comes unto God, must believe that God is; it follows,
and that he is a rewarder of those that diligently seek him: this must also be
believed, but the other first, and then this; first that God is, and then that
he is a rewarder of those that diligently seek him.

I shall now by Gods help insist upon this first principle of Religion, that
God is, or that there That there is a God.
is a God.

Let none think that this is a superfluous and needless labor, to go about to
demonstrate a thing so plain and evident as this is.

For, 1. If this be a truth necessary for all to know and believe, then it is
not unnecessary to insist upon it, and to confirm it, that we may see we have
just reason to believe as we do.

2. The Scripture tells us of such fools as say in Psalm. 14. 1.
their heart, there is no God: And we read of some, though but few, who have
denied it not only in their hearts, but with their mouths also.

3. This is a corrupt age into which we are fallen, most of the fundamental
truths are either denied, or doubted of; and though I do not read or hear of
any, that yet seeks to shake this basis of Religion, yet seeing (as the Apostle
says) evil men and seducers will wax worse and worse, it 2 Timothy 3. 13.
is good to be fore-armed, and to prevent the worst.

4. This being the main foundation of all Religion, it must be laid sure, that
so the superstructure may be the more firm.

These things premised, I come to the proof of the point, viz. that there is a
God.

And 1. We have in this the general consent even of the Heathens, although
Diagoras (they say) denied it, and Protagoras doubted of it, yet generally the
Heathens did acknowledge it: yea, it is said, that Protagoras was banished by
his Contrymen the Athenians, because he presumed to question such a truth as
this. Tullie a Tul. de Not. Deor. lib. 2.
Heathen man says, Nulla gens tam effera ac barbara, quae non cognoscit esse
Deum. There is no Nation so rude and barbarous, but it knows that there is a
God: It Is observed, that even such as are sine Rege, sine Lege, without
Magistrates, and without Laws, yet are not sine Religione, altogether without
Religion. Idolaters that worship a false God, show that they believe there is a
God; they are ignorant indeed of the only true God, and therefore they worship
a false God instead of him, yet this they assure themselves of, that there is a
God, or else they would worship none at all: So that (as Calvin well observes)
even Idolatry it self is hujus conceptionis amplum documentum, Calv. ^^st. l
1. c. 3.
an ample token and testimony of this conception, that there is a God.

2. There are many ways, whereby the Heathens, having only the light of
nature, did yet Tul. de Not. Deor.
see this, that there is a God. Tullie mentions four ways, by which they
came to be convinced of this, and (which is observable) I find all those
mentioned in Scripture as so many evictions of a Deity. 1. The foreknowledge
of things to come, viz. things that have no necessary dependence upon secondary
causes, but in that respect are altogether contingent, though the predictions
of the Heathens were generally such as did not argue a divine power, yet the
argument in it self is good, and sufficient to convince an Athiest: It is
certain, that things in respect of inferior causes merely contingent, have
been foreshewed long before they came to pass. The Prophet Isaiah prophesied
of Cyrus by name, though he died long before Cyrus was borne; so Esa. 44. 28.
and 45. 1. 1 King. 13 2.
did another Prophet in like manner of Josiah. Now this knowledge of things to
come is peculiar unto God, neither can any have it, but as inspired by God. By
this argument God proves himself to be the true God, and the gods of the
Heathens to be Idols, vanity, and nothing. Produce your cause (says the Lord)
bring forth your strong reasons, says the King of Jacob. Let them bring forth,
and show us what shall happen; let them show the former things what they be,
that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them, or declare us
things to come: show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know
that ye are Gods, Isa. 41. 21, 22, 23. And again, Isa. 43. 9. Let all the
Nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled: who among them
can declare this, and show us former things? viz. before they happen, as God
showed them by his Prophets, as Kimchi a Jewish Rabbin upon the place does
(...) Kimchi ad loc.
well expound it. Men and Devils may guess at things to come, but not
certainly and infallibly know them: The Chaldeans were famous for Astrology
and divination, yet the Prophet Isaiah derides them, and those that gave credit
to them; Stand now (says he to Babylon) with thine enchantments, and with the
multitude of thy Sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy youth, if so be
thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail: Thou art wearied
in the multitude of thy counsels, let now the Astrologers, the star-gazers,
the monthly Prognosticators stand up and save thee from these things that
shall come upon thee: Behold they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn
them, they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame, Isa. 47.
12, 13, 14. and v. 11. it is said, that evil should come suddenly upon Babylon,
that she should not know of before it came upon her; so that her Diviners could
not only not prevent her, and their own destruction, but not so much as
foresee it.

2. The great benefits which accrue unto men by the temperature of the seasons,
and the fruitfulness of the earth, and the abundance of many other
commodities; and the Scripture shows this also to be a good argument to prove
that there is a God: The Apostle says, that when God did not vouchsafe his
Word unto men, yet nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that
(says he) he did good, giving us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling our hearts with food and gladness, Acts 14. 17.

3. Thunder, pestilence, earthquake, and such like terrifying and destroying
accidents; so the Scripture also notes this as one means whereby God does make
himself known, The God of glory thundereth, says David, Psalm. 29. 3. and
diverse times in that Psalm he calls thunder Gods voice, by it God speaks
unto men, and proclaims unto them that there is a God. It Is said of Caligula
the Roman Emperor, that though he were otherwise most monstrous, and would
needs make himself a God, yet he were so affrighted with thunder, that he would
run under a bed to hide himself; this voice of the Lord did make him know, that
there is one who is not a mere titular God, or a God only by usurpation and
presumption, but a God indeed: So all the fearful judgments that are in the
world demonstrate that there is a God. The Lord is known by the judgment that
he executes, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 9. 16.

4. The constant and uniform motion of the celestial bodies, the variety,
beauty, and order of these and other things in the world. If (says Tullie)
thou should come into a stately and beautiful Tul. ubi supra.
Palace, curiously composed, exquisitly adorned, and richly furnished and
should see nothing in it but cats or weazells, or the like, thou would
never imagine that it was framed and fashioned by those creatures, but would
assure thy self that there was some man, by whom it was built and put into that
form that it is in: So all must needs acknowledge that there is a God, who made
this great and glorious house the world, man could never do it. No, (as one
says) man could never raise such a roof as heaven, nor lay such a floor as
earth. Thus also David tells us, that the heavens declare the glory of God, and
the firmament shows his handie work, Psalm. 19. 1. and Paul, that the
invisible things of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead,
Romans 1. 20.

To these arguments I will add but one more, and that is drawn from man's
conscience: There is a conscience in man, which upon occasion will accuse, or
excuse; Their conscience also bearing witness, (says the Apostle) and their
thoughts in the mean while accusing, or else excusing one anonher, Romans 2. 15.
though no man else be able to accuse a man, yet conscience will do it. A notable
example to this purpose is that of Joseph's brethren, whose consciences a long
time after accused them of selling their brother, when none besides themselves
and Joseph (whom they then little imagined to be within hearing) knew of it,
Genesis 42. 21, 22. Seneca therefore says excellently, Quid refert neminem scire,
cum tu seias? What matter is it, though no man else know what thou have done,
when as thou thy self do know it? So on the other side, though all the world
bear witness against a man, ^et if his conscience be clear, it will testify
for him, and this is enough to comfort him: Th^^ is our rejoicing, even the
testimony of our conscience, says S. Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and so the Heathens
could say, that a good conscience Hic murus aheneus esio, Nil con scire sibi.
Juven.
is murus aheneus, a wall of brass, a most sure defense against all calumny,
and all opposition. Now this conscience is the Candle of the Lord, as Soloman
calls it, Prove. 20. 27. it shows plainly that there is a God, from whom
nothing is hid, and by whom all shall be rewarded.

Ob. But it may be objected, if there be a God who made the world and governs
the world, Cum rapiani mala fata bonos, ignoscite fasso; Solicitor nullos esse
putare deos. Propert.
who is most great, and most good, most wise and most holy, etc. how then comes
it to pass, that there is so much evil, so much ataxie, and confusion in the
world?

Answ. I answer: God therefore suffers evil, because he knows how to bring
good out of evil: A skillful Physician can so temper poison, as to make a
Sovereign medicine of it; and so God can cause sin it self to be subservient
to his glory, and the good of those whom he has chosen: if there were no sin,
the glory of Gods grace in the pardoning of sin could not appear as it does,
Ephesians. 1. 6, 7. Mic. 7. 18. nor on the otherside, the glory of Gods justice in
punishing sin, Psalm. 119. 120. Aben Ezra therefore a learned Rabbin (...)
says well, It does not belong to the supreme wisdom, because of a little
evil to hinder much good.

This is the only objection that I find worth the answering; for that is a most
silly and sottish one that some are said to make, that they see no God, and
therefore have no reason to believe that there is any: By the same reason they
may deny that there is a soul in man; for neither do any see it otherwise then
by the operations and effects of it, and thus also they must needs see God, who
are not altogether blind and brutish.

Use 1. This then may let us see the wonderful perverseness of man's heart,
that will rebel against so clear light, either denying, or doubting of so
manifest a truth as this, that there is a God: though their consciences
convince them of this truth, yet they do what they can to suppress and
extinguish it, they withold the truth in unrighteousness, as the Apostle
says, Romans 1. 18. Men's actions outwardly declare what their hearts inwardly
think: How did David know that wicked fools say in their heart, that there is
no God? He knew it by their ways and doings, they are corrupt (says he) and
have done abominable things, Psalm. 14. 1. so Psalm. 10. 4. speaking of the
wicked, he says, God is not in all his thoughts, or as the Marginall reading
has it, all his thoughts are there is no God. This Atheism is that root from
whence does proceed all sin deliberately and wilfully committed. Did men indeed
believe that there is a God, who sees all, and will judge and recompense for
all, they durst not be so enormous and abominable as they are: They profess
that they know God, (says Paul) but in their works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. This root of
bitterness does naturally grow in all, even Atheism it self, a denying that
there is a God, is a part of that inbred corruption, that we are infected
with; that the regenerate are not wholly free from an evil heart of unbelief
even in this particular, appears both by the thoughts that sometimes arise in
their hearts, and also by those enormities that they sometimes fall into. We
are therefore to take notice of this vile and cursed nature that is in us, and
to be humbled for it, and to labor that it may be changed and renewed more and
more.

Use 2. Again, if there be a God, we must be careful to know him, and to
glorify him as God.

1. To know him; for to what purpose is it to know that there is a God, except
we also know what he is, so far forth as he is pleased to make himself known
both by his works, and by his Word? Thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of
thy father, said David, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Some have not the knowledge of God, I
speak this to your shame, said the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. 34.
And surely it is a great shame for such as profess themselves Christians, to
be so ignorant of God, as many are. The Book of Nature may afford some
knowledge of God, but much more the Book of Scripture; In Judah is God known,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 76. 1. Why in Judah more then elsewhere? because to
them there were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. they had the
Scriptures which others wanted, of whom therefore it is said, (not simply, but
comparatively) that they knew not God, 1 These. 4. 5. Study both these books
therefore, but especially the later, the Scriptures, which are able to make us
wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15.

But, 2. So know God, as to glorify him also; Give unto the Lord the glory due
unto his Name, Psalm. 29. 2. Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. First know him, but then also serve him: The Gentiles were
without excuse, because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, Romans
1. 20, 21. How much more shall Christians be without excuse, if they do not
glorify God as they ought, they having a far more excellent knowledge of
God, then the Gentiles had, or else it is a shame for them? Let us remember
that of our Savior, To whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be
required, Luke 12. 48.

THE SECOND SERMON.
JOH. 4. 24. God is a Spirit.
THe true knowledge of God is that which every one ought to seek and labor
for: Let not the wise man (the worldly wise man) glory in his wisdom, nor the
mighty man glory in his might: let not the rich man glory in his riches, but
let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me,
(says God) Jer. 9. 23, 24. Now the knowledge of God is:

1. That he is; Heb. 11. 6. He that comes unto God, must believe that God is.
Which words I have already insisted on, and have handled this point, That God
is, or That there is a God.

2. What he is: For, (as I also before touched) it availes little to know that
God is, except we also in some competent measure know what God is; we shall but
be like the Heathens, of whom it is said, that they were vain in their
imaginations, Romans 1. 21
and their foolish heart was darkened.

True it is, the nature of God is of that infinite perfection, that it is
incomprehensible, we can never attain to the full knowledge of it: It Is
reported of a Philosopher called Symonides, that Cic. de Not. Deor.
being asked what God is, he desired a days time to deliberate and consider
what to answer, after that he desired two days, and then four, and so still he
doubled the time, confessing, that the more he did inquire into the nature of
God, the further he found himself from attaining to the knowledge of it: And
so it will be with us, although we have a far clearer light to search by then
he had; Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty
to perfection? Job 11. 7. No, it cannot be, the adequate and comprehensive
knowledge of God, to know him to the very utmost of his perfection, is peculiar
to God himself, none but God can thus know God, neither men nor Angels are
capable of this knowledge: For, God is infinite, and every creature is finite,
and nothing that is finite can adequately and fully comprehend that which is
infinite; besides, our knowledge of God here in this life, is very weak and
imperfect, in comparison of what it shall be hereafter in the world to come.
Thou can not see my face; for there shall no man see me and live, said God to
Moses, Exodus 33. 20. Now (says S. Paul) we see through a glass darkly, but
then face to face; now know I in part, but then shall I know even as (in the
same manner, but not in the same measure) also I am known, 1 Cor. 13. 12. we
must not therefore as Oecumen. in Heb. 11 6.
one says, (...), curiously busy our selves about Gods essence, but we must
be wise unto sobriety, Scrutator Majestatis opprimetur a gloria, He that will
be over presumptuous to pry into Gods Majesty, shall be overwhelmed with his
glory; but yet so far forth as God has been pleased to reveal himself, we
must study and endeavor to know him, and this we may and must know concerning
God, that (as the Text does tell us) he is a Spirit.

The words were spoken by our Savior, and that upon this occasion, he was
discoursing with a woman of Samaria, who by what he had already said unto her,
perceived him to be some extraordinary person, and therefore she propounded a
case of conscience unto him, and desired to be resolved by him, viz. which was
the right and true place of Gods worship; for about this the Samaritans had a
controversy with the Jews, they worshipping God in a certain mountain which
they had, as their Fathers had done before them; the Jews on the otherside
affirming that Jerusalem was the place where men ought to worship: Our Savior
first let her know, that the Jews were in the right, they having Gods Word
for their warrant, for that God in his Word had appointed Jerusalem for the
time then present to be the place of his Worship; but withal ^e told her,
that the hour was at hand when such difference of places should cease, and
instead of that ceremonial and carnal Worship that was then in use, there
should be a more pure and spiritual Worship consisting not so much in outward
performances as before, but more in the inward devotion of the heart and
spirit: and he gives a reason why God requires such a Worship, viz. because it
is most agreeable to his nature, God is a Spirit, and they that worship him,
must worship him in spirit and in truth.

Object. But may some say, this reason is of no more force for the time of the
Gospel, then for the time before: For Gods nature was the same before, he was
then a spirit as much as now he is, therefore no more reason to worship God in
spirit now then before.

Answ. Yes, some more reason there is: for, though God were the same before
that he is now, yet he did not so clearly and fully make himself known before
as now he does: and therefore though before he did require to be worshipped in
spirit, (diverse places there are to this purpose in the Old Testament, some of
which I shall allege anon) yet now he requires it much more.

Thus having showed the coherence of the Text, I will propound the Doctrine in
no other terms, then the Text it self does contain in it, viz. That God is a
Spirit.

But what is meant by Spirit? The word spirit is (...), it has many
significations, and is very variously taken. The Greek word (...), and so the
Hebrew ruach, which signify spirit, are sometimes used for breath, Ezekiel. 37. 5.
I will cause breath to enter into you: in the Original the word is that which
in that language usually signifies spirit, viz. ruach, so Iam. 2. 26. The body
without the spirit is dead, in the Margent for spirit is put breath, so Job 33.
4. The Spirit of the Lord has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has
given me life, says Elihu: there the Spirit of the Lord, and the breath of the
Almighty, are (...), terms ^q^^table one to the other.

Again, sometimes these Greek and Hebrew words which signify spirit, are used
for the wind, Joh, 3. 8. The wind blows where it lists, the word translated
wind is the same with this in the Text, whereas usually elsewhere it is
translated spirit, viz. (...): and so the Hebrew ruach in the Old Testament is
often thus used, viz. for the wind.

But thirdly, the word spirit is after a sort appropriated to an incorporeall
substance, when Christ after his Resurrection appeared to his Disciples, and
they thought that they had seen a spirit, Behold my hands and my feet (said he
unto them) that it is I my self, handle me and see: for a spirit has not
flesh and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24. 37, 39. and thus by spirit is
sometimes meant the soul of man, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Glorify God in your body, and
in your spirit, that is, your soul* so Heb. 12. 23. the souls of the godly
separated from their bodies, are called, the spirits of just men made perfect:
sometimes by spirit is meant an Angel, the good Angels are called spirits,
Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all ministering Spirits? and so the evil Angels the
Devils, when the seventy Disciples came unto Christ, saying, Lord even the
Devils are subject unto us through thy Name, Christ answered, Notwithstanding
in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you: but rather rejoice,
because your names are written in Heaven, Luke 10. 17. 20. those whom the
Disciples called Devils, Christ called Spirits: And in this sense, viz. as by
spirit is meant an incorporeall substance, it is attributed to God, and he is
called a Spirit; the name of spirit, the spirit, the holy spirit, is
appropriated to the third Person of the Trinity, but the other Persons are a
spirit too, they are indeed all one and the same spirit, having all one and the
same essence and nature: the divine nature of Christ is called the spirit, 1
Pet. 3. 18. Being put to death in the flesh, (that is, his humane nature) but
quickened in the spirit, that is, by his divine nature: And our Savior here in
the Text having immediately before spoken of the Father, the first Person of
the Trinity, says, God (viz. the Father, yet not excluding, but including the
Son and the Holy Ghost) is a Spirit.

That God is a spirit, may be further proved by these Arguments:

1. That which is of most excellency must needs belong unto God, O Lord, how
excellent is thy Name? says David, Psalm. 8. 1. 9. His Name only is excellent,
says he, Psalm. 148. 13. Now as amongst all things, substances, so amongst all
substances spirits are most excellent: As substances are of more excellency
then accidents, so are spirits of more excellency then bodily substances; the
soul is more excellent then the body, and Angels being mere spirits, are more
excellent then men, who are not incorporeall as the Angels are. God therefore
being most excellent, must needs be as a substance not an accident, so a
spirit, not a bodily substance: Indeed God is so excellent that no names can be
found out, whereby sufficiently to express his nature, he infinitely
transcends all other substances, and all other spirits; but yet apprehending
God as we are able, we cannot but attribute the names of substance, and of
spirit unto him.

2. Invisible substances are called spirits: by this our Savior proved that he
was not a spirit, Luke 34. 29.
as the Disciples supposed, because he was a visible substance. The soul of man
being a spirit, is not visible, so neither the Angels, as being spirits: They
have indeed sometimes appeared unto men, but that was only in respect of those
bodies, which for the time they assumed: and after this manner has God
himself also appeared, as we find in Genesis 18. and Genesis 32. and thus more
especially by the Incarnation God ( viz. the second Person of the Trinity, the
Son, one and the same God with the Father, and the Holy Ghost) was made
visible; by this means God was manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 15. The Word
was made flesh (that is, the Son of God, God the Son, was made man) and dwelt
among us, and we beh^ld his glory, etc. Joh. 1. 14. but God in himself as God,
is invisible, so he is styled, 1 Timothy 1. 17. and so Joh. 1. 18. it is said, No
man has seen God at any time: and 1 Timothy 6. 16. whom no man has seen, nor can
see. It Is said indeed of Moses, that he saw him that is invisible, Heb. 11. 27.
that is, by the eye of Faith (which is the evidence of things not seen, Heb 11.
1.) he saw him, like as Abraham saw Christ's day many ages before Christ came
into the world, Joh. 8. 56. but properly Moses did not see God, neither could
see him, God being (as in that very place is expressed) invsible.

3. Gods immensity and ubiquity, his being in every place, yet so as not to be
included in any place, proves that he is a spirit: For, although not every
spirit is immense and every where present, neither the souls of men, nor the
Angels are so; yet every substance that is so, must needs be a spirit. For,
bodily substances are necessarily limited and circumscribed, they have their
bounds within which they are contained, He is not here, for he is risen, said
the Angel to those that came to seek Christ in the sepul^hre, Mat. 28. 6.
Christ having a true humane body, in that respect could not be both in the
grave, and out of it at the same time: But God is every where at all times, Do
not I the Lord fill heaven and earth? says he, Jer. 23. 24. God is said to be
in heaven, as there especially showing forth his glory, Heaven is my Throne,
says he, Esa. 66. 1. but he is not confined there, no, the heaven, and heaven
of heavens cannot contain thee, said Solomon to God, 1 King. 8. 27. therefore
God is no corporeal substance, but a spirit.

Use 1. This serves to confute that gross conceit of the Anthropomorphites,
who held God to have the form and shape of a man, and thus absurdly do now
some simple ones conceive of God; but if God be a spirit, then he neither has
the shape of a man, nor any other bodily shape whatsoever.

Ob. But it is said, that God made man after his own Image and likeness.

Ans. That is not meant in respect of bodily shape, as if God had the like
shape as man has: But first, because man is a rational and understanding
creature, in which respect still since the fall man retains in him the Image
and likeness of God, Jam 3. 9. Genesis 9. 6. And secondly, as man has dominion
over the other creatures, in this respect man is said to be the Image of God, 1
Cor. 11. 7. Thirdly, and principally, man was at first made after the image and
likeness of God, in that he was made righteous and holy, Put on the new man
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
The image of God therefore is seated in the soul, although it appear and shine
forth in the body, viz. as by outward and bodily actions man does show forth
his reason and understanding, and does exercise authority over the creatures,
and (if he be regenerate) that righteousness and holiness with which he is
endued.

Ob. But in Scripture God is often said to have eyes, ears, hands, etc.

Ans. The Scripture speaks of God after the (...).
manner of men, condescending to the weakness of our capacity because we see
with eyes, hear with ears, work with hands, therefore these bodily parts and
members are attributed unto God, only to signify, that God does exercise the
same acts (though not in the same manner) as we exercise with and by these
parts and members: to show that God does see, the Scripture attributes eyes; to
show that he does hear, it attributes ears; and to show that he does work, it
attributes hands unto him: but properly God does see without eyes, hear without
ears, and work without hands, having no bodily part or member whatsoever.

Use 2. This also makes for the confutation of Papists, who make pictures and
images whereby to represent God, whereas he is a spirit, and so cannot be set
forth by any bodily representations; the second Commandment forbids the making
of any image of similitude to represent God by it. And what a strict charge
does Moses give the Israelites, The Lord (says he) spoke unto you out of the
midst of the fire, ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude,
only ye heard a voice. -- Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves, (for
ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb
out of the midst of the fire) least ye corrupt your selves, and make you a
graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness if male or female,
the likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged
foul that flies in the air, the likeness of any thing that creeps on the
ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth,
Deuteronomy. 4. 12. 15, 16, 17, 18. and the Prophet Isaiah cries, To whom will ye
liken God? or what likeness will ye (...), etc. Plut. in Numa. (...). Ibid.
compare unto him? It is very observable that Plutach records of Numa
Pompilius, the second King of the Romans, viz. that he forbad the Romans to use
any Image of God, having the form of a man, or of any other living creature;
and the same Author moreover testifies, that for 170. years after Rome was
built they had no Image of God, neither painted nor carved; Temples (he says)
they had, but no image at all in them; and he gives this reason for it, that it
is not lawful to resemble better things to worse; nor possible to apprehend
God otherwise then by the conception of the mind and understanding: How is Rome
now professing it self Christian, become much more superstitious and
idolatrous in this particular, then it was when it was Heathenish?

Use 3. Here again we may see what it is, in respect of which man is excellent
in Gods account; it is not in respect of any corporal thing, any thing
belonging to the body, as beauty, strength, etc. much less in respect of
things more extrinsecall, as riches, honor, etc. but it is in respect of
things spiritual, things belonging to the soul, as grace and holiness: Look
not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature, because I have refused
him: for the Lord sees not as man sees; for man beholds the outward
appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart: thus spoke the Lord to Samuel, (1 Samuel 16. 7.) when Samuel seeing the goodly personage of Eliab, David's eldest
brother, presumed that it was he whom God had sent him to annoint King in the
room of Saul; So David says, that God neither delights in the strength of a
horse, nor takes pleasure in the legs of a man: but the Lord takes pleasure
in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147. 10, 11.
Favor is deceitful, (says Solomon) and beauty is vain; but a woman that
fears the Lord she shall be praised, Prove. 31. 30. Thus (beloved) it is, as
our spirits are, so does God esteem of us, He regards not the rich more then
the poor, says Elihu, Job 34. 19. No, it is not the rich, but the righteous
that God regards; The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, says
Solomon, Prove. 12. 26. although wicked men in respect of outward things be
worth never so much, yet with God they are of no account, because (as Prove. 10.
22.
the Wiseman says) the heart of the wicked is little worth: Therefore as we
desire to be esteemed of God, it behooves us to look and labor for spiritual
things to furnish our souls, and to adorn them with the gifts and graces of
Gods Spirit: S. Paul requires, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel,
with shamefastness and sobriety, not with broydred hair, or gold, or pearls,
or costly array: but (which becomes women professing godliness) with good
works, 1 Timothy* 2. 9, 10. those outward and bodily ornaments are not simply
forbidden, but they are to be slighted and neglected in comparison of the
other: So in like manner S. Peter, Whose adorning let it not be that outward
adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of
apparel: but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4.

Use 4. Finally, we may hence learn what Worship and Service it is that God
requires, and will accept at our hands, viz. that which is spiritual, which
proceeds not only from the outward man, the body, but principally from the
inward man, the heart and spirit: this is the more to be considered, in that
(as was showed before) for this very end Christ thus describes the nature of
God, and says, That God is a Spirit, from thence to infer, that he will be
worshipped in Spirit and in truth, this being that Worship which is agreeable
to his nature, My Son give me thy heart (says God) Prove. 23. 26. Whom I serve
with my spirit, (says the holy Apostle) Romans 1. 9. For we are the circumcision
(says the same Apostle) which worship God in the spirit, Phil. 3. 3. God
expresses all the detestation that may be of those Services, though such as
himself prescribed, which are merely outward and formal, not proceeding from
a pure heart, and holy affections; see Esa. 1. 10, 11 12, 13, 14. he threatens
severely to punish those that draw near him with their mouth, and honor him
with their lips, but remove their heart far from him, Esa. 29. 13, 14. Christ
told the Pharisees, that though they justified themselves before men, yet God
knew their heart, and that which was highly esteemed amongst men, was
abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. and Mat. 23. many a woe does
Christ denounce against them for their hypocrisy, saying seven several times,
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: and he bids his Disciples
beware of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, which is hypocrisy, Luke
12. 1. Though the outward performance be very weak, yet if the heart be rightly
affected, God accepts it, and will pass by the imperfection; The high places
were not taken away Quin damus id superis, de magna quod dare lance Non possit
magai M^ssalae lippa propago; Compositum jus fasque animi, Sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto. Hoc cedo ut admoveam templis, and
far^e litabo. Pers. Sat. 2.
out of Israel, nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect (that is, sincere
and upright) all his days, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. Ezekiah knew this, and therefore
when many did eat the Passover otherwise then they should have done, he prayed
for them, saving, The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to
seek God, the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to
the purification of the Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19. Thus our Savior seeing
his Disciples drowzie, and not able to keep from sleeping, when he had special
reason to require their attendance, yet knowing the sincerity of their hearts
and affections toward him, excused them, saying, The Spirit indeed is willing,
but the flesh is weak, Mat. 26. 41. On the other side, though the outward
actions seem glorious, yet if the inward affections be not right, God does
little regard them: Amaziah did that, which (in it self considered) was right
in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. Let Us
therefore have a care of our hearts and spirits, whatsoever we do: Let us
remember that of the Prophet, Take heed to your spirit, Mal. 2. 15. Let us be
sure, that as well our spirits as our bodies, be engaged in those services
which we perform unto God, that our hearts be therein upright before him; Let
my heart be sound in thy Statutes, that I may not be ashamed, (says that man
after Gods own heart, David) Psalm. 119. 80.

THE THIRD SERMON.
DEUTERONOMY. 6. 4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.
THis place of Scripture the Jews much magnify, and it is indeed a place very
famous and remarkable: When one asked our Savior which was the first, or
chiefest Commandment, he alleged these words, together with those in the next
Verse, saying, The first of all the Commandments is, Hear O Israel, the Lord
our God is one Lord. And thou shall love the Lord thy God Vide Fagium in Chald.
Paraph. ad hunc locum.
with all thine heart, etc. Mar. 12. 29. 30. But the Jews superstitiously
abuse the place, writing it in parchment, and binding it to their head, and to
their hands, and to the posts of their houses: so they pervert the meaning of
that Deuteronomy. 6. 8, 9. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine head, and
they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes: And thou shall write them upon
the posts of thy house, and on thy gates, and so of those parallel places Exodus
13. 9. and 16. some think that these Texts of Scripture are merely
metaphorical, only importing how mindful people should be of Gods precepts:
See Aben Ezra on Deuteronomy. 6. 9. by whom it appears, that some among the Jews have
understood those places in Moses, as parallel to those in Solomon.
And else* where indeed the like expressions are thus metaphorically used, as
Prove. 3. 3. Let not mercy and truth forsake thee, bind them about thy neck, and
write them upon the table of thine heart: and Prove. 7. 3. Bind them upon thy
fingers, write them on the table of thine heart. But others more probably
conceive, that those Precepts in the Law were also literally to be observed,
even as that concerning fringes, Numb. 15. 38, 39. Speak unto the children of
Israel (said God to Moses) and bid them, that they make them fringes in the
borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon
the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue: and it shall be unto you for a
fringe, that you may look upon it, and remember all the Commandments of the
Lord, and do them, etc. That the Jews were to observe this even according to
the Letter, is without question, the words cannot otherwise be understood, and
it seems, that the other Precepts also were of the same nature, viz. such as
were to have a literal observation, yet withal a mystical signification: For
we find them joined together as homogeneall, Mat. 23. 5. They make broad their
Phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments: By the Phylacteries,
are meant those sentences of Scripture which the Jews (who call them
Tephillin) used of old, and still use to write in parchment, and to fasten upon
their heads and hands, as by the borders of their garments are meant the
fringes, which they wore in those borders of their garments: Our Savior there
reproves the Scribes and Pharisees See Beza on Mat. 23. 4.
alike for both, not for having those Phylacteries and those borders, but for
making those Phylacteries broad, and enlarging those borders, as desirous to
seem more religious, and more holy then others, so that the use of both it
seems was required, though the abuse were condemned, and this abuse the Jews
were many of them guilty of, of old, and much more are they now guilty of it,
the ceremony being out of date, and not to be used at all in the times of
Gospel.

But to return to the words of the Text, they contain in them an Exhortation
directed at first to the Israelites, but which concerns us, and all Gods
people, [ Hear] that is, hearken, mind, observe and consider what is said, as
He that has ears to hear, let him hear, Luke 8. 8. And, he that has an ear,
let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, Apoc. 2. 11. Hear and
give ear, Ier. 13. 15. [ O Israel] Jacob was first called Israel, because he
prevailed with God, Genesis 32. 28. after him his posterity (whom God chose to be
his peculiar people) were also called Israel, or the children of Israel, or the
people of Israel; so that Israel and the people of God are used as terms
equivalent: Hear O my people, and I will speak, O Israel, and I will testify
unto thee, Psalm. 50. 7. so Gal. 6. 16. The Israel of God, is as much as the
people of God. [ The Lord] In the Hebrew it is (as they call it) the name of
four letters, Jehovah as we Nomen tetragrammaton; (...) Jehovah, comes of
Havah, which signifies the same with Hajah, whence is Ehjeh, rendered, I am.
now pronounce it, a name peculiar unto God, and not communicable to any
besides him; Whose Name alone is Jehovah, Psalm. 83. 18. Jehovah comes of a word
that signifies to be, and God is so called, as having his being of himself,
and giving being to all things besides himself: Our Translators sometimes, yet
but seldom, have the word Jehovah (about the pronounciation whereof learned
men differ) for the most part instead thereof they have Lord, like as the
Septuagint and the vulgar Latin Interpreter do constantly render it, but so,
as that to distinguish this word from other words which signify Lord also,
they use to write the word Lord, when it is to express Jehovah all in great
Letters thus, LORD: so that where in our Translations we find LORD so written
all in great letters, there in the Original is Jehovah, excepting some few
places where it is Jah, which is taken to be the contract of Jehovah. [Our God]
God is the God of all the world, as being the Creator, preserver and governor
of all; he is called, the God of all flesh. Jer. 32. 27. but in a more especial
manner was he the God of that people to whom Moses spoke, viz. Israel, they
being the seed of Abraham, with whom God entered into Covenant, saying, I will be
a God to thee and to thy seed, Genesis 17. 7. I am the Lord thy God, said he unto
them when he gave the law, Exo. 20. 2. so he is styled the God of Israel, 2 Samuel 23. 3. The true God whom the people of Israel did worship, is so
distinguished from false gods which the Heathens worshipped, All the gods of
the Nations See Esa. 37. 16.
are Idols, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 96. 5. and the Apostle says of them,
that they were without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. Is one Lord] only one,
as Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto men to die once: that is, once and no more.
So here, one Lord, that is one* and no more but one; there is no other LORD, no
other God truly and properly so called, but he only.

The words thus opened, the Doctrine which I observe from them to insist upon,
is this, That There be that are called gods, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 8. 5. in
that respect there be gods many, and lords many, as he there adds: But some
are falsely called gods, as Idols, which are sometimes called gods in respect of
that opinion, a false opinion which Idolaters have of them, With whomsoever
thou find thy gods, etc. said Jacob to Laban, he called his Idols his gods,
not that he did account them gods, but he spoke only in respect of that account
which Laban did make of them: so Ezekiah in his prayer unto God, Of a truth,
Lord, the Kings of Assyria have laid wast all the Nations and their Countries,
and have cast their gods into the fire: he calls them their gods, because they
reckoned them as gods, but so did not Ezekiah, for he adds immediately, for
they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, etc,

Again, some are called gods improperly, viz. because in a peculiar manner
they resemble God, in respect of some special dignity and eminency which they
have over, or above others. Thus the Angels are called gods, Thou made him a
little lower then the Angels, Psalm. 8. 5. in the Original it is Elohim, that
is, gods. And whereas it is said Psa. 97. 7. Worship him all ye Gods, it is
thus cited, Heb. 1. 6. Let all the Angels of God worship him: In this sense
also Princes, Judges, and Magistrates are called gods, I have said ye are gods,
Psalm. 82. 6. Thou shall not revile the gods, Exodus 22. 28. in the Margent it is
the Judges; that Magistrates are there meant is clear by the later part of the
Verse, nor curse the Ruler of thy people; so God speaking unto Moses concerning
Aaron, Thou shall be unto him (said he) instead of God, Exodus 4. 16. that is,
Moses should be superior to him, he should instruct and direct him, and
apppoint him what he should say and do, so Exodus 7. 1. And the Lord said unto
Moses, see I have made thee a God to Pharaoh: that is, Moses should exercise
power and authority over Pharaoh, he should bring plagues upon him, and remove
them from him at his pleasure: but truly and properly so called there is but
one God. The Apostle having said, that there are many that are called gods, he
adds, But unto us there is but one God, 1 Cor. 6. 8. so 1 Timothy 2. 5. For there
is one God: This is life eternal to know thee the only true God, etc. Joh. 17.
3. Thou even thou art Lord alone, Neh. 9. 6. For who is God save the Lord? 2 Samuel 22. 32. The Lord he is God, there is none else besides him, Deuteronomy. 4. 35.

The Heathen Philosophers and Poets, though they would not strive against the
stream, but gave way to the common error of the times, yet knew and sometimes
also acknowledged this truth. Plato Plato Epist. 13. ad Dionys.
writing to Dionysius, told him, that when he did write seriously, he made
mention of one God, when he wrote otherwise, then he mentioned Aristot.
Metaphys. lib. 12.
gods in the plural: So Aristotle proves the world to be governed by one only,
and brings in that of Homer, (...). Is is not good that there should be many
Rulers, (viz. supreme) let there be one Ruler, and one King. And he says, That
as a governor in Aristot. de Mundo if that book be his.
a ship, and a general in an Army, so is God in the world and that there is
but one God, though he be (...), i. e. called by many names. Thus also
Phocylides, (...), i. e. There is one God, wise, powerful, and blessed. And
Sophocles, (...), i. e. In very deed there is but one God. Many such sentences
and sayings ^mo ipsum vulgus Ethnicorum u^um Deum confitetur. Anima licet
falsis diis exancillata, cum tamen tesipiscit, ut ex crapula, and somno Deum
nominat, and quod Deus dederit omnium vox est. Judicem quoque contestantur
illum, Deus videt, and Deo commendo; and Deus mihi reddet. O testimonium animae
naturaliter Christianae! Denique pronuntians haec, non ad Capitolium, sed ad
coelum respicit. Tert. Apol.

Cum purant, cum optant, cum gratias agunt, non Jovem, aut Deos multos, sed
Deum nominant; adeo ipsa veritas cogente natura etiam ab invitis pectoribus
erumpit. Lactan. l. 2. c. 1.


are to be found in the writings of the Heathens; and even the vulgar sort
among them by their expressions which they sometimes used, did show themselves
convinced of this truth, that there is but only one God. For, as Tertullian
observes, they did use to say, God sees, I commend to God, God will render unto
me, and the like. And when they spoke thus, they did not (he says) look to the
Capitol, (where they worshipped their false God Jupiter,) but to heaven, where
the true God has his Throne: and the like observation also has Lactantius.

Reason also may demonstrate, that there are no more gods then one.

For, first, Gods immensity and infiniteness proves his Unity: for if there
were more Gods then one, then either one should include another, or not; if one
should include another, then that which is included should not be infinite, and
so not God: if one should not include another, then neither should any of them
be infinite. For, that which is infinite, includes every thing, but is it self
included in nothing; whence the Hebrews call God Makom, that signifies place,
he containing all things, but not contained himself in any thing, Behold, the
heaven, and heaven of heavens (...) Kimchi in 1 Reg. 8 27.
cannot contain thee, said Solomon unto God, 1 King. 8. 27. upon which place
Kimchi a Jewish Rabbin glosseth thus: Thou art the place of the world, but the
world is not thy place. God contains the world, but the world does not
contain God.

2. God has in him all excellency whatsoever, His Name only is excellent,
Psalm. 148. 13. therefore there can be but one God: For, if there were many
Gods, then one must differ from another, and so one should want some excellency
which another has, and consequently should not be God.

Ob. But the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost, God.

Ans. True, yet all but one God: For, these three are one, 1 John 5. 7. though
three Persons, yet one God.

Use. This serves first to confute the Papists, and to prove them guilty of
Idolatry: For though in word they confess only one God, yet in deed they make
many Gods, giving divine worship and honor unto Saints and Angels; they make
vows and prayers unto them, whereas this honor belongs unto God only: Call
upon me, says God, Psalm. 50. 15. When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. says our
Savior, Luke 11. 2. Vow and pay unto the Lord your God, says David, Psalm. 76.
11. so Solomon, When thou vowest a vow unto God, etc. Eccles. 5. 4 Bellarmine
himself In Scripturis nomen voti semper accipitur pro promissione facta Deo.
Nam cum Scriberentur Scripturae S. Nondum caeperat usus vovendi Sanctis.
Bellarm, de Cultu Sanctorum, lib. 3. cap. 9. sect. Praetered.
confesses, that in the Scriptures the name of vow is ever taken for a promise
made to God: And mark his reason, For, (says he) when the holy Scriptures
were written, the use of vowing unto Saints was not begun. It is without all
question; and therefore the more to blame they, who besides and against the
authority of the Scriptures did begin it afterward.

So also they do in effect make the Pope a God, taking themselves bound to
believe all his determinations, and to obey all his injunctions, not presuming
to examine and try whether they be true or false, right or wrong, whereas God
only is capable of this honor; Let God be true and every man a liar, Romans 3. 4.
Call no man your Father upon earth, (so as to yield absolute obedience unto
him) for one is your Father which is in heaven, Mat. 23. 9. yet Bellarmine
sticks not to say, that if the Si Papa erraret, praecipiendo vitia vel
prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia. credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes
malas, nisi vellet contra. conscientiam peccare. Bellar. de Pontif. lib. 4. c.
5.. Secundo, quia tunc.
Pope should err, so as to command vices and forbid virtues, all were bound to
believe vices to be good, and virtues to be evil, except they would sin
against their conscience: He takes it for granted, that all should do
whatsoever the Pope injoynes, without daring once to enter into the examination
of it: This is to make the Pope above an Angel, and therefore equal with God;
for the Apostle doubted not to say, If an Angel from heaven preach unto you
any other Gospel, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed, Gal. 1. 8.

Use 2. But to leave them; there are also many others, who though they pretend
to believe that there is but one God, yet indeed they make more Gods then one;
for the voluptuous person makes his belly his God, Whose God it their belly,
says the Apostle of some, Phil. 3. 19. so the covetous makes mammon or riches
his God: If I have made gold my hope, and said unto the fine gold, thou art my
confidence, Job. 31. 24. Job abhorred this, but the covetous man is guilty of
it; The rich man's (viz. the covetous rich man's) wealth is his strong City,
says Solomon, Prove. 10. 15. and so Prove. 18. 11. The rich man's wealth is his
strong City, and as a high wall in his own conceit. Hence the covetous person
is called an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. 5. and covetousness is called Idolatry, Col. 3.
5. so whatsoever it is that any set their heart upon, and put their trust in,
they make it their God; the proud person also, and the vainglorious makes
himself his God, seeking himself in all that he does, and arrogating the good
success that he has in any thing, unto himself. They sasacrifice to their
net, and burn incense to their drag, because by them their portion is fat, and
their meat plenteous, Heb. 1. 16. that is, they ascribe all their plenty and
prosperity to their own industry, By the strength of mine hand have I done it,
and by my wisdom, etc. Thus vaunted the King of Assyria, Esa. 10. 13. and
therefore he is taxed, Esa. 14. 14. as saying, I will ascend above the heights
of the clouds, I will be like the most high: So God bade the Prophet Ezekiel
say unto the Prince of Tyrus, Thus says the Lord God, because thine heart is
lifted up, and thou have said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, etc. Why
was this charged upon him? because he ascribed all his greatness unto himself;
With thy wisdom, and with thine understanding thou have gotten thee riches,
and have gotten gold and silver into thy treasuries.

Use 3. Let us therefore have a care to know and acknowledge the only true God,
to serve and worship him, and him only, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve, Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall have none other Gods
before me, Exodus 20. 3. This is the first and great Commandment, Mat. 22. 37,
38. with Mar. 12. 29, 30 the true God is a jealous God, as he styles himself,
Exodus, 20. 5. he will endure no corrivall, no copartner, My glory will I not
give unto another, says he, Esa. 42. 8. and 48. 11. Let Us know and consider,
that if we be (...), we are (...), if we have more Gods then one, we have none
at all, but are even without God, as the Apostle says the Gentiles were, who
had a multitude of Gods, Ephesians. 2. 12. And let us take heed of Polytheisme, as in
opinion, (whether directly with Pagans, or by consequence with Papists) so in
practice, in which respect we are much more prone unto it. Let Us remember that
of our Savior, Ye cannot serve God and mammon, Mat. 6. 24. so not God and any
lust whatsoever; God will have our whole heart, he will not yield that any
besides him (but only in subordination unto him) should have any part of it:
Their heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty, Hos. 10. 2.

THE FOURTH SERMON.
1 JOHN 5. 7. There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.
BEfore I build any thing upon this Txet, or deduce any thing from it, I must
assert and vindicate the Text it self: I had rather that you should hear what
is objected, so as withal to hear what is answered, then that (as otherwise
it might happen) you should meet with the Objection, and not know what Answer
can be given unto it. In this respect I like not that matters of controversy
should be meddled with, but so as that the principal Objections should be
produced and answered; for otherwise the opposers of the truth may have great
advantage, and people are apt to be seduced, or at least, to stagger, when
either in books or conferences they find things objected, which before they
never had any notice of: This therefore I will not now dissemble, that the
adversaries of the Doctrine concerning the Trinity, do except against this
place, as not written by S. John, nor any part of the Scripture, and they have
some color for this exception. For, it is confessed, that in some Greek copies
these words are not extant, nor in the Syriack Translation, which is ancient,
and of good account, as likewise that Chrysostom and some other ancient
writers in their Commentaries upon the Epistle, make no mention of these words,
which argues that they did not find them in those books which they perused. But
to this I answer:

1. That this Text for the matter contained in it, fully agrees with other
places of Scripture, so that although this Text were not, yet the truth which
it contains may otherwise sufficiently be proved.

2. Those words in the Verse following, in earth, show that these words in the
seventh Verse are genuine, and not to be omitted; for those words in that
Verse, in earth, answer to these in this Verse, in heaven.

3. Most of the Greek copies have this Text in them, and so has the vulgar
Latin Translation: Hierome also (as ancient as Chrysostom) reads it as part
of the Epistle, and so does Cyprian, Cyprian. de vint. Eccles.
one more ancient then them both; neither does it appear, that these words were
ever questioned, until after such time as the Arrian Heresy (impugning the
Divinity of Christ) was grown up; so that it is most probable, that (as
Hierome and others conceive) these words were scraped out by the Arrians, as
making sore against them, and so came to be wanting in some copies, and to be
omitted by some Commentators. The Heresy of the Arrians for a while prevailed
Ingemuit orbis, and se miratus est factum esse Arrianum. Hieron.
much, and bore great sway in the world, especially in the Eastern parts of it:
And it has been the wicked policy and practice of Heretics to expunge such
places of Scripture as were most pregnant against them, which they might do in
some copies, though not in all. Tertullian charge Marcion an Arch-heretike
with this crime, and thereupon calls him the Mouse of Pontus (the Country of
which Marcion was) because like a Mouse he gnawed the Scriptures, and cut away
some part of them so far as he was able. Gods prooidence and goodness
toward his Church is to be admired, in preserving the Scripture,
notwithstanding all the machinations and devices of heretics, and other
professed adversaries to abolish it. And thus much for the vindication of the
Text.

I will not stand about the coherence of the words, but something must be said
for the explication of them.

[ There are three,] viz. three Persons, which are presently after expressed, [
that bear witness in heaven,] viz. to the truth spoken of, v. 6. namely, that
Christ came both by water and blood, both to sanctify and to justify, and to
be a perfect Savior of his people from their sins, by taking away both the
stain and the guilt of them.

[ The Father,] the first person of the Trinity, so called in reference to the
second Person, commonly called the Son.

[ The Word,] that is, the Son, the second Person of the Trinity; for that is
here meant by the Word. Thus also the second Person is termed, Joh. 1. 1. and
14. and Revel. 19. 13. For there by the Word of God, is not meant the Word of
God either written or spoken, but the substantial Word, Christ the Son of God,
the second Person of the sacred Trinity, as is evident there by the context:
why the second Person is called the Word, is not so clear by the Scripture;
diverse reasons are alleged, and some such as seem over-Philosophicall, and too
remote from the simplicity of the Scriptures: That which seems to have most
ground in the Scripture, is this, that the second Person the Son, taking upon
him the nature of man, became the Interpreter of the Father, and as his Word,
making known his will unto men: No man has seen God at any time, the only
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, Joh.
1. 18. These words follow but a little after those, wherein this only begotten
Son is called the Word; so Heb. 1. 2. It Is said, that in these last times God
has spoken unto us by his Son.

In this respect may the Son be called the Word; or because he is the Word, or
In the Hebrew (...) word is also put for thing; and so in Greek (...) Luke 20.
3 Acts 8. 21 and 5. 6. and (...), Luk ^
thing so much spoken of by the Prophets: To him give all the Prophets
witness, Act. 10. 43. Howsoever this is clear, and this may suffice, that by
the Word, both in the Text, and elsewhere in the Scripture, the Son is meant.

[ And the Holy Ghost,] The third Person of the Trinity, called the Spirit, the
holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost: God (as God) is a Spirit, Joh. 4. 24. and so is
holy; and therefore this appellation of Spirit and holy Spirit, or Holy Ghost,
belongs also to the Father, and to the Son, yet it is more peculiarly
attributed, and in a manner appropriated to the third Person, why it is so, I
will not now stand to inquire.

[ And these three are one.] Some (most Orthodox) expound it thus, agree in
one; as it is expressed of those other three that bear witness in earth, v.
8. And this is true; yet the phrase used here, differing from that which is
used v. 8. I see (...). v. 7. (...). v. 8.
not that they are to be taken as equivalent, and importing both one and the
same thing: some one or two copies indeed are said here to have the same phrase
as v. 8. but generally it is otherwise, Unum sunt, not in unum.
and so Cyprian read it, are one, not agree in one, and he was before the time
of Arrius, by whom, or by some of whose sect probably this place was either
razed out or corrupted. This therefore is the meaning of the words, and so much
the phrase imports, that these are essentially and substantially one, that they
are one essence and one substance, one God: This Exposition is agreeable to
other places of Scripture, to the words themselves, and is generally embraced.
From the words thus explicated, there arises That the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost, are three distinct Persons, yet but one and the same God.

First, they are three dictinct Persons, differing each from other; so that the
Father is not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost, neither is the Son the Holy Ghost;
they are clearly distinguished, Mat. 3. 16, 17. And Jesus, when he was
baptized, went up straitway out of the water, and lo the heavens were opened
unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting
upon him: And lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased. Here we have the first Person, the Father, who spoke from
heaven, as is plain by those words, My beloved Son: He who has a son must
needs be a father. We have here also the second Person, the Son, of whom the
Father spoke, and who is expressly mentioned. And so also is the third Person,
the Spirit, the holy Spirit, or Holy Ghost, who came down in the likeness of a
Dove: All these three are here so described and set forth, as that they plainly
appear to be distinct each from other. So the distinction of the Father and
the Son, is evident from that 1 John 4. 9, 10. where it is said, that God sent
his Son: by God there, must needs be meant the Father, and the Person sending
must needs be distinct from the Person sent, so consequently the Father and the
Son are two dictinct Persons: And by the same reason so are also the Father and
the Holy Ghost; for the Father sends, the Holy Ghost is sent, The Holy Ghost
whom the Father will send, etc. Joh. 14. 26. And so also the Son and the Holy
Ghost are by this reason proved to be two distinct Persons, the Son being the
Person sending, and the Holy Ghost the Person sent; I will send him unto you,
says Christ, speaking of the Comforter, that is, the Holy Ghost, Joh. 16. 7.
How these three Persons are distinguished one from another, is not so necessary
to be known, as that they are distinguished, neither may we be overcurious to
inquire into it; but thus much the Scripture does manifest unto us concerning
the distinction of these divine Persons, that the Father is from none, the Son
is from the Father, and the Holy Ghost both from the Father and the Son: This
is clear from the places already alleged, 1 John 4. 9, 10. Joh. 14. 26. and
16. 7. And this is sufficient to show, not only that they are distinguished,
but also how they are distinguished.

Secondly, as they are three distinct Persons, so they are one and the same
God: This appears by that, Mat. 28. 19. Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: except the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost were each of them God, we might not baptize, nor be baptized in
their Name. For it is not lawful to baptize, or be baptized in the Name of any
but God, Were ye baptized in the name of Paul? 1 Cor. 1. 13. And again, v. 14,
and 15. I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius, least
any should say, that I had baptized in mine own name. Paul (we see) abhorred
this as most vile sacrilege, as a robbing of God of his honor, that any
should be baptized in his name: So that prayer, 2 Cor. 13. 24. The grace of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be
with you all; that also proves these three Persons each one of them to be God;
for prayer is to be made only unto God, Call upon me, Psalm. 50. 15. Now if they
be each one of them God, then there being no more Gods then one, they must
needs be one and the same God.

The Godhead of the Father is confessed by all, the Godhead of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, I shall prove more fully and distinctly hereafter in their
places; this proof may suffice for the present.

Use. Seeing therefore this mystery of Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity,
of three Persons being one God, and one God three Persons, seeing (I say) this
is revealed unto us in the Scriptures, let us not doubt of the truth of it,
much less deny it, but let us firmly assent unto it, and believe it: Let us
not say, as Nicodemus did in Joh. 3.
another case, How can these things be? There are many things in Religion which
are above reason, though not against reason: Surely, it is the greatest reason
that can be, that we should believe God concerning himself. For, can we know
God better then he does himself? And shall we not then believe what God does
say and testify of himself? We are not able to comprehend how it is; well, but
let us believe that it is, because so much is revealed: Secret things belong
unto the Lord our God, but things revealed unto us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. There are
many things in nature, the reason whereof we know not, yet do we not therefore
doubt of the things themselves, though we cannot tell how they came to be so,
yet we are assured that so they be; The wind blows where it lists, and thou
hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor whither it
goes, Joh. 3. 8. Thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child, Eccles. 11. 5. Scrutaeri
hoc, temeritas est, credere, pietas, nesse vero, vita, and vita aeterna est.
Bern. de Consid. l. 5. c. 8.
Bernard speaking of this mystery says well, To inquire into it (above what is
revealed) is rashness, to believe it, is piety, to know it, is life, even life
eternal.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
GENESIS 17. 1. I am the Almighty God.
GOd being to make a solemn Coveant with Abraham, and so both to promise all
manner of blessings unto him, and to require sincere and entire obedience of
him, premiseth this, that he is God Almighty, that so Abraham might be incited
both to obey him, and to trust in him.

[ The Almighty God,] In the Original it is, El Shaddai, which are two names
of God, and both of them import might and power: El is a name of God, as may
appear by that, Eli, Eli, etc. Mat. 26. 46.
that is, My God, my God, etc. The word does signify as much as might or
power, as it is rendered Mic. 2. 1. or mighty, as Ezekiel. 31. 11. And thus when it
is used as the Name of God, Aquila a Greek Interpreter, renders it (...), that
is, mighty. As for the other word, Shaddai, some derive it from Shadad, to wast
and destroy, as if the word imported thus much, that as God by his Almighty
power made all things, so by the same power he is able to destroy all, Joel 1.
15. As a destruction from the Almighty shall it come; in the Hebrew there is an
elegant Paromasia, (...) Ceshod misshaddai. Others take the word as compounded
of asher dai, that is, that is sufficient, as if God were therefore called
Shaddai, because he has all sufficiency in himself, has no need of any other,
but is able to supply the wants of all: Neither is (he) worshipped with men's
hands, as if he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all life and breath, and
all things, Act. 17. 25. The Greek Interpreters called the Septuagint, or
Seventie, sometimes translate the word (...), that is, sufficient, as Ruth 1.
20, 21. sometimes, (...), that is, Almighty, as Job 5. 17. Here in the Text,
(...), that is, thy God; and so in other places. Hierome renders it,
Omnipotens, that is, Almighty, and so our last Translators: In the Geneva
Translation it is rendered, Alsufficient; both these Almighty and Alfufficient
import the same thing, and do most fitly express the Original word Shaddai.

The Doctrine to be observed, is, That God is Almighty Genesis 49. 24. He is
called the Almighty God: And so also, Esa. 9. 6. Once has God Psalm. 62. 11
spoken, yea twice have I heard it (says David) that power belongs unto God.
But might and power are attributed likewise unto men, and to Angels, The mighty
men of Moab, etc. Exodus 15. 15. His mighty Angels, 2 These. 1. 7. Therefore to
distinguish God from all others, he is called Almighty; so here in the Text,
and likewise in many other places, as Genesis 28. 3. God Almighty bless thee, 2
Cor. 6. 18. says the Lord Almighty, Ruth 1. 20, 21. Job 5. 17. and elsewhere
he is styled, the Almighty.

He and only he is Almighty: For, first, he and only he can do all things. Men
can do much, Angels can do more; but neither men nor Angels can do all things.
This power belongs unto God, and to him only, He has done whatsoever he
pleased, Psalm. 115. 3. Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Genesis 18. 14. With
God nothing is impossible, Luke 1. 37. He is able to do exceeding abundantly
beyond all that we can either ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. He is able even to
subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21.

2. All the power that is in all the creatures, is from God, and therefore in a
more eminent manner in God. The great Behemoth, that is, (as is supposed) the
Elephant, whose strength is in his loins, and whose force is in the navell of
his belly: Who moves his tail like a Cedar, -- Whose bones are as strong
pieces of brass, and like bars of iron, Job 40. 16, 17, 18. This great
Behemoth (I say) is but one, though amongst suchlike creatures, the chief one
of the ways (or works) of God. Job 40. 19. He that made him, can make his
sword to approach unto him. Ibid. Though he be never so strong, yet he has his
strength from God, who therefore is stronger, and can subdue him. Yea, further,
all the power that all the creatures have, is Gods power, not only as from
him, but also as subservient to him, he orders it and makes use of it as he
pleases: The Angels that excel in strength, do his Commandments, harkening
to the voice of his word, Psa. 103. 20. Nebuchadnezzar that had such majesty,
and such might, that all People, Nations, and Languages, trembled and feared
before him; whom he would he slew, and whom he would he kept alive; whom he
would he set up, and whom he would he put down, Dan. 5. 19. even he was but
Gods servant, as God does call him, Ier. 25. 9. and 27. 6. God made him an
instrument to execute his will, and to fulfill his pleasure: They wrought for
me, says God, speaking of Nebuchadnezzar and his Army, when they had destroyed
that rich and strong City Tyrus, Ezekiel. 29. 26. The strength of Bears and of
Lions God uses at his pleasure, 2 King. 2. 24. and 17. 25. So the inanimate
creatures which are of most force and might, as fire, and hail, snow and
vapor, and stormy wind, they do but fulfill his Word, Psalm. 148. 8.

Furthermore, God can inhibit and restrain the force and fury of the creatures,
that they shall not put forth themselves, nor act at all except he pleases: He
stopped the mouths of the Lions that they could do nothing unto Daniel, Dan.
6. 22. He curbed and kept in the rage of the fire, that it could have no power
over the three young men, Dan. 3. 27. Again, God can lift up the creature
above it self, and make it act above its power, when he pleases. He made one
repast sufficient for Eliah to go in the strength of it forty days, and forty
nights, 1 King. 19. 8. with five barley loaves and two small fishes he
satisfied many thousands, and caused much to remain also of the fragments, Ioh.
6. 5. etc.

Finally, God can make the creatures work even quite contrary to their nature:
He made the waters to divide themselves, and to stand on heaps, as if they had
been walls of brass, or of marble, Exodus 14. 21, 22. He made the Sun to stand
still, Josh. 10. and to go back, Esa. 38. He made clay a means to open the
eyes of him that was blind, Joh. 9. 6. This may sufficiently demonstrate that
God is Almighty.

Ob. But there are some things which God cannot do, He cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. He cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2.

Ans. Some things imply imperfection, as sin, death, mutability, and the like:
these things are not compatible unto God, being inconsistent with his
perfection; the not being able to do such things, does not derogate from his
power, nor argue any inability in him, but the contrary: For indeed he could
not be Almighty, as he is, Deus dicitur omnipotens faciendo quod vult, non
patiendo quod non vult. Quod si ei accideret, nequaquam esset omnipotens. Vnde
prop^erea quaedam non potest, quia omnipotens est. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 5. c.
10.
if he could do (or rather suffer) things of that nature: God (says Austine)
is said to be Almighty, in doing what he will, not in suffering what he will
not; for if he were subject to that, he were not Almighty: And therefore
because God is Almighty, there are some things that he cannot do, viz. such
things as argue imperfection: For, (as Aquinas says well) though in word and
expression those things Quaedam sunt, quae dicunt potentiam quantum ad modum
dicendi, dicunt tamen impotentiam a part rei. Aquin.
seem to import power, yet in deed and in truth they import weakness: How weak
is thine heart, says the Lord God, seeing thou do all these things, the work
of an imperious whorish woman! Ezekiel. 16. 30.

Again, some things imply contradiction: as to make that which is past, not to
be past; that which is, whiles it is, not to be, and the like: These things
also do not fall under the power of God, yet neither is this any diminution or
aabatement of his power: God is the God of truth. Esa. 65. 16. but both parts
of a contradiction cannot be true: If it be true, that a thing is past, it
cannot be true that it is not past. Whosoever (says Austine) Quisquis dicit,
si Deus omnipotens est, faciat ut quae facta sunt, facta non fuerint; non videt
hoc se dicere, si Deus omnipotens est. faciat ut ea quae vera sunt, eo ipso
quod vera sunt, falsa sint. Aug. contra Faust. lib. 26. cap. 5.
says, If God be Almighty, let him cause that those things which are done
should not be done, he sees not that he says, if God be Almighty, let him
cause that those things which are true, in that they are true, should be false.
Quae implicant contradictionem, etc. convenientius est dicere, quod ca non
possunt fieri, quam quod ca Deus non possit facere. Aquin. par. 1. qu. 25. art.
3.
Concerning things of this nature, it is more meet (as Aquinas acutely
observes) to say, that they cannot be done, then that God cannot do them; that
is, the reason why God cannot do such things, is in the impossibility of their
nature, not in any defect of Gods power: Thus then God is Almighty, in that he
can do all things, which do not imply either contradiction or imperfection.

Now if God be Almighty, able to do whatsoever he pleases, then let us not
doubt of any thing that he has spoken, but though it may seem never so
strange, yet let us be assured of the truth of it. Why should it seem a thing
incredible with you, that God should raise again the dead? (said the Apostle)
Act. 26. 8. So Christ told the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection of the
dead, that they erred, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, Mat.
22. 29. Whatsoever it be that God has promised, let us assure our selves that
it shall be fulfilled; let us take heed of calling into question the power of
God, as that noble man did, who when in a time of most great scarcity, the
Prophet Elisha foretold most great plenty, and that to happen the very next
day after, said, Behold, if the Lord should make windows in heaven, might this
thing be? 2 King. 7. 1, 2. whereupon the Prophet told him, that he should see
it with his eyes, but should not taste of it; and so (as the story shows) it
came to pass, for when that plenty happened, he being appointed of the King to
keep the gate, was trodden on by the people, and so died. So the Israelites in
the wilderness, questioned whether God were able to supply their wants,
saying, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? -- Can he provide flesh for
his people? Psa. 78. 19, 20. In speaking thus, it is said, they spoke against
God: It is a great indignity unto God, to speak or think so of him, as if his
power were limited, as if there were any thing above his reach, or without the
sphere of his activity, yet (which may make us take the more heed unto our
selves) even the godly themselves are subject thus to distrust Gods power.
Sarah hearing the Lord to promise that she should bear Abraham a son, laughed
at it, as thinking it could not be, that Abraham and she being both so old as
they were, should yet have a child, Genesis 18. 10, 11, 12. So when God told
Moses, that he would give the Israelites in the wilderness flesh to eat, and
that for a month together, it seems that Moses did doubt of Gods ability to
perform this promise: The people among whom I am (said he) are six hundred
thousand footmen, and thou have said, I will give them flesh, that they may
eat a whole month: Shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them to
suffice them? or shall all the fish of the Sea be gathered together for them,
to suffice them? That Moses did not merely inquire how this should be done, but
did even doubt how it could be done, may appear by Gods answer unto him, And
the Lord said unto Moses, Is the Lords hand waxed short? Thou shall see whether
my word shall come to pass unto thee, or not, Number. 11. 21, 22, 23. Thus also
again, when the people murmuring for water, God bad Moses and Aaron speak unto
the Rock, and it should power forth water: Moses instead of speaking to the
Rock, smote it twice, which God commanded not, and spoke to the people, saying,
Hear now ye rebels, must we fetch you water out of this Rock? As if he should
say, Is this a likely thing to be done? And yet God had plainly said unto him
that it should be done, it is evident both by his speech and by his action, and
most of all by Gods words following after, that both he and Aaron did doubt of
that which God had said should be, Number. 20. 8, 9, 10, 11. And so Zacharias, the
Father of John the Baptist, when the Angel told him that he should have a son,
could not believe it, because he was old, and his wife also stricken in years,
Luke 1. 18. These examples show how apt the godly are to fail in the belief
of this point, touching Gods Almighty power: But let us beware of this evil
heart of unbelief; for it much provokes God, as appears by these very examples
now alleged: How he punished the noble man for his incredulity, was noted
before; Sarah also did not pass without a check, Genesis 18. 13. Moses and Aaron
were likewise reproved, and not only so, but also debarred from entering into
Canaan, Numb. 20. 12. 24. Deuteronomy. 32. 48, 49, 50, 51. so Zacharias was
immediately stricken dumb, and was no more able to speak, until such time as
he saw the accomplishment of Gods promise, which he had doubted of, Luke 1. 19,
20. No maryell if God be thus provoked by man's unbelief. For it makes Gods a
liar, 1 John 5. 10. And what greater dishonor can be done unto God then this?
On the other side it is said, that Abraham gave glory unto God, when as against
hope he believed in hope, etc. and being not weak in faith, he considered not
his own body, now dead, when he was about a hundred years old, nor the
deadness of Sarahs womb, and staggered not at the promise of God through
unbelief, but was strong in faith, and fully persuaded, that what he had
promised, he was able also to perform, Romans 4. 18, 19, 20, 21.

Use 2. But secondly, let us be sure to get interest in God, that he may be our
God: For otherwise what are we the better, though his power be never so great?
If we be aliens from him, what comfort can this afford unto us? But if the
Almighty be ours, what can we want? What moved the Septuagint here in the Text
instead of God Almighty, to render, thy God (and in like manner they also
interpret the word in other places) I cannot tell, but sure I am, except he be
thy God, and my God, it will avail us nothing that he is God Almighty. Toll
meum and toll Deum; take away our propriety in God, and take away God, we are
as if there were no God, in respect of any benefit that we can expect from him,
even without God in the world, (as it is said of the Gentiles) Ephesians. 2. 12.
David encouraged himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30. 6. had not the Lord
been his God, how could he have encouraged himself in him? so Jehoshaphat, Art
not tho^ our God? 2 Chronicles. 20. 7. And again, O our God, will thou not judge
them? v. 12. Hence it was that Balaam with all his enchantments and divinations
could do the people of Israel no hurt: The Almighty God was the God of that
people, The Lord his God is with him, (said Balaam) Number. 23. 21. And therefore
surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, nor any divination against
Israel, v. 23. Now if we would have interest Genesis 17. 7.
in God, we must have interest in Christ; I will be a God to thee, this is Gods
Covenant, and it is fulfilled in Christ, In whom all the promises of God are
Yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. they that are without Christ, are also without
God, Ephesians. 2. 12. There is no Mediator betwixt God and Man, but Christ, 1 Timothy
2. 5. No man comes unto the Father but by me, says Christ, Joh. 14 6. And as
by Christ we must have interest in God, so by faith we must have interest in
Christ: Faith is that whereby we receive Christ, Joh. 1. 12. whereby Christ
does dwell in us, Ephesians 3. 17.

Use 3. Thirdly, Let this make us to fly unto God in all our necessities, and
in our greatest dangers and distresses to trust in him: Our condition cannot be
so dismal, nor so deplorable, but he is able to deliver us, He is able to do
exceeding abundantly beyond all that we can either ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20.
Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands? said Nebuchadnezzar to
the three Nobles; but our God (said they) whom we serve, is able to deliver us,
etc. Dan. 3. 15. 17. Though there be never so many against us, yet if God be
with us, there are more with us, then with those that are against us; as Elisha
told his servant, 2 King. 6. 16. and so Ezekiah in like manner comforted and
encouraged the people, 2 Chronicles. 32. 7. Hereupon the Saints and Servants of God
triumph, saying, God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in
trouble: Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be removed, and though
the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea: Though the waters thereof
roar, etc. -- The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge,
Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3, 7. What time I am afraid (says David) I will trust in thee.
In God I will praise his Word; in God I have put my trust, I will not fear
what flesh can do unto me, Psalm. 56. 3, 4. And again, In God have I put my
trust, I will not be afraid what man can do unto me, v. 11. So the Apostle
says, We may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man
shall do unto me, Heb. 13. 5. If God be for us, who can be against us? Romans 8.
Ne existimemus plus ad impugnandum posse humana conamina, quam ad protegendum
valet divina tutela.
31. that is, so against us, as to prevail against us? Let us not think (as
Cyprian says excellently) that man can be more able to hurt, then God is able
to defend.

Use 4. Finally, this consideration of Gods omnipotency, should make us to
fear him, and not to dare to provoke him as we use to do, but to study to
please him, and to approve our selves before him. We labor, that whether
present or absent (whether alive or dead) we may be accepted of him, says S.
Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 9. And great reason why we should all so labor, God being
Almighty, and therefore able abundantly both to reward those that obey him, and
also to avenge himself on those that rebel against him; Wherefore came thou
not unto me? Am I not able indeed to promote thee to honor? said Balak to
Balaam, because he made him send the second time before he came unto him. Number.
22. 37. How much more may God thus expostulate with us, when we are slow and
negligent to do what he requires? For this reason did God tells Abraham that he
is the Almighty God, that so he might be the more incited to obey him, knowing
that he should lose nothing by his labor, but that his reward should be
exceeding great, as God told him, Genesis 15. 1 And as God is able to bless those
that fear him, so is he to curse those that despise him; Do we provoke the 1
Cor. 10. 22.
Lord to jealousy? (says the Apostle) are we stronger then he? Indeed if we
were stronger then God, we might be the more bold to provoke him, but he being
stronger, infinitely stronger then we, it is madness for us to provoke him:
Can thy heart endure, and can thy hands be strong when I shall have to do with
thee? (says God) Ezekiel. 22. 14. Thou, even thou art to be feared, (says David
unto God) for who may stand when once thou art angry? Psalm. 76. 7. Who can
stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his
anger? his fury is powered out like fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him,
Nah. 1. 6. Let us therefore fear the Lord, and walk humbly with him, even in
all holiness and obedience before him, that so his Almighty power may be for
us, and not against us; to our comfort and salvation, not to our terror and
destruction.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
HEB. 3. 4. He that built all things, is God.
THe Apostle speaking of Christ, and setting forth his excellency, compares him
with Moses, who was of great account with the Jews, to whom the Apostle wrote;
Who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all
Gods house, v. 2. But least any should conceive an equality betwixt Christ and
Moses, he goes on, and shows the excellency of Christ above Moses; For this
man was counted worthy of more glory then Moses, in as much as he who has
builded the house, has more honor then the house, v. 3. Moses was but a part
of the house, ( viz. the Church) but Christ the builder of the house, and so
the Lord and Master of it, whenas Moses, though he had a great place in it, yet
was but a servant, v. 5. and 6. Now having thus occasionally mentioned house
and building, he inserts as by way of Parenthesis, these words, For every house
is builded by some man, but he that built all things is God.

[ That built,] That is, made; as Genesis 2. 22. And the rib, etc. made he woman:
In the Original it is, built; and that which 2 Samuel 7. 11. is, He will make
thee an house, is 1 Chronicles. 17. 10. will build thee an house.

[ All things,] Calvin likes rather to limit this to all things belonging to
the Church, the house of God, mentioned both before and after; yet he
confesses, that it may be extended to the whole Creation: This sense seems
most agreeable to the words, that as every house has some man or other by whom
it is built, so the great house of the world that comprehends all things in it,
had God for the builder, or maker of it.

Hence then the conclusion is this, That God is he, who made all things.

In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth, says Moses, Genesis 1. 1. And then
he shows distinctly how all the several kinds of creatures were made of God:
So Neh. 9. 6. Thou, even thou art Lord alone; thou have made Heaven, the Heaven
of Heavens, with all their host; the Earth and all things that are therein; the
Seas, and all that is therein. And Revel. 4. 11. Thou have created all things,
and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

Moses writing of the Creation, makes no express mention of the Angels: It
seems that his purpose was only to express the Creation of things visible;
yet they may be implicitly mentioned in the word Heaven, thereby being meant
all things in heaven, all the host of heaven, as it is expressed, Genesis 2. 1.
and Neh. 9. 6. Now by the host of heaven are meant both the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, Deuteronomy. 4. 19. and also the Angels, 1 King. 22. 19. Howsoever, though it
be not so clear when the Angels were created, yet the Scripture is express
for this, that they were created, and that they also, as all other things, are
Gods creatures: Praise ye him all his Angels. -- Let them praise the Name of
the Lord; for he commanded, and they were created, Psa. 148. 2. 5. By him were
all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities or Powers,
etc. Col. 1. 16.

The light of natural reason is sufficient to demonstrate that God made the
world, the heaven and earth, and all things therein; for whatsoever is, must
either be of it self, or be made by some other; if it be of it self, then it is
God, for only God is of himself: if it be made by some Quod Deus mundum
fecerit, nulli tutius crededimus quam ipsi Deo. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 11. c.
4. Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa.
other, then either by God immediately, or by that which was made by God; so
that either immediately, or mediately all things are of him. But (as Austine
says) that God made the world, we do not more safely believe any then God
himself: His testimony is above all other arguments and ratiocinations
whatsoever. Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word
of God, Heb. 11. 3. The work of the Creation is common to all the three
Persons, To the Father; To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all
things, 1 Cor. 8. 6. to the Son, All things were made by him, Joh. 1. 3. By him
were all things created, etc. Col. 1. 16. to the Holy Ghost, The Spirit of God
has made me, Job 33. 4.

Use 1. Hence let us see and consider the excellency of God, and so give him
the glory due unto him: God is excellent, Psalm. 8. 1. and because of his
excellency he is to be glorified, Psalm. 148. 13. Now Gods excellency appears by
the creation of the world, the world is a glass wherein to behold Gods
excellency: His eternal power and Mundus est speculum Deitatis.
Godhead are clearly seen from the creation of the world, being understood by
the things that are made, Romans 1. 20. The heavens declare the glory of God,
Psalm. 19. 1. His glory is above the earth and Pulchra terra, pulchrum coelum;
sed pulchrior ille qui fecit illa.
heaven, Psalm. 148. 13. Whatsoever excellency is in any thing, is from God, and
consequently much more in God; and therefore the glory of all must be given
unto God. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things; to whom be
glory for ever, Amen. Romans 11. 36. Blessed be thy glorious Name, which is
exalted above all blessing and above all praise: Thou, even thou art Lord
alone, thou have made heaven, etc. Neh. 9. 5, 6. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, etc.
Revel. 4. 11.

More particularly, by the Creation of the world we may see,

1. The excellency of Gods power, that could make all things of nothing:
Philosophy tells us, that nothing is made of nothing. It is true, in respect Ex
nihilo nihil fit.
of natural agents, they must have some matter to work upon, else they can do
nothing. But Divinity tells us, that all things were made of nothing; that
things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear, Heb. 11. 3.
This is most true in respect of God, a supernatural agent: By this God shows
himself to be God, doing that which none can do but he. One says excellently,
If any besides One shall say, I am God, he must (...).
show us such a world as this is, and say, this is mine, of my making. The Lord
(says David) is great, and greatly to be praised; he is to be feared above all
gods: for all the gods of the Nations are Idols, but the Lord made the Heavens,
Psa. 96. 4, 5. The gods (says Jeremie) that have not made the Heavens and the
Earth, even they shall perish from under these Heavens. He has made the earth
by his power, Jer. 10. 11, 12.

2. The excellency of Gods wisdom, who could make such an infinite variety of
creatures, and not the least or meanest of them, but to have its use and office
in the universe: He has established the world by his wisdom, and has
stretched out Deus cum sit bonum nullo indigens bono, non nisi ex benigno
honitatis suae affectu mundum creavit. Aug. Confess.
the heavens by his discretion, Jer. 10. 12. and 51. 15. O Lord, how manifold
are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all, Psalm. 104. 24.

3. The excellency of Gods goodness, Thou art good, and do good, says
David unto God, Psalm. 119. 68. This was it that moved him to make the world,
not that he had any need of the creatures, (for from all eternity he was most
blessed and happy in himself) but that he might communicate his goodness to
the creatures: The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, says David,
Psalm. 33. 5. And again, The earth is full of thy riches; so is this great and
wide Sea, etc. Psalm. 104. 24, 25.

Moses says of the several things that God made, God saw that it was good,
and of them all collectively, that they were very good, hereby intimating unto
us, (as Austine observes) that there was no Scriptura per omnia Dei opera
subjungens, Et vidit Deus quia bonum est, completisque omnibus inferens, Et
vidit Deus omnia quae secit, and ecce bona valde, nullam aliam causam faciendi
mundi intelligi voluit, nisi ut bona fierent a bono Deo. Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib.
11. cap. 23. Rerum creatarum causa non est nisi bonitas Creatoris. Ibid. cap.
21.
other cause moving God to make the world, but that he being good might make
things that are good; The goodness of the Creator (as the same Author speaks)
is the cause of the creatures.

4. Gods eternity: He that made all things, must needs be before all things; he
that made all things in the beginning, must needs himself be without
beginning, and consequently eternal: Before the mountains were brought forth,
or ever thou had formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to
everlasting, thou art God. Psalm. 90. 2,

These excellent attributes of God shine forth, and show themselves in the work
of the Creation, and therefore let us take notice of them; let us look upon the
world, and the creatures in it, so as to see God, his power, wisdom, goodness
and eternity in them, and let us praise and glorify him for them. Let us
consider,

1. That God expects this of us, He made all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4.
that is, for his own glory, that we might know and acknowledge (so far forth
as he is pleased to reveal it) the excellency that is in him.

2. That the other creatures in their kind do glorify God, by keeping the
order in which God has set them, and by ministering matter unto us whereby to
praise God. Thus the Heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19. 1. and all his
works do praise him, Psalm. 145. 10. But we ought to praise and glorify God not
only objectively, but effectively, as being endued with reason and
understanding whereby to do it: All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and thy
Saints shall bless thee, Psalm. 145. 10. Gods Saints will do it, and so all
should do it. And even Galen a heathen man, admiring Beza in Romans 1. 20
the frame and composure of man's body, could not but praise and extol the
Maker of it, for his goodness that did move him, his wisdom that that did
direct him, and his power that did enable him to make it so exquisitely as he
has done; besides, God has made all the other creatures for us, and therefore
we are bound to glorify him, as for our selves, so for them also: When I
consider thy Heavens (says David) the work of thy fingers, the Moon, and the
Stars, which thou have ordained: What is man that thou art mindful of him? and
the son of man that thou visitest him? For thou have made him a little lower
then the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor: Thou made him
to have dominion over the works of thy hands, etc. Psalm. 8. 3, 4, 5, 6.

But (alas!) how many turn Gods glory into shame? as he complains, Psalm. 4.
2. Instead of glorifying him for the creatures, they dishonor him by the
creatures, setting their hearts and affections on the creatures rather then on
him: They assemble themselves for corn and wine, but they rebel against me,
says he, Hos. 7. 14. Excellent to this purpose is that of Austine, Deum ex
illis lauda, and in artificem eorum retorque amorem; ne in his quae tibi
placent, tu displiceas. Aug. Confess.
Take occasion by the creatures to praise God, and bring back your love from
them to him that made them, least in those things which please you, you your
selves displease God.

Use 2. Secondly, we must take heed how we judge of the creatures, seeing they
are Gods creatures: The Apostle fore-tells, that some would forbid the use of
meats, which God has created to be received with thankesgiving, 1 Timothy 4. 3
But he adds, that every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with thankesgiving, v. 4. So Romans 14. 14. I know and I am
persuaded (says he) by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it
self, etc. I fear not (says Austine) the uncleanness of the Non ego
immunditiam obson^^ timeo, sed immunditiam cupiditatis. Aug. Confess.
meat, but the uncleanness of the appetite.

The superstition of some is exceeding gross, who think they should be
polluted, if they should eat a little flesh in Lent, or on a Friday, though it
be Gods creature at one time, as well as at another, and no more forbidden by
him at one time then at another, yet they will lie, swear, etc. and fear no
pollution, See Mar. 7. 14. etc. to 23.

Use 3. Thirdly, we must have a care how we use the creatures; we may use them,
but we may not abuse them, 1 Cor. 7. 31. Use the world as not abusing it: We
must use the creatures,

1. Soberly, Take heed least at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, Luk 21. 34. We must so use the creatures, as that
we may be more fit to glorify the Creator, and to do him service: Whether ye
eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

2. Righteously; so as not to oppress, defraud, or any way wrong others in the
use of them: It must be our bread, Mat. 6. 11. we must come lawfully by it,
have a just right to it. We command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that
with quietness they work, and cat their own bread, (says the Apostle) 2
These. 3. 12. Bread of deceit (says Solomon) is sweet unto a man, but
afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel, Prove. 20. 17.

And again, to use the creatures righteously, is to use them not only not to
the hurt of others, but also to the good of others, viz. so as to succor and
relieve others with them: He that has two coats, let him impart to him that
has none; and he that has meat, let him do likewise, Luke 3. 11. This is a
work of righteousness: Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4. 27. He has dispersed abroad,
See Beza on Mat. 6. 1.
and given to the poor, and his righteousness indureth for ever, Psalm. 112. 9.
and 2 Cor. 9. 9. Nabal argued like a fool, as he was, saying, Shall I take my
bread, and my water, and my flesh, that I have killed for my shearers, and give
it unto men, whom I know not whence they be? 1 Samuel 25. 11. Cast thy bread upon
the waters, Eccles. 11. 1. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry? Isa. 58.
7. It is not so thine, but that thou must communicate to such as stand in need;
all thou have is Gods, he is the Lord of all, and thou art but his steward, and
therefore must dispense that which he has committed unto thee, not as thou
please, but as he appoints: As every one has received the gift, so
minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of
God, 1 Pet. 4. 10.

3. Religiously: 1. In faith, so as to be persuaded of the lawfulness of the
use of them. For to him that thinks any thing unclean, to him it is unclean,
Romans 14. 14. And he that doubts (viz. of the lawfulness of that whith he
does) is damned (that is, condemned of his own conscience) if he eat. For
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23. To use the creatures in faith,
is also to use them with a persuasion of interest in them, and right unto them
through Christ, in whom we recover that which we lost in Adam. And therefore
that which David speaks in the eight Psalm of the dominion that God gave unto
man over the creatures, the Apostle applies unto Christ, Heb. 2. 6. etc. And
Heb. 1. 2. it is said, that Christ is appointed heir of all things. And 1 Cor.
3. 22, 23. All things are yours, and ye are Christ's. This is not to be
understood as if unbelievers and aliens from Christ had not a civil right to
the things which they possess, but that they cannot have a religious and
sanctified use of them, because they cannot use them in faith, so as to be
persuaded of their interest in the creatures thorough Christ, they having no
union nor communion with him.

2. With prayer and thanksgiving; prayer for Gods blessing upon them, and
thanksgiving unto God for the comfort and benefit of them: Nothing is to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: For it is sanctified by the word
and prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. Christ took the loaves and the fishes, and gave
thanks, etc. Mat. 15. 36. so Paul took bread, and gave thanks to God. etc. Acts
27. 35. And it is said of the Israelites, 1 Samuel 9. 13. that they would not
begin to eat until the Prophet came and blessed the sacrifice, or feast to
which they were bidden: He that eats, eats to the Lord; for he gives God
thanks, says the Apostle, Romans 14. 6. so that they which eat, and do not give
God thanks, eat not to God, but to themselves; as he complains of some,
saying, And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat for your
selves, and drink for your selves? Zach. 7. 6. But our thanksgiving must be
real and serious, not formal and perfunctory: For God is not mocked, Gal. 6.
7. He cannot endure that people should draw near him with their mouth, and
honor him with their lips, whenas they remove their hearts far from him, Isa.
29. 13.

Use 4. If God made all things, then all things are his, and consequently he
may dispose of them as he pleases: Is it not lawful for him to do what he
will with his own? Mat. 20. 15. The Lord says thus, Behold that which I have
built, will I break down, and that which I have planted, will I pluck up, Jer.
45. 4. We ought therefore to be content with that portion which God does allot
us, though it be but little, and to take patiently all losses and crosses that
do befall us. The Lord gave; and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name
of the Lord, Job 1. 21.

Use 5. Hence also we ought to consider how we are degenerated from what God
did make us: He is good, and made every thing good, more especially man, whom
in a more especial manner he made like unto himself, Genesis 1. 26. But now
(alas!) we are naturally altogether corrupt and sinful, Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 20.
Psalm. 51. 5. Eccles. 7. 29. we must therefore be regenerated, and be made new
creatures: We must put on the new man which after Christ is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians 4. 24. We lost our original integrity
in Adam, we must recover it in Christ: As by the disobedience of one man (viz.
Adam) many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one man (viz. Christ)
shall many be made righteous, Romans 5. 19. As in Adam all dye, so in Christ
shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 22. viz. all that are Christ's, as the
Apostle explains himself, v, 23.

Use 7. Finally, this may teach us, that mere outward and ceremonial Worship
is not sufficient to please God, but that the heart must be given unto him. God
did indeed prescribe unto the Jews many carnal Ordinances, as they are
called, Heb, 9. 10. And now also he does require some bodily performances, as
to hear the Word, receive the Sacraments, etc. But he neither does nor did
require such things, as if he needed any thing that the creature can do, seeing
he made all, but only he would have the creature to show its subjection to him,
as the Creator. God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he
is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands; neither
is he worshipped with men's hands, as if he needed any thing, seeing he gives
to all life and breath, and all things, Acts 17. 24, 25. Thus says the Lord,
the Heaven is my throne, and the Earth is my footstool: Where is the house that
ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest? For all these things has
my hand made, and all those things have been, says the Lord; but to this man
will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles
at my Word, Isa. 66. 1, 2.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
JOH. 5. 17. My Father works hitherto, and I work.
OUr Savior having cured a lame man on the Sabbath day, the Jews hearing of
it, and being desirous to take any occasion whereby to quarrel with him,
sought to prosecute him as a transgressor of the Law, and one that had broken
the Sabbath, v. 16. Our Savior so answered for himself, as to let them know
that they did not rightly understand the Commandment concerning the Sabbath,
which was not to inhibit and restrain such works as did evidently make for the
glory of God, and the good of men, but only ordinary works, which hinder the
performing of those duties which God then requires. And he further shows, that
Gods resting on the seventh day, after that he had made all things in six
days, is not so meant, but that God does still continually work, though not in
that manner as in those first six days wherein he made the world, viz. so as
to make any new kinds of creatures, yet so as to preserve and govern the things
that he has made: And therefore to do any thing that is requisite and needful
for the preservation either of man or beast, is not unlawful. This is the
meaning of these words; But Jesus onswered them, My Father works hitherto,
and I work.

[ My Father works hitherto,] viz. by preserving and governing his creatures.

[ And I work,] viz. as God together with the Father, and as Man conformably to
the Father.

This sufficing for the explication of the words, we may observe from them,
That all things are

As God at first made all things, so he still uncessantly preserves and
governs all things: That Genesis 2. 2. And he rested on the seventh day from all
his work which he had made, is meant in respect of creating, not in respect of
preserving and governing.

God then on the seventh day ceased to create any more, as he had done in the
six days before; but he did not then, neither does he yet cease to preserve
and govern what he had created.

That all things are preserved of God is clear by that Act. 17. 28. In him we
live and move, and have our being; not only from him as our Creator, but in him
as our preserver. So Neh. 9. 6. more expressly it is said, that God not only
made all things, but also preserves them all. And Heb. 1. 6. it is said of
Christ as God, that he upholdeth all things by the word of his power.

Reas. Thus it must needs be, the creatures must needs Cuncta in illa
subsistunt a quo creata sunt. Cuncta quippe ex nihilo facta sunt, corumque
essenentia rursus ad nihilum tenderet, nisi eam author omnium manu retineret.
Gregor. Mor. l. 16. c. 18.
be preserved by the Creator, or else they cannot subsist; but as they were
made of nothing, so if they were not upheld by him that made them, they would
presently fall again to nothing: The creatures do not depend upon God, as a
house depends upon the builder; for though the builder go his way, and think no
more of the house, yet it stands: It is not so with the creatures, but they
depend upon God as the light in the air depends Sic se habet omnis creatura ad
Deum, si^ut a^r ad Solemn illumina^tem. Aquin. 1 par. quest. 104 art. 1.
on the Sun, viz. not only in respect of production, but also in respect of
preservation: if the Sun withdraw it self never so little, the light in the
air fails, and so would the creatures, if he should never so little
withdraw his preserving influence from them. So that Quamdi^ creatura est,
tamdiu creatur a Deo; quia quoad Deum est eadem actio creationis and
conservationis creaturarum. Durand. l. 2. did. 1. quaest 2.
God does as it were continually create the creatures, his preservation of the
creatures is as it were a continued creation.

Again, that all things are likewise governed of God, is most evident by the
Scripture: His Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103. 19. Nothing is so small,
but God orders it by his providence; not so much as a Sparrow does fall to the
ground, but as it pleases God, Mat. 10. 29. nothing is so casual, but God
disposes it. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is
of the Lord, Prove. 16. 33. No agent is so free and potent, but God rules over
it, and does with it what he pleases: The heart of the King is in the hand of
the Lord, as the rivers of waters, he turns it whithersoever he will, Prove.
21. 1. There Is no evil of affliction, but Gods hand has the chief stroke in
it; Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3. 6.
There Is no evil of sin, but God, though he be not the doer, yet is the orderer
of it: Though men sin of themselves, (for to sin argues not power, but
weakness, How weak is thine heart, seeing thou do all these things! Ezekiel.
16. 30.) yet they cannot sin either for the kind, or for the degree; or for the
manner, otherwise then God is pleased to permit: Herod and Pontius Pilate, with
the Gentiles, and the people of Israel were gathered together (viz. against
Christ) to do whatsoever Gods hand, and his counsel before determined, Acts 4.
27, 28.

Ob. But it often fares ill with the godly, and well with the wicked, and how
then are all things ordered and governed by God?

Answ. We judge of things too rashly: Judge not according to the appearance,
but judge righteous judgment, says our Savior, Joh. 7. 24. It is not well
with the wicked, nor ill with the godly, when it seems to be so with them: When
it seems to be well with the wicked, it is ill with them; The prosperity of
fools destroys them, Prove. 1. 32. Their table is made asnare unto them, and
that which should have been for their welfare, is unto them an occasion of
ruin, Psalm. 69. 22. They are but fatted as sheep for the slaughter, Jer. 12.
3. Neither on the other side is it ill with the godly, when it seems to be ill
with them; All things work together for their good, Romans 8. 28. Before I was
afflicted, I went astray; but now have I kept thy Word, Psalm. 119. 67. It is
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might keep thy Statutes: V. 71.
By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to
take away his sin, Isa. 27. 9. When we are judged, we are chast'ned of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 10. 32.

Ob. Does God take care for Oxen? says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 9. And how then
is his providence over all?

Answ. The Apostle there speaks not absolutely, but comparatively; God takes
care for Oxen, so as to provide for them: He preserves man and beast, Psalm.
36. 6. He causes the grass to grow for the cattle, Psalm. 104. 14. But the
Apostles meaning is, that God does not so take care for Oxen, as for men, and
for his Ministers, not so as to make a Law merely in respect of Oxen: That Law,
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, was not
(as the Apostle shows) so much in the behalf of Oxen, as to show that Gods
Ministers, who labor like Oxen, ought to be maintained. Or says he it
altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written, etc. 1 Cor.
9. 10.

Use 1. Hence we may see, and should consider our dependence on God, and so
should learn to trust not in our selves, nor in the creature, but in him only:
Self-confidence is a thing which even the best are subject to, but a thing
which God cannot endure, and in both respects we have the more cause to beware
of it; I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved. Thus David confefseth
of himself, but he presently adds, that God did hide his face, and then he was
troubled, Psalm. 30. 6, 7, For this very end God does withdraw the light of his
countenance from his children, and lay his afflicting hand upon them, that so
they may the better know and acknowledge how they depend upon him; We had the
sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in
God, etc. 2 Cor. 1. 9.

Use 2. Again, what cause have we to fear God, and to walk humbly and
obediently before him, seeing our dependence upon him is such, as that we
cannot subsist one moment without him? When Herod was incensed against them of
Tire and Sidon, they were very diligent and careful to use all means that
might be to appease him, and to reconcile themselves unto him, and that because
their Country was nourished by the Kings Country, Acts 12. 20. How then
should we take heed of provoking God! how should we lay to heart his
displeasure! we depending upon him infinitely more then they did upon Herod:
God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, have thou not
glorified: said Daniel to Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 23.

Use 3. Again, God being he that governs all, and provides for all, if we fear
him as we ought, we need not fear any thing, not the opposition that can be
made against us, not the want of any thing that is needful for us: We may
boldly say, the Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me,
Heb. 13. 6. Let them that suffer according to the will of God, (otherwise they
cannot suffer) commit the keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto
a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19. And how little reason they that fear God,
have to fear the want of what is good for them, David plainly shows, saying, O
fear the Lord ye his Saints; for there is no want to them that fear him. The
young Lions do lack and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord, shall not
want any good thing, Psalm. 44. 9, 10. Behold (says he also) the eye of the
Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy. To deliver
their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine, Psalm. 33. 18, 19.
Let Us not therefore be anxious and solicitous about the things of this life,
for he that provides even for the meanest of the creatures, will assuredly
provide for us, if we fear him and trust in him. See how our Savior urges and
presses this argument, Mat. 6. 25, 26, 28* 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. So the Apostle
Paul, Be careful for nothing (says he, meaning The word is (...) which is
also used Mat. 6 and it imports a distracting care.
anxiously careful) but in every thing by prayer and supplication with giving
of thanks, let your requests be made known unto God, Phil. 4. 6. And so S.
Peter, Cast all your care upon him, for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5. 7.

Use 4. This must also teach us in all our interprizes, and affairs, to seek
unto God to direct us, and to prosper ^s in that which we take in hand: Man
purposes, (we say, and that truly) but God disposes; So the Wiseman tells us,
Many devices are in the heart of a man; but the counsel (...).
of the Lord, that shall stand. All success depends on his blessing: if we
have it, no opposition can hurt us; if we want it, no endeavor of our own, no
assistance of others can do us any good: Except the Lord build the house, they
labor but in vain that build it: Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman
waketh but in vain. It is in vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to
eat the bread of sorrows, etc. Psalm. 127. 1, 2. All is in vain without Gods
blessing: and therefore needful it is to hearken to that advice of Solomon,
Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thine own understanding.
In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths, Prove. 3. 5, 6.
Needful it is to pray, as the Man of God does, Establish thou the work of our
hands upon us, yea, the work of our hands establish thou it, Psalm. 90. 17.

Use 5. So also in our successes and achievements, in all our prosperity and
welfare, we must acknowledge the goodness of God toward us, and give him the
glory of all, seeing that all is from him, and by his providence: We must take
heed of being like to those complained of, Hab. 1. 16. They sacrifice to their
net, and burn incense to their drag, etc, Moses earnestly admonished the
Israelites to beware of this fault; When thou have eaten and art full, then
thou shall bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he has given thee.
Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, etc. least when thou have eaten
and art full, and have built goodly houses, and dwelt therein: And when thy
hards and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and
all that thou have is multiplied, then thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget
the Lord thy God, etc. Deuteronomy. 8. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And thou say in thine
heart, My power and mine hand has gotten me this wealth. But thou shall
remember the Lord thy God; for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth,
etc. v. 17, 18. Nehemiah as he was careful to seek unto God, when he was to
make a request unto the King, Neh. 1. 11. and 2. 4. so was he also careful to
give praise and glory unto God, when the King had granted him that which he
requested of him. And the King granted me (says he) according to the good hand
of my God upon me, Neh. 2. 8. And v. 18. Then I told them of the hand of my God
which was good upon me. So Ezra having obtained a very large Commission of the
King for the good of Jerusalem, glorifies God for it; Blessed be the Lord God
of our Fathers, which has put such a thing as this in the Kings heart, etc.
Ezra 7. 27. And v. 28. And I was strengthened, as the hand of the Lord my God
was upon me.

Use 6. On the other side, in all adversities, crosses, and afflictions, we
must take heed of murmuring and impatience, seeing all comes to pass by Gods
providence. It is the Lord, (said Eli) let him do what seems good in his
sight, 1 Samuel 3. 18. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou did
it, says David, Psalm. 39. 9. This consisideration also did work upon Job, and
made him take all that befell him so patiently as he did; he over-looked the
Chaldeans and Sabeans, and Satan himself, he looked up to God, and
acknowledging his hand submitted unto him, and gave him glory: The Lord has
taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job. 1. 21.

Applicat. In these times of trouble and distraction, let this quiet and settle
our minds, that notwithstanding all commotions and combustions that are, or may
be, yet God rules and governs all. Say not (says Solomon) what is the cause
that the former days were better then these? for thou do not inquire wisely
of this matter, Eccl. 7. 10. Thou look only downward unto men, whereas thou
should rather look upward unto God, and consider his hand in all. So Eccles.
5. 8. If thou see (says he) the oppression of the poor, and violent
perverting of judgment and justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter;
for he that is higher then the highest (viz. of those that are upon the earth)
regards, and there is higher then they. In a word, let us consider this, and
comfort our selves with this, that things do not come to pass by the will and
pleasure of men, (for then indeed we might well fear what should become of us)
but by the will and pleasure of God, who will order all for his own glory, and
his peoples good. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice; let the multitude
of the Isles be glad thereat, Psalm. 97. 1. And v. 8. Sion heard and was glad,
and the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of thy judgments, O Lord.

Use 7. Finally, as in respect of the work of Creation, so also in respect of
the work of preservation and providence God is to be glorified. O blessed be
thy glorious Name, etc. (say they) for thou have made the Heavens, etc. and
thou preservest them all, Neh. 9. 5, 6. So David exhorts, saying, O bless God
ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard, who holds our soul
in life, etc. Psalm. 66. 8, 9. But still we must remember this, that we glorify
God not in word and tongue only, but in deed and in truth, that we praise him
with our lives, and not with our lips only; Let your light so shine forth
before men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your Father which is
in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16.

THE EIGHTH SERMON.
ACTS 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other
name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.
THese words were spoken by Peter, being full of the Holy Ghost, v. 7. And he
spoke them of Christ, Jesus Christ of Nazareth, v. 10. He told the Jewish
Rulers, that this Christ is he in whom alone is to be found salvation: Neither
is there salvation in any other, etc.

[ Salvation,] There is a temporal salvation, that is, a deliverance and
freedom from some temporal danger; as Exodus 14. 13. Stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord. And Exodus 15. 2. The Lord is become my salvation. There
is also eternal salvation, which is called the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet.
1. 9. This is a deliverance and freedom from eternal misery. Now its true of
temporal salvation, that there is not salvation in any other, but in Christ
only. As Christ is God, so it is he and only he that can save temporally; He
is the God of salvation, Psalm. 68. 20. In the Original it is in the plural
number, (...) of salvations: All manner of salvation whatsoever belongs unto
him, as the author and worker of it. So as Christ is Mediator, there is no
temporal salvation to be expected but in and through him: For in him all the
promises of God are yea, and in him amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. But here in the Text we
are to understand eternal salvation, which is usually meant where Christ is
spoken of as the purchaser and procurer of salvation. And so it is said
expressly, that he is the Author of eternal salvation, Heb. 5. 9. and which is
equivalent, that he has obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12.

[ In any other,] Or by any other; the Greek Preposition (...) in, like the
Hebrew (...) being often put for by: But here the phrase seems emphaticall,
implying that salvation is wholly contained in Christ, and not to be found any
where but in him only.

[ Nor any other Name,] That is, Person; as Acts 1. 15. The number of names
together were about an hundred and twenty; of names, that is, of persons.

[ Under Heaven,] This is not referred to those words, nor any other name; for
no other neither under heaven, nor in heaven is given unto men, whereby to be
saved. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? Psalm. 73. 25. But we must refer these
words to the word given, thus, There is no other name given under heaven, etc.

[ Among men,] The Angels in heaven never sinning, needed none to be given
among them, whereby to be saved; neither did God vouchsafe this mercy unto the
Angels that sinned, and therefore were cast out of heaven: God spared not the
Angels that sinned, 2 Pet. 2. 4. This was Gods (...), love toward man, Tit. 3.
4. To us a child is borne, to us a son is given, Isai. 9. 6. So said the
Prophet, but not so the Angel, not, to us, but, to you is born this day in the
City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, Luke 2. 11.

The words hold out unto us this conclusion, That Salvation is not to be found
in any but in Christ only.

Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13. 8. He ever
was, and still is, and ever shall be the only Author of salvation; none ever
were, nor are, nor ever shall be saved, but only in and through Christ Jesus.
This Doctrine of salvation by Christ only has been revealed from the beginning
of the world, throughout all ages, though in a different manner, and by
degrees, at first more darkly and sparingly, afterward more clearly and fully.
Search the Scriptures (says Christ) for in them ye think to have eternal
life, and they are they that testify of me, Joh. 5. 39. By the Scriptures he
means the Old Testament, for as then no part of the New Testament was written.
And again, in the same Chapter, v. 46. Had ye believed Moses, ye would have
believed me, for he wrote of me. Moses was the first penman of holy Scripture,
and (as Christ himself does testify) he wrote of Christ: And so we find he
did, and that in his first Book even about the beginning of it; He records how
immediately after man was fallen, Christ was promised to be his Savior. God
told the Serpent, that the seed of the woman should bruize his head, Genesis 3.
15. That is, that Christ made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4. should destroy the power
of that old Serpent the Devil, Rev. 20. 2. So also Moses relates how God
promised unto Abraham, saying, And in thy seed shall all the Nations of the
earth be blessed, Genesis 22. 18. In thy seed, that is, in Christ, Who took not
upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. and is
called the Son of Abraham, Mat. 1. 1. And we may observe how Christ at first
was called more generally the seed of the woman, but afterward more
particularly the seed of Abraham. But further, all the Prophets did testify of
Christ, and of salvation thorough him only: This may be seen in the Prophets
themselves, if we peruse them diligently, and compare their writings with the
writings of the Apostles and Evangelists. But because this would be a long
business, and it would require much time to demonstrate this in that manner, I
will only produce two or three places of the new Testament, where thus much is
clearly asserted: Zacharias the Father of John the Baptist, having said,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israle, who has visited and redeemed his people:
And has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant
David, (where observe that Christ is described still more particularly, as
being not only the seed of Abraham, but of David, and so called the son of
David, Mat. 1. 1.) immediately he adds, As he spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets, which have been since the world began, Luke 1. 68, 69, 70. So Stephen
speaking to the Jews, Which of the Prophets (said he) have not your Fathers
persecuted? And they have slain them which have showed before of the coming of
the just One, of whom now ye have been the betrayers and murderers, Acts 7.
52. Peter also in his Sermon to Cornelius, and the rest that were with him,
speaking of Christ, says, To him give all the Prophets witness, that through
his Name whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins, Acts
10. 43.

And as Moses and the Prophets did in words testify that Christ is the only
Savior, so from the time of Moses until the coming of Christ, there were many
types and figures, whereby this was signified: Some of these types and figures
were extraordinary and transient; some were ordinary and permanent. Of the
former sort was the brazen Serpent, which by Gods appointment Moses made, and
set upon a pole, that the people being stung with fiery Serpents, looking upon
it might be healed, as we read in Numb. 21. This was a figure of Christ lift up
on the Cross, on whom whosoever being stung by that old Se^pent the Devil,
looks with the eye of faith, he shall be healed.
Our Savior himself shows this to have prefigured him, and the benefit that
comes by him; As Moses (says he) lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so
must the Son of Man be lift up: that whosoever believes in him, might not
perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 14, 15. So the cloud which went
before the Israelites in the wilderness when they journeyed, and was a guide
unto them, and when they rested abode over their heads, and kept off the
scorching heat of the Sun from them, this cloud, I say, (of which see Exodus 13.
21, 22.) was likewise a type of Christ, by whom alone we are protected from the
fire of Gods wrath, and are directed to the heavenly Canaan. The Apostle says,
that the Israelites were baptized unto Moses in the cloud: It was a kind of
Baptism unto them; it was to them as baptism is to us, a Sacramental sign
pointing at Christ, and shadowing forth salvation by him, and him only. And so
also the Sea, as the Apostle shows in the same place, viz. 1 Cor. 10. 2. the
Sea thorough which the Israelites passed, when Pharaoh and the Egyptians
pursued them, and were ready to destroy them, wherein also their adversaries
were drowned, as the story is recorded in Exodus 14. Of this nature also was
Manna wherewith God did feed the Israelites, Exodus 16. The Apostle calls it
Spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10. 3. because it had a spiritual signification, it
signified Christ, and the body of Christ, (even as now the bread in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper does) that true bread which does feed the soul
unto eternal life, as Christ shows at large, in Joh. 6. So also was the rock
out of which God gave drink to the Israelites in the wilderness, Exodus 17.
That Rock was Christ, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 4. That is, it did
represent and signify Christ, like as Christ called the bread in the Sacrament
his body, and the wine his blood, which blood of his was also represented and
signified by that water out of the Rock, which therefore the Apostle there
calls Spiritual drink, in respect of the spiritual signification of it. These
types and figures of Christ, I call extraordinary and transient, because they
were only appointed upon occasion, and to continue but for a short time: But
there were other types and figures of him which were of a more solemn
institution, and of a more durable nature, which therefore I call ordinary and
permanent. Of this kind was the Passover, or the Paschall Lamb, the blood
whereof being sprinkled on the doors of the Israelites, they were preserved
when the firstborn of the Egyptians were destroyed, Exodus 12. That Lamb was a
figure of Christ, the Lamb of God, Joh. 1. 29. by whose blood we are saved,
whenas all that are not sprinkled with it, shall be destroyed; what is spoken
of that Lamb, Exodus 12. 46. is applied unto Christ, and alleged as meant
principally of him, Joh. 19. 36. So all the sacrifices and other rites and
ceremonies of the Law had reference unto Christ, and did typifie him as the
only Redeemer and Savior; Which are a shadow of things to come, (says the
Apostle, speaking of some of them) but the body is of Christ, Col. 2. 17. The
Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 17.
Grace in opposition to the Moral Law, and truth in opposition to the
ceremonial Law, which was but a shadow of those things, the truth whereof is
in Christ. For the Law having a shadow of good things to come* and not the very
image of the things, etc. Heb. 10. 1. For it is not possible that the blood of
bulls and goats should take away sin, v. 4. No, it is only the blood of Christ
which was typified by the blood of those creatures, that can do it. See there
what follows in the same Chapter: And indeed the scope of the whole Epistle is
to show that the ceremonial Law did but shadow out Christ, and therefore is
now abolished, Christ being come and having accomplished that which it shadowed.

Thus in the Scriptures of the Old Testament is Christ set forth, as he in whom
alone salvation is to be found. But much more clearly and fully is this
revealed in the Scriptures of the New Testament; We use great plainness of
speech: And not as Moses, that put a vail over his face, etc. says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. 12, 13. The Text in hand does plainly tell us, that there is
not salvation in any other, etc. So Mat. 1. 21. it is said that therefore he is
called Jesus, because he does save his people from their sins. And S. John
says, God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son: He
that has the Son, has life; but he that has not the Son, has not life, 1 John 5. 11, 12. Every where in the New Testament such sentences and sayings are
obvious.

But for the fuller manifestation of the truth of this Doctrine, let us further
consider that all the links of the golden chain of salvation, viz. Election,
Redemption, Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, and Glorification, all
have reference unto Christ, and dependence upon him.

1. Election; God has elected such as shall be saved: God has chosen you unto
salvation, 2 These. 2. 13. All they, and only they whom God has chosen, shall
be saved. Now the Apostle speaking of Christ, says, that God has chosen us in
him before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 3.

2. Redemption: All being by nature the bondslaves of Satan, none can be saved
except they be redeemed; God has visited and redeemed his people. And how? By
Christ, whom he has raised up to be a horn of salvation for us, etc. Luke 1.
68, 69. It Is Christ who by his blood has purchased eternal redemption for us,
Heb. 9, 12.

3. Adoption: They that shall be saved are called Heirs of salvation, Heb. 4.
14. But if children, then heirs, Romans 8. Now by nature all are the children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. It is therefore by grace and by adoption, that any become
Gods children; and this is through Christ. God has predestined us to the
adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto himself, Ephesians. 1. 5. When the fullness
of time was come, God sent his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons, Gal. 4. 4, 5.

4. Justification: All being naturally under the guilt of sin, they must be
justified and acquitted from that guilt, or else they cannot be saved; to die
in sin is as much as to perish for ever, Joh. 8. 24. Now there is no being
justified but by Christ, who is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the
world, Joh. 1. 29. Be it known unto you therefore men and brethren, that through
this man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins. And by him all that
believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by
the Law of Moses, Acts 13. 38, 39.

5. Sanctification: All being by nature, as guilty of, so polluted with sin,
they must first be sanctified, before they can be saved: That they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified, Acts
26. 18. But this sanctification also is thorough Christ: According to his mercy
he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost,
which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3. 5, 6.
It is said of Jesus Christ, that of his fullness we all receive grace for
grace, Joh. 1. 16.

6. Glorification: This is the highest step of salvation, that which makes it
complete and perfect; that which is called salvation ready to be revealed in
the last time, 1 Pet. 1. 5. is called, the glory that shall be revealed in us,
Romans 8. 18. Now this also is attained through Christ, it is called the glory of
the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 2. 14. Christ is himself already entered into
this glory, and he makes way for us to enter into it: I go to prepare a place
for you, says he, Joh. 14. 2. Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul,
both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within the veil, whither
the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, etc. Heb. 6. 19, 20.

Use 1. This serves to confute the Papists, who think to find salvation in
others, as in the Virgin Mary, and the rest of the Saints, and so in
themselves, thinking (if they think as they write) to be justified by their own
inherent righteousness, to satisfy the justice of God by their own
performances, and to obtain heaven by their own merits. But we have not thus
learned Christ: If righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain,
says S. Paul, Gal. 2. 21. So in vain did Christ come to be our Savior, if we
could satisfy and merit for our selves, or if the Saints could satisfy and
merit for us. All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Esa. 64. 4. That
elect vessel Paul desired to be found in Christ, not having his own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is thorough the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3. 9.

Use 2. So likewise are they here confuted, who think that people may be saved
by the mere light of nature, if they make a right use of it, and walk according
to it: The mere light of nature cannot bring to the knowledge of Christ,
without whom there is no salvation: Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven, said Christ to Peter, when he had made
a worthy confession of him, Mat. 16. 17. Search the Scriptures, etc. for they
are they that testify of me, says he, Joh. 5. 39. From a child thou have
known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation,
thorough faith which is in Christ Jesus, said Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Whiles the Ephesians were only under the light of nature, they were without
Christ, and so having no hope, viz. of salvation, Ephesians. 2. 12. Use 3. We then
here may see, and should consider the great goodness of God toward us, in
revealing Christ unto us: In former ages Christ was totally hid from the
greatest part of the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. That which is there spoken of the
Ephesians, was (as the Text it self also there does show) the case and
condition of all the Gentiles, that is, of all the world, except the Jews
only: And the Jews themselves had no such clear and full revelation of Christ,
as we now have. Things were delivered unto them more obscurely in types and
figures, as before noted; But now the grace of God which brings salvation
unto all men, has appeared, or has shined forth, as the word in the Original
does import. (...).
Christ has now brought life and immortality to light thorough the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: in whom the
God of this world has blinded the minds of them that believe not, etc. 2 Cor.
4. 3, 4.

Use 4. Let us therefore have a care to make sure of Christ, and of salvation
thorough Christ: Receive not the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 2. How shall
we escape if we neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2. 3.

1. Let us take heed of being ignorant of Christ, By his knowledge (that is, by
the knowledge of him) he shall justify many, Esa. 53. 11. This is life
eternal to know thee the only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ,
Joh. 17. 3. The more clearly that Christ is now made manifest, the more
inexcusable are we, if we be ignorant of him: This is the condemnation of the
world, that light is come into the world, but men loved darkness rather then
light, etc. Joh. 3. 19.

2. Let us take heed of relying on any thing but Christ: Only Christ is a sure
foundation, in whom whosoever believes shall not be ashamed, Esa. 28. 16. Romans
10. 11. It is faith in Christ, not works, the righteousness of Christ
apprehended by faith, not our own righteousness that we must build upon: We
conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law, Romans
3. 28. By grace ye are saved thorough faith, Ephesians. 2. 8. Not as faith is
considered absolutely, but as it is considered relatively; not in respect of it
self, but in respect of Christ, whom it lays hold on and receives: For
Christ does dwell in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. And He is our peace, Ephesians.
2. 14. and our hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1. Christ is the medicine that does work the
cure, faith the hand that does apply it, without which application though the
medicine be never so Sovereign, it can do us no good. But herewithall, we must
remember that faith without works is dead, Jam. 2. The same faith that looks
at, and lays hold on the promises, (which are Yea and Amen in Christ) has
respect to the precepts also, see Heb. 11. 7, 8, 17. And Christ came as to save
sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. so to call sinners to repentance, Mat. 9. 13. He came as
to save, so also to sanctify; see Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. and Tit. 2. 14. In a word
Christ is Lord as well as Jesus or Savior, and therefore except we yield
obedience to him, let us not think to be saved by him. He is the Author of
eternal salvation unto all them (and only them) that obey him.

THE NINTH SERMON.
HEB. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto
God by him.
THe scope of the Author of this Epistle, is to show, that the Leviticall
Priesthood* was but a type and figure of Christ's Priesthood, and that all the
rites and ceremonies of the Law were fulfilled in Christ: And in this Chapter
more peculiarly is showed, that Christ being a Priest after the order of
Melchisedek, his Priesthood was much more excellent then that of Aaron, who was
the first Priest under the Law. In the two Verses before the Text it is noted,
that under the Law there were many Priests, one succeeding another, because
they were mortal, and so one failing, another must succeed in his place; but
that Christ is the only Priest having no Successor, nor was there need of any,
because though he died, (as it was requisite he should, he being both Priest
and Sacrifice) yet he quickly rose again, and lives for ever. Hence he
infers, that Christ is a most sufficient Savior; Wherefore he is able to
save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them. Observe we therefore this Doctrine, That Christ is
a most powerful and a most sufficient Savior.

He is mighty to save, as it is said of him, Esa. 63. 1. He is a horn of
salvation, as he is called, Luke 1. 69. that is, a strong and mighty salvation,
for so the word horn in Scripture sometimes imports strength and might; The Lord
shall give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn of his Anointed, 1 Samuel
2. 10. And thus David calls God his rock, his fortress, and his deliverer, his
God, his strength, in whom he would trust, his buckler, and the horn of his
salvation, and his high Tower, Psalm. 18. 2. Those many other titles which are
heaped up together with it, show what is meant by this horn of salvation. So
Esa. 28. 16. Christ is called, a sure foundation: It Is safe building upon LXX.
(...). But the other Greek Interp^^ters, (...). V^lg. non festinet. (...) to
make have; (...) to be ashamed.
him, as it there follows, Whosoever believes in him shall not make have;
that is, not stumble and fall, as they are apt to do that make have: The
Apostle has it, shall not be ashamed, Romans 10. 11. viz. as they use to be
whose confidence proves vain, who trust in that which does them no good, or not
so much as they did expect from it. And so the Greek Interpreters called the
Septuagint, render it; the words in the Hebrew for to make have, and to be
ashamed, being somewhat alike in sound and in figure, and the sense of them
both equally agreeing to this place.

The power and sufficiency of Christ to save, may appear in these respects:

1. He is able to save as well one as another: He is not only able to save one,
or two, or a few, but all, be they never so many: Look unto me, and be ye
saved, all the ends of the earth, says he, Esa. 45. 22. It is a light thing
says God unto him, that thou should be my servant to raise up the Tribes of
Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel; I will also give thee for a
light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the ends of the
earth, Esa. 49. 6. See also Act. 13. 47. where this place is cited and
expounded of Christ: So Simeon having Christ (as then a young babe) in his
arms, said, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace; for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all
people, Luke 2. 29, 30, 31. True it is, all are not saved by Christ, but that
is not through defect in Christ, nor through any inability in him to save, but
through the indisposednesse that is in others to be saved: The pool of Bethesda
had in it virtue sufficient to cure any, yet only such were cured by it, as
after the moving of the water by an Angel, did first enter into it, Joh. 5. 4.
So there is sufficient virtue in Christ to save any, yet only such as believe
in him, shall be saved by him. By him all that believe, are justified, etc.
Acts 13. 39. To as many as received him, to them he gave power to be the Sons
of God, even to them that believed on his name, Joh. 1. 11, 12. Ye will not
come unto me, that ye might have life, Joh. 5. 40.

2. He is able to save as well at one time as at another, as well before his
Incarnation, as since; Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for
ever, Heb. 13. 8. They that were before Christ's coming in the flesh, did find
the power and sufficiency of Christ to save them, as well as they have been
since his coming: We believe that thorough the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ
we shall be saved even as they, said Peter, speaking of those that were before
Christ, Acts 15. 11. Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was
glad, said Christ, Joh. 8. 56.

3. He is able to save as well from one enemy, as from another: he came for
that end, that we should be saved from the hand of all our enemies, and from
the hand of all that hate us, Luke 1. 71. He is able to save from corporal
enemies; Be not afraid, (said he unto Paul) but speak, and hold not thy peace;
for I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee, to hurt thee, Acts 18. 9, 10.
And he is able to save from spiritual enemies: From sin, Thou shall call his
Name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. From
the Law: Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, etc. Gal. 3. 13.
From death; The last enemy (that enemy that holds out to the last) that shall
be destroyed, is death, 1 Cor. 15. 26. And v. 54. etc. When this corruptible
shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality,
then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed
up in victory. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? The
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be unto
God, that gives us victory thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. From the Devil: He
came to bruise the head of that old Serpent, as was promised in the beginning,
Genesis 3. 15. Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
likewise took part of the same, that thorough death he might destroy him that
had the power of death; that is, the Devil, Heb. 2. 14.

4. He is able to save not only for a while, but for ever: Israel shall be
saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation, Esa. 45. 17. He is the Author
of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. He has obtained
eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12.

5. He is able to save not only privatively, so as to remove all evil from us,
but also positively, so as to confer all good upon us: Had Joseph only been
delivered out of prison, he would have thought it no small favor; this was all
that he requested the chief Butler to do for him, when he had so comfortably
interpreted his dream unto him: But think on me when it shall be well with
thee, and show kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto
P^araoh, and bring me out of this house, Genesis 40. 14. But that he should be so
advanced as he was, this was much more. Now whosoever believes in Christ,
shall thorough him not only not perish, but also shall have eternal life, Joh.
3. 16.

Reasons why Christ is such a powerful and sufficient Savior.
1. Because of the dignity of his Person, He is the mighty God, as he is
styled, Esa. 9. 6. therefore he must needs be a mighty Savior. God with his
own blood did purchase his Church, as it is said, Acts 20. 28. The blood of
Christ is the blood not of a mere man, but of that person that is as well God
as man, and therefore that blood must needs be of infinite value, it must needs
be of sufficient force to purchase the Church, and to work the redemption of it.

2. Because both of the greatness, and also of the willingness of his
suffering: He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruized for our
iniquities, etc. Isai. 53. 5. And v. 10. it is said, that his soul was made an
offering for sin; and therefore he shall see his seed, and v. 11. He shall see
of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. Therefore does my Father
love me (says Christ) because I lay down my life, that I may take it up again:
No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self, Ioh. 10. 17, 18.

3. By the virtue of his Resurrection: Hereby he has made it appear, that our
debt is discharged, and Gods justice satisfied. He was delivered (viz. unto
death) for our offenses, and rose again for our justification, Romans 4. 25. Who
is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen
again, Romans 8. 34. Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has begotten us again unto a lively hope, through the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 1. 3.

4. By the power of his Ascension: He ascended up into heaven to make way for
us; I go to prepare a place for you, says he, Ioh. 14. 2. and in this respect
he is called our forerunner, Heb. 6. 20.

5. By the efficacy of his Intercession: Being ascended into heaven, and
sitting at Gods right hand, he makes intercession unto God for us, presenting
unto him the merit of his death which he suffered for our sins. See Heb. 9.
24.
And this reason is alleged why Christ is able to save to the uttermost all
that come unto God by him, because he ever lives to make intercession for
them: So Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us.

Use 1. Now if Christ be such a powerful and sufficient Savior, then the more
injurious are they of the Church of Rome both unto Christ and unto Christians,
in setting up other Saviors besides Christ, as if he alone were too weak and
insufficient to save us. But as the Gentiles being (...), such as had many
Gods, were indeed (...), such as had no God at all, but were without God in the
world, Ephesians. 2. 12. so they that will needs have many Saviors, have indeed no
Savior: they that will not be content with Christ alone for salvation, shall
neither have salvation by him, nor by any other; for there is none other by
whom to have it. There is not salvation in any other; for there is none other
Name under heaven given among men whereby to be saved, Acts 4. 12. If you will
not believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins, Ioh. 8. 24. Wherefore do
you spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which
satisfies not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and let
your soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your ear and come unto me, hear
and your soul shall live, etc. Esa. 55. 2, 3. It was the saying of one of the
Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, and it must be one principal part of our Creed,
None but Christ, none but Christ.

Use. 2. Again, there being such power and sufficiency in Christ to save, here
is comfort for all sin-sick souls, for all distressed consciences; here is
encouragement for them to come unto Christ, and to roll themselves upon him: He
is a Physician able to cure them, be their maladies never so great, never so
grievous. He cured Matthew a Publican, Zacheus chief of the Publicans; Paul a
persecutor; Mary Magdalen, that was possessed with seven Devils, and the Thief
on the Cross, when he was at the point of death, which he suffered for his
lewdness: Doubt not therefore, whosoever thou art, but he can cure thee also;
come unto him, and say as the Leper did, Lord if thou will, thou can make me
clean, Mat. 8. 2. and assuredly Christ will say unto thee, as he did to that
Leper, v. 3. I will, be thou clean: For, he is not less willing to save those
that come unto him, then he is able. He invites all to come, and offers his
grace unto all, if they do come; Ho, every one that thirsts, come unto the
waters, and he that has no money; come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and
milk without money, and without price, Esa. 55. 1. Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11. 28. Therefore
whatever thou art, if thou be sensible of sin, if burdened with it, if
thine iniquities be gone over thine head, and be as a heavy burden, too heavy
for thee to bear, as David complained of his iniquities, Psalm. 38. 4. Come and
cast thy burden upon the Lord, as he exhorts, Psalm. 55. 22. Cast it upon the
Lord Christ, who is both able and also willing to bear it. If thou be as
perplexed as the soul smitten Iaylor was, who cried out, What must I do that I
may be saved? I say unto thee, as Paul said unto him, Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16. 30, 31.

So, are we troubled for want of sanctification, because grace is so weak, and
corruption so strong in us? let us come unto Christ, who is full of grace, Ioh.
1. 14. And of his fullness we all receive grace for grace: V. 16. He is made of
God unto us sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. His grace is sufficient for us, 2
Cor. 12. 9. Though in us there be nothing but want and weakness, yet in Christ
is all fullness, and all power: I can do all things thorough Christ that
strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. As the conies being in themselves weak, yet
provide for their safety by this, that they make their houses in the rocks,
Prove. 30. 26. So let us get into the rock Christ, and then how weak soever
otherwise we be, we are safe; though the Devil our adversary be a lion, a
roaring lion, and go about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. yet Christ
is a lion as well as he, Rev. 5. 5. yea, a lion stronger then he, more potent
to save, then he is to destroy; He will bruise Satan under our feet, Romans 16.
20. Therefore be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.
10. Ioab fled to the horns of the Altar, and yet was never the better, 1 King.
2. but let us fly to Christ the horn of salvation, and whatsoever the danger
be that does pursue us, it shall not overtake us, we shall either escape the
thing it self, or at least the evil of it, we shall not be the worse, but the
better for it: All things shall work together for our good, Romans 8. 28. Even
death it self shall be gain unto us, Phil. 1. 21.

Use. 3. But as there is this consolation for us, so is there also admonition,
to take heed least we fail (or come short) of the grace of God, Heb. 12. (...).
15. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2. 3. And they
neglect this so great salvation, 1. Who expect salvation from any thing but
Christ only: And so do not only the Papists, but also many simple and
superstitious ones among our selves, who build upon themselves, their own
righteousness, their good prayers, good meanings and the like; whereas though
all were indeed good, (as without a true faith in Christ nothing is good) yet
are they not so good, as that it is safe to rest in them, and to build upon
them. Paul was as good in every respect, I dare say, as any of these, yet did
he renounce all his own righteousness, as not sufficient, if God should
contend with him, and fly unto Christ, and his righteousness, as that which
alone is sufficient unto justification and salvation, Phil. 3. 9.

2. They who pretend to Christ, and presume of salvation by Christ, and yet
indeed are aliens from Christ, and have no interest in him; they say, that they
believe in Christ, and hope to be saved by Christ, and yet live in their sins,
which Christ came to destroy: For the Son of God was manifested to destroy the
works of the Devil, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. Therefore though Christ be never so able to
save, yet such as remain impenitent and disobedient, shall have no salvation by
him, they have neither part nor portion in this matter: Christ commanded that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name, Luke 24. 47.
No remission of sins thorough him without repentance. Paul testified both to
the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 21. As many as walk according to this rule, peace
shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6. 16.

THE TENTH SERMON.
JOH. 10. 30. I and my Father are one.
I Have Sermon. 7. p. 63.
before showed, that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are three
distinct Persons, yet but one and the same God. Now I shall treat more
particularly, and more fully of the second Person, the Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ, and shall prove his Divinity, which has been much impugned both of
old, and of late, yea, is still at this day: Christ himself here speaking of
himself, and of his Father, affirms, that they are one, that is, (as I shall
endeavor to demonstrate) one in essence and nature, one and the same God. And
thus they to whom he spoke these words, did understand them, as appears by the
Verses immediately following, where it is said, that the Jews presently upon
these words took up stones to stone him, charging him with blasphemy, for that
he being a man, did make himself God. Indeed Calvin upon Abusi sunt hoc loco
veteres ut probarent Christum esse Patr^ (...). Neque n^ Christus de Vnitate
substantiae disputat, sed de consensu, quem cum Patre habet, quicquid scilicet
geritur a Christo, Patris virtute confirmatum iri. Calv. in loc.
the place likes not that these words should be made use of to prove the
Godhead of Christ, as the Ancients have done; for he supposes that Christ here
speaks not of the unity of substance, but only of the consent and agreement
that he has with the Father, so that whatsoever is done by him, is authorized
and ratified by the Father.

But first, Calvin himself for the thing, viz. Christ's Divinity, and
consubstantiality with the Father, is express and full.

2. So is the Scripture it self (as shall be showed) in many places.

3. Not only the ancient Writers have thus Hilar. de Trinit. l. 8.
interpreted it, (amongst whom Hilarie does tax and confute the Arrians who
expounded it of unity of will and consent) but the later also, Beza, Zanchius,
etc.

4. Christ having immediately before spoken of the power of his Father, brings
in these words (as Calvin also notes) to prevent the objection, that his
adversaries might have made, viz. that although the power of God, whom he
called his Father, were never so great, what was that to him? What was it to
prove that he could give eternal life unto his sheep, and that none should
pluck them out of his hand? as he spoke of himself, V. 28. To meet with this
objection, Christ affirms, that he and his Father are one, and consequently
his Fathers power is also his power, and none can therefore pluck his sheep out
of his hand; because none can pluck them out of his Fathers hand, v. 29. The
argument that Christ uses in these words, is more firm and strong, the words
being understood of his being one with his Father in respect of substance, then
if they be understood of his unity with the Father in respect of will. It is
well observed by Junius against S^cinus, that In praecedentibus, ad quorum
confirmationem hoc affer^ur, non agit Christus de suo and Patris erga oves suas
affectu; sed de sua and Patris ad salvandas oves poten^ia, ut illa verba Neque
rapiet cas quisquam e manu mea: neque quisquam potest eas eripere e manu Patris
mei, demonstrant clarissime. Jo. Jun. adversus Socinum. p. 169.
in the words before Christ speaks not (merely) of his own and his Fathers
affection toward his sheep; but of his own and his Fathers power to save his
sheep, as is most clearly demonstrated by those words, Neither shall any pluck
them out of my Quocunque ergo modo exponantur illa Joannis verba; sive primo de
potentiae and voluntatis unitate, ut a nonnullis, and per illationem de unitate
essentiae; sive primo de unitate essentiae, and illative de potentiae and
voluntatis, ut ab aliis; illud fixum manner debet, essentiae unitatem hinc
concludendam, etc. Ibid. p. 167.
hand; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. And therefere
whether the words be expounded (as they are by some) first of the unity of
power and will, and by consequence of the unity of essence; or (as by others)
first of the unity of essence; and by consequence of the Hanc essentiae
unitatem, non autem solummodo voluntatis consensum significare voluisse
Christum, cum dixit. Joan. 10.
unity of power and will; yet still the unity of essence (in Christ and the
Father) must be concluded from hence. In like manner Zanchie urges Ego and
Pater unum sumus, non solum Patrum, and omnium ferme doctissimorum hominum
consensus, verum etiam contextus ipse evincit. Conclusio enim Christi fuit,
oves meas e manu mea eripere nemo potest, eoque non possunt perire. Ra^io ab
aquali, imo eadempotentia sua cum potentia Patris, quae significatur nomine
manus, ducitur: Nemo potest rapere de manu Patris, quia major, id est,
potentior omnibus est. Ergo neque de manu mea* Ego enim and Pater unum sumus:
Quid hic aliud significat unum, quam unum non solum consensu, sed etiam
omnipotentia, coque natura and essentia? Zanch. Respons. ad Arrian. Antith. 37.
this place against an Arrian, saying, that besides the consent of the Fathers,
and almost all the learned, the very context it self does evince so much, that
here not only the consent of will, but the unity of essence is meant: For that
this was Christ's conclusion, None can pluck my sheep out of my hand, and
therefore they cannot perish: And the reason is drawn from hence, that he has
the same power that the Father has; None can pluck them out of my Fathers
hand; for he is greater [that is, more powerfull] then all: And therefore not
(...). Theophylact. in loc.
out of my hand; for I and my Father are one: What can here be meant by one,
but one not only in consent, but also in omnipotency, and so in nature and
essence? After this manner also Theophylact in his Commentary upon the place
Why [saith he] does Christ say, they shall never perish? because none can pluck
them out of my hand; for that my Father that gave them me, is greater then all,
neither can any pluck them out of his hand, and therefore not out of my hand:
for my hand, and the hand of my Father is one and the same; for I and my Father
are one in nature, and essence, and power.

Ob. But it may be objected, that whenas the Jews by these words conceived
that Christ did make himself God, and therefore would stone him as a
blasphemer, Christ intimated unto them, that they did mistake his meaning,
which was not so to make himself God as they supposed, but only in such sense
as the Scripture does sometimes attribute the name of God unto men, V. 34, 35,
36.

Ans. I answer: Christ might think this enough to show how absurd and unjust
their quarrel against him was, by alleging that mere men are sometimes called
Gods in the Scripture; yet does it not (...), etc. (...). Theoph. in Joan. 10.
See also Zanch. de tribus Elohim, l. 4. c. 5
follow, that therefore he should acknowledge himself a mere man; yea his own
words do show (as Theophylact observes) that he makes a great difference
betwixt himself and others, to whom the name of God is attributed. He denies
not himself to be God truly and properly so called, but rather confirms it: For
thus he argues; If they who have received their Divinity by grace, are yet
Gods, and not traduced, because so called, what reason is there for you to tax
me, who am God by nature, being he whom the Father has sanctified, that is,
set apart to be slain for the world? (For t^ings set apart for God, are said
to be sanctified, or to be holy.) It is manifest therefore, that seeing the
Father has sanctified and separated me for the saving of the world, I am not
merely like others that are called Gods, but am God indeed: For to save,
belongs unto him who is indeed God, and not unto Man, who is only made a God
by grace.

And further, Christ having confuted the calumny of the Jews by an Argument
drawn from Scripture, he goes on and fetches an argument from his works for
the confutation of it: If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not; but
if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works, that ye may know and
believe that the Father is in me, and I in him, v. 37, and 38. The Jews
themselves did plainly perceive, that Christ here did confirm that which he
had spoken before of his being one with the Father, and that his meaning was,
that he is one and the same God with the Father; for hereupon they were still
more enraged against him, as it is said, v. 39. Therefore they sought again to
take him, but he escaped out of their hands: And this may suffice for the
clearing and vindicating of the words; and so I may justly infer from them
this doctrinall conclusion, That Christ is God truly and properly so called,
even one and the same God with the Father.

For further proof hereof we have many testimonies Esa. 9. 6. Christ is called
the mighty God, though the faithless Jews seek to wrest that Scripture
another way. See before Sermon. 7.
of Scripture, as that Joh. 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God: By the Word, is here meant Christ, as is
clear by v. 14. and by Revel. 19. 13. Christ (I say) is so called in respect of
his divine nature; for the Word here denotes the Son, the second Person of the
Trinity, as is evident by 1 John 5. 7. Here therefore it is expressly affirmed,
that Christ as the Son of God, was before his Incarnation, before he was Man,
and that he was God. The same also is confirmed by that confession that Thomas
made of him, My Lord and my God, Joh. 20. 28. Thomas did not mean to flatter
Christ as the Poet did Augustus, calling him his Namque erit ille mihi Deus,
etc. Virgil.
God, although he knew him to be but a man; no, he believed what he spoke, and
he knew what he believed: Christ approved him for believing as he did, only
blamed him for being so slow to believe as he was, v. 29. Whereas it had been
no less then Idolatry in Thomas to have called Christ his God, if Christ had
not been God indeed. The Prophet Isaiah taxes Idolaters for saying to an Idol,
Deliver me, for thou art my God, Esa. 44. 17.

Again, the Godhead of Christ is likewise manifest by that, Acts 20. 28. Take
heed to your selves, etc. to feed the Church of God which he has purchased
with his own blood. It is Christ who with his blood did purchase the Church,
yet here it is said, that God did it, therefore it necessarily follows that
Christ is God, and so is he plainly called, Romans 9. 5. of whom (viz. the Jews)
as concerning concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed
for ever. Amen. Some would not have this clause referred unto Christ, and
therefore not to be read thus, who is over all, etc. but to be added as a
Doxologie, or praising of God, and to be read thus; God who is over all (be)
blessed for ever. Amen. But neither will the words so easily bear this sense,
neither were this so fit a place for such a Doxologie: And besides, those
words, as concerning the flesh, being spoken by way of limitation and
restriction to show how Christ came of the Jews, viz. not simply and
absolutely, but only in some respect, in respect of the flesh, his humane
nature, as man, those words, I say, sufficiently evince, that Christ has
another nature, a divine nature, and is God; and to make that more clear in
reference unto him, it follows, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen.
And yet further, consider that the Apostle is speaking of the Prerogatives of
the Jews, and mentions this in the last place as the greatest, that of them
^ame Christ: and to show what an honor this was unto them, he shows what an
honorable Person Christ is, even over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. So Col.
2. 9. it is said of Christ, that in him does dwell all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, that is, (...). Oecumen* ad loc.
really and substantially: And 1 Timothy 3. 16. God was manifested in the flesh,
that is, Christ being God, and as God, invisible, assumed flesh, was made man,
and so in the flesh as man was made visible and manifest: See Joh. 1. 14. So
Heb. 1. 8. Unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. What
can be more plain then this, that Christ the Son of God is here styled God,
even that God, whose Throne is for ever and ever? And thus also 1 John 5. 20.
of Christ is it said, This is the true God, and eternal life, immediately
before these words is Jesus Christ mentioned, neither can they without violent
perverting of them be referred to any other.

Thus are there many places of Scripture where Christ is expressly termed God,
the name of God, even the only true God, is given unto him: There are also many
other arguments which the Scripture affords, whereby to prove Christ's Godhead.

1. This is proved by those places where Christ is called the Son of God, his
begotten, his only begotten Son: The unbelieving Jews did acknowledge the
validity of this consequence, that if Christ be the Son of God, viz. properly
so called, as begotten of God, then also he is God, only they denied the
antecedent, that Christ is thus the Son of God. They sought to kill him,
because he had said, that God was his Father, making himself equal with God,
Ioh. 5. 18. They well perceived, that Christ did so call God his Father, as to
make himself God, even the same God with the Father: For otherwise they
themselves did call God their Father, Joh. 8. 41. And so Christ has taught all
believers to call God, saying, Our Father: but they knew that Christ did call
God his Father in another sense, and so he did. For God is our Father, and we
his children only by adoption: God has predestined us to the adoption of
children, etc. Ephesians. 1. 5. But God is the Father of Christ, and Christ is the
Son of God by generation. To him God speaks, saying, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee, Psalm. 2. 5. To be thus the Son of God is peculiar unto
Christ, neither Man nor Angel is capable of this honor, To which of the Angels
said God at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? Heb. 1.
5. Therefore is Christ in Scripture called (...), the only begotten Son of God,
Ioh. 3. 16. 1 Ioh. 4. 9, 10. because none but he is the Son of God in that
manner: Indeed in some sense believers are said to be begotten of God; Of his
own will begat he us, etc. Iam. 1. 18. But this is only in respect of that
renovation which God does work in us by his Spirit, in which respect we are
said also to be partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. But Christ is so
begotten of God, as to have the same essence, nature, and substance with God,
even as he that is begotten of man, is man; so Christ being properly
Intelligentiae istud humanae sensus excludit, ut aliquid a natura originis suae
nascendo diversum sit. -- Quis, rogo, furor est, nativitatem unigeniti Dei ad
degenerem ex Deo refer naturam, cum nativitas non nisi ex proprietate naturae
sit? Et jam nativitas non erit, si proprietas naturae in nativitate non fuerit.
-- Secundum quod ait, Quod ex carne nascitur, caro est, etc. non ambiguum est,
nascenti diversum atque alienum aliquid ab eo, ex quo natum sit, non inesse. --
Tenet nativitas eam, ex qua subsistit naturam, and Filius Dei, non aliud, quam
quod Deus est, subsistit. -- Universa nativitas non potest non in ea esse
natura, unde nascitur. Hilar. de Trinit. lib. 7. Vide etiam ibidem plura in
hanc sententiam.
begotten of God, is God, even God of God, (as the ancients have expressed it)
one and the same God with the Father. This Argument drawn from hence, that
Christ is the begotten and the only begotten Son of God, Hilary (who lived in
the time when the Arrians bore great sway, Constantius the Emperor siding with
them) much and often urges against the adversaries and opposers of Christ's
consubstantiality with the Father, proving that Christ being begotten, as he
is, of the Father, must needs have the same substance with the Father, for that
universally it holds in every thing that is properly begotten of another, that
it is of the same nature with that, of which it is begotten.

2. That Christ is God truly and properly, and so one and the same in essence
and substance with the Father, may appear by comparing places of the Old
Testament and of the New together: For so we may see, that what in the Old
Testament is spoken of Jehovah the LORD, the only true God, that in the New
Testament is interpreted of Christ, and applied to him as meant of him. Numb.
21. we read how the Israelites in the wilderness murmured against God, and
tempted him, and therefore he sent fiery Serpents among them to destroy them:
The people spoke against God, etc. v. 5. And the Lord sent fiery Serpents among
the people, etc. S. Paul 1 Cor. 10. 9. applies this to Christ, and says, that
they tempted him, and warnes Christians to take heed of tempting him as they
did: Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were
destroyed of Serpents. Though it be not expressed, as some of them also tempted
him, viz. Christ, yet in no congruity of speech or reason, can it be otherwise
interpreed: And therefore this does clearly prove that Christ is God the LORD.
So Psalm. 68. 18. The Psalmist speaking unto the LORD God, (as v. 16. and 17. do
manifest) says, Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive,
thou have received gifts for men. This the Apostle shows to be spoken of
Christ, But unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of
the gift of Christ: Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4, 7, 8. So that of David,
Psalm. 102. 25, 26, 27. Of old have thou (O my God, v. 24.) laid the foundation
of the earth, and the heavens are the work of thine hands: They shall perish,
but thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall wax old as a garment, as a
vesture ^^alt thou change them, and they shall be changed: But thou art the
same, and thy years shall have no end. That (I say) is cited Heb. 1. 10, 11,
12. as meant of Christ. And whereas the Prophet Esaias says, I saw the Lord
sitting upon a throne, etc. Esa. 6. 1. and adds v. 9, 10. that the Lord bad
him go and say unto the people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not, etc. S.
John citing the words of the Prophet says, that he spoke them of Christ, when
he saw his glory, Joh. 12. 39, 40. 41. And whereas the Lord, even he who is
God, and none else, Esa. 45. 22. says, I have sworn by my self, etc. that
unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear, Esa. 45. 23. The
Apostle shows this to appertain to Christ; for having said, We shall all
stand before the Judgment seat of Christ, he confirms it by this, For (says
he) it is written, As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and
every tongue shall confess to God, Romans 14. 10, 11. And to that place of Esaias
does he allude Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Where speaking of Christ, he says,
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and has given him a name above
every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc. And that
every tongue should confess that Jesus is the Lord, etc.

3. Divine attributes, such as are proper and peculiar to the only true God,
are given unto Christ, and therefore he is God truly and properly so called;
eternity, immutability, omnipotency, and omniscience belong only unto God, only
God is eternal: The Psalmist speaks it as a thing proper unto him, Before the
Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had for (...)d the earth, and the
world, from everlasting to everlasting thou art God, Psalm. 90. 2. So God is
described by this, that he inhabiteth eternity, Esa. 57. 15. And he is styled
the eternal God, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. So only God is immutable: I am the Lord, I
change not, Mal. 3. 6. Thou art the same, Psalm. 102. 27. And only God is
omnipotent, able to do all things, he is called the Almighty, Ruth 1. 20, 21.
He likewise only is omniscient, one that knows all things. Thou, even thou
only know the hearts of all the children of men, 1 Kings 8. 39. So that all
these Attributes are peculiar unto God, yet they all belong unto Christ, and
are given unto him: he is eternal, His goings forth have been from of old,
from everlasting, Mic. 5. 2. He is before all things, Col. 1. 17. He is the
first and the last, Rev. 1. 17. So he is immutable; to him is it spoken, They
shall be changed, but thou art the same, Heb. 1. 12. He also is omnipotent; He
is able to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21. And he is omniscient;
He needed not that any should testify of man; for he knew what was in man,
Joh. 2. 25. And Jesus knew their thoughts, Mat. 12. 25. When Jesus perceived
their thoughts, etc. Luke 5. 22. I am he that searches the reins and the
hearts, it is spoken by Christ, Rev. 2. 23. Add unto the forementioned
Attributes immensity, which only God is capable of: It is proper unto him to
fill heaven and earth, Jer. 23. 24. yet this also belongs unto Christ, The Son
of Man which is in heaven, Joh. 3. 13. Even then when he was upon earth, at the
same time he was also in heaven; which, if he were mere man, and not God also,
had not been possible.

4. Divine works are ascribed unto Christ, such as none can do but God only: It
is God that made all things, Genesis 1. 1. Yet is it said of Christ, that all
things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made,
Ioh. 1. 3. That by him were all things created, that are in heaven and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities or Powers, all things were created by him, and for him. And he
is before all things, and by him all things consist, Col. 1. 16, 17. It is God
also that does preserve all things, Neh. 9. 6. Yet this likewise is ascribed
unto Christ, He upholdeth all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. Only
God can raise the dead, 2 Cor. 1. 9. Romans 4. 17. Yet this Christ did, as the
History of the Gospel shows, and that not instrumentally and ministerially,
but authoritatively, and by his own power: Young man, I say unto thee arise,
Luk, 7. 14. Maid arise, Luke 8. 54. Lazarus come forth, Ioh. 11. 43. None can
forgive sins, but only God, Esa. 43. 25. yet this Christ did, Mar. 2. 5. --
12. The Scribes were right in this, that none but God can forgive sins, viz.
authoritatively, as Christ did; only in this they were wrong, that from a true
principle they inferred a false conclusion, viz. that therefore Christ taking
upon him so to forgive sins, was a blasphemer: Christ by the miracle which
immediately he wrought before their eyes, showed that he was another manner of
person then they took him to be, and that he had power to forgive sins, as he
did.

To redeem, and to save, are acts properly belonging unto God, Esa. 49. 26. I
the Lord am thy Redeemer, and thy Savior. Yet Christ also is our Redeemer and
Savior, as the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles every where do show.

5. Divine worship is given unto Christ, such as may not be given to any but to
God only: When he was a young Infant the Wisemen fell down and worshipped
him, Mat. 2. 11. His Disciples seeing him ascend up into heaven, they
worshipped him, Luke 24. 52. Of him it was said, Let all the Angels of God
worship him, Heb. 1. 6. All these places, as the circumstances of them do
evince, speak of religious worship, which is peculiar unto God, and may not be
given to any mere creature: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve, Mat. 4. 10. The Angel would not be worshipped by John, but
bad him give that honor to God, and worship him, Rev. 19. 10. and 22. 9. More
particularly, Faith and Hope are only to be in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. yet they are
and ought to be in Christ: Ye believe in God, believe also in me, Ioh. 14. 1.
Whosoever believes in him, shall not be ashamed, Romans 10. 11. In him shall the
Gentiles trust, Romans 15. 12. Prayer is to be made only unto God; Call upon me,
says God, Psalm. 50. 15. yet Stephen being full of the Holy Ghost, gave this
honor unto Christ, he prayed unto him, saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit,
Acts 7. 55. and 59. Thus both testimonies of Scripture, and arguments drawn
from Scripture make it most evident, that Christ is God truly and properly so
called, even one and the same God with the Father.

But diverse places there are which may be objected, as seeming to make against
this truth, which therefore are to be cleared, that it may appear, that being
rightly understood they do not make against it.

Object. 1. Mark 13. 32. Christ speaking of the day of Judgment, says, Of
that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels that are in heaven; nor
the Son, but the Father: If the Son be ignorant of that which the Father does
know, how then is he God consubstantiall and coequall with the Father?

Answ. Some interpret that so, as that the Son is said not to have known the
day of Judgment, because he did not know it so as to make it known unto
others: In which sense the Apostle said, I determined to know nothing among
you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. But this Exposition
cannot be admitted; for so neither does the Father know that day, viz. so as
make others also know it: Therefore the true meaning of the words is, that
Christ there spoke of himself as Man, not denying but that in some other
respect he did know that, which in respect of his humane nature was not known
unto him.

Object. 2. But again, when one came unto Christ, saying, Good Master, what
shall I do, that I may inherit eternal life? Christ said unto him, Why call
thou me good? There is none good but one, that is God, Luke 18. 18, 19. Here
Christ seems to deny himself to be God.

Answ. Not so, Christ spoke only in respect of that opinion, which he to whom
he spoke, had of him, who looked on him as a man, and no more; neither was it
Christ's meaning, that no mere man may be called good; for it is said of
Barnabas, that he was a good man, Acts 11. 24. But his meaning was to teach,
that when any goodness is found in man, the praise and glory must be given
unto God, who alone is essentially good; if any besides him be good, it is
only by participation from him, and therefore the honor is due unto him: For
of him, and through him, and for him are all things; to him be glory for ever,
Romans 11. 36.

Object. 3. But may some say, Does not Christ himself confess himself
inferior to the Father, saying, My Father is greater then I? Ioh. 14. 28.

Answ. Yes, but how? not simply and absolutely, but only in some sort, viz. in
respect (...). Theophylact. ad loc.
of his humane nature, whereby he took upon him the form of a Servant, Phil.
2. 7. but otherwise he was in the form of God, and thought it not robbery to
be-equall with God, v. 6. That Christ there spoke of himself as Man, may appear
by the words immediately going before, I go unto the Father, this Christ did as
Man; for otherwise as God, he was then with the Father, yea, in the Father, and
the Father in him, Joh. 14. 11. and 10. 38.

Object. 4. Again, it may be objected, that Christ ( John 17. 3.) speaking to
the Father, says thus; This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God,
and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ; where Christ seems to make his
Father only the true God.

Answ. Nay, he makes his Father the only It is (...) not (...).
true God; but there is great difference betwixt these two Propositions, The
Father is the only true God, and Only the Father is the true God: The one
imports that there is but only one true God, and that the Father is this God;
the other imports that none but the Father is this God, which is false; for the
Son also is this only true God, this true God which is only one, and so also is
the Holy Ghost: The same Answer serves for that 1 Cor. 8. 6. To us there is
but one God, the Father. The Apostle there only affirms, that there being but
only one true God, the Father is he; he denies not but that the Son, and so
the Holy Ghost is so also, even as when he adds, and one Lord Jesus, he only
affirms Jesus to be the only Lord, he denies not but that the Father is so
likewise.

Use 1. Thus the truth of the Doctrine concerning Christ's Divinity and
consubstantiality with the Father, being sufficiently demonstrated and
vindicated; here we may see and ought to consider the excellency of Christ, and
so learn to give him the glory due unto his Name: We cannot honor the Father
except we in like manner honor Christ also, he being one and the same in
substance and Godhead with the Father. That all men should honor the Son even
as they honor the Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not the
Father which has sent him, Joh. 5. 23. Whosoever denies the Son, the same
has not the Father, 1 John 2. 23. The Jews both now and of old have vilified
and despised Christ, He came unto his own, and his own received him not, Joh.
1. 11. For the most part they did not, yet some did, as the Evangelist there
immediately after shows. And so the Jewish writings testify, that some of
the ancient Rabbines have spoken very honorably of Christ, and indeed have
said that of him which shows that they believed him to be God, though the
later Rabbines reciting their words, endeavor to pervert the meaning of them,
descanting upon those words which are meant of Christ, Abrabaneel in Isaiam.
Esa. 52. 12. He shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high; they say,
that Christ should be exalted above Abraham, and extolled above Moses, and be
higher then the Angels. And in the new Testament the dignity of Christ is thus
comparatively set forth, by preferring him to all these, to Abraham, when the
Jews said unto Christ, Art thou greater then our Father Abraham? Ioh. 8. 53.
Christ answered v. 56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and saw it,
and was glad: And v. 58. Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was, I
am. So to Moses, For this man (Christ) was counted worthy of more glory then
Moses, inasmuch as he who has builded the house, has more honor then the
house. -- And Moses verily was faithful in all Gods house, as a servant, for a
testimony of those things that were to be spoken after: But Christ, as a Son
over his own house, etc. Heb. 3. 3, 5, 6. And so to the Angels, Christ is
likewise preferred to them, Being made so much better then the Angels, as he
has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they: For to which of
the Angels said God at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son. And
again, when he brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, And let
all the Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1. 4, 5, 6. But not only the Jews and
such like professed infidells and enemies of Christ, but also many that have
professed themselves Christians, have impugned his Divinity and Equality with
the Father, so robbing him of the glory due unto his Name. Thus Arrius and
Photinus with their followers of old, and Servetus and others of late, and some
even at this day: And therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before,
beware least ye also be carried away with the error of the wicked, and fall
from your own steadfastness; but grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; to him be glory both now and for ever. Amen. 2 Pet.
3. 17, 18.

Use 2. Here again we may see what cause we have to trust in Christ as a most
sure Redeemer and Savior, with that courage and confidence in all our troubles
and distresses whatsoever, whether inward or outward, we may come unto Christ
and unto God by Christ, that we may have help from him and by him, he being
such a Mediator betwixt God and Man, as is not only Man but also God,
coessentiall and coequall with the Father. Hence it is, and must needs be, that
he is a stone, a medstone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation, See
before Sermon. 9.
Esa. 28. 16. mighty to save, Esa. 63. 1. a horn of salvation, Luke 1. 69. able
to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore
holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and high
Priest of our profession Chrst Jesus, Heb. 3. 1. Seeing then we have a great
high Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold
fast our profession. -- Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace,
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 14,
16.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON.
MAT. 1. 20. For that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost.
IN the two Verses going before, S. Matthew relates how Mary being espoused
unto Joseph, before they came together, was found with child, which Joseph not
knowing how it came to pass, was so troubled at, that he thought to put her
away, though privily: But (as he adds in this Verse) God by his Angel let him
know, that he had no reason to be troubled as he was, nor to to take such a
course as he intended, for though Mary was with child, yet it was far otherwise
then he suspected, even by the miraculous power of the Holy Ghost working in
her. But while he thought on these things, behold the Angel of the Lord
appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Josph thou Son of David, fear not to take
unto thee Mary thy wife; For that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy
Ghost.

In this last part of the Verse, which I am only to insist upon, we have,
first, Who it was that conceived Christ, viz. Mary the wife of Joseph, he was
conceived in her. Secondly, how she conceived him, viz. not by any natural and
ordinary means, but by the supernatural and extraordinary power of God: For
that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.

First therefore, let us observe from hence, That Mary the wife of Joseph was
the Mother of Christ our Savior.

He was conceived in her, and so in her, as that he was conceived of her, that
is, of her substance. It Is said of Christ, that he took upon him the seed of
Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. And that according to the flesh, he was raised up of the
fruit of David's loins, Acts 2. 30. But this could not be, except that Christ
did receive the substance of his body from Mary, who did descend from Abraham,
and from David. A more direct testimony to this Geen. 3. 15 Christ is called
the seed of the woman.
purpose is that Gal. 4. 4. where it is said of Christ, that he was made of a
woman, which woman was Mary before mentioned, he was not only made in her, but
also made of her: so Luke 1. 42. Christ is called the fruit of her womb, which
shows that he was as well conceived of her as in her.

Use 1. This then confutes that heresy which some of old maintained, viz. that
Christ did not take a body of the substance of his Mother, but brought a body
down from heaven, and only passed thorough the womb of his Mother, as water
passes thorough a channel. This is a most erroneous conceit, and flatly
repugnant to the Scriptures before alleged; and though there be some places
which may seem to favor it, yet indeed they do not; as that 1 Cor. 15. 47. The
second man is the Lord from heaven: And that Ioh. 3. 13. No man has ascended
up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, etc. And that Ioh: 6. 38. I
came down from heaven. These places do not import any such thing, as that
Christ brought a body down with him from heaven, but only he is said to be
from heaven, and to come from heaven, because as God being in heaven (which is
called Gods dwelling place, 1 King. 8. 39. and his throne, Esa. 66. 1.) by his
Incarnation being made man he was upon earth, and so after a sort came down
from heaven: Christ as man did not come down from heaven, for he was not as man
in heaven until his Ascension: That Ioh. 3. 13. The Son of man which is in
heaven, was spoken of Christ the Son of Man, but not as the Son of Man; for so
he was then when it was spoken upon earth, and not in heaven. There is in those
words that which Divines call a communication of properties, that which is
proper to the (...).
one nature of Christ, is attributed unto him, being denominated by the other
nature; Christ as God was then in heaven when he was upon earth, for God
fills heaven and earth, Ier. 23. 24. And the same Person being both God and
Man, Christ denominated by his humane nature is said then to have been in
heaven, though this did agree to him only in respect of his divine nature.
Christ therefore, I say, as man, did not come down from heaven, neither
properly did he come down from heaven as God, but only in a Metaphorical sense
in that the divine nature was united to the humane nature; The Word was made
flesh (God was made man) and dwelt among us, Joh. 1. 14. otherwise properly the
divine nature can neither ascend nor descend, cannot remove from one place to
another, because it is immense and infinite.

Use 2. But again, if Mary were the Mother of our Savior, then surely we have
cause to honor her, so that we consider and have a care how we honor her;
those whom God does honor we also ought to honor. Now God did highly honor
her, whom he vouchsafed to make his (...) Deipara.
Mother; For in that she was the Mother of Christ, who is God, she was the
Mother of God, though not as God, but as Man. We ought therefore to honor her
so, as to think and speak honorably of her, to acknowledge Gods singular
favor toward her, and to account her blessed. Hail thou that art highly
favored, (said the Angel unto her) the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou
among women, Luke 1. 28. So Elizabeth being filled with the Holy Ghost, said
unto her, Blessed art thou among women, Or for blessed, etc. the particle there
is rather causall then copulative, as the Hebrew ^ is, Isa. 64. 5.
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Luke 1. 41, 42. And Mary her self
magnifying God for his mercy and goodness toward her, Behold from henceforth
all Generations shall call me blessed: For he that is mighty has done to me
great things, Luke 1. 48, 49. But here we must take heed least we exceed and go
beyond our bounds, as the Papists do, who will needs give unto Mary the honor
which is no way due, nor may be given unto her.

For, first, they hold, that she was conceived without original sin; of which
more anon.

2. That for her merits she became the Mother of our Savior, whereas besides
that none can properly merit any thing at the hands of God, every one being
less then all Gods mercies, as Jacob confessed he was, Genesis 32. 10. Besides
this, I say, those very places which they build upon, are directly against
them: As that Luke 1. 28. which they read thus, Hail thou that art full of
grace, and thence they infer, that for the fullness of grace that was in her,
she merited that honor to be Christ's Mother. But the word in the Original
there used, does not signify full of grace, but (...).
highly favored, graciously accepted, or much graced, as it is explained, v.
30. Thou have found favor with God: So that although she had (no doubt) a
great measure of grace in her, yet that was not it, but Gods grace and favor
toward her, which was the cause why such honor was conferred upon her.
Iansenius a learned Jansen. Concord. c. 3.
Papist, grants that this is the sense and signification of the word used in
the Original: He adds indeed that this does imply the other, viz. that she
was full of grace.

But first, there is no necessary connection of these two together; Judas was
much graced and highly favored to be made one of Christ's Apostles, and so Saul
to be made King of Israel; yet were they not therefore full of grace.

2. We deny not but that the Mother of our Lord both was much graced, and also
had much grace, only we say, it was the grace and favor which was showed her,
not the grace and goodness which was in her, which was meant by the Angel as
the true and proper cause why she was chosen to be our Lords Mother. So that
Luke 1. Vulg. Respexit humilitatem, etc.
48. He has regarded the humility of his handmaiden, according as the Rhemists
after the vulgar Latin Translator, render it, or (as some of our English
Translations) the lowliness of his handmaid; this the Papists for most part so
understand, as that for the grace and virtue of humility and lowliness of mind
which was in her, God did show such respect unto her. Thus in the Ladies
Psalter B. Mar. Psalm. 33. Quia Domina humillima fuisti, increatum verbnm ex te
carnem assumere coegesti.
Psalter (as they call it) they say unto her, Because thou, O Lady, were most
humble, thou did cause the uncreated Word (the Son of God) to assume flesh of
thee. But the word which is used (...).
in the Original, does not signify humility or lowliness of mind, but
humility or lowliness (or rather lowness) of estate and condition. It is the
same word which the Apostle uses Phil. 3. 21. to set forth the vileness of
the body, as now it is in this life, in comparison of what it shall be in the
life to come, Our vile body, word for word according to the Original, it is,
the body of our vileness. So that the blessed Mother of our Lord, does
therefore magnify the Lord, because he so regarded her being of such low and
mean estate in comparison of many others: He has put down (says she presently
after in her Magnificat) the mighty from their seat, and has exalted them of
low degree: Where also the word rendered (...)*
them of low degree, is that from which is derived the other before mentioned.
The Rhemists here Vulg. exaltavit humlles.
also have, and has exalted the humble; but not such as are virtuously humble
are here meant, (by the force of the word that is used) but such as are of low
degree, as is clear by this, that they are opposed to the mighty, such as are
of high degree, great and eminent in the world. Besides, what could have been
more repugnant to true humility and lowliness of mind, (with which as with
other graces, we grant the Mother of our Savior was replenished) then to boast
of it, and to ascribe Gods bounty and favor unto it? For these reasons both
Jansenius and Maldonate (learned men of the Romish Church) do ingeniously
confess, that not humility of mind, but of estate is here meant.

3. Whereas they pray unto all Saints departed (an honor which is due only
unto God, Psalm. 50. 15. Mat. 6. 9. Romans 10. 14.) this they do above all to our
Lords Mother. And here first they are no less ridiculous then impious in
truning the Angels Salutation into a Prayer, saying unto her, Hail Mary, etc.
wherein (as a reverend Writer says truly and wittily) they do at once abuse
the Virgin, the Angel, and the Salutation. Again, some of their famous
Doctors have So testifies Cassander one of their own Authors in his
Consultation.
avouched, that whereas Ahasuerus promised to Esther the one half of his
Kingdom, if she would desire it, God has indeed given one half of his Kingdom
to the Virgin Mary: For his Kingdom consisting of mercy and judgment, that
part of it which concerns mercy, they say, he has given unto her, reserving to
himself the other part concerning judgment, or bequeathing it to his Son: And
thus also they speak in the forementioned Psalter, Give, O God, thy judgment
to Psalt. B. Mar. Psa. 71.
the King, and thy mercy to the Queen his Mother. And the whole Book of Psalms
they have so metamorphosed and changed, as instead of Lord to put in Lady, and
to ascribe that to her, which David ascribes to the Lord: As Psalm. 7. In thee,
O Lady, have I put In te Domina speravi, de in i(...)is meis, etc.

Usqu(...) Domina oblivis(...)?

In ma^^s tuas Domina commendo spiritum meum.

Domina refugium nostrum es in omni necessitate.

Venite ad eam omnes qui laboratis, etc. Ibid. Psalm. 2.


my trust, deliver my soul from mine enemies: And Psalm. 12. (or after the
Hebrew the 13.) How long will thou forget me, O Lady? And Psalm. 30. Into thy
hands, O Lady, I commend my spirit. And Psalm. 45. O Lady thou art our refuge in
all our necessities. And whereas Christ says, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all
that labor, etc. they apply it to his Mother, and say, Come unto her all ye
that labor, etc. And if yet any thing can be more gross, they pray unto her
to command her Son. Bellarmine it seems, was ashamed of this impiety, for he
complains much of Calvin as being very injurious unto them in offering to
charge them in this manner; with great indignation he cries, Quis nostrum hoc
dicit? Cur non probat ullo exemplo? Which of us does speak so? Why does he not
prove it by some example? Yet their own Cassander (for so he carried himself
Cassand. Consult.
as one of the Church of Rome, though he disliked many things in it) testifies,
that in some Churches publicly they did sing on this wise, O O felix puerpera,
nostra pians Scelera, jure Matris impera Redemptori.
happy childbearing woman, who do expiate our wickedness, by the right of a
mother command our Redeemer. Surely, if it be possible to dishonor God, they
do exceedingly dishonor him in presuming thus to honor her, whom otherwise
(so we keep our selves within the bounds of sobriety) we ought to honor.

But I leave this point, and come to the other viz. That Mary the wife of
Joseph was so the Mother of Christ, as that nevertheless when she bare him she
was a most pure Virgin, conceiving him not by the operation of man, but by the
power of the Holy Ghost.

Whereas it is said in the Text, of the Holy Ghost, it is meant of the Holy
Ghost not as the matter, but as the efficient, in which sense it is said, 1
Cor. 11. 12. All things (are) of God. Again, though the Holy Ghost only be
expressed, yet the other Persons of the Trinity are not excluded: The Apostle
speaking of the Father, says, Of whom are all things, 1 Cor. 8. 6. If all
things be of the Father, then Christ's body was of him, viz. as the worker and
maker of it; and as of the Father, so also of the Son, who is the same
substance with the Father, Ioh. 10. 30. And by whom likewise all things were
made, Ioh. 1. 3.

Now that Mary was thus the Mother of Christ, is evident both by the Text, and
also by that which goes before, Mat. 1. 18. and that which follows after, Mat.
1. 22, 23, 24, 25. so by that Luke 1. 34, 35.

Object. It may be objected, that Joseph is called Christ's Father; Is not this
Joseph's Son? said some of him, Luke 4. 22.

Answ. I answer: They supposed so, but it was not so as they supposed: That
this was but a supposition, S. Luke shows in the foregoing Chapter, v. 23.
where he says that Christ was ( as was supposed) the Son of Joseph, not so
indeed, but only as was supposed.

Object. But may some say, Mary her self did call Joseph Christ's Father; Thy
Father and I have sought thee sorrowing, said she to Christ, Luke 2. 48.

Answ. True; but how did she mean that Joseph was his father? not his natural
father that begot him, but his legal father, as being the husband of his
mother: Joseph also was Christ's foster-father, or nursing-father, he who did
educate him and bring him up.

Object. But some may yet object, if Joseph were not Christ's natural Father,
how is Christ's Genealogy fetched from Joseph? how is Christ showed to be the
Son of Abraham and of David by this, that Joseph did descend from Abraham Mat.
1. Luke 3.
and from David? How does this follow, except as Joseph did proceed from them,
so Christ did proceed from Joseph?

Answ. To this it is answered, That Mary and Joseph were both of one Tribe and
of one Family, by virtue of that Law, Numb. 36. 8. where it is required, that
every woman being an inheritresse, should marry to one of her own Tribe and
Family, that so inheritances might not pass from one Tribe or Family to
another: And therefore the rehearsing of Christ's Genealogy by Joseph was a
rehearsing of it by Mary, it being showed that Joseph was of the posterity of
Abraham and of David, the same was consequently showed concerning Mary, who by
virtue of that Law forementioned was married unto him, and so it follows that
Christ also by that rehearsal is demonstrated to descend from Abraham and from
David.

Object. Some may yet object, that Elizabeth is called Mary's Kinswoman, Luke
1. 36. Now Elizabeth was of Aaron, who was of the Tribe of Levi, Luke 1. 5.
whereas David was of the Tribe of Judah, and so Christ who descended from
David, Heb. 7. 14. How then did Mary descend from David, and not rather from
Aaron as Elizabeth her kinswoman did?

Answ. It does not follow, that because Elizabeth was of the daughters of
Aaron, therefore Mary being her kinswoman was so too: For though such women as
had no brethren, and so had inheritances, were to marry in their own Tribe
and Family, yet others were not tied to this. The men of Benjamin did marry
women that were of other Tribes, as we read Judges 21. And had it not been
lawful for them to marry in that manner, what needed that Oath mentioned Judge.
21. 1.? why should the other Tribes swear (as they did) that they would not
give their daughters to the Benjamites, if it were not lawful for those of one
Tribe to marry with those of another Tribe? So 2 Chronicles. 22. 11. it is said, that
Iehoshabeath the daughter of King Iehoram of the Tribe of Judah, was wife to
Iehojada the Priest, who was of the Tribe of Levi: Therefore Elizabeth might be
of Levi and of Aaron by the fathers side, and of Judah and of David by the
mothers side, and so by her mother be akin to Mary.

Now it was requisite that Christ should thus be conceived, viz. so as that his
Mother should be a Virgin, because it was requisite that he should be conceived
without sin; he that came to take away our sin, was himself to be without sin.
For such an high Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate
from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. But such as are conceived after the ordinary manner,
are conceived in sin, Psalm. 51. 5. The Papists generally of late times do
except the mother of Christ, and will have her to have been conceived without
sin, to have been free from original corruption: Thus (I say) they do of late
times; for Bonaventure who was betwixt 300. Bonavent. in 3. Sent. did. 3. art.
1. quaest. 2. number. 15.
and 400. years ago, says that in his time all generally held the contrary.
And he also gives this reason why all should hold so, Ne dum gloria Matris
ampliatur, gloria filii minuatur, least whiles the glory of the Mother be
increased, the glory of the Son (of Christ) be diminished. But now as
Bellarmine Bellarm. de amiss. great. l. 4. ^ c. 15.
tells us, The whole Christian world almost (but it is that whole world spoken
of Rev. 13. 3.) does celebrate the Feast of the Conception of the Virgin Mary,
and does call it the immaculate Conception. And he adds, that three several
Popes ( viz. Alexander the sixth, Julius the second, and Leo the tenth) did
confirm and adorn with privileges, a certain religious Order instituted in
honor of that immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary; he says indeed, that
notwithstanding all this, they do not hold that opinion (of the Virgin Mary's
being conceived without sin) as certain, but only as probable: How this will
consist with that infallibility and authority which the Pope challenges, and
Bellarmine also maintains to belong unto him, let others judge; but, say I,
what probability is there in that opinion which has no warrant from Scripture?
yea, it is against Scripture: The Scripture affirming, that by Adam sin entered
into the world, and all have sinned, Romans 5. 12. Neither does the Scripture
except any but Christ only, who was conceived and born by the miraculous power
and operation of the Holy Ghost.

Use 1. The use of this point is first for our consolation: For Christ being
thus conceived, and so without sin, whatsoever he suffered, it was not for
himself, but for us, not for any sin of his own, but for our sins. And
therefore, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, Ioh.
1. 29. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, Esa. 45. 22.
Let us look unto him and behold him with the eye of faith, and then whatsoever
our sins be we shall be saved: For him that knew no sin (viz. in himself)
has God made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Use 2. But secondly, it serves also for our admonition: For as Christ was
corporally conceived by the Holy Ghost in the Virgin Mary, so must he also by
the Holy Ghost be spiritually conceived in us, or else we shall have no benefit
by him: we must conceive him in our hearts by faith working thorough love, and
bringing forth the fruits of righteousness. The Apostle told the Galathians,
that he did travel with them in birth until Christ were formed in them, Gal.
4. 19. And Gal. 2. 20. he says, that not he, but Christ did live in him. The
blessed Virgin her self should have had but small blessedness by conceiving
Christ in her Nihil illi materna propinquitas profuisset, nisi faelicius
Christum in cord quam in carne gestasset. Aug. Beatior fuit percipiendo fidem
Christi, quam concipiendo carnem Christi. Idem.
womb, if she had not also conceived him in her heart: She her self in her
Magnificat did rejoice not so much that God was her Son, as that God was her
Savior, which except she had conceived him in her heart by faith, he had not
been. When some told Christ that his mother and his brethren desired to speak
with him, he said, Who is my Mother? and who are my brethren? And pointing to
his Disciples, he said, Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever shall
do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister
and mother, Mat. 12. 47, 48, 49, 50. Not that Christ did despise his kindred
according to the flesh, but that he did prefer his spiritual kindred: so when
one said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave
the suck; he answered, yea, rather blessed are they that hear the Word of God
and keep it, Luk* 11. 27, 28.

THE TWELFTH SERMON.
ISA. 53. 3. A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief.
THis Chapter contains Deinde etiam hoc adjiciendum, quod non tam propheta
dicendus sit, quam Evangelista. Ita enim universa Christi ecclesiaeque mysteria
ad liquidum prosecutus est, ut non putes eum de futuro vaticinari, sed de
praeteritis historiam texere. Hieron. prefat. in Isaiam.
in it a most famous prophecy of Christ's suffering and humiliation, the sacred
Penman of the holy Ghost, Esaias, writes so clearly, and so fully, that as
Hierome said of him, he might seem rather like an Evangelist to record things
past, then as a Prophet to foretell things to come. The Chaldie Paraphrast, and
the Rabbines of old were convinced, that the Prophet here did speak of the
Messiah, that is, of Christ, and so some of the later Rabbines also; as
witnesses Abrabaneel upon the place, though he as diverse others of them would
pervert and wrest it another way. Yea so clear and Jo. Isaacus Defen. hebr.
verit. adversus Li^dan.
convincing is this prophecy contained in this Chapter, that John Isaac a
learned Jew of late years (as himself testifies) was converted from Iudaisme,
and became a Christian by the very reading of this Chapter. It was a part of
this Chapter that the Eunuch read as he was riding in his Chariot, and he not
at first understanding of whom the Prophet spoke, Philip expounded it unto him,
and let him know that it was of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, Act. 8. 30.
35.

The Prophet in the beginning of the Chapter foreshews, that few of the Jews
would believe that which he did write of Christ: Who will believe our report?
etc. v. 1. For as the Apostle says, Christ crucified was unto the Jews a
stumbling block 1 Cor. 1. 23. Therefore they despised and rejected him, because
he came in an humble and despicable manner, and not in that pomp and state as
they expected. So much the Prophet here foreshews; For he shall grow up before
him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he has no form, nor
comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should
desire him. He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief, etc. v. 2. and 3.

A man of sorrowes] that is, a man wholly subject to sorrows, a man most full
of sorrows: As a man of understanding, Prove. 24. 5. that is, a man full of
understanding. A man of strife, Ier. 15. 10. that is, a man subject to strife,
a man with whom every one striveth, for the phrase is there taken passively.

And acquainted with grief] In the original it is word for word, and knowing
grief, or rather, (...)
and known of grief, the phrase imports that he was so continually exercised
with grief, that grief and he were become (as it were) familiar, and were well
acquainted one with the other.

These words, as considered with reference to those Chap. 52. 12. where this
Section concerning Christ begins, as also with reference to what follows in
the last Verse of this Chapter, afford this observation, That Christ's sorrow
and humiliation went before his joy and exaltation.

Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
Luke 24. 26. First, he was to suffer such things, and then having suffered
them, to enter into his glory: Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he
descended first? etc. Ephesians. 4. 9. His descension was before his ascension, He
was made perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2. 10.

It was necessary, that if Christ should have any estate of humiliation at all,
it should be before his estate of exaltation: For being once exalted and in
glory, he could not possibly be subject to any sorrow or suffering. The estate
of glory is inconsistent with sorrow and suffering; Christ being raised from
the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6. 9. So,
had he at first entered into glory before his suffering, neither death, nor any
affliction (which seems to make way for death) could have laid hold on him.

Quest. But may some say, why should Christ be subject to any sorrow at all?

Answ. I answer: There was reason for it in diverse respects:

1. God so determined, it was his will and pleasure it should be so: It pleased
the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief, Esa. 53. 10. It was the cup
that his Father gave him to drink, Joh. 18. 11. Herod and Pilate, with the
Gentiles and the Jews, did but what God had before determined to be done, Acts
4. 27, 28.

2. God not only determined, but also signified and made it known beforehand,
that so it should be, that Christ should suffer; Saying none other things then
Moses and the Prophets (that is, God by them) did say should come, that Christ
should suffer, etc. Acts 26. 22, 23. Those things that God before had showed by
the mouth of his Prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has so fulfilled,
Act. 3. 18. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, etc. even
therefore because it was so written, Luke 24. 46. Think thou (said Christ to
Peter, who sought to keep him from suffering) that I cannot now pray unto my
Father, and he shall presently give me more then twelve Legions of Angels? But
how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? Mat. 26. 53,
54.

3. Our case and condition did require that so it should be; Christ was to
suffer, that so we might not suffer; I mean, not suffer so, as otherwise we
must have suffered, even so, as to lie down in sorrow, so as to suffer eternal
woe and misery: Esa. 50. 11
God was injured and offended, and his Justice would be satisfied; we were
utterly unable to make satisfaction without lying under everlasting
condemnation. Therefore that we might not perish, it was requisite that Christ
should suffer, and by suffering satisfy for us: Surely he has borne our
griefs, and carried our sorrows. -- He was wounded for our transgressions, he
was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes are we healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, and turned
every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us
all, Esa. 53. 4, 5, 6. God made him to be sin, an offering and a sacrifice for
sin) for us, who knew no sin, [that is, was guilty of none] that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him, a Cor. 5. 21.

Use 1. If it were thus with the Head, then so also it must be with the
Members; if thus with Christ, then so also with Christians: For whom he did
foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son,
etc. Romans 8. 29. God has predestined us to be conformed unto Christ, viz.
first in sorrow and suffering, and then in glory and happiness: If so be that
we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together, Romans 8. 17. If we
be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer, we shall also
reign, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. If Christ the Captain of our Salvation were made
perfect by sufferings, as it is said of him, Heb. 2. 10. then we must not think
to be made perfect without sufferings, but must look to follow Christ, as
soldiers do their Captain. Thou therefore endure hardness as a good soldier
of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 3. When some desired of Christ, that they might sit
one at his right hand, the other at his left in his glory; Christ told them,
that they knew not what they asked: and asked them, if they could drink of the
cup that he was to drink of, and be baptized with the baptism that he was to be
baptized with, Mar. 10. 37, 38. He gave them to understand, that they should
first think of partaking with him in his sufferings, before they could partake
with them in his glory.

1. Suffering is a means whereby Christ does try who are his: The Lord
knows who are his, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 19. True, but God makes it
appear by the crosses and afflictions that he lays upon them; hereby their
faith, patience, self-denial, submission unto God, and dependence upon God is
made manifest: Thou, O God, have proved us, thou have tried us as silver is
tried, say the people of God unto him; And how did he prove and try them? They
add, Thou broughtest us into the net, thou laidst affliction upon our loins:
Thou made men to ride over our heads, Psalm. 66. 10, 11, 12. Now for a season
(says S. Peter, speaking to those who had received Christ into their hearts
by faith) if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations, that
the trial of your faith being much more precious then of gold that perishes,
though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory
at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. And beloved, think it not
strange (says he) concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, etc. 1 Pet.
4. 12. See also Rev. 2. 10. and 3. 10.

2. Suffering is a means whereby God does purge and refine those that are his,
and so whereby he does prepare and fit them for the glory that he has
prepared for them; even as the fire not only tries the gold or silver, but
also purges it from the dross that was mixed with it: Some of them of
understanding shall fall (into affliction) to try them, and to purge them, and
to make them white, Dan. 11. 35.

Use 2. Let us then be admonished to think of this, that Christ suffered before
he reigned, first he was crowned with thorns, before he was crowned with
glory, and so it must accordingly fare with us, if we belong unto Christ: let
us (I say) think of it, and prepare for it. For,

1. We are apt to put far away sorrow and suffering, to put it far from our
thoughts, like the sons of Zebedeus, Mar. 10. 37. who were more ready to think
of reigning with Christ, then to think of suffering, though (as Christ taught
them) that be first to be thought of.

2. Hereupon we become unable to suffer, because we are so unmindfull of
suffering: Think not strange, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 12. Because we do not think of it
before it comes, therefore we think it strange when it comes: The blow that
comes suddenly strikes sore, whereas praemonitus praemunitus, forewarned,
fore-armed; praevisa jacula, minus feriunt, the blow that is foreseen, if it
cannot be prevented, yet it may be received so as to do the less hurt;
Jerusalem remembered not her last end, therefore she came down wonderfully, Lam.
1. 9. And the Apostle tells the Thessalonians, that he sent Timotheus unto
them, that no man should be moved with those afflictions, (which happened unto
him, and might also happen unto them) for (says he) your selves know that we
are appointed thereunto: For verily when we were with you, we told you before,
that we should suffer tribulation, even as it came to pass, and ye know, 1
These. 3. 3, 4. He foretold them of it, that so they might not startle or
stagger at it when it came to pass: So Christ having told his Disciples, that
the time was coming, when as they that did kill them would think they did God
service, he adds, But these things have I told you, that when the time shall
come, ye may remember that I told you of them, Joh. 16. 24. And Luke 14. 28.
etc. Christ propounds two Parables to this end, to show that if we will
indeed be his Disciples we must reckon beforehand, and make account of
suffering with him, and for him.

Object. But may some object, If this be the condition of a Christian, how
then is Christ's yoke easy, and his burden light, as he affirms it to be,
Mat. 11. 29?

Sol. To this I answer, that the yoke and burden as of service, so of
suffering, which Christ does put upon a Christian, is easy and light. For,

1. Christ having gone before, has made way for a Christian to follow after;
In the world [saith he] ye shall have tribulation, but be of good comfort, I
have overcome the world, Joh. 16. 33.

2. Christ does moderate the affliction, and gives strength to bear it; he will
not suffer those that belong unto him to be tempted above what they are able,
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape it, that they may be
able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10. 13. His grace is sufficient for them, 2 Cor. 12. 9.

Use 3. Here is comfort and encouragement for all true Christians; they need
not to be dejected and dismayed, because of any sorrow or suffering that does
befall them; for it fares no otherwise with them, then it fared with Christ
himself; yea, indeed all that they can suffer is nothing in comparison of what
he suffered: Let Us consider,

1. That it is very absurd, and against all reason, that we should think much
to be under that condition that Christ himself was under: The Disciple is not
above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord. It is enough for the Disciple
to be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord, if they have called the
Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more will they call them of his
household? Mat. 10. 24, 25.

2. That it is an honor for us to be conformed unto Christ in suffering as he
suffered: If I must needs glory, I will glory in the things which concern mine
infirmities, says Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 30. God forbid (said he also) that I should
glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world, Gal. 6. 14.

3. That Christ having himself been so acquainted with grief and sorrow, he can
and will compassionate us in our sufferings: For in that he himself has
suffered, he is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2. 18. For we have
not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
but was in all points like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come
boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to
help in time of need, Heb. 4. 15. 16. yea, Christ does account the suffering of
his members to be his own suffering: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? said
he, when Saul did persecute Christians, Act. 9. 4. and v. 5. I am Jesus whom
thou persecutest.

4. That if we would be conformed unto Christ in suffering, we shall also be
conformed unto him in glory, Romans 8. 17. and 2 Timothy 2. 11. 12. Therefore S.
Peter bids, Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that
when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy, 1
Pet.. 4.. 13. This is the misery of such as are aliens from Christ, that their
joy shall be turned into sorrow; Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and
the end of that mirth is heaviness, Prove. 14. 13. As the crackling of thorns
under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool, Eccles. 7. 6. On the other side this
is the happiness of those that are Christ's, that their sorrow shall be turned
into joy, as Christ told his Disciples, Joh. 16. 20. And see there, v. 21. and
22. Let us therefore look unto the end of our suffering, what it tends to, and
what will be the issue of it, and we shall see there is reason not to be
troubled at it, but to rejoice in it: Christ for the joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, Heb. 12. 2. And there we are
bidden to look unto him, to imitate him, and so to run with patience the race
that is set before us. Thus by faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused
to be called the Son of Pharoahs daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt:
And why? for he had respect to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26.
So Paul professes of himself, saying, We faint not, but though our outward man
perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory, whiles we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18.

Caution. But our care must be, that in respect of the ground and cause of our
suffering, we be like unto Christ, that is, that we do not suffer for
ill-doing, but for well-doing, I mean in respect of men; for otherwise if God
shall contend with us, we cannot answer to one of a thousand, Job 9. 4.
Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments, said David, Psalm. 119.
137. Yet in the same Psalm speaking of men, v. 86. he says, They persecute me
wrongfully. So must it be our care to suffer, when we do suffer by the hands of
men, or else we are not conformed unto Christ in our suffering, we do not
suffer as he suffered; for he did nothing for which to suffer: No, He was holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 25. He did no sin, neither
was guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 22. Which of you convinces me of sin?
said he to his most malicious adversaries, Joh. 8. 46. They hated me without a
cause, said he, Joh. 15. 25. This man has done nothing amiss, said one of
him, that was crucified together with him, Luke 23. 41. And so Pilate that
condemned him, did yet often times (as the Evangelists record) confess that he
found no fault in him: Therefore Non paena, sed causa facit Martyrem. Non quid
quisque patiatur, sed quare patiatur, attendi debet. Aug.
if we suffer as Malefactors and evil doers, we do not suffer as Christ
suffered. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, (says
Christ not simply, they that are persecuted, but that are persecuted for
righteousness sake) for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when
men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you falsely for my names sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, etc. Mat.
5. 10, 11, 12. for this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief suffering wrongfully: For what glory is it if when ye are buffeted
for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? etc. 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20, 21. If ye
suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye, 1 Pet. 3. 14. If ye be reproached
for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, etc. But let none of you suffer as a
murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's
matters: Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let
him glorify God on this behalf, 1 Pet. 4. 14, 15, 16. And V. 19. Wherefore let
them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
souls to him in well-doing, as to a faithful Creator.

THE THIRTEENTH SERMON.
ISA. 53. 3. A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief.
HAving finished one point observed from these words, as they cohere with other
words both before and after, I come now to that which in themselves considered
they hold out unto That Christ was a man full of sorrows and of sufferings.

The whole life of Christ was a continual suffering, his very incarnation was
a passion, Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, but made himself of no reputation (word for word according to the
original, emptied (...).
himself) and took upon him the form of a servant, etc. That the Creator should
become a creature, God be made man, he whom the heaven of heavens cannot
contain, be enclosed in the womb, this was surely a wondrous suffering.
Again, immediately after he was born, he was laid in a manger, Luke 2.
as if he had not been worthy to have a place amongst men, within a few days
after he was circumcised, shortly after that he was persecuted by Herod, so
that to escape the danger, he was fain to be carried into another Country,
even into Egypt. Mat. 2.
For the rest of his life, until he was about 30. years old, the Scripture
speaks but little of it, only it shows us that he was with Mary his true Luke
2. 51.
Mother, and Joseph his supposed Father, and was subject unto them; and
intimates that he did execute the same trade that Joseph was of, whence it
seems as some called him the Carpenters son, Mat. 13. 55. so others called him
the Carpenter, Mar. 6. 3. When he came abroad to execute the office for which
he was sent, presently he was set upon and assaulted by the devil, and
continually was he Mat. 4.
haunted and baited as it were by the Scribes and Pharisecs, and such as could
not endure the splendour of his life and doctrine. Besides, he was poor and
indigent, having no home, no habitation of his own, though he were rich, yet
for our sakes he became poor 2 Cor. 8. 9. Even so poor, that others did
minister unto him of their substance, Luke 8. 3. And whereas the foxes have
holes, and the birds of the air have nests, he had not where to lay his head,
viz. otherwise then to be beholding unto others for it, Luke 9. 58. But all
this was but the beginning of Christ's sorrows, his chief suffering was at last,
at and immediately before his death, from the time of his agony in the garden,
to the time of his hanging and dying upon the Cross. That which he then
suffered was such and so great; that (...) it is called his Passion, or his
suffering. Let us therefore a little (as we are able) see and consider what he
then suffered. And he fuffered (as the Scripture shows) both outwardly and
inwardly.

He suffered outwardly, 1. in his reputation, for goods he had none to suffer
in, except his clothes, which he was divested of, Ioh. 19. 23. 24. But for his
reputation he suffered much in it; and that is no small suffering. For a good
name is better then precious ointment, Eccles. 7. 1. A good name is rather to
be chosen then great riches, Prove. 22. 1. A good report makes the bones fat,
Prove. 15. 30. Therefore on the otherside, an evil report, slander, and
defamation, contempt and reproach makes the bones lean, its a great grief, a
great vexation. False witnesses did rise up against me, they laid to my charge
things that I knew not. Thus David complains of the hard measure that he found
from some, Psalm. 35. 11. and v. 21. Yea, they opened their mouth wide against
me, and said, Aha, Aha, our eye has seen it. And Psalm. 120. 2. he cries out,
Deliver my soul from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. And Psalm. 123.
3, 4. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us, cry the people of God
unto him, for we are exceedingly filled with contempt: our soul is exceedingly
filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of
the proud. Amongst other grievous sufferings which the Saints endured, are
reckoned mockings, Heb. 11. 36. In this respect its said that Ismael persecuted
Isaac, Gal. 4. 29. in that he mocked him, Genesis 21. 9. Now how was Christ
traduced and slandered? how visited and reproached? how taunted and mocked? We
have found this fellow perverting the Nation (said his malicious adversaries of
him) and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ
a King. Luke 23. 2. Thus they accused him most falsely; for he taught the people
quite contrary both by word and deed, as appears Mat. 22. 17. and 17. 24, 25,
26, 27. So they called him a deceiver, yea that deceiver, as if he had been the
grand Impostor, Mat. 27. 63. whereas he is the Amen, the true and faithful
witness, Revel. 3. 14. Yea the truth it self, Joh. 14. 6. They clothed him
with a scarlet robe, put a crown of thorns upon his head, and a reed (in stead
of a Scepter) in his hand, and bowed the knee before him, and mocked him
saying, Hail King of the Jews, Mat. 27. 28, 29. As he hung upon the Cross,
they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, and saying, Thou that
destroyest the Temple, and buildest it again in three days, save thy self; If
thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross, likewise also the chief
Priests mocking him, with the Scribes and Elders, said, he saved others,
himself he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from
the Cross, and we will believe him. He trusted in God, let him deliver him now
if he will have him; for he said, I am the Son of God: The thieves also that
were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth, Mat. 27. 39, 40, 41, 42,
43, 44. They not only crucified him, which was a thing ignominious and
shameful enough, but they crucified him betwixt two thieves, so that he was
numbered among the transgressors, Isai. 53. 12. Mar. 15. 28. Yea he was
accounted the chief transgressor.

2. He suffered outwardly in his body, What part of his body was free from
suffering? his head was ^ricked with thorns, his face spit upon and buffeted,
his back scourged; all this he suffered before he was crucified. And by these
sufferings, together with the tossing of him from place to place, want of
sleep, and the like, he was so wearied and so weakened, that he was not able
to bear his Cross (it seems) to the place where he was crucified. Its said,
Ioh. 19. 17. that he went bearing his Cross; Lipsius de Cruce.
and so the learned observe, that they who were crucified used to do. But its
said Mat. 27. 32. As they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name;
him they compelled to bear his Cross. So Luke 23. 26. It appears by comparing
the Evangelists together, that Christ at first (as the manner was) bore his
Cross himself, but afterward in the way, they perceiving him unable to bear
it, laid hold on that Simon, whom they met, and made him to bear it. After
this, his hands and feet (parts (...) Psalm. 22. 16.
most tender, and sensible of pain) were pierced, yea as the Hebrew word
signifies, were dug with nails, and his whole body was stretched and
vvracked upon the Cross, for many hours together before Aquin. part. 3.
quaest. 46* art 6.
he gave up the Ghost. All this bodily pain that Christ endured, is justly
conceived to have been so much the more vehement and grievous, by how much his
body was of a more excellent temper and complexion, as being miraculously
formed and framed by the holy Ghost, Luke 1. 35. For things that are wrought
supernaturally by miracle, excel those things that are effected by natural
causes, as the wine that Christ did miraculously make of water, was better
then other wine, Joh. 2. 10.

Christ also suffered inwardly, and his inward suffering was his sorest
suffering; the suffering of his body, was but as the body of his suffering;
the suffering of his soul, was as the soul of his suffering. The spirit of a
man will bear his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18. 14.
Now Christ's spirit was wounded. He was sore amazed, and very heavy, Mar. 14.
33. The words in the original (...).
are very emphaticall, and the force of them not easy to be expressed to the
full; the one imports a vehement astonishing fear; and the other such grief and
heaviness, as makes one to be alone, and to avoid all company: it follows
there in the next verse, that he said, My soul is exceeding (...)
sorrowful unto death. He was environed, compassed round about with sorrow, so
that there was no way to turn, but still sorrow was in the way; so much the
Greek word there used does import. In the cold night, lying on the cold ground,
he did sweat, and that in a most strange manner, his sweat was as it were great
drops of blood falling down to the ground: when he was upon the Cross he cried
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? All this shows what a
wonderful suffering he had in his soul; which how great it was, only he knows
that felt it. Let none marvel, that Christ should be in such perplexity of
spirit, whereas usually the Martyrs did show no such consternation and
amazement in their sufferings, but did endure them with much patience, yea with
much alacrity and cheerfulness, with much joy and gladness: let none, I say,
marvel at this, for the Martyrs were filled with inward joy and comfort, which
did much mitigate, if not quite extinguish the sense of their outward
sufferings; but it was otherwise with Christ, although the divine nature were
personally united to the humane nature, yet it did for a while suspend and
withhold the influence of consolation. If Job being but tried of God, did yet
so complain, saying, O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity
laid in the balances together; for now it would be heavier then the sand of the
Sea. Job. 6. 2, 3. And if David being chastned of God, did yet so cry out,
saying, O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure; for thine arrows stick fast in me, and thine hand presses me
sore: there is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger, nor any rest
in my bones because of my sin, Psalm. 38. 1, 2, 3. How great needs must be
Christ's sorrow, and the suffering of his soul, when it pleased the Lord to
bruise him? Isai. 53. 10. and to lay upon him the iniquities of us all, Isai.
53. 6. Certainly if Christ had been a mere man, he had sunk under the burden,
and had never been able to bear it; he could never have g^ne thorough such
sorrows and sufferings as he did.

For the efficient causes of Christ's sufferings, the inferior and subordinate
were Satan and wicked men. The Prince of this world comes, Joh. 14. 30. The
devil put it into the heart of Judas to betray him, Joh. 13, 2. The Kings of
the earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and
against his Christ. For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, both Herod and
Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles, and the people of the Jews were gathered
togethor, Acts 4. 26. 27. The superior causes were God and Christ himself. All
those that were gathered together against Christ, did but what God had before
determined to be done, Act. 4. 28. When Pilate vaunted that he had power to
crucify Christ, and power to let him go, Thou could have no power over me
(said Christ again unto him) except it were given thee from above. Therefore
Joh. 7. 30. and 8. 20.
we read in diverse places, that though the adversaries of Christ endeavored to
lay hands on him, yet they could not, they had no power to do it, because his
hour was not yet come, viz. the hour or time wherein God had appointed him to
suffer, and so accordingly he was willing to suffer: for he did not suffer any
thing but as himself pleased, Therefore (says he) does my Father love me,
because I lay down my life, that I may take it up again: No man takes it from
me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it up again: this Commandment I have received of my Father, Joh.
10. 17, 18. When they came to apprehend Christ, as they did, so little were
they able to do any thing unto him against his will, that no sooner did he tell
them, that he was the man whom they did seek, but they went back and fell to
the ground, Joh. 18. 6. Besides, as the story there shows, he knowing before
hand what things were to befall him, went forth to meet them, and to expose
himself unto them. True it is, he prayed, and that again and again, that the
Cup might Mat. 26.
pass from him, that he might not suffer as he did, but it was still upon
supposition, if it might stand with the will of his Father, and with submission
unto his will: considering the things which he suffered in themselves, so he
would not have suffered them; for it is natural for every thing to desire the
preservation of it self; and Christ took upon him our nature, though not the
sinfulness of our nature. He was tempted like unto us in all things, yet
without sin, Heb. 4. 15. But considering the things which he suffered, as
ordained of God for him to suffer, so he was willing to suffer them,
Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26. 39. And v. 41. thy will
be done, And Joh. 18. 11. The cup which my Father has given me to drink, shall
I not drink it?

As for the final causes of Christ's sufferings; they were Gods Glory, and man's
Redemption.

1. Gods Glory. Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say, Father save me
from this hour, but therefore came I to this hour: Father glorify thy name,
Joh. 12. 27. 28.

2. Man's Redemption. He suffered to redeem man from sin, He was wounded for our
iniquities, he was bruised for our transgressions, etc. Isai. 53. 4; 5, 6. He
himself bare our sins on his body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And so to redeem
man from misery: Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made
a curse for us, Gal 3. 13.

Use 1. The consideration of Christ's sufferings may serve for our consolation.

1. Are we burdened with sin? do we groan under the heavy weight of it? Let Us
consider what Christ has suffered, and why he has suffered. His soul was made
an offering for sin, Isai. 53. 11. Not for any sin of his own, for he had none,
but for our sin, as was before showed; our sin has he satisfied for by his
suffering: For what can be the sins of the sons of men, for which the
sufferings of the Son of God are not a sufficient satisfaction?

Therefore in all affliction and distress of conscience lets fly unto Christ,
lets roll our selves on him, and cleave to him, and we are safe. The blood of
Christ is that fountain set open for the washing away of sin and uncleanness,
Zach. 13. 1. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Act.
16. 31.

2. Are there any outward troubles and pressures upon us? Let us consider what
Christ has suffered, and how by his suffering he has recon^ised us to God,
and purchased eternal Redemption for us, and therefore we need not fear,
though the earth be removed, and though the hills be carried into the midst of
the sea, though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the mountains
shake with the swelling thereof. Psalm. 46. 2. 3. He that spared not his own
sor, but gave him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us
all things? Romans 8. 32. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, distress or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril* or
sword? (As it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day long, and
counted as sheep for the sl^ughter) Nay in all these things we are more then
Conquerours thorough him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.
35, 36, 37 38, 39.

Use 2. Here also is instruction for us, not to rely on our own, but on Christ's
sufferings. We must turn unto God, as with all our heart, so with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning, Joel. 2. 12. We must so lay to heart our sins,
as to be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, our laughter must be turned into
mourning, and our joy into heaviness, Jam. 4. 9. We must take a holy revenge
on our selves for our sinners, 2. Cor. 7. 11. If we would judge our selves we
should not be judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 31. Because we neglect to judge
our selves, therefore God does judge us, and lay his afflicting hand upon us,
to bring us to a sight and sense of our sins, that we may repent of them, and
so not perish in them. When we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we
may not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32. The Antinomians are much
wide and wrong* who will not have God to afflict his children at all for sin,
yet the Apostle says, we are chastned of the Lord, and chastning presupposes
a fault for which one is chastned. And so the Apostle expressly, For this
cause many among you are weak, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 30. viz. for their sin in
receiving the Lords Supper so unworthily as they did.

Yet the punishment that God does inflict upon his children, is but
castigatory, not satisfactory, as the Papists would persuade us, who hold that
men may and must satisfy the justice of God, by their own sufferings, which
they must either voluntarily or else perforce endure: only Christ is the
propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 2, Only the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sins, 1 Jo. 1. 7. Only Christ's suffering is our
satisfaction.

Use 3. Again by Christ's sufferings, we may see the evil and odious nature of
sin: how exceedingly God does hate and abhor it, in that his justice would not
be satisfied but by such sorrows and such sufferings of his own son! O let not
us love that which God does so hate, Ye that love the Lord, hate evil, Psalm.
97. 10. Sin is evil in the sight of God, let it be so in ours also, he hates
sin, and therefore let us also hate it; let us not make light of that which
Christ found so heavy, let us remember what he said as he went to the Cross,
If they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry? Luke
22. 31. If Christ who himself had no sin, did so suffer for sin, what shall
become of those who are full of nothing but sin, and will still go on to fill
themselves more and more with it? O let us look on him whom we have pierced,
and let us mourn for him (that is, for our sins by which we have pierced him)
as one mourns for his only son, and be in bitterness for him, as one is in
bitterness for his first born, Zach. 12. 10.

Use 3. Finally, here we may see the wonderful love of God, and of Christ
toward us, that rather then we should receive the just recompense and reward
of our sins, God would give his own Son, and Christ would give himself to
suffer for us. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life,
Joh. 3. 16. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, etc. Joh. 4. 9.
Who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. Amat non immerito, qui
amatus sine merito, Great cause have we to love God, and to love Christ, who so
loved us when there was no cause to love us, but to hate and abhor us. God
commends his love toward us, in that whiles we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us, Romans 5. 8. Herein is love, not that we loved him, but that he loved us,
and sent his son into the world for us, 1 John 4. 10. He adds v. 19. We love
him, because he loved us first. It behooves us to do so, but so as to testify
our love by our obedience. This is the love of God, that we keep his
Commandments, 1 John 5. 3. If ye love me, keep my Commandments, Joh. 14. 15.
And as such was the love of God and of Christ toward us, so we accordingly
ought to love one another, If God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another, 1 John 4. 11. Walk in love, as Christ also loved us, and gave himself
for us, etc. Ephesians. 5. 2. A new Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one
another, as I have loved you, that you also love one another. By this shall all
men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another, Joh. 13. 34,
35.

THE FOURTEENTH SERMON.
PHIL. 2. 8. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
THe Apostle exhorting unto unity and concord, v. 1, and 2. as a means
conducing thereunto, he exhorts unto humility and lowliness of mind, v. 3. and
4. And to incite unto this, he propounds the example of Christ, whom Christians
ought to imitate, v. 5. etc.

Having showed how Christ humbled himself in being made man, he shows how he
humbled himself when he was made man, viz. so as to be obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross.

[ Being found in fashion as a man,] This does not import that Christ only had
the shape and form of a man but was not man indeed, as some Heretics have
maintained: Every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, (is true man, having true humane nature) is not of God, 1 These. 4. 3.
This particle as is not always a mere note of similitude, but sometimes is
used to set forth the truth of a thing, as Joh. 1. 14. The Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory as the glory of the only begotten
Son of God, etc. That as the glory, etc. imports that the glory of Christ,
which S. John speaks of, was indeed the very glory of the only begotten Son of
God. So Philem. v. 9. being such a one as Paul the aged, says Paul of himself;
it is therefore as much as if he had said, being Paul the aged. So likewise
Mat. 14. 5. They counted him as a Prophet, it is spoken concerning John
Baptist, and the meaning is, they counted him indeed a Prophet, as his Father
Zacharias prophesied of him when he was newly born, saying, And thou child
shall be called the Prophet of the highest, etc. Luke 1. 76. So here it being
said, that Christ was found in fashion as a man, the meaning is, that he was
very man indeed, like other men, sin only excepted, Heb. 4. 15.

The scope of the Apostle is to show how low Christ did humble himself: 1.
Unto death. 2. Such a kind of death, even the death of the Cross.

First therefore observe from hence, That Christ was obedient unto death: where
three things are to be showed, viz. 1. That Christ did suffer death. And 2.
That it was the will of God, that Christ should suffer death. And 3. That
Christ in obedience to the will of God did suffer death.

1. Christ did suffer death: So all the Evangelists record, and so S. Paul
preached, 1 Cor. 15. 3. So the Prophets fore-shewed, Saying none other things
then those which the Prophers and Moses did say should come, that Christ should
suffer, (viz. death, as appears by the words following, and that he should be
the first that should rise from the dead,) Acts 26. 22, 23. Daniel foretold
Christ's death, saying, After threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off,
Dan. 9. 26. So Isaiah prophesied of him, saying, He was cut off out of the Land
of the living, Esa. 53. 8. And v. 12. He has powered out his soul unto death.
Christ's death also was prefigured in the Law, which was given by the Ministry
of Moses: all the sacrifices were figures of Christ's death, therefore he is
called the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, Joh. 1. 29. All
the Lambs (and so other beasts) that were sacrificed in the time of the Law,
did typifie and prefigure Christ, who as a Lamb was to be slain and sacrificed
for us. The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews shows Christ in this among
other things to have differed from the Priests that were in the Law, that
whereas they offered often, Christ offered but once, and that because he
offered himself his offering was his suffering, so that if he should have
offered often, he must also have died often, whereas men use to die but once,
and so was Christ to die, but not oft'ner. See Heb. 9. 25, 26, 27, 28.

Ob. But it may be objected, that some places of the Old Testament speaking of
Christ, seem to import that he should not die: Thou art a Priest for ever, etc.
Psalm. 110. 4. His dominion is an everlasting dominion, etc. Dan. 7. 14.

Ans. Indeed some from those and the like places did infer that Christ should
not die: For when they heard Christ speak of his death, they objected against
it, saying, We have heard out of the Law, that Christ abides for ever, Joh.
12. 34. As if because he should abide for ever, as was signified in the The Law
is sometimes put for any part of the Old Testament, as Joh. 15. 25. and 1 Cor.
14. 21.
Law, that is in the writings of the Old Testament, therefore he should not die;
but they erred, not rightly understanding the Scriptures which speak of Christ's
abiding for ever. For the meaning of them is not, that Christ should not die,
but that although he did die, yet he should soon rise again, and so abide for
ever: Christ being risen from the dead, dies no more, death has no more
dominion over him, Romans 6. 9.

2. It was the will of God that Christ should suffer death: There is nothing
whatsoever comes to pass but by the will of God; Who has said, Nihil fit nisi
omnipotens fieri velit, vel ipse faciendo, vel permittendo ut fiat ab aliis.
Aug.
and it comes to pass, and the Lord commands it not? Lam. 3. 37. otherwise
then by the will and pleasure of God not so much as a sparrow does fall to the
ground, Mat. 10. 29. much less could so great a thing as Christ's death have
been, had it not been the will and pleasure of God that it should be. Pilate
condemned Christ to die, and others did execute the sentence which Pilate had
pronounced; but neither Pilate nor others did any thing to Christ, but as God
had before determined to be done, Acts 4. 27, 28.

3. It being the will of God, that Christ should suffer death, Christ in
obedience to the will of God did suffer it: This Commandment have I received
of my Father, said Christ, Joh. 10. 18. viz. that he should lay down his life,
and therefore he would and did lay it down. And Joh. 18. 11. The cup which my
Father has given me to drink, shall I not drink it? As if he should say,
Shall I not suffer death, seeing he will have me suffer it? True it is, Christ
considering death in it self, would have avoided it; but considering it as that
which his Father would have him to suffer, so he was willing to suffer it, Mat.
26. 39, 42.

Q. But why would God have Christ to suffer death?

A. 1. For the satisfying of his Justice: God had determined and declared death
to be the punishment that should be inflicted for sin, Genesis 2. 17. and 3. 19.
Ro^. 6. 33. Christ was to satisfy for sin, and therefore he was to suffer
death. His soul was made an offering for sin, Esa. 53. 10. Without shedding of
blood is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. And v. 26. He appeared to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself. Thus Christ died for our sins, 1 Cor. 15. 3. 2. God
would have Christ to suffer death, for the magnifying of his mercy. God
commends his love toward us, (sets it out in this) that whiles we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us, To. 5. 8.

By Christ's death, first, we are reconciled unto God: When we were enemies we
were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. In whom we have
redemption thorough his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins, Col. 1. 14.
And v. 21, and 22. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your
mind thorough wicked works, yet now has he reconciled, in the body of his
flesh through death.

2. We are delivered from Satan. Now shall the Prince of this world be cast
out, said Christ, when the time of his death was at hand, Joh. 12. 31. For
as much as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took
part of the same, that thorough death he might destroy him that had the power
of death, that is, the devil, Heb. 2. 14. The devil is there said to have the
power of death (though that properly belong unto God; for it is he that
kills, and he that makes alive, 1 Samuel 26. Deuteronomy. 32. 39.) because by the
malice of the devil man became guilty of sin, and so liable unto death. Christ
by his death has vanquished Satan, and freed those that belong unto him from
Satan's power. Therefore they that believe in Christ, are said to be brought
from the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26. 18. and to be delivered from the
power of darkness, Col. 1. 13.

3. We have right unto eternal life. Had not Christ died, we had been
incapable of life, that life which is to come. This was signified by that Genesis
3. 24. where it is said, that Adam having sinned, God drove him out (viz. of
Paradise) and he placed at the East of the garden of Eden, Cherubins, and a
flaming sword which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life. By
reason of sin the life to come, eternal life (which was shadowed by that tree
of life) was inaccessible unto us, we could have no access unto it; but Christ
by his blood has made a new and living way for us, Heb. 10. 20. And for this
cause he is the mediator of the new Testament, that by means of death, for the
redemption of the transgressions, that were the first Testament, they which are
called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. And in
the two verses following is showed, why the new Covenant that God has made
with his people, is called a Testament, because it is of force by Christ's
death. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of
the testator. For a Testament is of force after men are dead, otherwise it is
of no strength at all, whiles the testator lives. Neither does this make for
the Popish opinion of Limbus Patrum, as if before Christ's death none did go to
heaven, and enjoy the happiness of the life to come: For Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13. 8. The death of Christ
was of force, as well before, as since Christ's coming; they that did believe in
Christ to come, did enjoy the benefit of his death, as well as they that now
since his coming do believe in him.

Ob. But may some say, notwithstanding Christ's death, yet still all die.

Answ. True, but not so as otherwise, had it not been for Christ's death, they
should have died. For 1. By the death of Christ all that believe, are
altogether freed from the second death; over such the second death has no
power, Revel. 20. 6.

2. The first death to believers is as no death, but an entrance into life,
even life eternal. Blessed are the dead which die in our Lord, from
henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, etc.
Revel. 14. 13. The souls of the faithful being separated from their bodies, do
immediately enter into happiness, which made the Apostle say, that to die was
gain unto him, Phil. 1. 21. And v. 23. that he desired to be dissolved and to
be with Christ, which was far better. And the bodies of believers shall also in
due time be raised up, and together with their souls be made partakers of
eternal bliss. Christ by his death has overcome death, so that they that
believe in him shall not be overcome by it, not so as for ever to remain under
the power and dominion of it. I will ransom them from the power of the grave,
(says Christ) I will redeem them from death: O death I will by thy plagues; O
grave I will be thy destruction, Hos. 13. 14. To which place the Apostle
alludeth, saying, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? And
he adds, the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. But
(...)ks be unto God, who gives us victory thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, 1
Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.

Use 1. Here then is consolation for us in respect of the guilt of sin, and the
fear of wrath as due for sin. Do our consciences accuse us? does Satan throw
his fiery darts at us? The meditation and application of Christ's death is
sufficient to quiet our consciences, and to repel Satan and all his assaults:
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies.
Who is he that Turbatur conscientia, sed non perturbabitur, qui^ vulnerum
Domini recordabor.
condemns? it is Christ that died, Romans 8. 33, 34. My conscience (says one)
is troubled, but it shall not be orewhelmed: for I will remember the wounds of
the Lord Jesus.

Use. 3. But as Christ died for sin, so must we die unto sin; thus must we be
conformed to his death, or else we can expect no benefit by it. We thus judge
(says the Apostle) that if one died for all, then were all dead; And that he
died for all, that they that live, should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto him that died for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 15. They are
therefore most foolish and absurd, who think that because Christ died for them,
therefore they may live as they list. As if Christ by his death had purchased
not freedom from sin, but freedom to sin: this is, to turn the grace of God
into lasciviousness, and to deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
Jude v. 4. But we have not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4. 20. our very Baptism
does teach us another lesson. The Apostle having said, Where sin abounded,
there grace has abounded much more, Romans 5. 20. To prevent the abuse of this
doctrine, he adds presently after; What shall we say then? shall we continue
in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid: How shall we that are dead unto sin,
live any longer therein? Know ye not that so many of us, as were baptized into
Christ, were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by
baptism into death, etc. Romans 6. 1. 2, 3, 4. So Col. 3. 2, 3. Set your
affections on things above, not on things on the earth, for ye are dead, viz.
unto sin, and v. 5. Mortify therefore your members that are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is idolatry. This mortifying of sin, and dying unto sin,
imports 1. A serious and settled purpose to eschew sin. I said (that is, I
purposed, I resolved) I will take heed unto my ways, that I offend not with my
tongue, Psalm. 39. 1. I am purposed, that my mouth shall not transgress, Psalm.
17. 3.

2. A care to avoid the occasions of sin: Depart from me ye wicked, for I will
keep the Commandments of my God, Psalm. 119. 115.

3. A diligent use of the means whereby to subdue sin: Thy Word have I hid
within my heart, that I might not sin against thee, Psalm. 119. 11.

Use 3. As Christ was obedient unto death, so we must learn by his example to
be obedient also as well in suffering as in doing, and that in suffering death
it self, if God call unto it; You have not yet resisted unto blood, Heb. 12. 4.
As if he should say, in obedience unto God you must resist, striving (as there
it follows) against sin, even unto blood, the shedding of your blood, if need
be; so did Christ who is there propounded as a pattern for our imitation,
Looking unto Jesus, etc. v. 2. Consider him, v. 3. Not that we are to expose
our selves to danger when we may avoid it by good and honest means, without
dishonor to God and his truth: When they persecute you in one City, flee into
another, so did Christ counsel his Disciples, Mat. 10. 23. And Christ himself
did so, when some being offended at his Doctrine would have throne him down
from the brow of the hill, on which the City was built, he conveyed himself
away from them, and escaped their hands, Luke 4. 29, 30. And so when Paul was
like to be apprehended by the Governor in Damascus, he was let down in a
basket thorough a window, and by that means escaped, 2 Cor. 11, 32, 33. But if
God call us to suffer, if it appear to be his will, if it cannot be avoided
without dishonouring of God and his Gospel, in this case we must be willing to
submit unto God, and to be obedient unto death as Christ was, to lay down our
lives for God, and for his truth as Christ did: Fight the good fight of faith,
lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also called, and have professed a
goood profession before many Witnesses. I give thee charge in the sight of God,
who quickneth all things, and before Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate
witnessed a good confession, that thou keep this Commandment without spot,
unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 6. 12, 13,
14. As if the Apostle should say, Christ bare witness to the truth before
Pontius Pilate unto death; so must we also, if need be, bear witness to it,
though we die for it: He that loves his life (to wit, inordinately, so as that
he will not part with it when God does call for it, but does prefer it before
Gods glory, he that so loves his life) shall lose it; and he that hates his
life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal, Joh. 12. 25. See the like
saying, Mat. 16. 25. and 10. 39. And Christ would have all that take upon them
the profession of his Name, to consider this, that for his sake they must be
ready (if the case so require) to forgo whatsoever is near and dear unto
them, even life it self. So S. Luke shows us, saying, And there went great
multitudes with him, and he turned and said unto them, If any man come to me,
and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and
sisters, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 25. 26.

THE FIFTEENTH SERMON.
PHILIP. 2. 8. Even the death of the Cross.
THus the Apostle shows the greatness of Christ's humiliation and obedience, in
that he not only humbled himself, and was obedient unto death, but such a kind
of death, even the death of the Cross, that is, death on the Cross; he was
crucified, nailed alive to the Cross, and so did hang upon the Cross until
he died. This point then offers it self to be considered, That Christ was
obedient even to the death of the Cross.

In the handling of this point I shall show. 1. That Christ suffered death on
the Cross. 2. That this was a great aggravation of Christ's suffering. 3. What
use is to be made of the point.

For the first, That Christ suffered death upon the Cross, it is a thing
clearly recorded by all the four Evangelists, So Paul in his Epistles often
speaks of the Cross of Christ (that is, of Christ's death on the Cross) and of
Christ crucified. See 1 Cor. 1. 18. 23. and 2. 2. 8. Gal. 6. 14. Phil. 3. 18.
So Peter says, that Christ bare our sins on his body on the tree, that is, on
the Cross, 1 Pet. 2. 24. David also prophesied of this, saying, They pierced
my hands, and my feet, Psalm. 22. 16. He spoke those words prophetically in the
person of Christ; as the very beginning of the Psalm does show, My God, My God,
why have thou forsaken me? which words (as the Evangelists record) Christ
uttered, when he was upon the Cross. So v. 18. They part my garments among
them, and cast lots upon my vesture. Which (as appears likewise by the history
of the Gospel) was fulfilled in Christ, when he was crucified.

Christ also himself did foretell what kind of death he should suffer, to wit,
the death of the Cross. Behold (said he to his Disciples) We go up to
Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief Priests, and to
the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death. And they shall deliver him to
the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him. Mat. 20. 18, 19. So
Joh. 12. 32, 33. And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me. That by
his lifting up he meant lifting up upon the Cross, to die upon it, the
Evangelist immediately declares, saying, This he said, signifying what death he
should die.

Christ's death upon the Cross was likewise typified, and prefigured by the
brazen Serpent, of which we read, Number. 21. There the sacred history tells us
how God when the Israelites sinned against God, and provoked him by murmuring,
he plagued them by sending fiery Serpents among them; but in wrath remembering
mercy, he commanded Moses to set upon a pole a brazen Serpent (the similitude
of a serpent made of brass) that whosoever was stung by a fiery serpent, by
looking up to that brazen serpent might be made whole: This brazen serpent so
lifted up, was a type and figure of Christ lifted up upon the Cross, that
whosoever are stung by that old serpent the devil, may look up to him with the
eye of faith, and be saved. This Christ himself does signify unto us, saying,
As Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be
lifted up, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life, Joh. 3. 14, 15.

Ob. But it may be objected, that among the Jews this kind of death was not in
use. The Jewish Talmud tells us, that Sanhedr. c. 7.
they had four kinds of capital punishments, to wit, stoning, burning,
killing with the sword, and strangling. They make no mention of crucifying;
neither do we find it mentioned any where in the old Testament. There indeed we
read of hanging, but it was not a hanging of any whilst they were alive, but
only a hanging of them after that they were otherwise put to death, to wit, for
the greater infamy of those who were hanged, and for the greater terror of
others. Joshua first smote and slew the five Kings of Canaan, and then hanged
them upon trees until evening; for by the Law, Deuteronomy. 21* 23. none were to hang
longer, Jos. 10. 26. This hanging was quite another thing much different from
crucifying. For they that were crucified were hanged alive, being nailed to a
cross, and so did hang until they were dead. It Is said indeed that the Jews
slew Christ, and hanged him on a tree, Act. 5. 30. and 10. 39. But that is not
so to be understood, as if they did first slay him, and then hang him on a
tree, that had not been crucifying; neither does that agree with the sacred
history of the Gospel. The meaning of those places is, that they slew him by
hanging him on a tree. The particle and in those places is exegeticall or
explicative rather then copulative, it shows how they flew him, to wit so, as
that they hanged him on a tree.

Answ. Some of the Jewish Rabbines indeed think by this argument (to wit that
crucifying, or putting to death by hanging upon a Cross, was not used among
the Jews) they think (I say) to convince the Gospel of falsehood* but they
bewray either their ignorance or malice, or both. For in the R. Lipman in
Nizzaction, ut est apud Munster. in Mat. Hebr.
time of our Savior, and some while before, the Jews were under the power and
jurisdiction of the Romans, as appears not only by the new Testament, Luke 2.
1. 4, 5. and 3. 1. and so other places; but also by foreign Writers, as
Josephus a Jew, and Tacitus a heathen man. Now crucifying was a punishment,
which was much used among the Romans; and they brought it into use among the
Jews, when they had dominion over them. And those forementioned Authors, to wit
Josephus and Tacitus, do both of them record how Christ was put to death by
Pontius Pilate, being Governor Joseph. Antiq. l. 18. c. 4. Tacit. Annal. l. 15.
in Judea under the Roman Emperor Tiberius; and one of them, namely Josephus,
expressly says that Pilate caused him to be crucified. Christ himself
foretelling his death, and the manner of it, showed how it should come to
pass, that he should be crucified, to wit, that the Jews should deliver him to
the Gentiles, namely the Romans, and they (as their custom was) should
crucify him, Mat. 20. 18, 19. So it was, as the Evangelists relate. Pilate
willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered
Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified. And the soldiers led him
away, etc. And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple robe from
him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him, Mar. 15.
15, 16, 20. S. John also having said, that Pilate bade the Jews take Christ,
and judge him according to their Law, and that the Jews answered, that it was
not lawful for them to put any man to death; he adds, That the saying of
Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying what death he should die,
Joh. 18. 31, 32. Christ had signified, that he should die the death of the
Cross, which was fulfilled by the Jews delivering of Christ unto Pilate, who
being a Roman, condemned him to that kind of death, which was in use among the
Romans: Peter indeed told the Jews, that they had crucified Christ, Acts 2.
22, 23. 36. and 5, 30. But that was because it was done thorough their
instigation. See Luke 23. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. And Acts 3. 13, 14, 15. the Jews
are justly charged with it, because they were the workers and procurers of it.
Thus then the objection is sufficiently answered, and the first thing
propounded is sufficiently cleared, to wit, that Christ suffered death on the
Cross.

2. The next thing to be considered is, that this was a great aggravation of
Christ's suffering: The Apostle (we see in the Text) aggravates his suffering by
this, that he not only suffered death, but even the death of the Cross. This
death was more grievous then other kinds of death in diverse respects: For,
first, it was a more painful death; (...) Lxx. (...). Vulg. Lat. Fodcrunt.
Crucis nomen a cruciatu. Lipsius de cruce. Acerbissimum inter supplicia
censebatur. Lips. Ibid.
He endured the Cross: So it is said of Christ, Heb. 12. 2. which intimates
that the death of the Cross was very grievous and hard to be endured. It is
grievous to endure any death that is violent, but especially the death of the
Cross; to have the hands and the feet (which by reason of the multitude of
sinews, are of all parts most sensible of pain) pierced thorough with nails,
yea dug, as the word used Psalm. 22. 16. does indeed signify, and so to be
fastened to a Cross, and to hang for many hours together, this must needs be
very dolourus and painful: The Latin word for a Cross comes of a word that
signifies torment, of all punishments that of the Cross was accounted most
bitter and most tormenting. And in the Scripture Phrase the Cross is put for
all affliction whatsoever; If any man will come after me (said Christ) let him
deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me, Mat. 6. 24. And Luke 14.
27. Whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after me, cannot be my
Disciple. For one to bear his Cross, is as much as patiently to endure any
affliction that shall come upon him.

2. The death of the Cross was a most shameful death: It Is said of Christ,
that he endured the Cross, despising the shame, Heb. 12. 2. Any death that is
inflicted as a punishment, is ignominious, and carries shame along with it, but
the death of the Cross especially; it was called a slavish punishment, because
it was at first only inflicted on slaves, afterward it was also inflicted on
others, yet but seldom, and only Servile supplicium. Lips. de cruce. Primum
receptum in servos iisque quodammodo approbrium. Ibid. Et si interdum and in
liberos homines sic animadversum reperio; sed raro, non nisi ob insigne scelus,
ut in latrones, grassatores, and transfugas. Lips. Ibid.
on such as were notorious malefafactors, as robbers, murderers, and
renegadoes. When Verres being the Roman Governor in Sicilie, put some of the
Romans to this kind of death, Cicero pleading against him, aggravated this as
a most great and horrid crime. It is heinous thing (said he) to Facinus est
vincire civem Roma^um, scelus verberare, prope parricidium necare: quid dicam
in crucem tollere? Verbo satis digno tam ^efaria res appellari nullo modo
potest. Cic. in Ver. Orat. 3.
bind a Roman Citizen, a great wickedness to scourge him, almost as bad as
murdering ones own father to put him to death: What then shall I call it to
hang him on the Cross? Such a detestable act cannot by any word be
sufficiently expressed. What manner of persons they did use to inflict this
death of the Cross upon, we may see by those who were crucified together with
Christ; There were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand,
and another on the left, Mat. 27. 38. They were thieves, robbers, murderers,
as the word in the Original does import: The word in the singular number used
of Barabbas, is rendered a robber, Joh. 18. 40. And of this same Barabbas Acts
3. 14. it is said, that he was a murderer. It is said of Constantine the first
Emperor that made public profession of Christianiry, that in honor of Christ
he took away this kind of punishment, (crucifying) so that since it has not
been used as before it was.

3. It was a more cursed death. For he that is hanged, is accursed of God,
Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Every death inflicted as a punishment due to him, on whom it is
inflicted, is a token and testimony of Gods curse. But hanging more especially,
it exposing a man more then ordinary to the open view of all, to take notice of
him, as one whom God has accursed. This I take to be the reason, why he that
is hanged, is rather then any other, said to be accursed of God, because he
more especially is made a spectacle of Gods wrath and indignation against him.
Christ (says S. Paul) has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us; for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a tree,
Gal. 3. 13. The Apostle there alleges that of Moses, and thence shows why
Christ suffered on the Cross rather then otherwise. Other reasons some give,
viz. that Obediens factus? Usque ad mortem, mortem autem crucis, eam, quae in
ligno fuerat, inobedientiam sanans. Iren. l 5. Vti quemadmodum per lignum facti
sumus debitores Deo, per lignum accipiamus nostri debiti remissionem. Ibid.
(...). Theophyl. ad ^oh. 19. ^5.
as death came by it: and that as Satan vanquished man by a tree, so Christ by
the same means might vanquish Satan. But although Gods wisdom and power in so
ordering it, may thus be observed, yet the Scripture does not assign these
reasons, but only the other, to wit, that so it might appear that Christ bare
our sins, and the curse that was due unto us for them.

Use. 1. What comfort then is here for us. 1. in all spiritual conflicts, in
all distresses of consciences? Seeing Christ has not only suffered, not only
suffered death, but even the death of the Cross for us. Therefore if that old
Serpent the devil sting us, let us by faith look upon this brazen Serpent,
Christ lift up upon the Cross, and then we shall be safe. Christ being
crucified for us, has blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances that was
against us, which was contrary unto us, and has taken it out of the way,
nailing it unto his Cross. And having spoiled principalities and powers, he
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it, Col. 2. 14, 15.

2. In all outward troubles and afflictions. Do we suffer pain? Do we suffer
shame? Why? did not Christ so before us? Yea, what is our suffering in
comparison of his suffering? Therefore let us run with parience the race that
is set before us, Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who
for the joy that was set before him endured the Cross, despising the shame,
etc. Heb 12. 1, 2. Paul though he suffered never so painfully, never so
shamefully, yet gloried in Christ crucified, and abhorred to glory in any thing
besides. God forbid (said he) that I should glory in any thing, save in the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I
unto the world, Gal. 6. 14. We read that when the Israelites passing through
the wilderness toward Canaan, came to a place where was Exodus 15. 23. 25.
water, but bitter, that they could not drink of it, Moses (as the Lord
appointed) cast in a tree into the water, and so it became sweet. So whatsoever
bitter waters of affliction we meet with, as we pass thorough the wilderness
of this world unto the heavenly Canaan, let us cast into them the tree on which
Christ suffered, let us meditate of Christ's suffering upon the Cross, and this
will sweeten all. Christ by his cursed death which he suffered, has taken away
the cursednesse of all our suffering, so that all shall work together for our
good, Romans 8. 28.

Use 2. Therefore let us labor and have a care to know Christ crucified; let
all our thoughts and meditations be taken up about him. I determined (says S.
Paul) to know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.
2. He means that all his preaching and teaching among them, should aim at this,
that they might rightly know Jesus Christ and him crucified. The preaching of
Christ crucified is that foolishness of preaching (as the world accounts it)
by which it pleases God to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. For the
preaching of the Cross (says he there v. 18.) is foolishness to them that
perish, but unto us which are saved it is the power of God. So again v. 23. and
24. But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness, But unto them which are called both Jews and Greeks,
Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. True it is, we preach Christ's
Incarnation, and the holiness of his conversation whilst he lived upon earth,
his Resurrection, Ascension, etc. yet still with reference to his Cross,
either as going before, and making way for it; or as following after, and
showing the efficacy of it. Yea, we preach the Law, but with reference to
Christ crucified; either to convince of sin, and so to show the need of Christ,
or to preserve from sin, and to conform unto Christ. By the law is the
knowledge of sin, says the Apostle, Romans 3. 20. And so the Law is the rule of
righteousness, according to which Christ himself did walk, and so must they
that are in Christ. He that says he abides in him, ought himself to walk,
even as he walked, 1 John 2. 6. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19. For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but
faith which works thorough love, Gal. 5. 6. For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature. And as
many as walk according to this rule (viz. of a new creature, of faith that
works thorough love, and of the keeping of Gods Commandments) peace shall be
upon them, and mercy, etc. Gal. 6. 15. 16. In a word, as Christ was crucified,
so also must we be crucified, or else Christ crucified shall profit us nothing.
Knowing this that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might
be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, Romans 6. 6. I am
crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I but Christ does live in
me, and the life which I now live, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved
me, and gave himself for me, Gal. ^. 20. And they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5. 24. Such as wilfully
give themselves up to evil and sinful courses, are the enemies Terret ac
fugat daemonas; pellit mor bos and omnia mala; sanctificat ea, quibus
imprimitur. Bellarm.
of the Cross of Christ, as the Apostle calls them, Phil: 3. 18. They do what
in them lies, to make the Cross of Christ of no effect. For he his own self
bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being dead unto sin, should live
unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

Caution. But let us take heed and beware of the superstition and idolatry of
the Papists, who adore the Cross, and make an Idol of it. Bellarmine sticks
not to affirm, that the sign of the Cross does affright and chase away the
devils, drive away diseases, and all evils, and sanctify those things upon
which it is imprinted. But the Scripture does teach us otherwise; viz. that it
is faith in Christ crucified, and not the sign of the Cross, whereby we must
resist Satan, and whereby we must obtain of God whatsoever is requisite and
needful for us: The devil your adversary goes about like a roaring Lion,
etc. Whom resist steadfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Whatsoever you shall
ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you, Joh. 16. 23. Again we must also
take heed and beware of the blasphemy of the Socinians, who hold that Christ
suffered death, even the death of the Cross, only to confirm his Doctrine, and
to give us an example, but not to bear the curse that was due unto us, and so
to satisfy the justice of God for us. But what more repugnant to the
Scripture, which says that Christ was made sin (that is, a In the Hebrew the
word that signifies sin, is often put for a sacrifice for sin.
sacrifice for sin) and a curse for us, 2 Cor. 5. 24. Gal. 3. 13. I conclude
with the words of S. Peter, Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things
before, beware least ye also be carried away with the error of the wicked, and
fall from your own sted fastness: But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesut Christ, to him be glory both now and for ever, Amen.
2 Pet. 3. 17, 18.

THE SIXTEENTH SERMON.
1 COR. 15. 4. And that he was buried.
THe Apostle here in the beginning of this Chapter puts the Corinthians in mind
of the Gospel which he had preached unto them, and rehearses some of the
chief heads of it, amongst the rest this of Christ's burial, so that this is a
point for Ministers to preach, and for people to think of, viz. That Christ was
buried.

This is recorded by all the Evangelists; and it was also long before spoken of
by the Prophet Isaiah, And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich
in his death, Esa. 53. 9. It was likewise prefigured in that which happened to
the Prophet Jonas, For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales
belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of
the earth, (that is, in the grave) said Christ, Mat. 12. 40.

Ob. It may be objected, that such as were crucified as Christ was, did not use
to be buried, but were wont to hang upon the Cross until they rotted, and to
that end there were Soldiers Solenne illud fuit, crucifixorum corpora militari
custodia signari, donec putruissent, ne quis ea ad sepulturam detraheret. Lips.
appointed to watch them, lest any should come to take them away to bury them.
Thus they used to deal with those that were crucified, as they relate who are
versed in the Antiquities of the Romans, among whom crucifying was in use, and
so (as before was showed) they having dominion over the Jews, by that means it
was that Christ was crucified.

Ans. I answer, that although that were the custom of the Romans not to
permit those whom they did crucify to be buried, yet they were so indulgent to
the Jews as to suffer them to observe their own Laws which God prescribed
unto them. Now one Law which the Jews were to observe, was this, that if any
were hanged on a tree, he should not hang all night, but be taken down at even,
Deuteronomy. 21. 23. And so S. John relates, that the Jews came to Pilate and desired
him that the bodies (of Christ, and the other that were crucified with him)
might not remain on the Cross on the Sabbath day, which was the day after they
were crucified, Joh. 19. 31. There was then more especial cause why they
desired to have the bodies taken down, because besides that Law in Deuteronomie
before mentioned, the day after was the Sabbath day, and an extraordinary
Sabbath (as it is there said, for that Sabbath day was an high day) by reason
of the feast of the Passover, which also was at that time. But by this place
of the Evangelist we may see that the Romans were not so strict with the Jews,
but that they would let them enjoy their liberty in things that did concern
their Religion. And moreover the Evangelists show that there was special leave
given by Pilate the Roman Governor for Christ's burial, Joh. 19. 38. And the
like may be seen in the other Evangelists.

It was meet that Christ should be buried: First, for the greater certainty of
his death, that it might the better appear that he was dead indeed, and not in
appearance only; for none use to be buried, but such as are first dead: And
Pilate was very careful to be certified first of Christ's death, before he
would give leave that he should be buried, Mar. 15. 43, 44, 45.

2. For the greater certainty of his Resurrection: And in this respect the
Evangelists observe not only that Christ was buried, but also they record the
circumstances of his burial, and show how he was buried, viz. In a new
sepulcher wherein never man was laid, Joh. 19. 41, 42. That so none might
cavil, and say, it was not Christ, but some other that (...). Theophylact. ad
loc.
did arise from the dead; and that none also might pretend that Christ did not
rise by his own power, but by the touch of some other who had been buried in
the same grave before: As we read of one, who being cast into the grave where
the Prophet Elisha was buried, by the touch of the dead bones of the Prophet
revived, 2 King. 13. 21.

And again, the Evangelists record that Christ was laid in a sepulcher which
was hewn out of a Rock, and that a great stone was rolled to the door of the
sepulcher, and that the stone was sealed, and a watch set to keep the
sepulcher, Mat. 27. 60, 66. So that it could not with any probability be
pretended that either by undermining or otherwise, Christ was stolen out of the
sepulcher.

3. Christ's burial was a further degree of his humiliation: It was much for him
to die, and more to die the death of the Cross, and yet more to condescend and
stoop so low, as to be laid in the grave the common receptacle of the dead. Job
speaking of a man that is high and eminent in the world while he lives,
shows that yet when he dies he shall be brought so low as to be laid in the
grave: Who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him what he
has done? Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and shall remain in the tomb,
the clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him, etc. Job 21. 31, 32, 33.

4. This served to make Christ's victory over death, and over him that had the
power of death, that is, the Devil, the more glorious; that he not only died,
but also was buried; death seemed to have full conquest over Christ, having
gotten him into its den, yet even there did Christ vanquish and subdue it: Thus
did he most gloriously triumph, fulfilling that, O death, I will be thy plague,
O grave, I will be thy destruction, Hos. 13. 14.

Use 1. This point concerning Christ's burial does make much for the confirming
of our faith in Christ, to assure us that our sins are fully expiated and
abolished by Christ, that as they were nailed to his Cross, Col. 2. 14. so
also buried in his grave, never to rise up against us to our condemnation.
Christ bare our sins in his body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Therefore Christ
being buried; our sins also were buried with him, so that we being united by
faith unto Christ, and having interest in him, we are freed from sin, and need
Ioh. 1.
not fear the imputation of it. Jonah being cast into the sea, and buried as it
were in the belly of the fish, presently the storm ceased, and the Sea was
calm. So Christ being laid in the grave and buried, our consciences, though
otherwise by reason of the guilt of sin, full of vexation and horror, have good
cause to be calm and quiet.

Use 2. Again, here is good comfort and encouragement for us (if we belong to
Christ) against the fear of death, and the horror of the grave. Christ has
grapled with death and the grave, and has overcome them, and therefore we need
not to be afraid of them, Christ having followed death into its den; and there
gotten victory over it: we may assure our selves, that though death prevail so
far over us, as to draw us into it is den, yet it shall not be able to keep us
there, but Christ will make good that which is promised, Hos. 13. 14. I will
ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from death. So
Christ assures us, that the hour is coming in the which all that are in the
grave shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, Joh. 5. 28. 29. In like
manner the Apostle says, Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death where is thy sting? O grave
where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
Law. But thanks be unto God, who gives us victory thorough Jesus Christ our
Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57. The graves of the Saints are called beds
wherein they lie and rest for a while, but at length arise and come out of
them. They shall rest in their beds, Isai, 57. 2. So by Ecclesiastical writers
burying places (...). Caemiteria.
are expressed by a word that properly signifies places to sleep in, even as in
Scripture death is usually termed sleep.

Use 3. But if we would have such hope in Christ, in that he was buried, then
we must be conformed unto him in respect of his burial; as he was buried
literally, so must we be buried mystically. We are buried with him by baptism,
says the Apostle, Romans 6. 4. Our Baptism is a seal of our ingrafting into
Christ, and of our communicating with him, and conforming unto him even in his
burial. So Col. 2. 12. Buried with him in baptism, This is in respect of our
old man, as it is called, Romans 6. 6. that is, our corrupt nature, this must be
crucified, mortified and buried, so as not to serve sin, as there the Apostle
does express it. Even as a dead body is laid in the ground, and overwhelmed
with earth, so the corruption that is in us, must be subdued and brought under,
that it may not reign in us, nor have dominion over us. Let not sin therefore
reign in your mortal body, Romans 6. 12. The greatest tyrants and oppressors
being in the grave, all their tyranny and oppression cease. There the wicked
cease from troubling, Joh. 3. 17. So we being in the sense before expressed, by
way of analogy and resemblance buried with Christ, sin shall not have that
power over us, as over the unregenerate. I say, not so, as over the
unregenerate. But we must not think that whiles we are here, we can be so
conformed unto Christ, so dead and buried with him as to be without sin, to be
quite free from it. No, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves 1 John 1. 8. In many things we offend all, Iam. 3. 2. But if we have the spirit
of Christ ( And if any have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his,
Romans 8. 9.) then we are so in a spiritual sense dead and buried with Christ,
as not to be under the reigning power of sin, and the dominion of it. Sin shall
not have dominion over you, for you are not under the Law but under grace, Romans
6. 14.

Again, there is not the like reason of spiritual death and burial, and of
that which it corporal. For corporal death and burial is finished at once;
but not so that which is spiritual; this is done by degrees, by little and
little: He that is already dead and buried in a spiritual sense, that is, he
whose old man, whose imbred corruption is as it were put to death, and laid in
the grave, yet must still die in that kind, and be buried still more and more,
because he has still some relics of the old man, still some sin and
corruption remains in him. The Apostle having said, ye are dead, Col. 3. 3. Yet
adds v. 3. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth;
fornication, uncleanness, etc.

But let us consider this; we profess our selves Christians, Disciples, and
followers of Christ, and so consequently dead and buried with him. If then we
walk in sin, we make our selves prodigious: for is it not a prodigious thing
for one that is dead and buried, yet to walk as if he were alive? O then as we
have put on Christ by profession, and so at least all that are baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. Let us also put on Christ by imitation,
conforming our selves unto him, and walking as he walked. Of this putting on of
Christ the Apostle speaks, and to it he exhorts saying, Let us walk honestly as
in the day, not in rioting and in drunkenness, not in cha^bering and
wantonness, not in strife and envy; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 13, 14.

Use 4. In the last place, the doctrine of Christ's burying may serve for our
information. As 1. That it is a Christian course to bury the dead: Nature it
self does teach so much, and much more Christianity, that the dead ought to be
buried. The Saints have showed a special care to perform their duty in this
respect. Sarah being dead, Abraham was very careful to have her buried. I am a
stranger and a sojourner with you (said he to the Hittites) give me a
possession of a burying place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my
sight, Genesis 23. 4. And it is observable, that he purchased nothing in the Land
of Canaan, but only the place there spoken of to bury in. So Stephen being
stoned to death, devout men carried him to be buried, Act. 8. 2. It Is recorded
of Isaac and Ismael, that when Abraham their Father was dead, they buried him,
Genesis 25. 9. And so of Jacob and Esau, that they did the same for Isaac, Genesis
35. 29. Though Ismael and Esau were profane persons (Gal. 4. 29. Heb. 12. 16.)
yet they joined with Isaac and Jacob, who were godly, in the burying of their
Father: that therefore which we read in the Gospel, that when Christ called
one to follow him, and he desired first to go and bury his Father, Christ said,
Let the dead bury the dead; That, I say, is not so to be taken, as if Christ
did condemn, or vilify the office of burying the dead, as if this care did not
become the godly. For (as the Apostle says in another 1 Timothy 5. ^.
case) He that neglects this, has denied the faith, and is worse then an
infidel, because he omits that which even infidells will be careful to
perform: But it was only the intent and meaning of Christ, to teach that all
carnal affections must be laid aside, and nothing must hinder us from
following Christ, when he does call, nor from doing that which he does enjoin.
How far Christ was from intending to disparage the office of burying the dead,
may appear by that which he spoke in defense of Mary, whom some excepted
against, because of the precious ointment that she had powered upon him, saying,
that it might better have been sold, and the money given to the poor, Let her
alone (said Christ) for against the day of my burying has she done this, Joh.
12. 7. They are therefore inhumane, who not content with the death of those
whom they hate and persecute, will not suffer them to be buried, or not to rest
when they are buried. This indeed is a punishment denounced against, and
inflicted upon some for the example of others. He shall be buried with the
burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem, Jer.
22. 19. Their dead bodies shall be for meat to the fowls of the heaven, and to
the beasts of the earth, Jer. 32. 20. And as Josiah turned himself, he espied
the Sepulchers that were there in the mount, and he sent and took the bones out
of the Sepulchers, and burnt them upon the Altar, etc. 2 King. 23. 16. God had
long before declared, that Josiah should thus deal with the dead bones of
Idolaters, 1 Kings 13. 2. But what does this make for them, who deal thus even
with the Saints, whose death is precious in the sight of the Lord? This the
Psalmist complains sore of, The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to
be meat to the fowls of the heavens, the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of
the earth. Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and
there was none to bury them, Psalm. 79. 2, 3. Thus barbarously did they of the
Romish Church here in the time of Q. Mary deal with those worthy men Bucer and
Fagius, they dug up their dead bodies out of their graves, and consumed them
in the fire: and this inhumanity have some used toward the dead, out of a
desire to revenge themselves on them to the uttermost; as it is said of Sylla,
that he caused the dead body of Marius his adversary to be dug up. And so
Pope Sergius the third is reported to have dealt in like manner with his
Predecessor Formosus, whom he hated, because he had gotten the Papal dignity
before him.

2. From Christ's burying, we may learn that the custom of the Country (having
nothing superstitious, nor uncomely in it) is in this respect to be observed:
It is said that for the manner of Christ's burying, it was as the manner of the
Jews was to bury Joh. 19. 40. Whence Austin observes, that in those offices In
hujusmodi officiis, quae mortuis exhibentur, mos ^ujuslibet regionis est
servandus. Aug.
that are performed to the dead, the custom of each Country is to be observed.

Caution. But concerning burial, this caution is requisite, not to think any
therefore more aliens from Christ, if they be not buried at all, or but meanly
buried; nor therefore to think any the nearer unto Christ, if they have a
sumptuous and stately burial. The Papists are very superstitious in this,
thinking it to concern the welfare of the soul, to be buried rather in one
place then in another. Purgatory is the ground of this conceit, but Purgatory
it self has no ground in Scripture for it. The Scripture tells us, that when
Eccl. 12. 7.
a man dies, as the body goes to the earth, so the soul goes to God, viz. to
be judged by him; neither shall the soul fare better or worse, whether the body
be buried or not, or buried after this, or another manner. We read of the rich
man's burying, Luke 16. yet his soul went to hell: We read not of any burial
that Lazarus had, yet his soul was carried into Abraham's bosom. True it is,
the Patriarks of old were very solicitous about their burying in the Land of
Canaan, though they died out of it, Genesis 47. 29, 30, 31, and 49. 29. etc. And
50. 26. But that was not out of any superstitious opinion that they had, as if
the welfare of their souls did depend upon the place where they were buried,
but only to show that they died in faith, being fully assured that God would at
length perform what he had promised, viz. that he would give them (in their
posterity) the Land of Canaan: God will surely visit you, said Joseph, speaking
of this very thing, Genesis 50. 25. And besides they looked on Canaan, not as a
bare earthly Country, but as a type of heaven. To conclude therefore, let it
be our care to live and to die in faith, and then however it fare with us in
respect of burial, we are happy, our souls enter into ^lisse immediately, 2
Cor. 5. 1. And so also shall our bodias at length be made par^akers of it, 1
Cor. 15. 53.

THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON.
PSA. 16. 10. Thou will not leave my soul in hell.
THe Article of Christ's descending into hell, is grounded upon this Text,
wherein as S. Peter shows, Act. 2. 25. etc. David spoke concerning Christ. And
therefore Austin might Quis nisi infidelis negaverit fuisse apud inferos
Christum? Aug. Epist. 99.
well say, who but an infidel will deny that Christ was in hell? For this, that
Christ's soul should not be left in hell, does necessarily presuppose that his
soul was in hell: For it is most irrational and absurd, to say that one shall
be left there, where he never was, nor should be. All therefore (as Bellarmine
observes) Omnes convenient, quod Christus aliquo modo ad inferos descenderit.
Bell. de Christi anima lib. 4. cap. 6.
agree in this, that Christ some way, in one sense or other, was in hell. But
for the manner how Christ was in hell, there is much difference among Divines;
and all arises from the word hell, which some take in one sense, and some in
another, I shall as briefly, and perspicuously as I may set down the several
opinions, that there are about this point, confuting those which I hold to be
erroneous, and confirming that which I judge to be true.

First therefore, because the word Hell is sometimes The first opinion about
Christ's descending into hell.
in Scripture used metaphorically, for most great and grievous affliction,
which is endured here in this life, ( the sorrows of hell compassed me about,
says David, Psalm. 18. 5. So Psalm. 116. 3. The pains of hell got hold on me.)
Some by Christ's descending into hell spoken of in the Creed, understand the
inward sufferings of Christ's soul, which of all his sufferings were most
grievous. But to omit other arguments against this opinion, it is sufficiently
overthrown by this, that these words of David (Thou will not leave my soul in
hell) as cited and expounded by Peter in the second of the Acts, are the ground
of that Article in the Creed; for else it has no ground in Scripture, as I
think I am sure, there is no place which does so clearly hold out unto us by
necessary consequence Christ's being in hell, as this does. And therefore though
Calvin, (a prime Author of this first opinion, and a man most deservedly
renowned in the Church of God) spoke consentaneously to his opinion, when in
his Commentary upon this sixteenth Psalm, he liked not that upon occasion of
these words of David, any should fall upon the point of Christ's descending into
hell, which is mentioned in the Creed, yet I can by no means assent unto him.
For if not these words of David which we have now in hand, no place in all the
Scripture (I dare say) will afford occasion to treat of the Article. But it
appears that Calvin (being a man very acute) did well perceive that these words
of David, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, as commented upon Act. 2. will
not admit, that Christ's descending into hell should be expounded of the
sufferings of Christ's soul. For by hell in the words of David, must needs be
meant something that concerned Christ when he was dead: Peter tells us that in
those words ( Thou will not leave my soul in hell) David spoke of the
Resurrection of Christ, Act. 2. 31. Now if this, that Christ's soul should not
be left in hell, import that Christ should rise from the dead, then it must
necessarily follow, that Christ's being in hell, which is implied in David's
words, imports something that concerned him being dead: And consequently the
sufferings of Christ's soul, which were before his death, cannot be meant by it.

Secondly, the Papists take hell here for Limbus The second opinion.
Patrum, as they call it, a place where they say the souls of the godly that
died before Christ, were. For they divide hell into four several regions, 1.
The hell of the damned, the place of eternal torment, 2. Purgatory, where they
say the souls of such are as were not sufficiently purged from their sins,
whiles they were upon earth, and therefore for the thorough purging of them,
are there in torment equal for the time to that of the damned, 3. Limbus
Infantium, a place where they place such Infants as die without baptism, whom
they make to suffer the loss of heaven and heavenly happiness, but no pain or
torment, 4. Limbus Patrum, where in like manner the Fathers before Christ (as
they hold) were, suffering no pain, but only wanting the joys of heaven. To
that place (say they) did Christ's soul when it was separated from his body,
descend, to deliver the souls from thence, and to carry them to heaven; this is
their opinion, and their exposition of the Article of Christ's descending into
hell.

But not now to contest with them about those other regions of hell, viz.
Purgatory and Limbus Infantium, as for this Limbus Patrum, it is a place of
their own devising, we see no ground for it in Scripture, but strong reasons
against it. For 1. Christ's death was efficacious to believers before his
coming, as well as it is now since his coming. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13. 8. We believe that thorough the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as they, said Peter, speaking of
those that were before Christ. He does but equal us to them in point of
salvation thorough Christ.

2. The faithful before Christ did account this life upon earth a pilgrimage,
and did expect heaven as their country, when this life was ended. These all
died in faith (it is spoken of Abraham Isaac and Jacob) having not received the
promises (that is, the things promised) but saw them afar off, and were
persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers
and pilgrims on the earth. For they that say such things, declare plainly that
they seek a Country. And truly if they had been mindful of that country, from
whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned. But now
they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly; wherefore God is not
ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City, Heb. 11.
11. 14, 15, 16.

3. Abraham's bosom (as the place is called, where the souls of the godly were
before Christ) could be no such place as that which they call Limbus Patrum.
For 1. Lazarus was carried thither by Angels, Luke 16. 22. But Angels (the good
Angels, as they were) should rather carry to heaven then to hell, as they make
their Limbus to be. 2. It was a place of comfort, Luke 16. 25. But where hell
Nondum inveni, and adhuc quaero, nec mihi occurit Inferos alicubi in bono
posuisse Scripturam duntaxat Canonicam, non autem in bono accipiendum sinum
Abrahae, and illam requiem, quo ab angelis pius pauper ablatus est, nescio
utrum quisquam possit audire. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 12. c. 33.
in Scripture is taken for a place of comfort, let them look: Augustine
confesses that he did seek, but could not find it; and thought this a good
argument, why by hell should not be meant Abraham's bosom. 3. There was a great
space, a great gulf betwixt the place called Abraham's bosom where Lazarus
was, and the place of torment where the rich man was, Luke 16. 26. Whence also
Austin infers that Abraham's bosom is no part, and as it were a member In
his ipsis tanti magistri verbis, ubi ait dixisse Abraham, Inter vos and nos
Chaos magnum firmatum est, satis, ut opinor, ipparet, non esse quandam partem,
and quasi membrum inferorum tantae illius faelicitatis sinum. Aug. Epist. 99.
Jansen. Concord. cap. 97.
of hell, which the Papists make it to be. Jansenius a learned Papist (being
much more ingenious then Bellarmine, and Gregory Martin, who would gladly
fasten upon Austin that which is quite contrary to his meaning) confesses that
Austin by discourse and argumentation did gather, that Abraham's bosom was no
part of hell; neither does he, nor any other that I know, endeavor to answer
the reasons that induced Austine to be of this judgment.

4. Christ promised to the believing thief, saying, This day shall thou be with
me in Paradise. Now Bellarmine himself (handling another Bellar. de Beatitud.
Sanct. l. 1. c. 3.
point) holds Paradise there to be heaven, as the word is used; 2 Cor. 12. 4.
compared with v. 2. Now how does this stand with that assertion of theirs, that
the souls of the Saints were not in heaven until Christ's ascension? or that
Christ's soul went to Limbus, a place very far distant and different from
heaven? Some say, that the Thief to whom Christ spoke, descended with Christ
into Limbus, and that it was then Paradise when Christ was there: But this (as
a reverend Author says well) B. Usher of Christ's descent into hell. Bellar. de
beat. Sanc. l. 1. c. 6.
is to turn the third heaven into the third or fourth hell.

5. Bellarmine proves that the faithful now since the coming of Christ; go
immediately after death to heaven, (except Purgatory stop them a while) and
that because God is not more prone and ready to punish, then he is to reward;
therefore seeing the wicked go immediately to hell, there is no reason to
conceive but that the godly go immediately to heaven. And that the wicked when
they die go immediately to hell, he proves by the example of the rich man
mentioned Luke 16. Now if this argument be of force, (as I grant it is) then it
proves as much for the faithful that were before Christ: For that of the rich
man, Luke 16. shows that then (before Christ's death) the wicked immediately
after death went to hell, where the damned are in torment; and neither will the
Papists however deny that. And therefore why should they deny that the godly
then did go immediately to heaven, God being no less ready to reward, then to
punish? These reasons there are against that Limbus which they speak of, and so
against their Exposition of the Article of Christ's descending into hell: But
some Objections they make, which are to be answered.

Object. They object that Genesis 37. 53. I will go down to the grave (to hell, as
they read it) to my Son, etc. Thus spoke Jacob concerning his son Joseph, when
his brethren had sold him, and made Jacob believe that some wild beast had
devoured him. The Hebrew word there used viz. Sheol, which we sometimes
translate grave, sometimes hell, they say cannot there signify grave, but must
signify hell, viz. that part of hell, which they call Limbus Patrum; Jacobs
meaning (say they) was that he would go mourning thither, whither Joseph (as he
supposed) was gone before him: And they prove that the grave cannot there be
meant, because Jacob imagined Joseph torn in pieces by some wild beast, and so
not to have been buried.

Answ. But this place makes nothing for their purpose; all that Jacob meant
was, that in vain did they go about to comfort him, for he would not be
comforted, but would mourn unto death, even as Joseph (he thought) was dead:
It Is not unusual for those that mourn for their friends being dead, to say
that they will go unto them, Aben Ezrae a Jewish Rabbin does upon that very
place Genesis 37. 33. reprove them that take Sheol for hell. See B. Usher of
Christ's descent.
meaning that they also will die as they died: As for the word Sheol, it
signifies the estate of the dead, (as hereafter I shall show) and so the grave,
yet not properly an artificial grave, but a natural grave, such an one as
nature one way or other does provide for every one, whatsoever the manner of
his death be. It Is reported of the Hyrcanians, that they were so barbarous, as
to cast dead bodies unto dogs to be devoured: And that thereupon Diogenes used
to say, that if he were torn in pieces by dogs, yet he should have an
Hyrcanian burial; so if Joseph had been devoured by a wild beast, the very
belly of the beast had been a grave unto him.

Object. But again, they object likewise that Joh. 14. 2. I go to prepare a
place for you; thence they infer, that before Christ's ascension none did go to
heaven.

Answ. But this inference is not good; for (as was showed before) Christ's
death, and so his resurrection and his ascension was effectual from the
beginning; as by virtue of Christ's death the faithful that were before Christ,
had their sins remitted, so also by virtue of his ascension did they go to
heaven.

Object. But (say they again) the Scripture plainly tells us, that the way
into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first
Tabernacle was yet standing; therefore during that time none did go to heaven.

Answ. This does not follow; the meaning of those words is only this, (as
Aquinas himself Acquin. ad loc.
does expound them) that Christ who is the way, as he styles himself, Ioh. 14.
6. was not then in the time of the Law so clearly revealed, as now he is in the
time of the Gospel; before he was set forth more darkly under types and
figures, but now is plainly preached. And so much for this second Opinion
touching Christ's descent into hell.

Thirdly, some taking the word hell for the The third Opinion.
hell of the damned, the ^ace where the damned are in torment, (which is the
most usual acception of our English word hell) conceive and maintain, that
when Christ died his soul went thither, there to triumph over Satan in his own
Palace; and this they hold to be the meaning of that in the Creed, He descended
into hell: But that ever Christ was in that hell, I can make no part of my
Creed; for I see nothing in Scripture (upon which faith must be grounded) for
it, but much against it.

1. The Hebrew word Sheol, and the Greek word Hades, which are translated hell,
do not properly signify the hell of the damned, but are of a more large
extent, as I shall show hereafter.

2. The four Evangelists (as we use to call them) Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John, writing professedly the History of our Savior Christ from his
Incarnation to his Ascension, do neither directly, nor by consequence, neither
expressly nor implicitly record any such thing as his going to hell, as hell
is taken for the place of torment. And it is observable, that S. Luke in his
Preface to his Gospel tells Theophilus, that he did write unto him that he
might know the certainty of those things wherein he had been instructed, Luke
1. 4. wherein he had been catechized, as according to the Original it does
sound; (...).
so that Christ's descending into hell in this sense, whereof S. Luke makes no
mention, was no part of Theophilus his Catechism.

3. S. Paul rehearsing the chief heads of the Gospel which he preached to the
Corinthians, mentions Christ's death and burial, and his resurrection, 1 Cor.
15. 1, 2, 3, 4. but for his going to hell according to this Exposition, he
neither expresses nor implies any such matter. So that it was no part of the
Gospel which Paul preached to the Corinthians, and yet there was no deficiency
in his preaching, it was sufficient to save them, v. 2.

4. These words of the Text in hand, Thou will not leave my soul in hell,
together with S. Peter's comment upon them, Acts 2. show, that by hell is not to
be understood the hell of the damned, according to this Exposition.

For, 1. It is spoken of as a great benefit, a matter of joy and rejoicing,
that Christ's soul was not left in hell; Therefore my heart is glad, and my
glory [my tongue, Acts 2. 26.] rejoiced: my flesh also shall rest in hope; for
thou will not leave my soul in hell, etc. Psalm. 16. 9, 10. But is it to be
accounted such a benefit, such a matter of joy and gladness for one not to be
left in that place, to which he goes to that end that he may triumph over his
adversaries whom he has conquered? as they that embrace this Exposition say
that Christ went to the hell of the damned, there to triumph over the Devils.

2. S. Peter, Acts 2. 31. says, David in these words, Thou will not leave my
soul in hell, did speak of Christ's Resurrection, and so to that purpose to
prove the Resurrection of Christ, S. Paul Acts 13. 35. does cite the later part
of the Verse, Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see corruption. But Christ's
Resurrection though it presuppose his being in hell in some sense, yet not in
that sense as hell is taken for the place where the damned are in torment:
Christ might well enough as he did, rise again, and yet never be in that hell.

3. That hell that Christ was not left in, David was left in, else S. Peter
could not argue as he does, that David in these words, Thou will not leave my
soul in hell, spoke of Christ, and not of himself; for that the words being
understood of David are not true, but most true as understood of Christ: Men
and brethren, said Peter to the Jews, let me freely speak unto you of the
Patriarch David, that he is both dead, buried, and his Sepulcher remains with
us to this day; therefore being a Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with
an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh, he
would raise up Christ to sit upon his Throne; He seeing this before, spoke of
the Resurrection of Christ, that his soul should not be left in hell, nor his
flesh see corruption, Acts 2. 29, 30, 31. By David's Sepulcher remaining with
them, to that day, S. Peter means that David was left in the hell which he
speaks of, and therefore did not speak of himself, but of Christ, who was not
left in it. So S. Paul having cited the words immediately following these of
the Text, Thou shall not suffer thy holy one to see corruption, he also proves
that this was meant of Christ, and not of David; For David (says he) after he
had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid
with his fathers, and saw corruption: But he whom God raised again, saw no
corruption, Acts 13. 35, 36, 37. David spoke not of himself, but of Christ,
when he said, Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see corruption, because
David did see corruption, but Christ did not see it; so David spoke not of
himself, but of Christ, when he said, Thou will not leave my soul in hell;
because David's soul was left in hell, but Christ's soul was not left in it: This
is the Apostles argument, which necessarily evinceth, that by hell here spoken
of, is meant some other thing then the place of torment; for David's soul was
not left in that hell, it never came into it; that hell belonging not to the
godly and elect, but to the wicked and reprobate: Therefore neither is this the
hell in which (as the words imply) Christ's soul was for a while, though it did
not remain there.

5. This Exposition of Christ's descending into the hell of the damned there to
triumph, makes his descending into hell a part of his exaltation; for it is ones
exaltation to triumph over his enemies. But Christ's descending into hell
expressed in the Creed, and intimated in the Scripture, was a part of his
humiliation. Thou will not leave my soul in hell: surely it was a part of
Christ's humiliation to be there, seeing he speaks of it as a benefit, and an
argument of his joy and gladness (as before noted) that he was not to be left
there. Besides, Christ's Resurrection was the beginning, and (...). Eusebius.
Demonst. Evang. lib. 10.
the first step of his exaltation, and therefore what went before his
Resurrection, as his descending into hell did, belonged to his humiliation. The
Apostle says that Christ humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even
the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 8. And it is unquestionable, that Christ's
death was a part, and a chief part of his humiliation. Therefore so long as he
remained dead, that is, until his Resurrection, he was in the estate of
humiliation.

6. It appears by Scripture, that when Christ died his soul went to heaven, and
therefore not to hell, as taken for the place of torment, which is most
opposite and contrary unto heaven. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise,
said Christ to the penitent malefactor. Therefore Christ's soul being separated
from his body, went to Paradise, which is all one with the third [that is, the
highest] heaven, as was before showed. Some answer that Christ meant of himself
in respect of his divine nature, which is in all places, and in Paradise or
heaven in a more especial manner; in that respect (they say) Christ did
promise the repentant thief that he should be with him that day in Paradise.
But first, Bellarmine does well refell this Bellar. de Beatitud. Sanct. l. 1.
c. 3.
answer; for that Christ promised that the thief should be where he was; but
in respect of his divine nature, Christ was with the thief here in this world,
even then when he played the thief; so that in this sense Christ in those words
( with me) had promised no new thing unto him. 2. The word of Christ cannot
without doing violence unto them be otherwise taken, then to import this, that
as the thief was then in respect of the body, partner with Christ in pain and
torment, so that same day both their souls should be together, where they
should enjoy bliss and happiness. Some therefore yielding that those words,
with me, have reference to Christ in respect of his soul, say that Christ's soul
betwixt his death and his Resurrection, might be both in heaven, and in hell
the place of torment, one while in the one, another while in the other. But
this is a groundless conjecture, the Scripture Act. 2. clearly Videtur quod
usque ad horam resurrectionis. manserit in inferno. Aquinas part. 3. qu. 5.
art. 4.
enough shows, that Christ's soul from the time of his death was in the hell
that it speaks of, until the time of his Resurrection. Again, some of the
ancients do not without cause infer from those words of Christ, which he spoke
when he gave up the Ghost, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. For
though Christ's soul even in the hell of the damned, might yet be said to be in
the hands of the Father, yet much Eusebius Emisenus, (...). Juenricus. Tunc
clamor Domini magno conamine missus, Aetheriis animam comitem commiscuit auris.
rather might it be said to be in his hands, being in heaven.

Some arguments used in defense of this opinion are to be answered.

Ob. As first that drawn from Mat. 12. 40. As Jonas was three days and three
nights in the belly of the whale, so shall the son of man be three days and
three nights in the heart of the earth: Here by the heart of the earth, they
understand hell, the hell of the damned, which they suppose to be in the heart,
or midst of the earth. The Papists also make use of this place for their Limbus
before spoken of: but it makes for neither opinion. For 1. The Scripture does
not declare where hell (the place Qui ignis (gehennae) cujusmodi, and in qua
mundi, vel regionum part futurus* sit, hominem arbitror scire neminem, nisi
forte cui Spiritus divinus ostendit. Aug. de Civ, Dei lib. 20. cap. 16.
of torment, to which the Papists make their Limbus to be contiguous) is
seated. Austin speaking of the fire of hell, says, that he supposed no man
could tell of what kind it is, or in what part of the world, except perhaps
Gods spirit did reveal it. 2. In those words of Christ which are objected, by
the heart of the earth is meant the grave. For Christ's abiding so long in the
heart of the earth, was to be a sign to the Jews (as the context shows)
therefore it was to be a thing apparent unto them, which his abiding so long in
the grave was, but not his abiding so long either in Limb, or in the hell of
the damned. For if ever Christ were there, yet it was more then the Jews could
see, but they might see that at such a time he was laid in the grave, and that
he continued there until such a time after.

Ob. Against this it is objected, That the heart is put for the midst of a
thing, and therefore the grave being not the midst of the earth, cannot be the
heart of it.

Answ. But in the Scripture that part of a thing which is betwixt the extremes,
though it be not equally distant from the extremes, is called the midst, or the
heart, Ezekiel. 14. 14. 16. 18. 20. where its said, if Noah, Daniel and Job were
in it, etc. in the original it is word for word, in the midst of (...)
it; where by the midst of the Land is not meant precisely the middle part of
the Land, but any place within it. S^ Ezekiel. 27. 4. Tyrus is said to be in the
midst of the sea; in the original (as the margent notes) it is, in the heart
of the sea. Yet this heart or midst of the sea was not exactly the middle of
it; for Tyrus as it is said there v. 3. was situate at the entry of the sea.

Ob. But Bellarmine yet further objects, that Christ's sepulcher seems to have
been above the earth, and not at all within it, because it was hewn out of a
rock, as the Scripture tells us.

Answ. But this hinders not why it might not be within the earth; and that it
was so, the Scripture shows, relating how a great stone was rolled to the
mouth of the sepulcher, Mat. 27. 60. and that John stooped down to look into
the sepulcher, Ioh. 20. 5. These circumstances argue that the sepulcher was
beneath in the earth, and therefore might well be called the heart of the earth.

Ob. Again they argue from Ephesians. 4. 9. where it is said, That Christ descended
into the lower parts of the earth, which some will have to signify hell, the
place of torment, and the Papists will have Limbus Patrum to be meant.

Answ. But 1. why the lower parts of the earth should denote the hell of the
damned, or Limbus Patrum (if there had been any such place at all) I do not
see, it being unknown to us [as I said before] where that hell is seated. 2.
Therefore Cajetans exposition is much better, that by the lower parts of the
earth Ad inferiores parts terrae, i. e. ad inferiorem partem mundi, terram,
Cajet. ad loc. Comparatur non una pars terrae cum altera, sed tota terra cum
caelo, acsi diceret, ex sede tam excelsa in hoc nostrum Barathrum descendisse.
Calvin. ad loc.
is meant the earth, which is the lower part of the world, heaven being the
higher part of it. This exposition does well agree with the Apostles argument
which he there uses, This that he ascended, what is it, but that he also
descended first into the lower parts of the earth?

Before Christ could ascend into heaven, it was necessary that he should
descend to the earth by his Incarnation; but there was no necessity of his
descending either to the hell of the damned, or to Limbus Patrum before his
Ascension into heaven: he might well ascend thither, though he did never
descend to either of those places. 3. If by the lower parts of the earth, it be
not meet to understand the whole earth, as being the lower part of the world,
but that some certain parts of the earth lower then the rest must be
understood, then most fitly thereby is understood the grave, into which Christ
deseended. The grave is called the lower parts of the earth (that is, one of
the lower parts, as Judge. 12. 7. it is said, Iephtah was buried in the Cities of
Gilead, that is, in one of the Cities) in opposition to the surface on upper
part of the earth, on which we live. Thus Ezekiel. 32. 18. by the nether parts of
the earth are meant graves, as it is expressed v. 23.

Object. But again, some allege that Romans 10. 7. Who shall descend into the
deep? that is to bring up Christ again from the dead: where the Apostle
insinuates that Christ being dead was in the deep; and by the deep is sometimes
meant hell the place of torment, as Luke 8. 31. where it is said, that the
Devils besought Christ, That he would not command them to go out into the
deep. And so Revel. 9. 1. and 20. 1. where the same word in the Original is
used, but is rendered bottomless pit. Some therefore from those words of the
Apostle, draw an argument to prove that when Christ died, his soul went to
hell, where the damned are in torment.

Answ. But though the word which the Apostle uses, be sometimes taken in that
sense, it follows not that it must be so taken here, it being not the proper
signification of the word, nor any thing appearing to restrain it here to that
sense: The Apostle there, I grant, does imply that Christ was in the deep when
he was dead, but by the deep I see not why we should understand any other thing
then death, or the grave, which like a great deep does swallow up that (...)
LXX. (...).
which falls into it; Thou shall bring me again (says David) from the depths
of the earth, Psalm. 71. 20. that is, from death, or from the grave, as appears
by the words immediately before, thou shall quicken me. So Psalm. 88. 6. Thou
have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps; where (...) LXX.
(...).
in the Original is used another word, but of like signification, and what he
means by being laid in the deeps, we may see by that in the Verse going before,
Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave: And the Septuagint
there for in the deeps, have in the shadow of death. And so much for the third
Opinion about the meaning of the Article of Christ's descending into hell.

THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON.
FOurthly, some by hell, where Christ's being in The fourth Opinion.
hell is spoken of, understand the grave: In this sense diverse both ancient and
modern Writers take it. And it is observed, that in all the ancient Creeds that
were Ruffin. in Symb. Sciendum san^ est, quod in Ecclesiae Romanae symbolo non
habetur additum, descendit ad inferna; sed neque in orientis Ecclesiis habetur
hic Sermo. Vis tamen verbi eadem videtur esse in eo quod sepultus dicitur. See
B. Usher, who has many testimonies of the ancients to this purpose.
within 600. years after Christ, except one, which Ruffinus followed, if
Christ's burial be mentioned, then his descending into hell is not mentioned;
and if his descending into hell be mentioned, then his burial is not
mentioned. See to this purpose Athanasius his Creed, and the Nicene Creed,
which are both to be found in the Book of Common Prayer. This argues, that the
ancients did take Christ's burial and his descending into hell to import both
one thing, and therefore they thought it sufficient to mention either the one
or the other, and Ruffinus mentioning both, yet thinks the one to differ
nothing from the other. Certain it is, that Sheol and Hades, which words are
rendered hell, are often used for the grave, which though some of the Papists
either ignorantly or impudently deny, yet some of Genebr. in Symb. Athanas.
them again do acknowledge it, and one (namely Genebrard) otherwise none of the
modestest and most ingenuous among them, Genesis 42. 38. If mischief befall him by
the way, in the which you go, then you shall bring down my gray ^airs with
sorrow to the grave. The word there rendered grave is Sheol, which in the Text
is rendered hell; and so it is the same word that is used Genesis 44. 29. 31. where
it is likewise translated grave. And in these places the grave must needs be
meant; for to the grave and to no other hell do gray hairs (mentioned in those
same places) go down: So by the same reason the word signifies the grave, 1
King. 2. 6. Let not his hoare head go down to (Sheol, that is) the grave in
peace. And v. 9. But his hoare head bring down to (Sheol, i. e.) the grave with
blood. So Job 17. 13. If I wait, the grave (in the Original it is Sheol) is
mine house; that the grave is there meant, appears by v. 14. I have said to
corruption, thou art my Father, to the worm, thou art my mother and my sister.
And Psalm. 141. Our bones are scattered at the graves mouth. In the Hebrew is
Sheol, which can there signify nothing but the grave, though the Vulgar Latin
Translator there have secus infernum, near hell, as the English Papists at
Doway render it, yet Genebrard upon the place expounds it, juxta sepulchrum, by
the grave: For how should bones lie scattered by any other hell then that?
Psalm. 6. 5. In the grave [Sheol also is there in the Originall] who shall give
thee thanks? That Sheol is there rightly rendered the grave, appears by that
parallel place, Psalm. 88. 11. Shall thy loving kindness be deelared in the
grave? Where the Hebrew word is Keber, which only signifies the grave. And by
that word Keber do the So R. Solomon expounds it, Genesis 37. 35. And so also
there Aben Ezra. So likewise R. Levi, 2 Samuel 22. 6.
Jewish Rabbines usually expound the word Sheol, which in the Text and in other
places is rendered hell.

Ob. But it is objected, that in these words, Thou will not leave my soul in
hell., the grave cannot be meant by hell; because here the Scripture speaks of
Christ's soul not being left in hell, whereas it is not the soul, but the body
that is in the grave.

Answ. To this it is answered, that some learned Papists themselves in these
words, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, by hell understand the grave, and
by soul the body. And therefore Bellarmine and others had no reason to
exagitate Beza * See B. Usher whocites Pagnine, Vatablus, Arias Montanus, and
Isidorus Clarius.
for interpreting those words in that manner. But may some say, Is the soul
sometimes put for the body? I answer, yes that it is, Genesis 46. 26. All the
souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins, etc. There
by souls are meant bodies; for according to the opinion generally received of
Papists and Protestants, the bodies and not the souls of children are from the
loins of their parents. If any shall say, that there in that place of Genesis,
by souls, are meant persons, who are called souls, the part, (and that the
better part) being put for the whole: I reply, 1. That yet the persons there
are called souls in respect of their bodies; for that in respect of them it was
that they came out of Jacobs loins. 2. That the same may be said here, that
soul is put for the person, whereof the soul is a part, Thou will not leave my
soul in hell, that is, thou will not leave me in hell, where by hell may still
be meant the grave.

But some may yet further inquire and say, Is the body alone, when the soul is
departed out of it, any where in Scripture called soul? I answer, yes it is,
Levit. 21. 1. There shall none be defiled for the dead, etc. In the original
the word rendered the dead, is Nephesh, (...)
which in the Text, and usually, is rendered soul. The same word also is used
for a dead body, Number. 19. 13. Whosoever touches the dead body of (...) Bellar.
de Christo lib. 4. cap. 12.
any man, etc. Bellarmine answers, that there is great difference betwixt the
Hebrew word Nephesh, and the Greek word (used Act. 2.) Psyche, for that Psyche,
and so the Latin word anima (he says) is not of so large acception as Nephesh:
but nothing could be said more absurd then this is. For as here in the Text the
Hebrew word Nephesh is in Greek rendered Psyche, that is, soul; even so is it
also in those other places, to wit, Levit. 21. 1. Number. 19. 13. where Bellarmine
confesses Nephesh to signify either the whole man, or the body apart by it
self; the same must therefore necessarily be confessed of the Greek word
Psyche. And thus also sometimes is the Latin word anima used, to wit, for the
body when it is dead, as in that of the Prince of Latin Poets, -- Virgil.
animamque sepulchro Condimus, that is word for word, And we lay the soul in
the sepulcher, where by the soul must needs be meant the dead body. Austin
uses a fit similitude whereby to illustrate the reason why the Sicut
appellamus Ecclesiam, Basilicam, qua continetur populus, qui vere appellatur
Ecclesia, ut nomine Ecclesiae, id est, populi, qui continetur, significemus
locum qui continet. Ita quod animae corporibus continentur, intelligi corpora
filiorum per nominatas animas ( Genesis 46. 26.) possunt. Sic enim melius
accipitur etiam illud, quod Lex inquinari dicit cum, qui intraverit super
animam mortuam, hoc est, super defuncti cadaver; ut nomine animae mortuae
mortuum corpus intelligatur, quod animam continebat; quia and absente populo,
id est, Ecclesia, locus tamen ille nibilominus ecclesia nuncupatur. Aug. Epist.
57. ad Optat.
soul is sometimes taken for the body, and that even when the soul is departed
from it. As we commonly call the place where the people of God assemble
together for religious exercises, the Church, whenas properly the people
themselves are the Church. So the soul contained in the body, is put for the
body in which it is contained. And as the place is called the Church, even when
the people (which is indeed the Church) is out of it. So also the soul is
sometimes put for the body, even when the body is dead, and the soul separated
from it.

Ob. But against this exposition it is objected, that in the Creed Christ's
burial is spoken of before, and that plainly, and therefore it is not probable
that it should be mentioned over again, and that in such obscure words as
these, he descended into hell.

Answ. This objection seems to be of much force, and in this respect I am
inclined to think, that the meaning of these words, he descended into hell, is
not the same with that which went immediately before, and buried, but that
something more is signified in Christ's descending into hell, then in his
burial; yet they that follow this Exposition do not altogether want what to
answer to the Objection. For, 1. When as anciently (as before I noted) only one
of these (either Christ's burial or his descending into hell) was mentioned in
the Creed, it might so come to pass, that afterward both were joined together,
and yet the same thing be signified by them. 2. Christ's funeration or preparing
for his burying, may be understood in the Creed by the word See. B. Usher.
buried; She did it for my burial, so we read Christ's words, Mat. 26. 12. where
be speaks of the woman (...).
that powered ointment upon him. The words in the Original, which are rendered,
for my burial, properly signify, to prepare me for burial. And by Christ's
descending into hell, may be meant his interring, or laying in the grave. 3. If
these answers do not satisfy, as I confess I am not satisfied with them, it
may be said, (and so some do interpret their meaning) that they who expound
those words, Thou will not leave my Ames. in Bell. Ener.
soul in hell, so as by hell to understand the grave, do not by Christ's being
in hell, or descending into hell simply understand his be laid in the grave,
[which is his buriall] but his abiding in the state of death, which in respect
of the body, was his abiding in the grave: But this last answer falls into
another Exposition of Christ's descending into hell, which though it be near
akin to this last mentioned, yet is distinct from it. The fifth Opinion.


Fifthly, therefore some by Christ's being in hell understand his being in the
state of the dead, and under the power and dominion of death. And this I hold
the best and most genuine Exposition of these words, Thou will not leave my
soul in hell, that is, thou will not leave me in the state of the dead, or
under the power of death, but wilt raise me again from the dead. And so
consequently the Article of Christ's descending into hell (whereof these words
are the foundation) imports no more, but that Christ went into the other world,
was in the state of the dead, and under deaths dominion, to wit, until his
Resurrection. This Exposition keeps the propriety of the words, and the order
of the Creed, neither is there any thing that I know of weight against it. The
Hebrew word Sheol, and the Greek Hades, which are rendered sometimes hell, do
signify the estate of the dead, or the power of death; Hell and destruction
are before the Lord, Prove. 15. 11. Jansenius a learned Writer of the Church of
Rome, upon the place notes, that by hell and destruction Per infernum and
perditionem significatur status mortuorum, and non solum damnatorum, ut nos
fere ex his vocibus auditis concipimus, sed in genere status defunctorum.
Jansen. ad loc.
is signified the state of the dead, and not only of the damned, as we usually
when we hear these words, do conceive, but the state of those in general that
are departed out of this life. Thus also Genebrard another Romish Author, and a
skillful Hebritian, on Psalm. 30. 3. (as we reckon) Ab inferno, id est, e statu
mortuorum liberasti. Geneb. ad loc.
where David says, O Lord thou have brought up my soul from Sheol, (hell, our
Translators have, the grave) Genebrard I say interprets it thus: From hell,
that is, out of the state of the dead have thou delivered me. And so that Psalm.
89. 48. What man is he that lives and shall not see death? and shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of Sheol, of hell? So Viz. That in the Book of
Common Prayer. Infernus significat totum mortuorum statum. Genesis ad loc.
one of our Translations has it, the last Translation has of the grave; that
likewise does Genebrard expound in like manner, though first he would draw it
to their fained Limbus beforementioned, yet upon second thoughts (which use to
be wiser) he adds, Hell does signify the whole state of the dead.

And it is evident, that by hell there, cannot be meant the hell of the damned;
for David would not make it a thing impossible for any to escape that hell, as
he does make it for any to escape the hell that he speaks of: Therefore by
hell he must needs mean either the grave (and then the word [soul] is not taken
properly) or the state of the state of the* dead, from which without
extraordinary dispensation, none is exempted. Thus also is the Greek word Hades
used, 1 Cor. 15. 55. O Hades, [O hell, so our Translators in the Margent render
it, though the Textuall reading be, O grave] where is thy victory? There is no
other hell, but the state of the dead, and the power of death, which is
vanquished and destroyed at and by the Resurrection, of which the Apostle there
speaks. So Rev. 20. 16. Death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, that
is, death and the power of death: For the hell of the damned, the place of
torment, cannot there be meant by hell, that hell being the lake of fire, into
which hell, there spoken of, is cast: The meaning of the words is, that at the
Resurrection there shall be no more death, nor any power of death any where,
but only in that lake of fire, the place where the damned are in torment, whose
condition because of the wretchedness of it, is called death, the second
death, Rev. 20. 6. And thus both Ecclesiastical and Heathen Authors do use the
word Hades, making all that are dead, and so under the power of death, to be
(...), in inferno, See B. Usher.
in hell, as we English it. And thus have some of the ancients expounded
Christ's descending into hell. This is the Law of humane necessity, (says
Hilary) Humanae ista Lex necessitatis, ut consepultis corporibus ad inferos
animae descendant. Quam descensionem Dominus ad consummationem very hominis non
recusavit. Hill. in Psalm. 138.
that when the bodies are buried, the souls descend into hell, [he means by
hell, the state of the dead in general, and the power of death keeping the
soul separated from the body] which descent, the Lord [Christ] to prove himself
true man, did not refuse; in like manner other of the Ancients. S. Peter's words
also do confirm this Exposition, Acts 2. 24. where speaking of Christ he says,
Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was not
possible that he should be holden by it. The word in the Original signifies to
be holden (...)
by force and strong hand, to be holden under ones power and dominion. And to
prove that Christ could not possibly be thus held by death, he alleges the
testimony of the Prophet David, who speaking in the Person of Christ, said,
Thou will not leave my soul in hell: So that by Peter's Commentary upon these
words of David, it appears that Christ's not being left in hell signifies
nothing else but his not being left under the power of death, from which he was
freed by his Resurrection, of which Peter says that David did speak in those
words, Acts 2. 31. And consequently Christ's being in hell (which is implied in
these words of David, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, and expressed in the
Creed) imports nothing else but his being under the power of death, under which
he was kept for a while, though not long. So that of S. Paul, Romans 6. 9. Christ
being risen from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him;
that also intimates that Christ being dead, until he rose from the dead, death
had dominion over him, not whether he would or no, but through his own
permission, Joh. 10. 18.

Ob. But may some say, according to this Exposition, there is nothing more
signified in the Article of Christ's descending into hell, then in the other
that he died.

Answ. I answer: Yes, there is more signified in the one, then in the other:
For that Christ died, imports only that his soul was separated from his body;
but, that he descended into hell, imports that his soul and body continued
for a while in the state of separation, to wit, until his Resurrection, when
they were again united one to the other. Such difference as there is betwixt B.
Usher.
birth and life here, such also is there betwixt death and descending into
hell: Death performs its work in a moment, but hell continues this work, to
wit, the separation of the soul from the body, until the body rising again,
the soul and it are reunited together: Therefore it may seem to be said, Rev.
6. 8. that hell followed after death, and thus both soul and body are said to
be in Sheol, or Hades, or hell, whilst they remain separated one from the
other.

Object. But again it may be objected, that if the soul whilst it is in a
state of separation from the body, be said to be in hell, then it is in hell
even when it is in heaven.

Answ. It is granted; nor is this uncouth or inconvenient, as some may think it
to be, because of the usual sense and signification wherein the word hell is
taken: For as the word flesh is in B. Usher.
our ordinary speech taken strictly in opposition to fish, yet sometimes, and
in propriety of speech it is of a more large extent. For, there is a flesh of
fish, 1 Cor, 15. 39. So though we usually take the word hell in opposition to
heaven, taking hell for the place of torment, as heaven for the place of
happiness; yet the word hell as answering the Hebrew Sheol, and the Greek
Hades, is so large as to comprehend even heaven it self in the notion of it:
Not indeed as heaven is the place of bliss and happiness, nor as it shall be
after the Resurrection, when the soul and body shall be in heaven, but as
heaven is the receptacle of souls separated from their bodies; which state of
separation (though it rea^h to heaven, as it does in respect of the souls of
the godly, yet) appertains to the dominion of death, and the imperfection of
the Saints, who are not set free from that dominion of death, and that
imperfection, until the Resurrection.

Object. Some may yet again object, That the word descended, which is used in
the Creed, argues that hell is below, whereas heaven is above: and how then can
it be said, that Christ (in respect of his soul) descended into hell, whenas
his soul went to heaven?

Answ. To this it is answered diverse ways:

1. That although when the godly die, in respect of Licet ex mortuis aliqui
ascendunt in coelum, omnes tamen, qui sepeliuntur, descendunt in terram; unde a
condition prima descensus cadaverum, totus reliquus mortuorum status
appellatur descensus. Alsted. in Theol. Catechit. in Exposit. Symb.
their souls, they ascend up to heaven, yet because generally all in respect of
their bodies (when they are buried) descend down into the earth, therefore from
that first condition of the descending of dead bodies, the whole estate of the
dead is called a descent.

2. That the word which signifies, to descend, is often used for to remove
from one place to (...)
another, though it be not from a higher place to a lower, which is properly to
descend: As B Usher.
Acts 13. 4. So they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost departed unto Seleucia.
The word in the (...)
Original rendered departed, is that which properly signifies descended. So
Acts 18. 5. When Silas and Timot^^us were come from Macedonia; in the Original
the same word (rendered were come) is used. And so in other places; so that
whereas it is said in the Creed, he descended into hell, the word descended is
not to be pressed, but to be taken as if it were said, he went to h^ll. And
this may suffice for the explicating of the Article of Christ's descending into
hell, which was the thing I aimed in the handling of these words, Thou will not
leave my soul in hell.

THE NINETEENTH SERMON.
ACTS 10. 40. Him God raised up the third day.
THese words were spoken by Peter, and I need not tell of whom he spoke them;
for they that know any thing in this kind, know that it is Christ whom God
raised up the third day.

Him God raised up,] viz from the dead, as it is expressed, Romans 8. 11.

The third day,] viz. after that he died, as appears by the context; Whom they
slew, and hanged on a tree, Him* God raised up the third day.

Here then we have,

1. The Resurrection of Christ, Him God raised up.

2. The time of his Resurrection, the third day.

First then let us observe this, That Christ did rise again from the dead. The
Resurrection of Christ is an Article of main concernment: Peter told the
Disciples, that one was to be chosen in the place of Judas the traitor; and
why? to be a witness with us (said he) of his (that is, of Christ's)
resurrection, Act. 1. 22. The Apostles were to testify other things besides
the resurrection of Christ, but this is mentioned as a principal point to
which they were to give testimony. So Act. 4. 33. And with great power gave the
Apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. The Jews, the
professed enemies of Christ, believe that he died, even died the death of the
Cross; but they will not believe that he rose again, therefore Christ
Resurrectio Christi est fides Christianorum.
crucified is a stumbling block unto them, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1. 23.
But Christ's resurrection is the faith of a Christian. He that does not believe
this, does believe nothing to any purpose, If Christ be not risen (says S.
Paul, and he is as not risen, to those that do not believe him to be risen)
then is our preaching vain, and your faith also is vain, 1 Cor. 15. 14. And
again v. 17. If Christ be not raised your faith is vain. It behooves every one
therefore, not only to say that he believes the article of Christ's
resurrection, but to believe it indeed, and to know upon what grounds he does
believe it. Let us therefore see what grounds we have for this in, and from the
Scripture.

1. Christ's resurrection was tipified and prefigured. Some conceive Isaac to
have been a type and figure of Christ in this respect; Isaac, I say, who (as
the story shows, Genesis 22.) was bound, and laid upon the Altar, and as good as
dead, yet was raised up and delivered: whence it is said, that Abraham received
him from the dead in a figure, Heb. 11. 19. Some understand it thus in a figure
of (...). Eras. (resurrectionis) typo. (...). Occumen.
Christ's resurrection. But I insist not on that place, which others more
probably interpret otherwise. That Jonas his deliverance out of the whales
belly, wherein he was (as it were) buried, was a type of Christ's resurrection
from the dead, we have Christ's own testimony. As Jonas was three days, and
three nights in the whales belly (and then was delivered out of it) so shall
the son of man be three days, and three nights in the heart of the earth, that
is, in the grave, and then be raised up out of it, Mat. 12. 40.

2. Christ's resurrection was prophesied and foretold: Christ himself the great
Prophet did foretell it in those words even now cited. And so in other places,
Mat. 17, 22, 23. The son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men; and
they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again. And Joh. 2. 19.
Jesus answered, and said unto them; destroy this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it up. This he spoke of the Temple of his body, as it follows there
v. 22. And when he was risen from the dead, his Disciples remembered that he had
said this unto them, v. 22. Although Christ's own Disciples (it seems) did not
understand the meaning of those words until they were fulfilled, that is,
until Christ was risen from the dead, yet Christ had so plainly at other times
foretold his resurrection, that the chief Priests and Pharisees could say unto
Pilate, when Christ was crucified, dead and buried, Sir, we remember that that
deceiver said, while he was yet alive, after three days I will rise again. And
so the Prophets that were before Christ's coming in the flesh, did foreshew (as
other things concerning him) that he should rise from the dead. David in those
words, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine holy one to see
corruption, Psalm. 16. 10. did speak of Christ's resurrection, as is testified by
S. Peter Act. 2. 31. He seeing this before, spoke of the resurrection of
Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, nor his flesh did see corruption.
And so by S. Paul, Act. 13. 35, 36, 37. Wherefore he says also in another
Psalm, Thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. For David after
he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell asleep, and was laid
unto his fathers, and saw corruption. But he whom God raised again, saw no
corruption. So all the Prophets speaking of Christ, his Priesthood, and
Kingdom enduring for ever, did consequently speak of Christ's resurrection. As
Or Solomon who by the title seems to have been the composer of that. 72. Psalm.
David Psalm. 72. 17. and 110. 4. And Daniel chapt. 7. v. 14. Some from those
and the like places of the Prophets falsely und^^stood, did infer that Christ
should not die, Joh. ^^. 34. But the Prophets had no such meaning, but that
though Christ did die, yet he should rise again and so abide for ever. And
therefore Christ called them fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the
Prophets had written, who would not believe his resurrection, when they were
told of it, Luke 24. 25. And Paul professed that he did say no other things,
then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come, That Christ should
suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, Act.
26. 22, 23.

3. All the four Evangelists (as we call them) Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
have carefully recorded Christ's rising from the dead. Though as in other of
their relations, so in this, they differ in circumstances, some relating one
cireumstance, some another, yet they agree in the substance, all relating this,
that he rose again. They show us also that Christ after his resurrection by
many infallible proofs did show himself alive, as S. Luke speaks, Act. 1. 3.
That when his Disciples thought him to have been a spirit, he said unto them,
Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self, handle me, and see, for a
spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus
spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet, Luke 24. 39, 40. And presently
after it follows, that he called for meat, and did eat before them. S. John
also relates how when Christ had appeared after his resurrection to the
Apostles, Thomas not being among them when he heard of it, he would not believe
it, professing that except he should see in his hands the print of the nails,
and put his finger into the print of his nails, and thrust his hand into his
side, he would not believe. And that afterward Christ appeared unto them again,
Thomas being with them, and that he spoke unto Thomas saying, Reach hither thy
finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my
side, and be not faithless, but believe: And that then Thomas cried out, My
Lord and my God, Joh. 20. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. The Evangelists also record that
Christ's resurrection was witnessed by an Angel from heaven, Mat. 28. 5, 6. Mar.
16. 5, 6. Yea by more Angels then one, Luke 24. 4, 5, 6.

4. The Apostles did no less diligently preach and publish Christ's
resurrection. Paul preached it, as he testifies, 1 Cor. 15. 4. Where also in
the verses following he does largely insist upon the proof and demonstration of
it. So Act 13. 30. etc. We find that in one of his Sermons he was much upon
this point. And so also was Peter, Act. 2. 24. etc. And it is said of all the
Apostles in general (except Paul who was called to the Apostleship afterward)
that with great power they gave witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus,
Act. 4. 33. And Paul urges the force of this argument drawn from the preaching
of the Apostles, Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God, because we have
testified of God, that he raised up Christ, whom he raised not up, if so be
that the dead rise not, 1 Cor. 15. 15.

5. Diverse reasons and arguments grounded upon Scripture prove that Christ did
rise from the dead. For 1. It was meet that as Christ did freely and
voluntarily humble himself, so again he should be exalted, Those that honor
me, I will honor, says God, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Therefore as Christ did honor God
by submitting himself unto death, so God would honor him by raising him from
the dead. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross, Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, Phil. 2. 8. 9. Mansit
and in separatione inseparabilis unitas. Bern. de Consid. l. 5. c. 10.


2. Although when Christ died, his soul and body were separated one from the
other, yet the divine nature was separated from neither the one nor the other.
Come, see the place where the Lord lay, said the Angel, speaking of the grave
where the dead body of Christ was laid, Mat. 28. 6. which shows that the divine
nature was still united to the body, though the soul were separated from it.
And otherwise we could not rightly confess (as we do) in the Creed, that
Christ the only son of God was buried. Now there being this union betwixt the
divine nature, and Christ's body, it was not only meet, but necessary that his
body should be raised up, and not be held under deaths dominion. Though being
man he died, yet being God he rose again; being put to death in the flesh, (his
humane nature) but quickened by the spirit, his divine nature, 1 Pet. 3. 18.

3. For the working out of our redemption it was requisite that Christ should
not only die, but also rise again. Some when Christ did hang upon the Cross,
blasphemed, saying, He saved others, himself he cannot save, Mar. 15. 31.
Whereas that he might save others, himself he would not save, viz. not so as
not to die. But had he so died, as not to rise again, his death would have been
of none effect. For how could we have believed, that he by his death had
redeemed us from death (even eternal death and destruction) if he himself had
been so swallowed up of death, as for ever to lie under the power and dominion
of it? Therefore the Apostle says that Christ was delivered for our offenses,
and rose again for our justification, Romans 4. 25. And, if Christ be not risen,
your faith is in vain, you are yet in your sins, 1 Cor. 15. 17. And as Christ's
resurrection was thus necessary in respect of our redemption, the forgiveness
of our sins; Ephesians. 1. 7. Romans 8. 23.
so was it also in respect of the redemption of our body. How could we have
expected the resurrection of our bodies, if Christ's body had not been raised
up? If the Head had not risen again, how should the members rise again? The
resurrection of the members depends upon the resurrection of the Head; the
resurrection of Christians upon Christ's resurrection, as the Apostle shows at
large, 1 Cor. 15.

Use. 1. Now if Christ rose again; then how wretched and miserable are the
Jews, who will not believe Christ's resurrection, but as their fathers did, so do
they still, impugn and oppose it. S. Matthew relates that when the soldiers
that were set to guard Christ's sepulcher, went and told the chief Priests what
had happened they gave them large money that they might say, that whiles they
slept, Christ's Disciples came and stole them away, And this saying, (says he)
is commonly reported among the Jews until this day, Mat. 28. 11. 15. Now
consider a little what an absurd and foolish fable this was, which yet the Jews
were so ready to believe. 1. How improbable that a few weak timorous men, who
but a few days before did forsake, yea one of them forswear Christ, yet now
should be so valiant, or rather foolhardy, as to adventure to steal Christ out
of the grave, knowing that a guard of soldiers was purposely set to prevent
such a design? 2. Suppose they should have so far adventured, as some of them
to epsy whether the soldiers were asleep or no, yet how could they assure
themselves, that the soldiers should continue asleep, until they had
dispatched that for which they came? Yea, how could this be, there being a
great stone for them to roll away from the mouth of the sepulcher, which could
not be done without making such a noise as to awaken some of the soldiers at
least, if they were asleep before? 3. Grant the Disciples should have had such
courage as to attempt the business, and such happiness as to effect it, yet
would they have been so foolish and unwise, as to stay at the sepulcher to
unloose the clothes in which Christ's body was wrapped? Would they not rather
have hasted away with the body as it was buried, and have loosed the cloths
then when they had more leisure to do it, and might do it with more safety? But
the linen cloths were found lying in the grave, and the napkin that was about
Christ's head, not lying with the linen cloths, but wrapped together in a place
by it self, Ioh. 20. 6. 7. And 4. if the Disples could break thorough all
difficulties, and get Christ's body away with them, yet could they put life into
it when they had it? But Christ after his passion, by many infallible proofs
showed himself alive, Act. 1. 3. otherwise it is senseless to imagine, that the
Disciples (having so deserted Christ, when he was alive) would have so
constantly preached and avouched his resurrection, as they did. And lastly, the
very tale does sufficiently confute it self, and show its own absurdity. For if
the soldiers (as they said) were asleep, how then could they tell that Christ
was taken away by his Disciples? it might be otherwise (as indeed it was) for
any thing thar they did know.

Use 2. Secondly, Christ's resurrection serves to demonstrate Christ's divinity.
The divinity of Christ and his resurrection, so mutually help to demonstrate
each other. His resurrection is demonstrated by his divinity, as the effect by
the cause: and his divinity by his refurrection, as the cause by the effect.
That which God the Father speaks unto Christ, Psalm. 2. 7. Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee, the Apostle refers to Christ's resurrection, Act. 13.
32. 33. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was
made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us, in that he has
raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. The Apostle by this day, shows that the day
of Christ's resurrection is understood; not that then Christ was first begotten
of the Father, and became the Son of God (for he was so from all eternity* Mic.
5. 2.) but then when Christ rose again he appeared to be the Son of God, his
begotten Son, God of God, one and the same God with the Pather. Thus the same
Apostle says plainly, that Christ was declared to be the Son of God, with
power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead,
Romans 1. 4. Christ's divine nature before did lie hid under the infirmity of his
humane nature, but by his rising from the dead it did look forth, and show it
self.

Ob. Some may say, many others (as we find recorded both in the old, and in the
new Testament) did rise from the dead besides Christ, yea many before Christ,
and how then does his resurrection demonstrate his divine nature?

Answ. I answer, Christ's resurrection did excel the refunction of others in a
twofold respect. For 1. Others did rise again, but so as to die again the life
to which they rose was this mortal life, But Christ arose to life immortal;
Christ being. risen from the dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion
over him, Romans 6.

2. Christ arose by his own virtue and power, which none ever did, or shall do,
but he only. Destroy this Temple (said Christ, meaning his body) and in three
days I will raise it up, Joh. 2. 19. I lay down my life (said he) that I may
take it up again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; I
have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again, Joh. 10. 17.
18. Now except Christ were God, it had not Resurrexisse per se ex mortuis in
vitam, nisi Dei natura non potuit. Hilar. de Trin. l. 7.
been possible for him to raise himself from the dead, this is not competible
to a mere humane nature.

Ob. But may some object, it is said in the Text, and in other places, that God
raised up Christ; therefore [it seems] he did not raise himself, but was raised
by another.

Answ. This does not follow; Christ both was raised of God, and also did raise
himself. As man, so God did raise him up; as God; so he rose of himself; Christ
and the Father are one, Joh. 10. 30. That which the Father does, he does also,
Joh. 5. 17. and 14. 10, 11. Therefore Cum eadem fit divina virtus and operatio,
and Patris, and Filii, haec duo se mutuo consequuntur, quod Christus fit
suscitatus divina virtute Patris and* sui ipsius. Aquin. part. 3. quest. 53.
art. 4. ad. 1.
these two are so far from crossing one the other. Christ was raised up by
the power of his Father, and Christ arose by his own power; that they confirm
one the other; they follow one upon the other.

Use 3. Thirdly, by Christ's Resurrection our faith is confirmed in him as a
most perfect Redeemer: For seeing that Christ died for our sins, he as our
Surety, was arrested by death as Gods Sergeant, and cast into the prison of the
grave, in that he was not still detained there, but released and set free, it
clearly shows that the debt is discharged, Gods justice satisfied, and we
through faith in Christ, reconciled unto God, and at peace with him. The two
Disciples that knew Christ to be dead, but knew not that he was risen again,
seemed to have but small hope of redemption by him, We trusted (said they) that
it had been he that should have redeemed ^srael, Luke 24. 21. They did trust so
before, but now (it seems) they did in a manner despair of it: And indeed had
Christ so died as not to rise again, we could have had but a dead hope, as I
showed before. But now our hope is a lively hope, as S. Peter calls it; Blessed
be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant
mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope. (how?) by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 1. 3. So S. Paul having said that Christ was
delivered for our offenses, and rose again for our justification, he adds
immediately, Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 4. 25. and 5. 1. And Acts 13. 38, 39.
having immediately before confirmed Christ's Resurrection, he thereupon
inferres, Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that thorough this
man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins: And by him all that believe are
justified, etc. And Romans 8. 34. he cries out, Who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again. And Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he
is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them.

Use 4. Fourthly, by the Resurrection of Christ we may be assured of our own
Resurrection: The Apostle 1 Cor. 15. to convince some among the Corinthians,
who denied the Resurrection of the dead, first proves at large Christ's
Resurrection, and from thence infers the resurrection of Christians: Now if
Christ be preached (says he) that he rose from the dead, how say some among
you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? But if there be no resurrection
of the dead, then is Christ not risen, 1 Cor. 15. 12, 13. And v. 16. For if the
dead rise not, then is not Christ raised. And v. 20. etc. But now is Christ
risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept: For since
by man came death, by man also came the Resurrection from the dead. For as in
Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in his own
order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming.
So 2 Cor. 4. 14. Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up
us also by Jesus, etc. And 1 These. 4. 14. For if we believe that Jesus died,
and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.

The force of this inference (viz. of the resurrection of Christians from
Christ's resurrection) consists in that near relation and union that is betwixt
Christ and Christians, he being their head, Quod praecessit in caepite,
impletum erit in corpore. Bern.
and they his members: As in the natural body, though all the members be under
water, yet the head being above they are safe, and there is no fear of drowning;
so is it in the mystical body, Christ our head being risen, though we his
members lie in the dust, yet there is a sure and certain hope of our
resurrection. For the members must be with the head, and conformed to it;
Father I will that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, said
Christ, Joh. 17. 24. We know that when he shall appear, we shall be like unto
him, 1 John 3. 2. Christ shall change our vile bodies, and shall make them like
unto his own most glorious body, Phil. 3. 21.

THE TWENTIETH SERMON.
Use 5. Fifthly and lastly, as Christ rose corporally, so ought we to rise
spiritually, viz. from the death of sin, to the life of grace. There is a death
of the soul by sin, and a resurrection of the soul by grace. Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5.
14. And that we must be conformed unto Christ by a spiritual resurrection, the
Apostle shows Romans 6. 4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life, And v. 11. Likewise
reckon ye also your selves dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord. We must thus be conformed unto Christ by the
resurrection of our souls here, or else we shall not be conformed unto Christ by
the resurrection of our bodies hereafter. For though all shall corporally rise
again, yet not so as to be conformed unto Christ in glory and happiness. No,
thus shall none rise corporally, but only such as now rise spiritually, so as
to be conformed unto Christ in grace and holiness. Only they that whiles they
are upon earth, have their conversation in heaven, can expect that the Lord
Jesus will change their vile bodies, and make them like unto his own most
glorious body, Phil. 3. 20, 21.

Now if we would know whether we be partakers of this spiritual resurrection,
we may try and discern it by these marks.

1. Heavenly mindedness. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things that
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your affections
on things above, and not on things on the earth, Col. 3. 1. 2.

2. Love of Gods children. We know that we are passed from death to life,
because we love the brethren, 1 John 3. 14. This is meant of loving the godly,
eo nomine, in that very respect as they are godly, not for by ends, or carnal
respects, which they may do who are not godly.

3. A sense and feeling of spiritual wants and infirmities. Where there is
such a feeling there is life, as there was in Paul, who complained of the
corruptions that were in him, as grievous and burdensome unto him; For I know
(said he) that in me (that is in my flesh) no good dwells. For to will is
present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not. For the
good that I would do, I do not, but the evil that I would not, that I do. I
find then a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. For I
delight in the law of God, after the inward man; But I see another law in my
members warring against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law
of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death, Romans 7. 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24. On the other side,
such appears to be alienated from the life of God, as are without feeling, Ephesians.
4. 18, 19. such as are full of sin and of corruption, and yet are nothing
sensible of it, but like the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, think that they
are rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, when as indeed
they are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17.

4. A love of Gods Ordinances: As they that have corporal life, so also they
that have spiritual life, will desire food convenient for them, whereby their
life may be preserved, and whereby they may grow: As new born babes desire the
sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby; If so be that you have
tasted, that the Lord is gracious* Pet. 2. 2, 3.

5. Communion with God by prayer. The Spirit which is the worker of this
spiritual resurrection, is the Spirit of grace and supplications, Zach. 12.
10. The Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, Romans 8. 15. Behold he
prays, said Christ to Ananias, speaking of Saul (after called Paul) when a
spiritual life was newly put into him, Acts 9. 11.

The ordinary means whereby this spiritual resurrection is wrought, is the
Word preached: As at the last day, the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead
(corporally) shall be raised, 1 Cor. 15. 52. So they that are spiritually dead,
are raised by the Trumpet of Gods Word, sounding in their ears: Verily, verily,
I say unto you, (says Christ) that the hour is coming, and n^w is, that the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live,
Joh. 5. 25. That is spoken of the spiritual Resurrection, as appears by these
words, and now is, even as that which presently after follows, v. 28. and 29.
is spoken of the corporal Resurrection; The hour is coming, in the which all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth.

But the corporal Resurrection and the spiritual in this do differ, that the
corporal Resurrection is complete and perfect at once; In a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15. 52. But the spiritual resurrection is carried
on by degrees, by little and little, the inward man is renewed day by day, 2
Cor. 4. 16. Therefore they that are already in some measure made partakers of
spiritual resurrection, must still labor that they may be made more and more
partakers of it; Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. So much for this point concerning Christ's
Resurrection, That Christ did rise again from the dead. I come now to speak a
little of the time of his Resurrection, the third day, and here this point is
to be considered, Destroy this Temple, and after three days I will raise it
up, Joh. 2. 19. From that time farth began Jesus to show unto his Disciples,
how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders, and
chief Priests and Scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day,
Mat. 16. 21. So Mat. 20. 18, 19. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of
Man shall be betrayed unto the chief Priests, and unto the Scribes, and they
shall condemn him to death; And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and
to scourge, and crucify him, and the third day he shall rise again: And so
much the chief Priests and Pharisees had understood, as appears by their words
to Pilate, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive,
after three days I will rise again. And therefore they desired to have Christ's
Sepulcher watched but till the third day, Mat. 27. 63, 64.

All the four Evangelists also do record, as that Christ rose again, so that he
rose again the third day.

So also Paul preached, how that Christ did for our sins according to the
Scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day, 1
Cor. 15. 3. 4.

It was congruous and meet that Christ should rise again the third day, not
sooner nor later. Not sooner, to show that he was truly dead, and for a while
under the power of death, and the dominion of it, which is meant by his being
in hell, as was shevved before. Not later, that so he might comfort and revive
the drooping and dying spirits of his Disciples, who after his death, until
they heard of his resurrection mourned and wept, Mar. 16. 10. And that he might
strengthen their faith which was ready to fail, as appears by that Luke 24. 21.
We trusted that it had been he, that should have redeemed Israel.

Again, it was not only congruous and meet, but also requisite and necessary
that Christ should rise the third day, because so it was 1. prefigured; viz. by
that which happened unto Jonas; his being three days and three nights in the
fishes belly, neither more nor less, signified that Christ should be so long,
neither more nor less in the grave, Mat. 12. 40.

Ob. If Christ were three days and three nights in the grave, how then did he
rise again the third day.

Answ. Those three days, and three nights are taken synecdochically, that is,
not for three whole days, and three whole nights, but for part of three days,
and part of three nights. Christ died and was buried (as the Evangelists show)
the day before the Jewish Sabbath, that is on Friday (as we call it) toward
evening; that part of the day is [by a synedoche] reckoned for a day, and to it
belongs the night going before, the Jews beginning the natural day, which
consists of 24. hours, at evening, Levit. 23. 32. Then Christ lay in the grave
the night following, and the day after, which we call Saturday, here are two
days and two nights, and so likewise he remained in the grave the night after,
and rose early in the morning, to which night must be added the day following,
which we call Sunday, as being a part of that natural day to which it
belonged; and so there are three days and three nights, and yet Christ rose
the third day. Thus are those three days and three nights to be understood,
that Esther and the Jews fasted Esth. 4. 16. For the fast ended the third day,
as is clear by this, that then Esther put on her royal apparel, and went to
the King, etc. Esth. 5. ^^ etc.

2. It was requisite and necessary that Christ should rise again the third day,
because it was so prophesied, Thus it is written [said Christ to his Disciples
after his resurrection) and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from
the dead the third day, Luke 24. 46. So S. Paul says that Christ rose again
the third day according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 4.

Quest. But (may some say) where in the Old Testament is it prophesied that
Christ should rise the third day?

Ans. 1. Those words of David, which he spoke of Christ, and of his
resurrection, Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption, Psalm. 16.
10. though they do not precisely mention the third day, yet they plainly show
so much, that he should not remain long in the grave, but should speedily rise
again. And by this S. Paul proves that the words were not meant of David
himself, but of Christ; for that David saw corruption, but Christ (being raised
from the dead the third day) saw no corruption, Act. 13. 35, 36, 37. In the
like manner did S. Peter argue, Act. 2. 29. 30, 31, 32.

^. There is express mention of the third day in reference to Christ's
Resurrection, Hos. 6. 2. Aster two days he will revive us, in the third day he
will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Although those words be
directly and immediately understood of Gods people (as it seems both by the
words themselves, and also by the words going before and after) yet it is with
reference unto Christ and his Resurrection; for otherwise why should the third
day be specified? Neither do I know, how it could be said that Christ rose
again the third, according to the Scriptures (viz. of the old Testament) if in
this place there be not an allusion at least to Christ's rising again the third
day; seeing that in all the old Testament the third day in this respect is no
where mentioned, except in this place. And therefore not without cause [I
think] in the margent of our Bibles over against this place of Hosea, is noted
that place, 1 Cor. 15. 4. as having reference the one to the other: and so many
of the Ancients have expounded this place in Hosea of Christ: and this is to be
considered, that there is such a near union Lactant. Iustit. l. 4. 1. 19. Aug.
de Civit. Dei l. 18. c. 28. Bern. Sermon. 1. de Resurrect. And so others cited by
R^her^ upon the place.
betwixt Christ and believers, that sometimes that which belongs to believers
is spoken of Christ: As, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? said Christ, when
Saul did persecute those that believed in Christ, Act. 9. 4. And so on the
other side, that which belongs to Christ is spoken of believers; as here in the
Prophet, the third day he will raise us up, whenas properly Christ was raised
up the third day; but believers are said to be raised up in him, and with him:
Even when we were dead in sins, God has quickened us together with Christ (by
grace ye are saved) And has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6.

Now from the time of Christ's Resurrection, the third day after that he died,
it is worthy to Bern. Ser. 1. de resurrect.
be observed (as Bernard has noted) that the same day of the week whereon
Christ as God did make man (viz. the sixth day) the same day did he also as man
die to redeem man: and as on the seventh and last day of the week Christ did
rest, having finished the work of the Creation; so also did he rest the same
day in the grave, having by his death finished the work or the Redemption: and
the third day being the first day of the week (as the Evangelists expressly
call it) he rose again, as being the first fruits of them that slept, as the
Apostle calls him, 1 Cor. 15. 20.

And as the seventh day of the week (called Saturday) was observed by the Jews
in memory of the Creation; so the first day of the week (called Sunday) is
observed by Christians in memory of Christ's Resurrection And so of the
Redemption, which Christ wrought for us by his death, and made it appear by his
resurrection.
and it is called the Lords day, Revel. 1. 10. Of the observation of this day in
the Apostles time we read also, Act. 20. 7. and 1 Cor. 16. 2.

The one and twentieth SERMON.
EPHESIANS. 4. 10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended far above
all heavens, that he might fill all things.
THe Apostle having v. 8. spoken of Christ's ascending up on high, and having v.
9. noted, that his ascending did presuppose his descending, he returns here to
speak again of his ascending, and to show how high he ascended, far above all
all Heavens; and why? that he might fill all things.

[ He that descended] either from heaven to earth by his Incarnation, in which
respect it is said, that he came down from heaven, Joh. 3. 13. or from the
upper part of the earth to the grave, in which respect it seems to be said v.
9. that he descended into the lower parts of the earth; though that also may be
meant of Christ's Incarnation, as was showed before, page 214. etc.

[ Is the same that ascended,] The same Person, (...). Oecumen. ad loc.
whence (as Oecumenius observes) the heresy of Nestorius is confuted, who
would divide the Person of Christ, denying one and the same Person to be both
God and Man: For if this descending here spoken of, be meant of the
Incarnation, then Christ as God, descended, ( viz. metaphorically) and as man*
ascended; yet he that descended is the same that ascended; therefore God and
Man in Christ are but one Person. And if this descending be meant of of Christ's
death and burial, yet still it serves to the same purpose; for so Christ
descended as man, (in that respect he died and was buried) but ascended as God,
that is* by the power of his divine nature, by which also (as was showed
before) he rose from the dead.

[ Far above all Heavens,] viz* all visible heavens, as the air, and that
wherein are the Sun, Moon and Stars, above which two heavens there is the third
Heaven, as it is called, 2 Cor. 12. 2. And thither is Christ ascended; Whom the
Heaven must receive until the time of restitution of all things, Acts 2. 21

[ That he might fill all things] with his spiritual presence and power, which
he does since his ascension show forth otherwise then he did before: Or it may
be read (as the Margent has it) that he might fulfill all things, viz. which
were prophesied and foretold of him, as the Apostle showed immediately before
that this was, that Christ should ascend upon high; and therefore he did
ascend, that as other things, so this Prophecy and prediction concerning him
might be fulfilled.

From the words thus explicated, I observe

Christ's ascension was prophesied by David, Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have ascended up
on high. This was spoken concerning Christ, as the Apostle testifies, Ephesians. 4.
8.

Christ also himself did foretell his ascension, Joh. 6. 62. What and if you
shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? And Joh. 20. 17. Jesus
says unto her, (viz. Mary Magdalen^, to whom he showed himself after his
Resurrection) Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to
my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my Father, and to your Father, to
my God, and to your God.

Diverse of the Evangelists do also record Christ's ascension: He was received up
into heaven, Mar. 16. 19. He was parted from them, (viz. his Disciples,) and
was carried up into heaven, Luke 24. 51. While they beheld he was taken up,
Acts 1. 9.

S. Luke also relates the circumstances of Christ's ascension: As,

1. The time when he ascended, viz. forty days after his resurrection: To whom
also he showed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being
seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom
of God, Acts 1. 3. where he gives two reasons why Christ did continue so long
upon earth after his resurrection before he ascended into heaven, viz. 1. To
confirm unto his Disciples his resurrection, and to assure them of the truth
of it. 2. To instruct them in things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

2. The place where, viz. Bethany: And he led them out as far as to Bethany,
etc. Luke 24. 50. Now Joh. 11. 1. it is said that Bethany was the Town of Mary
and her sister Martha, that is, the town where they dwelt, and had their
abode; in which sense Bethsaida is called the City of Andrew and Peter, Joh. 1.
44. Yet it seems that the place where Christ ascended, was not the town called
Bethanie, but the Tract of Mount Olivet, where the Town stood. For it is said,
Acts 1. 12. That the Disciples who were with Christ at his ascension,
immediately after he was ascended, returned unto Jerusalem from the Mount
called Olivet. It is not likely that Christ would be in a Town, when he
ascended; for then all promiscuously would have seen his ascension, whereas
only his Disciples were Spectators of it: Neither is it said, Luke 24. 50. that
Christ led them to Bethanie, and there ascended, but that he led them out [viz.
from Jerusalem] as far as Bethanie. S. Luke chapter 19. v. 29. tells us, that as
Christ went to his Passion, he went by Bethanie; so that by the same place by
which he went to his Passion, he had his ascension.

And Bethany also signifies as much as the house of affliction; if we will
ascend up to our Fathers house to heaven, it must be by Bethany, the house of
affliction: We must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God,
Acts 14. 22.

3. The manner how he ascended; And it came to pass while he blessed them, he
was parted from them and carried up into heaven, Luke 24. 51. Thus having loved
his own that were in the world, he loved them to the end, Joh. 13. 1. At the
very last moment of his abiding here upon earth, he blessed those that were
with him, and in them us, and all that belong unto him: As he said Ioh. 17. 20.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word; So neither did he bless them alone, but them also which
through their word believe in him. Again, for the manner of Christ's ascension,
it is said, Acts 1. 9. That while they (his Disciples) beheld, he was taken up,
and a cloud received him out of their sight, So that Christ did ascend visibly,
and there were eyewitnesses of his ascension: and lest they should have
imagined, that their senses were deluded, or any way have doubted of the truth
of Christ's ascension, two Angels from heaven in the likeness of men appeared
unto them, both to confirm Christ's ascension into heaven, and also to show that
he was not so ascended, but that he shall at length come again, viz. at the
last judgment. And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up,
behold two men stood by them in white apparel, which also said, ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into
heaven, Act. 1. 10. 11.

Ob. Some may here object that Joh. 3. 13. The Son of man, which is in heaven.
If Christ then being upon earth, were in heaven, how could he ascend into
heaven?

Answ. Yes, being in heaven (even when he was upon earth) as God, he might
nevertheless, and did as man ascend into heaven. Christ consisting of two
natures, the divine, and the humane, something belongs unto him in respect of
the one nature, and something in respect of the other. In respect of his divine
nature he is every where, in respect of his humane, he is only in one place at
one time. The man Christ, yet not as man, but as God, was in heaven at the same
time that he was upon earth. On the other side, Christ being God, yet not as
God, but as man, left the earth, and went up to heaven.

There are many reasons why Christ ascended into heaven.

1. As he came from heaven to work our Redemption, so having finished the work
which he Reasons of Christ's Ascension
had to do, it was meet that he should return thither from whence he came; I
came forth from the Father, and am come into the world; again I leave the
world, and go to the Father, said he, Joh. 16. 28. And Joh. 17. 4, 5. I have
glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do,
and now, O Father, glorify me with thine own self, with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was.

2. After Christ's humiliation, was to follow his exaltation, as Christ himself
showed, Luke 24. 26. And so Paul Phil. 2. 8, 9. Now as Christ's Resurrection was
the first step of his exaltation, so his Ascension was another step, and a
further degree of it.

3. Thus Christ made it appear, that (as he told Pilate) his Kingdom is not of
this world, Joh. 18. 36. Contrary to what his own Disciples did imagine, even
after his resurrection, as appears by that question which they asked him, Lord,
will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? Act. 1. 6.

4. Christ by his ascension showed himself to have fully conquered sin, death
and Satan; he did manifest his victory over these by his Resurrection, but more
fully by his ascension, whereby he did triumph over them: Therefore it is said,
that when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, Ephesians. 4. 8. that
is, he led a multitude of captives, as the phrase is used, Judge. 5. 12.

5. It was requisite that Christ should ascend into heaven, that as he executed
the office of a Priest, by offering himself upon the Cross for us, so he might
also do it by appearing before God in heaven, and there making intercession
unto him for us. Aaron the Jewish high Priest was to bear the names of the
children of Israel in the brestplate of judgment upon his heart, when he went
into the holy place for a memorial before the Lord continually, Exodus 28. 29.
This was a type and a figure of Christ's entering into heaven for us as our high
Priest, Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus made an high Priest
for ever, after the order of Melchisedec, Heb. 6. 20. For Christ is not entered
into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but
into heaven it self now to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24.

Christ was to ascend into heaven, that so he might power his spirit upon his
Church: When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men. Ephesians. 4. 8. viz. spiritual gifts, the gifts and graces of his
spirit, Psalm. 68. 18. it is said that at his ascension he received gifts, but
for men, and that is as much as to give gifts unto men. Fetch me a little
water, said Eliah to the widow, 1 Kings 17. 10. according to the original it
is, Receive, or take me (or for me) a little water; (...)
and that is as much as if he had said, Give me a little water: So v. 13. Bring
me a morsel of bread; in the Hebrew, Receive, or take me, etc. It is the same
word which is used Psalm. 68. 18.

Quest. But some may demand and say, Was not the spirit given unto men before
Christ's ascension?

Answ. I answer, yes, but not so freely and fully as afterward: He that
believes on me (said Christ) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water. This he spoke (says the Evangelist) of the spirit which they that
believe on him should receive. For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because
Jesus was not yet glorified, ^oh. 7. 38. 39. I tell you the truth, said Christ
to his Disciples, it is not expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not
away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him
unto you, Joh. 16. 7. Besides that, Christ was to be glorified before that he
was to send the Holy Ghost, the Disciples having Christ's corporal presence,
did so fix themselves upon Spiritalis presentiae plenitudo, quamdiu conspectu
carnis praesens aderat, adventare non poterat. Cyprian de Ascens. Christi.
it, that they were not so capable of his spiritual presence; and therefore to
make way for this, the other was to be removed.

7. Christ ascended into heaven, that he might there prepare a place for his
members. Thus he told his Disciples saying, In my Fathers house are many
mansions, I go to prepare a place for you, Joh. 14. 2. In this respect Christ
is called the forerunner, Heb. 6. 20. as going before, and preparing the way
for others to follow after.

Use 1, Now this point concerning Christ's Ascension, serves t^ confute the
Papists concerning Transubstantiation, and that real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament which they maintain, viz. a carnal and corporal presence, for we
deny not a real presence, only we hold that is a spiritual presence. And as
the Angel argued from Christ's Resurrection, and thereby proved that he was not
in the grave in that manner as some supposed; He is not here, for he is risen,
Mat 28. 6. So may we argue from Christ's Ascension, and prove that he is not in
the Sacrament in that manner, as they of the Church of Rome; He is not there,
for he is ascended. And to this end did Christ speak of his Ascension, thereby
to convince some, and to let them see how much they did mistake his Propterea
Ascensionis suaein coelum mentionem fecit, ut eos a corporali intellectu
abstraheret. Athanas. in illud Quicunque dixerit verbum, etc.
meaning, when they understood that which he had spoken about eating his flesh,
in a carnal sense, whereas it was to be understood spiritually. When Jesus knew
in himself that his Disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, Does this
offend you? what and if ye shall see the son of man ascend up where he was
before? It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, the words
that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life, John 6. 61, 62, 63.
As if he should have said, the fleshly manner of eating which you dream of,
would avail nothing; that therefore which I spoke, of eating my flesh, is not
so to be understood, but in a spiritual sense; and that will more plainly
appear by my ascension into heaven.

Again, by Christ's ascension the Papists are confuted in respect of Crucifixes,
and other such like Images, which they make to represent Christ. For Christ
has purposely withdrawn himself from us corporally, that we might acquaint
our selves with him spiritually, and yet they will needs have some corporal
representation of him. Thus do they directly cross Christ's intent in ascending
into heaven, which is, that now he should not be known so as when he was upon
the earth, viz. in a carnal, but in a spiritual manner. Though we have known
Christ after the flesh, says the Apostle, yet henceforth know we him no more,
2 Cor. 5. 16. Not now any more after the flesh, as being a man of such a
stature, such a feature, etc. This place does utterly overthrow the
representing of Christ by an Image, it serving to no end but to breed carnal
cenceits and apprehensions of Christ, which now since Christ's ascension are not
lawful.

Use 1. Christ's ascension makes for our consolation.

1. It serves to encourage us to go unto God in all our necessities, and with
confidence to pray unto him both for pardon of sin, and for supply of
whatsoever is needful for us, seeing we have such a Mediator, who is gone
into heaven, there to appear and make intercession for us. If any man sin,
says S. John, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous,
and he is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. He is with the Father,
for he is ascended up to the Father, and therefore we may be sure that the
Father will be propitious to us for his sake. Seeing then we have a great High
Priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast
our profession. Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 14. 16. So
Heb. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. Having therefore brethren, boldness to enter into the
holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has
consecrated for us, thorough the vail, that is to say, his flesh: And having an
High Priest over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart in full
assurance of faith.

2. It also affords unto us a ground of assurance, that we belonging unto
Christ, and being his, shall ascend into heaven: For the Head being ascended,
the members must in due time ascend also, the head and the members must be
together; Where I am, there shall also my servant be, says Christ, Joh. 12.
26. And Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they whom thou have given me, be where
I am. And Joh. 14. ^, 3. I go to prepare a place for you: And if I go, and
prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that
where I am, there ye may be also. The Apostle speaks of our ascension as a
thing already effected and wrought by Christ's ascension; God (he says) has
made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 6. Thus
Christ's Ascension serves to comfort us in all adversity, and to take away the
fear of death, yea, to make death desirable, seeing it will but convey us
thither, whither Christ is gone before to prepare a place for us: Therefore we
are always confident (says the Apostle) knowing that while we are present in
the body, we are absent from the Lord. (For we walk by faith and not by sight.)
We are confident, I say, willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7, 8. And so Phil. 1. 23. Desiring to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

Use. Lastly, the ascension of Christ serves to admonish us to ascend thither
spiritually whither Christ is ascended corporally; to have our hearts and
affections in heaven where Christ is: Why seek ye the living among the dead? He
is not here, but is risen, said the Angels to those that came to seek Christ
in the Sepulcher, Luke 24. 5, 6. So, Why seek we Christ among the things of the
earth? He is not here, but is ascended. Therefore if we seek Christ, let us
seek those things that are above, where Christ is; let us set our affections on
things above, and not on things that are upon the earth, Col. 3. 1, 2. As
Christ is in heaven, so our conversation also must be in heaven, Phil. 3. 20.

The two and twentieth SERMON.
HEB. 12. 2. And is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God.
THe Apostle, v. 1. exhorts to patience and perseverance in the way of
holiness; Let us run with patience (or patient continuance, as the word there
used is rendered, Romans 2. 7.) the race (...).
that is set before us. And this exhortation he infers from the examples of
the Saints mentioned in the 11. Chapter, Wherefore seeing we also are compassed
about with such a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight and sin
which does so easily beset us, and let us run, etc. Then he further inforceth
the exhortation from the example of Christ, who above all is to be followed, v.
2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy
that was set before him endured the Cross, despising the shame; that is, for
the blessed and happy estate that he was to enter into after his passion, he
was well content to suffer as he did. And then he goes on, showing that Christ's
expectation was not in vain, but that he obtained the glory and happiness
which he looked for; And is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God,
that is, of God sitting in his Throne: He speaks of God as a King in his
Throne, and so Christ sitting at the right hand of God, is said to sit at the
right hand of the Throne of God.

Hence then let us observe this point, That

Christ's resurrection was the beginning of his exaltation, his ascension was a
higher degree of it, and his sitting at the right hand of God, yet higher then
both, and the highest that may be: This degree of exaltation is peculiar unto
Christ, whereas the other are common to him with his members: They shall all
rise from the dead, and ascend up to heaven, David is not ascended into the
heavens, says Peter, Act. 2. 34. As yet David is not ascended (in respect of
the body, to which ascension properly belongs) but he shall ascend, and so all
the Saints likewise; they shall be caught up together in the clouds, to meet
the Lord in the air and so shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. But
besides Christ, none ever did or shall sit at the right hand of God; this
honor is not communicable to any other, whether man or Angel. For to which of
the Angels said God at any time, sit on my right hand? Heb. 1. 13.

Now that Christ does sit at the right hand of (...).
God, it is most clear, as by the Text in hand, so by many other places of
Scripture: As Heb. 1. 3. When he had by himself purged our sins, he sat down
on the right hand of the Majesty on high. And Heb. 8. 1. We have such an High
Priest, who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the
Heavens. And Heb. 10. 12. But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for
sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God. So S. Mark testifies of
Christ, that he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of of
God, Mar. 16. 19. And this Christ himself did foretell, Luke 22. 69.
Hereafter shall the Son of Man sit on the right hand of the power of God. And
David did prophecy of it long before, saying, The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit
thou at my right Hand until I make thine Enemies thy footstool, Psalm. 110. 1.
which words were spoken concerning Christ as Christ himself has showed, Mat.
22. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. And so S. Peter, Acts 2. 34, 35. And the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, c. 1. v. 13.

But now let us see what is meant by Christ's (...).
sitting at the right hand of God: The expression is metaphorical, and there
is a double metaphore in it, viz. both in that Christ is said to sit, and also
in that he is said to sit at the right hand of God.

1. For the phrase of sitting, as here it is used, and applied unto Christ, by
the consent of all, is metaphorical, not denoting the site and posture of
Christ's body, which is the proper acception of the word, but the honor and
majesty that Christ is in. Thus the word is figuratively used, because Masters
use to sit, and servants to stand, and wait upon them. Whether is greater, he
that sits at meat, or he that serves? Is not he that sits at meat? Luke
22. 27. So Kings use to sit in their Thrones, and Judges and Magistrates in
their seats of honor. Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and
he shall sit upon my Throne, said David to Bathsheba, 1 Kings 1. 13. So Exodus
18. 13. it is said, that Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood
by Moses, etc. Hence metaphorically God is said to sit, God reigns over the
Heathen, God sits upon the throne of his holiness, Psalm 47. 8. So Psalm
2. 4. He that sits in heaven, shall laugh them to scorn.

God being a spirit cannot properly either sit Non de corporis constitutione,
sed de imperii majestate hic agitur, Calvin. Instit. l. 2. c. 16. ^ct. 15.
or stand, they being bodily postures, and properly belonging to bodily
substances And though Christ having still after his Resurrection and ascension,
a true humane body, as before, may properly sit, yet that is not the intent of
the Holy Ghost in the Scripture, to show what bodily posture Christ is in, but
to show what dignity he is in: and therefore sometimes in Scripture Christ is
said, to stand at the right hand of God, viz. Act. 7. 55, 56. But he being full
of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and Quid est quod hunc
Marcus sedentem, Stephanus vero stantem se videre testatur? Sed scitis,
fratres, quia sedere judicantis est, stare vero pugnantis, vel adjuvantis. Quia
ergo Redemptor noster assumptus in coelum, and nunc omnia judicat, and ad
extrentum omnium judex veniet, hunc post assumptione^ Marcus sedere describit,
quia post ascensionis suae gloriam judex in fine vid^bitur. Stephanus vero hanc
in labor certaminis positus, stant em vidit, quem adjutorem habuit; quia ut
iste in terra persecutorum infidelitatem vinceret, pro illo de coelo illius
gratia pugnavit. Gregor. homil. 29. in Evang.
saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right Hand of God, and said,
Behold, I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right Hand
of God. He is there described standing, as ready to aid and assist Stephen in
the great conflict which he endured for his sake: but otherwise in the
Scripture he is usually said to sit, to signify the honor and authority that
he is invested with.

2. For the right hand of God, it must needs be taken, not properly, but
metaphorically, God being a spirit, and therefore having no hand, either right
or left, nor any bodily member whatsoever. It was a gross heresy of the
Anthropomorphites to hold God to be of humane form and shape, whereas Christ
says plainly that God is a spirit, Joh. 4. 24. And that a spirit has not
flesh and bones, Luke 24. 39. Therefore when hands, eyes, ears and the like are
attributed unto God in the Scripture, (...).
it is by a figurative kind of speech, whereby in condescension to the
weakness of our capacity, that is attributed unto God, which properly belongs
unto man, and not unto God: because man does hear with his ears, see with his
eyes, and work with his hands, therefore to show that God does hear, and see,
and work; these bodily parts and members are attributed unto God, though
properly they do not belong unto him. By the right Hand of God is often
signified the force, might and power of God, Thy right Hand O Lord, said Moses,
is become glorious in power, thy right hand O Lord has dashed in pieces the
enemy, Exodus 15. 6. So David Psalm. 118. 15, 16. The right Hand of the Lord does
valiantly, The right Hand of the Lord is exalted; the right Hand of the Lord
does valiantly. But the right hand also is used to denote the more honorable
place; as when Bathsheba the mother of Solomon went unto him, as he sat on
this Throne, he rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her; and sat down
on his Throne, and caused a seat to be set for her; and she sat on his right
Hand, 1 Kings 2. 19. So Psalm. 45. 9. Upon thy right Hand did stand the Queen in
gold of Ophir. Thus Christ is said to be at Gods right Hand, as being in
highest honor next unto God, even as Bethsheba was set in highest place of
honor next unto the King: Christ's sitting at the right hand of God imports his
Kingly power, and sovereign power over all creatures; that all power both in
heaven and in earth is given unto him, as he said, Mat. 28. 18. That he has a
name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc.
that is, that all should be subject unto him, Phil. 2. 9, 10. Whereas David
speaking of Christ, says, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou thou on my
right Hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool, Psalm. 110. 1. S. Paul in
reference to those words, says, For he must reign until his enemies be made
his footstool, 1 Cor. 15. 25. Whereby we see that Christ sitting at the right
hand of God, and his reigning, are one and the same thing, So what is meant by
Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, the same Apostle shows, Ephesians. 1.
20, 21, 22. Where he says that God raised Christ from the dead, and set him at
his own right Hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality and
power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come. And has put all things under his
feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the Church. And so
likewise S. Peter, who speaking of Christ says, Who is gone into heaven, and
is on the right hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and Powers being made
subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

Thus then we see both that it is so, that Christ does sit at the right hand of
God, and also what is meant by it.

And by this which has been said it may appear, that Christ is said to sit at
the right hand of God in respect of his humane nature. In that respect he was
humbled, and in that respect he was exalted, the divine nature properly being
capable neither of the one, nor of the other. As man, he suffered, was
crucified, dead and buried, and descended into hell; and so as man he rose
again, ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God. The divine
nature is said to be humbled, not properly, as if it is glory was indeed
diminished, but that assuming to it self humane nature subject to infirmity,
its glory did lie hid, and not appear, So also it is said to be exalted, not
properly, as if any glory indeed were added unto it, but by the exaltation of
that humane nature, which it assumed, it is glory is made to appear and shine
forth. Now this glorious exaltation of Christ's humane nature, did belong unto
it by virtue of the hypostaticall union, and so was due unto Christ at the
first moment that the two natures were united together in one person: but by
dispensation, for the working out of our Redemption, Christ did not enter into
the possession of his glory, till after his passion, Ought not Christ to suffer
these things, and to enter into his glory? viz. after his suffering, Luke 24.
26. It was his glory, that which of right did belong Quomodo suam, si oportuit?
and quomodo oportuit, si suam? Si glorii ejus fuit, quomodo ut a^ illam
intraret, pati oportuit? Sed suam propterff se; oportuit propter nos. -- Si
aliter venisset, pervenisset, sed non subv^nisset. Hugo. de S. Vict.
unto him, even as man, that man being God also; yet for our sakes, that our
Redemption might be essected by him, it behoved him first to suffer, as he did,
and then to enter into his glory.

Use 1. Here then we may see the glorious and transcendent excellency of
Christ, even as man, and so in him the wonderful exaltation of our humane
nature. Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man
that thou visitest him? Thou have made him a little lower then the Angels, and
have crowned him with glory and honor, Psalm. 8. 4, 5. Yea the man Christ is
made a great deal higher then the Angels. We see Jesus, says the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews having cited these words of David, who was made a little
(...)
(or for a little while) lower then the Angels, for the suffering of death,
crowned with Glory and Honor, Heb. 2. 9. Christ for a while, that he might
suffer death for our Redemption, was lower then the Angels, being a man subject
to infirmity, but now he is crowned with glory and honor, whereby he is far
above the Angels.

Caution. But here we must beware of that error which some have fallen into: We
must not think that because Christ as man does sit at the right hand of God,
therefore Majesty and Glory properly divine and infinite is communicated to
Christ's humane nature. This is exceeding gross, and the very heresy of
Eutyches, who because he would not with Nestorius divide the person of Christ,
therefore falling into another extreme he would confound his natures, making
the humane nature to be swallowed up (as it were) by the divine nature. But
Christ's glory does not take away the truth of his humanity; it is exalted, but
not Gloria humanitatem non tollit, sed extollit, non interfi^it; sed perficit.
Gerson.
abolished. And therefore neither must we (as some do) from Christ's sitting at
the right hand of God, infer the ubiquity of Christ's body, as if therefore it
were every where. For ubiquity, or being every where, is proper and peculiar to
the divine nature, the humane nature is not capable of it. He is not here (viz.
in respect of the body) for he is risen, Luke 24. 6. So he is not here (in that
respect) Secundum hanc formam non est putandus ubique diffusus. Cavendum enim
est, ne ita divinitatem astruamus hominis, ut veritatem corporis destruamus.
Aug. Epist. 57.
for he is ascended into heaven, and there sits at the right hand of God.
Indeed Christ as God, when he was upon earth, was also in heaven, Ioh. 3. 13.
And so now in that respect being in heaven, he is also on earth, Mat. 28. 20.
But as man he was not in heaven, when he was on earth, neither is he in that
respect now on earth, when he is in heaven.

Use 2. This also makes exceedingly for the comfort of all such as belong unto
Christ, and are his; they need not fear either to want any good or to suffer
any evil, seeing he to whom they belong, is so exalted over all, and therefore
able to protect them, and to provide for them: Are we afraid of the rage and
malice either of men or Devils? Though they be too strong for us, yet Christ
is too strong for them, and much less are they able to resist him, then we are
to resist them. This was enough to animate and encourage Stephen
notwithstanding the fury of his adversaries, that he saw Christ standing at the
right hand of God ready to defend him, Acts 7. 55, 56. So let us with the eye
of faith look up unto Christ, and not fear what men or Devils can do unto us:
When Saul persecuted the members of Christ upon earth, Christ from heaven spoke
unto him, and let him know that he did persecute him, and that he had a hard
match of it; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? -- I am Jesus whom thou
persecuiest; it is hard for thee to to kick against the pricks, Acts 9. 4, 5.
So Ephesians. 1. 22. it is said that all things are put under Christ's feet, and that
he is head over all things to the Church, or for the Church, that is, for the
comfort and welfare of the Church.

Again, does the guilt of sin sting and wound our consciences? Let us consider
what a mighty Redeemer, Mediator, and Advocate we have, Who when he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high,
Heb. 1. 3. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather, that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us, Romans 8. 34.

Again, do we want any thing that is good and needful for us? We may go with
boldness unto God, and ask of him in the Name of Christ, whom he has so
exalted, as to set him at his own right hand. Adonijah thought himself sure to
speed when he had Bathsheba, whom Solomon did so honor, to intercede for him;
and so, had his request been just and reasonable, it had been granted. See 1
King. 2. 17; 18, 19, 20. How much more may we be assured, that having Christ to
mediate and intercede for us, we shall obtain what we ask in his Name?
Whatsoever you ask the Father in my Name, he will give it, says Christ, Joh.
16. 23. Therefore let us come with boldness to the Throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need, Heb. 4. 16.

Finally, whatever our trouble or distress be, yet let us not be dejected nor
dismayed, considering that Christ is at Gods right hand, and as he is thus
exalted, so we also as members of his body, shall proportionably be exalted in
due time: Run with patience the race that is set before you, looking unto Jesus
the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the Throne of God, Heb. 12. 1. If we suffer (with Christ) we shall also reign
with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. To him that overcomes (says Christ) will I grant to
sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my
Father in his Throne, Rev. 3. 21.

Use 3. This also serves for the terror of such as stand out against Christ,
and will not come in, and submit unto him: All the wicked and ungodly are
Christ's enemies, ( the enemies of the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3. 18.) but
especially such as having means and offers of grace, yet slight and despise
them. Now if Christ be invested with such dignity and power, then woe unto his
enemies, they must be made his footstool, Psalm. 110. 5. and 1 Cor. 15. 25. He
will rule in the midst of his Enemies, Psalm. 110. 2. He will one day say, Those
mine Enemies, that would not suffer me to reign over them, Vicisti Galilee,
vicisti.
bring hither, and slay them before me, Luke 19. 27. Julian the Apostate was
forced at length to confess that Christ was too hard for him, and had got the
victory over him; and so shall all such proud and presumptuous opposers of
Christ, as he was. He shall break them with a rod of iron, and dash them in
pieces like a potters vessel, Psalm. 2. 9.

Use 4. Lastly therefore, this may teach and admonish all to reverence Christ,
and to submit unto him; S. Peter having spoken of Christ's sitting at the right
hand of God, adds immediately, Therefore let all the house of Israel know
assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom you have crucified, both
Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36. He is Lord and King over all, and therefore to be
obeyed by all; he will rule and reign over all whether they will or not, even
the Devils themselves are under his power, and are constrained to be subject
to him. But let us willingly subject our selves unto Christ, and yield
obedience unto him, that so his Majesty and power may be for us, and not
against us; for our comfort, and not for our confusion: Serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice with trembling: Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and you
perish from the way: if his wrath be kindled, yea but a little, blessed are all
they that trust in him, Psalm. 2. 11, 12.

The three and twentieth SERMON.
ACTS 10. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify
that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead.
Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, is (as I have formerly showed) the
highest degree of his exaltation; and therefore his coming to judge both the
quick and the dead, is not a degree above it, but belongs unto it as a part of
it: Christ's sitting at the right hand of God (as has been showed) denotes that
supreme power and dignity unto which Christ is exalted above all creatures: Now
the most clear evidence and demonstration of this dignity and power, in the
full exercise of it, shall be seen by Christ's coming to Judgment; then shall
every knee be made to bow unto him, Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. with Romans 14. 10, 11.
compared together: Therefore Christ's coming to Judgment and his Kingdom are
joined together as equivalent, 2 Timothy 4. 1. because when Christ comes to
judgment, then his Kingdom shall be consummated and made perfect. Whereas
therefore in the Creed after the Article of Christ's sitting at the right hand
of God, it is said, From thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the
dead; those words from thence, are not so to be understood, as if Christ should
come from the right hand of God to judge both the quick and the dead: No,
Christ shall then especially sit (that is, appear to sit) at the right hand of
God, when he comes to judgment. And so much Christ himself has showed us,
saying, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of Heaven, viz. to judgment, Mat. 26. 64. But
the words from thence have reverence unto heaven, which was mentioned in the
Creed a little before; He ascended into heaven, and (there) sits at the
right hand of God, from thence (that is, from heaven) he shall come to judge
both the quick and the dead. Thus the Angels told the Disciples, who beheld
Christ's ascension, De caelo venturus est ad judicandum* vivos and mortuos. Aug.
Enchir. c. 54.
This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall come in like
manner as you have seen him go into Heaven, Acts 1. 11. So S. Paul, 1 These. 4.
16. The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven, etc. And again, 2 These. 1. 7.
When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, etc.

Quest. But who are meant by the quick and dead, which are spoken of both in
the Creed, and in the Scripture, as in the Text, and so in other places; as 2 Timothy 4. 1. and 1 Pet. 4. 5.

Answ. Some by quick are said to understand men's souls, and by dead men's
bodies; as if when Test Danco in Enchir. Aug. c. 55.
it is said, that Christ shall judge both quick and d^ad, the meaning were,
that he shall judge both soul and body: but this is an un^duth and incongruous
exposition. For by quick and dead are meant, not diverse parts, but diverse
persons* like as Romans 14. 9. where it is said, that to this end Christ both
died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living.
Augustine gives In Enchir. cap. 55.
two interpretations of these words, quick and dead. 1. That by quick are meant
the righteous, and by dead the wicked, who are dead vvhilest they live, 1 Timothy
5. 6. Dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1.

But neither is this interpretation to be embraced, for thus the words quick
and dead, are taken metaphorically, and not properly, whereas we ought not to
recede from the propriety of words, except necessity enforce thereunto, which
here it does not. 2. That by quick we are to understand those who are now
alive, or shall be alive at Christ's coming; and by dead those who are now
dead, or shall be at Christ's coming: and this indeed is the true and genuine
meaning of the words. The Scripture shows, that they who are alive at
Christ's coming, shall so remain, and they who were before dead, shall be
raised up, and together with the other shall be judged; and in this sense is
it said, that Christ shall judge both quick and dead; not that any shall be
dead, when they are judged, but where as they were dead, they shall be raised
up, and so be judged. Thus is that to be understood, Revel. 20. 12. I saw the
dead, small and great stand before God, viz. to be judged, as it there
follows; the dead, that is, those who had been dead. And in opposition to
these are the quick, that is, they who are found living when Christ comes, and
so remaining alive come to judgment. For the Lord himself, says S. Paul, shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive,
and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air, etc.

1 These. 4. 16. 17. Here the Apostle shows, that the Elect Electi qui
relinquimur, non moriemur, sed de vita corporali, transferemur in vitam
immortalem. Hoc n. clare significat, repetendo qui vivimus simul rapiemur cum
illis. Hoc consonat verbis Petri Act. 10. Ipse est, qui constitutus est a Deo
judex vivorum and mortuorum. Et ideo in symbol. cantamus, etc. Cajetan. ad 1
These. 4. vide etiam Cajetan. ad 2 Timothy 4. 1. and ad Act. 10. 42.
(for of them only he here speaks) that remain and are alive at Christ's
coming, shall not die, but shall together with those that were dead, but then
are raised up, be conveyed unto Christ, and be with him for ever, viz. after
the judgment, which shall pass upon them. Austin indeed having alleged these
words of the Apostle, makes a question, whether Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 20. c. 20.
they, whom Christ at his coming shall find alive, in that very space, whilst
they are caught up, as the Apostle speaks, shall not have their souls separated
from their bodies, and presently reunited unto them. But there is no ground at
all for any such conceit: and that other parallel place of the Apostle is
against it, viz. that 1 Cor 15. 51, 52. Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall
not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in a twinkling of an
eye, at the last trump, for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. Here the Apostle plainly
shewketh, that the Elect (of which likewise he here speaeth) that are alive at
Christ's coming, shall not sleep, that is, not die, but only shall be changed,
that is, as he after explaineth it, of mortal shall be made immortal, and of
corruptible incorruptible. Indeed this place to the Corinthians is diversely
read, and that was it that did mislead Austin, he followed another, and a
contrary reading viz. We shall all rise again, or We shall all sleep, but we
shall not all be changed, But these readings are false, and the other, which we
have in our Translations, and is found in the Greek, is the true reading, See
Cajetan on 1 Cor. 15. 51. 522.
as may appear by diverse reasons, 1. Otherwise this place to the Corinthians,
and that other to the Thessalonians should but ill agree; and therefore for the
reconciling of them, Austin was fain to make that strange quaere before
mentioned, and to imagine that which neither by Scripture nor by reason has
any probability for it. 2. If we should read it thus, we shall not all be
changed, then the Apostle should comprehend himself in the number of those that
perish; for the change there spoken of, is a change unto glory and happiness,
as appears by the words following: and therefore all the Elect have that
change, only the reprobrate have it not, though a change also they shall have,
but a woeful and miserable change, and not that which the Apostle there
intends. 3. That which seems to me most convincing, is this, that except we
should read it as we do, We shall not all sleep, but we shall al be changed, that
preface which the Apostle uses, were impertinent and improper, Behold, I show
you a mystery. For what mystery is there in this, that all shall sleep, and
die, but not all be changed, that is, inherit glory and eternal life? If this
had been that which the Apostle was to say, he would never have brought it in
Vere hoc est magnum, mysterium, quod aliqui electorumabsque morte intercedente
assequentur omnes immutationes supra scriptur, etc. Cajetan. i^ 1 Cor. 15.
with such a preamble, he would never have spoken of it as a mystery; for
surely nothing is more obvious to every understanding, then that though all
shall die, yet all shall not enjoy the life to come. But this is a mystery
indeed, except the Apostle had by the spirit of God revealed it, we should have
been ignorant of it, that all shall not die, but that some shall be exempted
from death, and without the intervention of death shall pass from this life to
another incomparably better.

Ob. Some may object that Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto men to die once. And
how then should the Apostle say, We shall not all sleep, that is, die?

Answ. But this objection is easily answered; Cajetane speaks briefly, but
pithily, Statutum regulare Cajetane ad. These. 4. 17.
est, illos autem non mori singular est, That is, the Statute or appointment
for men to die, is regular and ordinary, but for those who remain at Christ's
coming, not to die, is singular and extraordinary. And so necessarily those
words, It is appointed unto men to die once: must be understood of Gods usual
and ordinary dispensation; for by once there is meant only once, as appears by
the context; yet we know that Lazarus and some others, who were raised from the
dead to this mortal life, did die more then once: and besides, the Scripture
shows that Enoch and Eliah were so translated See Calvin on 1 Cor. 15.
and taken from the earth, as not to die once. Some further answer, that the
change, which the Apostle speaks of, shall be as a kind of death; but being no
separation of soul and body, it is not properly death; I therefore rather
acquiesce in the former answer. And so also is that to be understood, which
Austin objecteth, That which thou sowest, it is not Quomodo, quos viventes hic
Christus inveniet, per immortalitatem in illo vivificabuntur, etsi non
moriuntur, cum videamus propter hoc esse dictum, Tu quod seminas, etc. Aug. de
Civ. Dei l. 20. c. 20.
quickened except it die, 1 Cor. 15. 36. The Apostle there also speaks of that
which is regular and ordinary, and so it is true, regularly and ordinarily none
are quickened, that is, inherit eternal life, but they first die: yet this
hinders, not but that in respect of some it may be otherwise by a singular and
extraordinary privilege vouchsafed unto them. So it was with Enoch and Eliah,
and so it shall be with those that are alive at Christ's coming to judgment.

This being premised for the understanding of those words, quick and dead, from
the Text I shall deduce two points whcih clearly arise from it, viz. 1. That
both quick and dead, even all generally whosoever they be, must be judged.

2. That Christ is he who must be the Judge of all, both of quick and dead.

For the first, That all generally shall be judged, the Scripture is plain and
express, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto men to die once, and after this the
Judgment, Eccles. 12. 14. God will bring every work to judgment, Heb. 6. 2.
the judgment to come there called eternal judgment, to distinguish it from
judgments executed here, which are but temporal, that judgment, I say, is
reckoned amongst the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; as they are there
called, v. 1.

This truth also may be confirmed by diverse arguments.

1. The judgments which God has already executed, or does execute upon
transgressors, prove that there is a judgment to come; S. Peter makes use of
this argument, from Gods dealing with the Angels that sinned, with the old
world, and with Sodom and Gomorrah, he infers, that God will at length meet
with all the wicked, that those foregoing judgments are tokens of this
judgment which is to come; If God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast
them down to hell, etc. And spared not the old world, etc. And turning the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow,
etc. The Lord knows how to deliver the righteous out of temptation, and to
reserve the wicked unto the day of Judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2. 4. 9

2. Man's own conscience is enough to convince him of this, that all shall be
judged: For conscience will check and reprove for doing ill, though otherwise
amongst men none know of it, or if some do, yet either they cannot, or will not
punish for it. When David had but cut off the lap of Saul's garment, whereas
some would have had him cut off his head, his heart smotehim for it, 1 Samuel 24.
5. And so when he had sinned in causing the people to be numbered, 2 Samuel 24.
10. On the other side, conscience will comfort and encourage in doing well,
though in the world one be traduced and slandered as an evil doer: This is our
rejoicing (said the Apostle) even the testimony of our conscience, 2 Cor. 1.
12. Neither is this work of conscience only in the regenerate, but even in the
unregenerate also. The Apostle speaking of the Gentiles who had but the light
of nature, and so a mere natural conscience, yet says says of them, that
they show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing
one another, Rom, 2. 15.

We find that the Heathens could say, that Conscientia mill testes. Hic murus
aheneus esto, Nil consicre sibi Juven
conscience is a thousand witnesses; no matter who testify for a man, if
conscience testify against him; no matter who testify against him, if
conscience testify for him; A good conscience (say they) is a wall of brass,
able to protect and defend against all opposition. But on the other side, What
skills it, or what matter is it (says Seneca) Quid infert neminem scire, cum
tu scias? O te miserum, si contemnas hunc testem!
though none know what thou have done, whenas thou know it? O the
wretchedness of thy condition, if thou do despise this witness, thine own
conscience! True it is, conscience does often lie asleep, it is stupefied and
seared many times; but at one time or other it will awake, it will accuse,
convince, condemn, and torment; affliction does use to awaken conscience if it
were asleep before. Joseph's brethren after they had sold him, concealed the
matter for a long time, and their conscience did little trouble them (for ought
we find) about it: But when they found themselves in distress, Joseph (whom
they knew not, though he knew them) dealing roughly with them, then their
conscience did awake, and cry out against them for that which they had done so
long (twenty years and more, as appears by the story) before: They said one to
another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is
this distress come upon us. And Ruben answered them saying, Spoke I not unto
you, saying, Do not sin against the child, and ye would not hear? therefore is
this distress come upon us, Genesis 42, 21, 22. And not only Joseph's brethren,
who though guilty of much sin, yet were endued with true grace, but even
Pharaoh himself when Gods hand was heavy upon him, cried, peccavi, saying, I
have sinned this time, the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked,
Exodus 9. 27. And so Adoni Bezek a cruel Tyrant, when the Israelites had taken
him, and cut off his thumbs and his great toes, then his conscience accused him
of his cruelty, and he confessed that he was dealt with, as he had dealt with
others, Judge. 1. 7. Threescore and ten Kings (said he) having their thumbs and
their great toes cut off, gathered meat under my table; as I have done, so God
has requited me: Thus the conscience of man does sufficiently show that there
shall be judgment, wherein all shall receive according to their ways and
their doings.

3. Justice requires, that it should fare better Ut bonis been fit, malis autem
male.
with the good, then with the bad, with the righteous, then with the wicked:
That the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee, said Abraham
unto God, Genesis 18. 25. And so this is far from God; for the just Lord will do
no iniquity, Zeph. 3. 5. No, as Elihu speaks, far be it from God that he should
do wickedness, and from the Almighty that he should commit iniquity: For the
work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to find according
to his ways. Yea surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty
pervert judgment, Job 34. 10, 11, 12. God bids, Say unto the righteous, it
shall be well with him, etc. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him,
etc. Esa. 3. 10, 11. But this difference betwixt the righteous and the wicked,
does not always appear in this world; No, here no man knows love or hatred
by all that is before them, Eccles. 9. 1. That is, by Gods outward
administrations none knows whom he loves, and whom he hates, because (as it
follows) All things come alike unto all; there is one event to the righteous,
and to the wicked; to the good, and to the clean, and to the unclean, to him
that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; to him that swears, and to
him that fears an Oath. Yea, oftentimes so it is here in this world, that the
wicked flourish and prosper, whenas the righteous are afflicted and in misery.
Here profane Esau stays at home, and takes his pleasure, while godly Jacob is
forced to endure much hardness in a foreign Country. Here Nabal (a man of
Belial) feasts it like a King, while David, a man after Gods own heart, is in
want and penury. Yea, here Barabbas, a murderer, is released, and set at
liberty, and Christ himself is condemned and crucified. It must needs be
therefore, that hereafter there shall be a Judgment, wherein men shall
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God,
and him that serves him not, Mal. 3. 18. The sufferings of the godly here in
this life (as the Apostle tells us) are a manifest token of the righteous
judgment of God, 2 These. 1. 5. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you that are troubled,
rest with us when the Lord Jesus shall appear, etc. v. 6.

Thus both Scripture and Reason show, that all must be judged: And the Heathens
have known and acknowledged so much: The (...). Plato in Gorgia. (...). Soph.
dead must be judged, (says Plato.) In the other world (says Sophocles) we
hold that there are two paths, one for the just, and another for the unjust.
(...) Philem.


More fully to this purpose Philemon, another Heathen Poet; If the righteous
and the wicked shall both fare alike, then go rob, steal, defraud, do what
thou will: Be not deceived, even after death there shall be judgment, which
God the righteous Judge of all will execute.

The four and twentieth SERMON.
IT being now sufficiently proved, that generally all must be judged, we must
further know that there is a twofold judgment to come, viz. a particular
judgment, and a general judgment. A particular judgment, whereby one
immediately after death is judged. Thus is that understood, Eccles. 12. 7. Then
shall the dust return to the earth as it was, (that is, when one dies, the
body called dust, because it was made of dust, shall return to the earth, of
which it was made) and the spirit shall return to God that gave it; that is, the
soul shall return to God, who did create and infuse it into the body: A part
shall go to God to be judged by him, (...)
as the Chaldee Paraphrast does well explain it. And that parabolicall
history, or historical parable of the rich man and Lazarus, which shows how
immediately after they were dead, the one went to hell, and the other to
Abraham's bosom; that (I say) does show that every one particularly when he
dies is, judged, and receives either reward or punishment: But besides this
particular judgment, there shall also be a general judgment, wherein all
together shall be judged: God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the
world, Acts 17. 21. This is that Judgment which is meant in those places of
Scripture which speak of the day of Judgment, and so in the Text, and other
places, where the judging of quick and dead is spoken of.

Now there are d^vers reasons why besides the particular judgment there should
also be a general judgment.

1. Because the particular judgment reaches only to the soul: the difference
betwixt the godly and the wicked when they die, is in respect of the soul, not
of the body; but the body having been partner with the soul either in well or
ill doing, reason requires that they should both share either in reward or
punishment: We must all appear before the Iudgement-seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in the body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5. 10. The things were done in the body;
therefore the recompense must be received also in the body, and consequently
there must be a Judgment wherein both soul and body shall be judged.

2. The particular Judgment is secret and unknown to those that live here in
this world, they cannot ordinarily tell what sentence does pass upon any when
they die; therefore it is meet that there should be another judgment, which
shall be open and manifest unto all, that so Gods justice in his
administrations toward men may be made clear and evident. Hence the Apostle
calls the day of Judgment, the day of the revelation of the righteous
judgment of God, Romans 2. 5. Not simply the day of the righteous judgment of
God, but the day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, that is,
the day wherein the righteous judgment of God shall be revealed and made
manifest: Gods Judgment is always righteous, Is there unrighteousness with
God? God forbid, Romans 9. 14. But here many times the righteousness of Gods
Judgment does not appear; David having said that Gods righteousness is like
the great mountains, that is, most firm and unmovable, adds immediately, that
his judgments are a great deep, it is not easy for us to dive into them, or
to find out the reason of them, Psalm. 36. 6. So the Apostle cries out, How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? Romans 11. 33.
But in the great day of the Lord which is to come, Gods judgment shall not
only be righteous, as it ever is, but also shall appear to be righteous, all
shall clearly see the righteousness of it.

3. The general judgment is congruous and requisite, besides the particular
judgment, for the greater comfort and honor of the godly, and for the greater
horror and confusion of the wicked. What comfort and honor shall it be to the
godly, whenas they, who whilst they lived here, were accounted as the filth
and offscouring of all things, and were exposed to all kind of injuries and
indignit^es, shall receive their reward openly in the view of all the world?
And so on the otherside, what horror and confusion will it be to the wicked,
whenas they who here were accounted the only happy men, shall publicly in the
sight of all be adjudged to eternal torment? The Apostle speaking of the
general judgment, says, that then Christ shall be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 1. 10. So Daniel says, that then
the righteous shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, Dan. 12. 3. but
that the wicked shall have shame and everlasting contempt.

Use 1. This point concerning the judgment to come, serves to convince many.

1. Those mockers and scoffers mentioned by S. Peter; Knowing this first, that
there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. They mean of
Christ's coming to judgment? where is it? say they: as if they should say, We
have heard much of it, but we cannot see it, and because they do not see it,
neither will they believe it: so the Prophet Zephany tells of some that are
settled on their lees, and say in their heart, the Lord will neither do good,
neither will he do evil, Zeph. 1. 12. But the Prophet there shows that the Lord
will punish such as these, Prove. 19. 29. Judgments are prepared for scorners;
Esa 28. 22. Now therefore be ye not mockers lest your bonds be made strong; he
speaks of temporal Judgments that shall be inflicted on them, how much less
shall they escape eternal judgment? Enoch also (says S. Jude) the seventh
from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten
thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him, Jude v. 14, and 15.

2. Hypocrites and formal professors, who have a form of godliness, but deny
the power of it, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Who think it enough to carry it fair outwardly in
the eyes of men, not considering nor caring what they are in the sight of God.
But God will bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing, whether it
be good or evil, Eccles. 12. 14. He will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart, 1 Timothy 4, 5.

3. Such presumptuous ones, who though they be foolish and ignorant, froward
and disobedient, yet doubt not but that when they die they shall go to heaven.
But be not deceived, God is not mocked; as a man sows, so shall he reap, Gal.
6. 7. Christ will come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on those that know not
God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1. 8. And
therefore woe unto all that remain either in their ignorance, or in their
disobedience.

Use 2. The consideration of this judgment Aug. Confess. l. 6. c. 6.
should therefore stir us up unto repentance, and provoke us unto all holy
obedience. What can work upon us, and prevail with us, if not the consideration
of the judgment to come; Austin in his Confessions testifies, that it was
Metus Mortis, and futuri judicii, the fear of death, and of judgment after
death, which did bring him out of the deep gulf of sin and sensuality, wherein
he was almost swallowed up and drowned. And he says that disputing with his
friends, de finibus bonorum and malorum, of the chiefest good and evil, he
should have given the garland to Epicurus, who made happiness to consist in
sensual pleasure and delight, but that he was persuaded that after this life
is ended, men shall receive of God according to their ways and doings, which
Epicurus would not believe. Oftentimes in the Scripture is this consideration
used and urged as a forcible motive to repentance and circumspect walking.
Rejoice O young man, says Solomon, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes, As if he should say, I know this is that which thou
desire, and art prone unto; well, do so if thou will, but know that for all
these things God will bring thee unto judgment, Eccl. 11. 9. So Eccl. 12. 13,
14. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter. Fear God, and keep his
Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man, for God shall bring every
work to judgment: So S. Paul And the times of this ignorance God winked at,
but now commands all men every where to repent, because he has appointed a
day, wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, etc. Act. 17. 30, 31.
And 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent
(that is, whether alive or dead) we may be accepted of him. For we must all
appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in the body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
evil. Knowing therefore that terror of the Lord, we persuade men. As if he
should say, surely this if any thing will persuade them to have a care what
they do, seeing there must be a judgment, wherein God will render unto them
according to their deeds. So also S. Peter having spoken of this judgment,
infers from ^hence, What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation and godliness! 2 Pet. 3. 11.

But let us take heed lest we put far away the evil Amos 6. 3.
day, thinking that this judgment will not come yet, and that there is time
enough to prepare for it. The Scripture in many places tells us that the day of
the Lord, the day of Judgment, will come as a thief, suddenly, when it is
little expected by many, and therefore it behooves us to watch, and prepare for
it continually, that it may not surprise us ere we be aware. Your selves know
perfectly that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the night. For when
they shall say peace, and safety, then sudden destruction shall come upon them,
as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5. 2, 3.
The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, 2 Pet. 3. 10. If thou
shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shall not know what
hour I will come upon thee, Revel. 3. 3. Behold, I come as a thief, blessed is
he that watches, Revel. 16. 15. Watch therefore, for you know not what hour
your Lord comes. But know this, that if the good man of the house had known in
what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have
suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an
hour as you think not, the Son of Man comes, Mat. 24. 42, 43, 44. Take ye
heed, watch and pray, for you know not when the time is, Mar. 13. 23. Take heed
to your selves least at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and that day come upon you unawares.
For as a snare will it come upon all them that dwell on the face of the earth:
Watch ye therefore, etc. Luke 21. 34, 35, 36. We see how earnestly Christ
admonished those that lived so many hundred years ago, to take heed least the
day of judgment should come on them ere they were aware. And good reason, for
he that is unprepated at his death, shall be Imparatum inveniet ille dies, quem
imparatam invenerit vitae hujus ultimas dies. Aug. Qualis ^^ die isto^^isque
moritur, talis in die illo judicabitur. Idem.
unprepared at the last judgment. As death leaves a man, so will the day of
judgment find him. Yea there is (as has been showed) a particular judgment
upon the soul immediately after death, and as it fares with the soul then in
the particular judgment, so must it after fare both with body and soul, in the
general judgment. But further, as the consideration of judgment to come,
should deter us from all sin, and provoke us unto all obedience, so there are
diverse particular duties which it both serves to admonish us of, and incite us
unto. As 1. To take heed of judging, censuring and condemning one another. This
is not so to be taken, as some are apt to mis-interpret and misapply it, as if
we might not admonish and reprove one another. He will needs make himself a
Judge, said the Sodomites of Lot, when he said to them, Nay my brethren, I pray
you do not so wickedly, Genesis 19. 9. So when Moses reproved one for doing his
fellow wrong, presently the man took him up saying, Who made thee a Judge and a
Ruler over us! Exodus 2. 14. But all in their places and callings ought to do
this, Ministers must do it; These things teach and exhort, and rebuke with all
Authority, Tit. 2. 15. Preach the word, be instant in season, and out of
season, reprove, rebuke, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 2. So also private Christians; Let the
word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one
another, Col. 3. 16. Warn them that are unruly, 1 These. 5. 14. Thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Levit. 19. 17. But
though this be required of us, yet are we forbidden to be censorious: judge
not, that ye be not judged, Mat. 7. 1. Yea because we must our selves be
judged, therefore we must not take upon us to judge others. Why do thou
judge thy brother, or why do thou set at naught thy brother? we shall all
stand before the judgment seat of Christ, As it is written, As I live says
the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God.
So then, every one of us shall give an account of himself unto God. Let us not
therefore judge one another any more, Romans 14. 10, 11, 12, 13. There is one
Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy; who art thou that judge
another? Jam. 4. 12. And how must we refrain from judging, because of that
judgment that is to come? we must take heed of judging further then we know,
as of men's purposes and intentions further then they manifest them by their
actions. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of
the heart, 1 Cor. 4. 5. If men's actions be good, we must take heed how we judge
their intentions, as to say, that they do things for by ends, and earthly
respects, for profit, credit, and the like. And if their actions be doubtful,
we are to interpret things in the best sense, Charity thinks no evil, 1 Cor.
13. 5. Where it sees none, it thinks or suspecteth none. Neither if men's
actions some of them be apparently evil, must we therefore presume to judge so
of their persons; for so we shall offend against the generation of Gods
children. Psalm. 73. 15.
The wicked may do some things that are good, and so the godly some things that
are evil, for in many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. Finally, though it be
evident, that any for the present are in a damnable estate, in that they set
themselves Psalm. 36. 4. Isai. 3. 9.
in a way that is not good, and do not abhor evil, They declare their sins as
Sodom and hide them not, yet may we not therefore be peremptory to judge of
their eternal condition; we may not therefore say that they are reprobates,
castawaies, damned wretches, and that there is no hope of them. For this is
more then we know, we must leave it unto him, Who has mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardens, Romans 9. 18.

There are two sorts of people, who are especially faulty in this kind, 1. Such
as take upon them to judge and censure others, that so themselves may seem the
more pure, and the more perfect. As the depressing of the one scale is the
lifting up of the other; so they think, that what they detract from others,
they shall add unto themselves. See Absalons hypocritical censoriousnesse, 2 Samuel 15. 3. 4. But thou art inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art that judge,
for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that
judge, do the same things. But we are sure that the judgment of God is
according to truth, against them that commit such things. And think thou
this, O man, that iudgest them, which do such things, and do the same, that
thou shall escape the judgment of God? Romans 2. 1, 2, 3. If a man think himself
to be something when he is nothing; he deceives himself. But let every man
prove his own work, and so shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in
another. For every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6. 3, 4, 5. My brethren
be not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation.
For in many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 1, 2.

2. Such as wittingly and wilfully traduce and slander others, whose
conversations they know to be holy and good, and even therefore they seek what
they can to defame them. They think it strange that you will not run with them
to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you. Who shall give an account
to him who is ready to judge both the quick and the dead, 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5.

2. To beware of abusing that power that we have over, or above others. For
though they be not able to plead their own cause, and to vindicate themselves,
yet God at the last judgment, if not before, will plead their cause for them,
and will avenge them on those that have done them wrong. Rob not the poor,
because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the gate. For the Lord
will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them, Prove.
22. 22, 23, He that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong that he does, and
there is no respect of persons, Col. 3. 25. Therefore Masters give unto your
servants, that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a master in
heaven, Col. 4. 1. This consideration of Gods judgment to come wrought so upon
Job, that he durst not oppress either servants or others. If I did despise
(says he) the cause of my manservant, or of my maidservant, when they
contended with me. What then shall I do when God stands up, and when he
visits, what shall I answer him? Job. 31. 13, 14. If I have lift up my hand
against the father less, when I saw my help in the gate (that is, when by his
greatness he could have easily escaped censure in the courts of humane
judicature) Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be
broken from the bone. For destruction from God was a terror unto me, and
because of his highness I could not endure, Joh. 31. 21, 22, 23.

3. To show mercy unto others, that we our selves in that great day may obtain
mercy. With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7. 2.
Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5. 7. But he shall
have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2. 13. Now we
must be merciful in forgiving. For how can we expect that God should forgive
us, if we will not forgive others? Christ has taught us to pray, forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive those that trespass against us, And he adds, For
if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
your trespasses, Mat. 6. 14. 15. And to this end he propounded a Parable of a
certain King, who having forgiven one of his servants a great debt which he
was never able to pay, when he heard how that servant would not remit a small
debt that his fellow servants owed him, he was wroth with him, and exacted his
debt of him, Mat. 18. 23. etc. And the Application of the Parable is subjoyned
v. 35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your
hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses: Therefore let not
the Sun go down upon your wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26. Yet some will continue in their
wrath and enmity, In ipsa morte ira vivebat. Flor.
not only until night, but even until death, they will lie down not only in
their beds, but in their graves with it.

2. In giving, that is, succouring and relieving those that are in want and
misery: The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed
me, and was not ashamed of my chain; but when he was in Rome he sought me out
very diligently, and found me. The Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy
of the Lord in that day, 2 Timothy 1. 16, 17, 18. And what account shall be made
at the last judgment of this kind of mercy, Christ has plainly showed, Mat.
25. 34. etc. where he fore-tells how to those who have been careful to succor
and relieve others, he will say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world; for I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc. On the
other side to those, who have refused thus to show mercy, he will say, Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, etc. Some (as Austine
records) Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 212. c. 17.
have strained this, and other such like places, beyond all due measure,
inferring from thence, that if a man did not neglect to give alms howsoever
otherwise he lived, yet he should not be damned. But this is a most erroneous
and damnable opinion: For though a man give all his goods to feed the poor,
yet if he be without charity, it shall profit him nothing, as the Apostle
teaches, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Now where sin and ungodliness does reign, there is no
charity; for charity proceeds out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith
unf^ined, as we learn of the same Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 5. That of our Savior
holds good in respect of all, as well almes-givers as others, Except ye repent,
ye shall all perish, Luke 13. 3, 5. Gregory says well, that he that gives Dat
sua Deo, se diabolo. Greg. Pastor. par. 3. admonit. 21.
alms liberally, and yet otherwise lives wickedly, gives his goods to God, and
himself to the Devil: That of our Savior, Luke 11. 41. Give alms of of such
things as you have, and behold all things are clean unto you, is not so to be
taken, as if giving of alms alone would serve the turn; but he spoke in respect
of the Pharisees, as the context shows: The Pharisees were superstitious in
washing and cleansing their cups, and platters, but regarded not to wash and
cleanse their hearts. And because coveousnesse was the sin which was
predominant in them, as appears, Luke 16. 14. Mat. 23. 14. Therefore Christ
prescribed a remedy suitable to the disease; as a Physician will say, to such as
are given to excess, Use abstinence, and all will be well: So Daniel knowing
that Nebuchadnezzar had been a great oppressor, exhorted him to the exercise of
that virtue especially which was most contrary to the vice that reigned in him;
Wherefore O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, break off thy sins
by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4.
27.

The error of the Papists also is here to be avoided, They hold that by works
of mercy we may satisfy for our sins, and merit heaven: But it is only Christ,
who is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 1. 2. and who has purchased
eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. It is mercy that we must expect in the
day of Judgment, notwithstanding all the works of mercy, or what ever good
works we have done, as is clear by the Dignatio locum non habet, ubi fuerit
praesumptio dignitatis. Bern. Gal. 5. 6.
places before cited, 2 Timothy 1. 18. Now Gods mercy and our merit will not stand
together: But as other good works, so works of mercy being the fruits of a
living faith, that works thorough love, shall be found pleasing unto God, and
profitable unto us at the last judgment.

Use 3. Thirdly, and lastly, This Judgment to come being considered, affoards
comfort unto the godly, and is sufficient to encourage them against all the
molestations and troubles that here they meet with, As,

1. The prosperity of the wicked does sometimes not a little vex and grieve the
godly: Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea and are mighty in power?
Their seed is established in their sight, etc. Job 21. 7, 8. Wherefore does the
way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? Jer. 12. 1. But as for me my feet were almost gone, my steps had
well nigh slipped: For I was envious at the foolish when I saw the prosperity of
the wicked, etc. Psalm. 73. 2, 3. etc. But what reason is there to envy the
wicked, because they prosper and flourish for a while, whenas at last God will
pay them home, and they shall perish for ever? The wicked is reserved to the
day of destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of wrath, Job 21. 30.
Pull them out as sheep for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of
slaughter, Jer. 12. 3. When I thought to understand this, it was too painful
for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I their end.
Surely thou did set them in slippery places, thou castedst them down into
destruction: How are they brought into desolation as in a m^ment? They are
utterly consumed with terrors: As a dream when one awaketh, so O Lord when
thou awakest thou shall despise their image, Psalm. 73. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Therefore fret not thy self because of evil doers, neither be thou envious
against the workers of iniquity: For they shall soon be cut down like the
grass, and wither as the green herb, Psa. 37. 1, 2.

2. We are apt to be troubled at the disorder and confusion that is in the
world, that much sin and wickedness does pass without control, that
judgment is perverted, the righteous are condemned* and the wicked justified:
But let us consider that there is a judgment to come which will rectify all,
and set all straight; I saw under the Sun (says Solomon) the place of
Judgment, that wickedness was there, and the place of righteousness, that
iniquity was there; I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the
wicked; for there is a time there for every purpose, and for every work, Eccl.
3. 16, 17. If thou see (says he) the oppression of the poor, and violent
perverting of judgment and justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter;
for he that is higher then the highest regards the matter, and there be
higher then they, Eccles. 5. 8.

3. The godly are subject here to slanders, calumnies, and defamations: But let
them consider that the day is coming when all foul and falsle aspersions that
were cast on them, shall be wiped off, and their innocence be made manifest
unto all; Commit thy way unto the Lord trust also in him, and he shall bring it
to pass: And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the noon day, Psalm. 36. 5, 6. But with me it is a very small
thing, that I should be judged of you, or of man's Judgment. -- But he that
judge^h me is the Lord, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

4. Persecution which the godly here endure, is sometimes bitter and grievous
unto them. But this (says the Apostle) is a manifest token of the righteous
judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for
which ye also suffer. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation to those that trouble you: And to you who are troubled, rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus shall appear from Heaven, etc. 2 These. 1. 5, 6, 7. etc.
Be patient therefore brethren (says S. James) unto the coming of the Lord:
Behold the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the Earth, and has
long patience for it, until he receive the former and the latter rain. Be ye
also patient, stablish your hearts; for the coming of the Lord draws nigh,
James 5. 7, 8. And so much for this Doctrine, That all generally shall be
judged.

The five and twentieth SERMON.
THe second point to be considered from the Text, is this, That Christ is he,
who must be the

The Text is clear and express for this, and so also the Scripture in many
other places. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1. We
must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. We shall all
stand before the judgment seat of Christ, Romans 14. 10. In the day when God
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, Romans 2. 16 Because he has
appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man
whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he
has raised him from the dead, Act. 17. 31. For the Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment to the Son, Ioh. 5. 22. And has given him
authority also to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man, v. 27.

Quest. But how is it said, that the Father judges no man? the contrary is
affirmed by S. Peter, If ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judges according to every man's work, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 17.

Answ. It is not meant that simply and absolutely the Father judges no man,
but only in some respect, that is, the Father judges no man immediately by
himself, but mediately by Christ, as the Apostle shows, Romans 2. 16. and Act.
Ferus on Ioh. 5. 22.
17. 31. In judgment (as some observe) four things are to be considered. 1.
The judiciary power and authority. 2. an inward approbation of good, and
detestation of evil. 3. a retribution of reward. 3. an outward sitting in
judgment, and pronouncing of sentence, in respect of the three first
particulars, the last judgment is common to the whole Trinity, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost; but in respect of the fourth and last particular it is
proper and peculiar unto Christ.

Quest. But again it may be said, Christ being one and the same God with the
Father, Ioh. 10. 30. how has he this authority assigned unto him? All things
that the Father has, are mine, says Christ, Joh. 16. 15.

Diverse of the Ancients understand it so, that Hilary Chrysostomand
Theophylact: See Iansenius in Concord.
the Father begetting the Son, and communicating the divine nature unto him, in
that respect gave him authority to execute judgment. In which sense it is
said, As the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have
life in himself, Joh. 5. 26. But Austin justly disliketh this exposition; for
so it could not be said, The Father judges no man. For as the Father begets
the Son, who is equal to the Father, so the Father judges together with the
Son: the one judges in like Secundum hoc enim quod Pater aequalem genuit
Filium, judicat eum Filio. Aug. Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa.
manner as the other. For the works of the Trinity that are without, are common
to all the three Persons: In this respect therefore he says it is to be
understood, that the Father has committed all judgment to the Son, in that the
Secundum hoc ergo dictum est, quod in judicio non in forma Dei, sed in forma
Filii hominis apparebit. Aug.
Son shall appear in judgment, not in the form of God, but in the form of
man. And this he well confirms by that, He has given him authority to execute
judgment, because he is the Son of man, Joh. 5. 27. The power of judging Pater
Filio potestatem judicandi, quam ab aeterno habuit ut Deus, dedit in tempore,
qui^ Filius hominis est, hoc est, quatenus est homo. Aug.
belonged to the Son from all eternity, as God, but as man, in time he received
that power of the Father. I saw in the night visions (says Daniel) and behold,
one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient
of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him
dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, Nations and languages
should serve him, etc. Dan. 7. 13, 14. This shows, that Christ as the Son of
man, that is, as man, had a Kingdom given unto him of God; and to the
administration of that Kingdom, this appertains, that he should judge the
world. For he must reign until hes enemies be made his footstool, 1 Cor. 15.
25. Which shall be fulfilled at his coming to judgment; then shall he exercise
his Kingly power to the full. And therefore it is said, that he shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1. The reason
why Christ is to be the Judge of all, is the will and pleasure of God, it is
his ordination and appointment, he is ordained of God to be the judge of quick
and dead, says Peter in the Text. So Paul Act. 17. 31. says that God has
ordained him to judge the world.

It is congruous and agreeable to reason that it should be so in diverse
respects, 1. For a reward to Christ's humiliation, for he that humbles himself,
shall be exalted, Luke 18. 14. Now Christ humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross. Wherefore also God has highly
exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth: And that every tongue should confess that Jesus is the Lord,
to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. The full accomplishment
hereof shall be at the last judgment, as appears by comparing this place with
that, Romans 14. 10, 11. We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
For it is written, As I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and
every tongue shall confess to God. That which is written (to wit, Isai. 45.
23.) of every knee bowing unto God, and of every tongue confessing unto him,
the Apostle interprets of Christ, as meant of him, and thence proves that all
must stand before his judgment seat; for that then indeed shall every knee
bow, that is, every one shall be subject unto him, and every tongue shall
confess him to be Lord over all. And thus some understand that, Ioh. 5. 27.
And has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son
of man, that is (say they) because he did so humble himfelf as to be made man,
and being man to suffer as he did.

2. That so the judicial proceedings might be in an outward and visible
manner. And thus others do more fitly expound that, Ioh. 5. 27. Where it is
said that authority to execute judgment is given unto Christ, because he is the
son of man, that is, because he only of all the three Persons is man, and
consequently is meet so to execute judgment, as that he may generally be seen
of all. Thus it is said, that when he comes, every eye shall see him, Revel.
1. 7.

Ob. But may some object, This honor to be the judge of all, is not peculiar
unto Christ; for it is said, that the Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2.

Answ. I answer, One may be said to judge many ways. 1. Comparatively, thus it
is said, Mat. 12. 41* 42. The men of Nineve shall rise in the judgment with
this generation, and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching
of Jonas; and behold, a greater then Jonas is here. The Queen of the South
shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it; for
she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon;
and behold, a greater then Solomon is here. Thus also is it said, Mat. 12. 27.
If I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out?
therefore they shall be your judges. Thus comparatively, not only the Saints
shall judge the wicked, that is, make it appear, that the wicked are justly to
be condemned; but even the wicked also shall judge the wicked, some being far
more grossly then others.

2. Interpretatively, by way of approbation: and thus also shall the Saints
judge the world, by consenting unto, and approving of Christ's judgment, as just
and right. They shall say, as it is, Revel. 16. 5. Thou art righteous O Lord,
which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged thus.

3. Eminently, as an assessor and Bencher next unto the Judge. Thus shall some
of the Saints judge the world, to wit, the Apostles to whom Christ said, When
the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19. 28.

4. Authoritatively, and so none of the Saints shall judge the world, but
Christ only.

Use 1. Here then is terror to all those who are enemies to Christ, and aliens
from Christ, as all the wicked and unregenerate are. Some there are who
conspire against God, and against Christ, saying, Let us break their bonds
asunder, and cast away their cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3. We will not have this
man to reign over us, Luke 19. 14. But O ye sons of men how long will ye turn
my glory into shame? how long Psalm. 4. 2.
will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? What do these but strive against
the stream? and kick against pricks? They do but imagine a vain thing, Psalm. 2.
1. Act. 9. 4.
Christ is King, and shall reign over them whether they will or no, if not by
their voluntary subjection to their eternal comfort, yet perforce to their
eternal confusion. He shall break them with a rod of iron, and break them in
pieces like a potters vessel. Psalm. 2. 9. He shall say at the last day, Those
mine enemies, that would not suffer me to reign over them, bring hither, and
slay them before me, Luke 19. 27.

More particulerly here is terror for diverse sorts of the ungodly.

1. Adulterers, Fornicatours and unclean persons, who professing themselves
Christians, yet consider not that of the Apostle, Know ye not, that your bodies
are the members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make
them the members of on harlot? God forbid, 1 Cor. 6. 15. shall any be thus
injurious unto Christ, and yet escape when he shall come to judgment? No,
Whoremongers and adulterers he will judge, Hebr. 13. 4. Though they escape
here, they shall not escape hereafter. The Lord knows how to reserve the
unjust to the day of judgment to be punished; Chiefly those that walk after
the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, 2 Pet. 2. 9, 10.

2. Swearers, who never mention Christ but in their oaths, never think of his
sufferings, his wounds, his blood, his death, but to swear by them, as much as
in them lies, they crucify him again and again, and continually make his
wounds to bleed afresh. Some such miscreants there are, as Salvian complained
of in his times, They never less intend Nunquam minus cogitant quippiam
facere, quam cum iurant per Christum se esse facturos. Salv. de Gubernat. l. 4.
to do a thing, then when they swear by Christ that they will do it. Yea those
things that are most evil and odious unto Christ, they Cogitant se scelera
etiam religiose facturos. Salv. Ibid.
will swear by Christ, that they will do; as if (says he) they thought that by
this means their wicked acts shall be done religiously.

3. Such as slight, or profane the Ordinances of Christ, his Word, and his
Sacraments: Instead of observing that of the Apostle, Let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly in all wisdom, Col. 3. 16. they are like those, Jer. 6.
10. The Word of the Lord is a reproach unto them, and they have no delight in
it. So for the Sacraments, they think with Naaman, Are not Abana and Parphar,
rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of Israel? 2 King. 5. 12. What
is there more in the water of Baptism, then in other water? What more in the
bread and wine on the Lords Table, then in bread and wine elsewhere?

4. Such as despise and hate, traduce and persecute Christ's members: These more
especially shall give an account unto him, who is ready to judge both the quick
and the dead. All the respect that is showed unto the members of Christ, and so
all the indignity that is done unto them, Christ at the last Judgment, will
take as showed and done unto himself: Come ye blessed, etc. For I was an
hungered, and ye fed me, etc. Forasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least
of these of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me, Mat. 25. 34. etc. On
the other side, Depart from me ye cursed, etc. For I was an hungered, and ye
gave me no meat, etc. Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these my
brethren, ye did it not to me, V. 41. etc. Therefore whosoever shall offend one of
these little ones that believe in Christ, it were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of
the Sea, Mat. 18. 6.

5. They who in place and office are the Ministers of Christ, but do not take
heed to the Ministry which they have received in the Lord, to Col. 4. 17.
fulfill it: How strictly did Paul charge Timothy to have a care of this,
setting before him Christ's coming to Judgment? I charge thee therefore (said
he) before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge both the quick and
the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, preach the Word, be instant in
season and out of season, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. So Peter, The Elders that are
among you, I exhort, etc. Feed the flock of God, which is among you, taking the
oversight thereof not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but
of a ready mind; neither being Lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples to
the flock. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown
of glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. See Mat. 24. 45, -- 51.

Use 2. Secondly, here is comfort for those that belong unto Christ, and have
interest in him; what need such to fear condemnation, whenas it is Christ by
whom they shall be judged? He Advocatus noster factus est judex noster Greg.
hom. 34. in Evang.
that is our Advocate, who makes intercession for us, he shall be our Judge,
and how then shall we be condemned? Though Satan be (as his name imports, and
S. Peter terms him) our adversary, 1 Pet. 5. 8. though he cease not to accuse
us,, Rev. 12. 10. Yet we repenting and believing in Christ, may say with the
Apostle, Who is he Romans 8. 34
that condemns? seeing Christ is he that judges. When the wicked shall be at
their wits end, and shall say to the mountains and to the rocks, fall on us,
and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand? Rev. 6. 16, 17. Then shall all true believers lift up their heads, for
that their redemption is at hand: Then shall they say, L^, Luke 21. 28.
this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us; this is the
Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoice in his salvation,
Esa. 25. 9.

Use 3. Thirdly, and lastly, let us be admonished to consider Christ, and to
think of him, not only as a Redeemer, but also as a Judge; let us know and
consider, that as Christ came once to save sinners, so he will come again to
condemn sinners, even all impenitent sinners: His first coming was in humility
and meekness, his second coming will be in majesty and terror; For the Son of
man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then he shall
render to every man according to his works, Mat. 16. 27. So Mat. 25. 31. When
the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then
shall he fit upon the Throne of his glory. The terriblenesse of Christ's coming
to judgment is lively set forth by the Apostle, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. The Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power: Well might he say, as he
did, Knowing therefore this terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11.
Let us take heed lest we now despise that sweet invitation, Come unto me all ye
that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you ease, Mat. 11. 28. lest
hereafter we hear that dreadful denuntiation, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41. Let us
remember that of Paul, The grace of God which brings salvation, has appeared
unto all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. And that of Peter, Wherefore beloved, seeing that
you look for such things, be diligent, that you may be found of him in peace,
without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. 14. In a word, let us have a care so to
assure our selves of interest in Christ by faith, and so to show forth our
faith in Christ by our love and obedience unto him, that as he says, Behold I
come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man as his work shall be,
Rev. 22. 12. Surely I come quickly, v. 20. So we may have courage and
confidence to say, as there immediately it follows, Amen, even so come Lord
Jesus.

The six and twentieth SERMON.
2 COR. 13. 14. And the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.
THese words are a part of the conclusion of this Epistle. The Apostle usually
begins and ends with prayer in the behalf of those to whom he writes. So in
other Epistles, and so in this, Grace be to you, and peace from God our Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ, Chap. 1. v. 2. And here in like manner, The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the
Holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.

I am to treat only of that part of the verse, which concerns the Holy Ghost,
and before I come to the doctrine which the words afford, I must insist a
little upon the name, nature, person, and operation of the Holy Ghost.

1. For the name, Holy Ghost: Ghost is as much as Of the name Holy Ghost.
spirit, and ghostly as much as spiritual. In the Scripture where this Person
called the Holy Ghost, is spoken of, our Translators sometimes use the word
Ghost, and sometimes the word Spirit. Yet (as I observe) they do not altogether
use the words promiscuously, but with this difference. Where the word Holy is
not prefixed, they always The word Ghost explained.
use the word Spirit, and not the word Ghost. And so also when this Person is
spoken of in relation to God, or to Christ, although the word Holy be prefixed.
As the Spirit, not the Ghost, the Spirit of God or of Christ, not the Ghost of
God or of Christ: his holy Spirit, not his Holy Ghost. Otherwise when this
Person is spoken of without any such relation, and with the Epithet Holy
prefixed, they use the word Ghost rather then Spirit. But however, the word in
the Original is the same, and these words Ghost and Spirit differ in sound,
rather then in sense and signification. Now the word in the Hebrew, and in the
Greek, and (...). Spiritus.
in the Latin (the three learned Languages) which is rendered sometimes Ghost,
but more frequently Spirit, this word (I say) is attributed to diverse things.
1. Sometimes it is taken for breath; I will cause breath to enter into you, and
you shall live, Ezekiel. 37. 5. In the Original the word rendered breath, is that
which usually is rendered Spirit. So (...)
Jam. 2. 26. Where it is said, the body without the Spirit is dead, in the
margent for spirit is breath. 2. The word sometimes is used for the wind, as
Joh. 3. 8. The wind blows where it lists, so is every one that is born of
the spirit. In the Original it is (...).
one and the same word which is rendered in the beginning of the verse Wind, and
in the end of the Spiritus ubi vult spirat.
verse Spirit: and the vulgar Latin there has not Ventus which properly
signifies wind, but Spiritus, whence we have the word Spirit. 3. This word
Spirit is used to signify an incorporeall and immaterial substance. A spirit
has not flesh and bones, Luke 24. 39. And thus by spirit sometimes is meant
the soul of man. When a man dies, then shall the dust, that is, the body (made
of dust) return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God that
gave it, Eccles. 22. 7. Where by spirit is meant the soul of man, which is a
spiritual substance. Thus also the Angels, whether good or bad, are called
spirits. The good Angels, Are they not all ministering spirits? etc. Heb. 1. 14.
The bad Angels, when some said unto Christ, Lord, even the devils are subject
unto us thorough thy name, Luke 10. 17. Christ answered them, Notwithstanding
in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice
because your names are written in heaven, v. 20. And in this sense is the word
Spirit attributed unto God, Ioh. 4. 24. God is a Spirit. And so 1 Pet. 3. 18.
By spirit is signified Christ's divine nature, which is the Son, in all the
three Persons. Being put to death by the flesh (that is, the humane nature) but
quickened in the spirit, that is, the divine nature. And peculiarly the third
Person of the sacred Trinity has the name of Spirit appropriated to him.
Sometimes this Person is called the Spirit, Romans 8. 16. Sometimes the Spirit of
God, 1 John 4. 2. Sometimes the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9. Sometimes the Holy
Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, as in the Text, and other places. Why the third
Person is peculiarly called the Spirit, though the Father be a spirit, and the
Son a spirit as well as the Holy Ghost; the Scripture does not express,
neither is it much material for us to inquire. Some give Secundum quod spiritus
dicitur a spiritualitate; sic convenit toti Trinitati. -- Secundum autem quod
dicitur a spiratione, sic convenit illi soli Personae, quae procedit ut amor,
etc. Bonavent. in Sent. l. 1. did. 10. quest. 3.
this reason, that this Person proceeds from the Father and the Son by
spiration, or breathing; which must be understood after a spiritual and
ineffable manner. It may be said, that this divine Person is therefore called
the Spirit, because he was inspired or breathed into, and did breath in the
Prophets and Apostles. This inward and spiritual inspiration was signified, and
confirmed by Cum arcana inspiratione poss^t Christus gratiam confer
Apostolis, visibilem flatum ad dear voluit ad cos melius confirmandos. Calvin.
in Ioh. 20. 22.
that outward and corporal breathing, which is mentioned, Ioh. 20. 22. Where
it is said, that when Christ gave the Holy Ghost unto his Apostles, he breathed
on them, and said unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 20. 22. This
Person is called Holy. Now there is a holiness, which is only external and
adherent, which does not constitute a thing holy in it self, but only in its
use and relation. Thus Jerusalem is called the Holy City, Mat. 4. 5. to wit,
because The word Holy expounded.
it had special relation unto God, it was the City of the great King, that is,
of God, Mat. 5. 35. Thus also the Temple, and the things of the Temple were
holy. And thus the water in Baptism, and the bread and wine in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper are holy, as having peculiar reference unto God, and set apart
for holy uses. There is also an internal and inherent holiness, whereby a
thing is in it self holy. And thus all true believers are holy, being inwardly
purged and cleansed in some measure from the filth and pollution of sin. You
are washed, you are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Thus also the good Angels are holy, they are called the Holy
Angels, Mat. 25. 31. And after a most eminent manner God is holy, he is styled
the Holy one, Job. 6. 10. Isai. 40. 25. Yea it is said that he only is holy,
Revel. 15. 4. to wit, independently and essentially, men and Angels being but
holy by participation. And peculiarly holiness is attributed to the third
Person in the Blessed Trinity; though the first person and the second person be
holy too, yet the third person is peculiarly styled holy, it being the peculiar
work of this person to sanctify and make holy. Not as if the Father and the
Son did not sanctify as well as the Holy Ghost, but the Father and the Son do
sanctify by the Holy Ghost; whence sanctification is called the sanctification
of the spirit, 2 These. 2. 13. because it is peculiarly wrought by the spirit,
and so much for the name Holy Ghost, or holy Spirit.

2. The nature of the holy Ghost is to be considered, viz. that the holy Ghost
is God truly and Of the nature of the Holy Ghost that the Holy Ghost is God.
properly so called, having one and the same divine nature with the Father and
the Son, for these three are one, 1. Ioh. 5. 7. three persons, yet but one God,
as has been showed before upon that Text; but here the Godhead of the Holy
Ghost is to be proved more fully: and we have clear testimony of Scripture for
it: Why has Satan filled thine heart, to lie unto the Holy Ghost? said Peter
to Ananias, Act. 5. 3. And he adds presently after, Thou have not lied unto
men, but unto God, v. 4. This clearly shows the Holy Ghost to be God. And the
same may further be confirmed by diverse arguments.

1. Divine attributes belong unto the holy Ghost, such as are proper unto God,
and consequently the Holy Ghost is God. Ubiquity, omnipresence, to be every
where, which is peculiar unto God, is attributed to the Holy Ghost. Whither
shall I go from thy spirit? Psalm. 139. 7. So also is omniscience, to know all
things, which likewise appertains to God only: The spirit searches all things,
even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10.

2. Divine works are ascribed to the Holy Ghost, such works as none can do but
only God, and therefore also the Holy Ghost is God. The work of Creation, which
is proper unto God, belongs to the Holy Ghost. The Spirit of God has made me,
said Elihu, Job 33. 4. And surely he that made him, made all. So also the work
of sanctification belongs only unto God; The very God of peace sanctify you
wholly, 1 These. 5. 23. Yet this work is ascribed to the Holy Ghost; yea this
Person (as has been showed) is therefore called the Holy Ghost, because he
peculiarly does work sanctification, and make holy.

3. Divine honor is given to the Holy Ghost, that honor which is due only unto
God: And this also evinceth that the Holy Ghost is God: Baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19. We may
not baptize, or be baptized in the name of any, but only of God. Were any of
you baptized in the name of Paul? 1 Cor. 1. 13. Seeing therefore that we
baptize and are baptized, according to Christ's own institution, as in the name
of the Father, and of the Son* so also of the holy Ghost, it necessarily
follows that as the Father is God, and the Son God, so is the Holy Ghost God
also. And so in the Text, that we have in hand, the Apostle prays for the
Corinthians, that they might enjoy, as the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ (the
Son) and the love of God (the Father) so likewise the communion of the Holy
Ghost; and it is an implicit invocation as of Christ the Son, and of God the
Father, so of the holy Ghost; as if the Apostle should have said, I pray to our
Lord Jesus Christ, that his grace, and to God (the Father) that his love, and
to the Holy Ghost, that his communion may be with you all: and this may suffice
to prove that the holy Ghost is God.

3. I pass to the person of the holy Ghost; and Of the person of the Holy
Ghost.
here three things are to be considered. 1. That the Holy Ghost is a Person. 2.
That the Holy Ghost is a person distinct from the Father and the Son. 3. That
the Holy Ghost is a person proceeding both from the Father, and from the Son.

1. The holy Ghost is a person, not an attribute That the H. Ghost is a person.
or affection, as mercy, justice, power, wisdom, and the like. For those things
which are proper and peculiar to a person are attributed to the holy Ghost, as
to be vexed and grieved, They vexed his holy spirit, Isai. 63. 10. Grieve not
the holy spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30. True it is, the holy Ghost being God,
cannot properly be vexed or grieved, but this (as other things in Scripture) is
spoken after the manner of men, but however it argues that the holy Ghost is a
person, even as that Psalm. 95. 10. Forty years long was I grieved with this
generation, shows him that spoke it, to be a person. So when the holy Ghost is
said to speak, to command and enjoin, it argues that the Holy Ghost is a
person. The Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, etc. Act. 13. 2.
Above all, that Mat. 3. 16. is most strong and forcible for this purpose. There
it is said, that the Holy Ghost came down in the likeness of a dove, which
could not be except the Holy Ghost were a person: For nothing but a person can
assume a shape wherein to appear; a mere attribute or affection cannot do it.

2. The Holy Ghost is a person distinct from the That the H. Ghost is a person
distinct from the Father and the Son.
Father and the Son. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, said Christ to his Disciples, Joh. 14. 16. The Comforter there
spoken of is the Holy Ghost, as appears v. 17. Even the spirit of truth, etc.
and v. 26. The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost. This therefore is another, a
person distinct from Christ the Son, and so likewise from the Father. For the
Father does send this Comforter, the Holy Ghost, John 14. 26. Now the person
sending, and the person sent must needs be distinct the one from the other. And
this same reason also proves the Son and the Holy Ghost to be two distinct
persons, because the Holy Ghost is sent by the Son; When the Comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you, said Christ, Joh. 15. 26. And so Ioh. 16. 7. If I go
not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send
him unto you. The distinction also of the Holy Ghost both from the Father, and
from the Son, is evident by that Mat. 28. 19. Baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son; and of the Holy Ghost. As likewise by this conclusion,
whereof the Text is a part, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. These places do
clearly show that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are three distinct
persons: and so S. John speaking of them, That the H. Ghost proceeds both
from the Father, and from the Son.
says, There are three, and these three, 1 Ioh. 5. 7.

3. The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son: this is the
difference, whereby the divine persons are distinguished one from another: the
Father proceeds from none, the Son proceeds from the Father, and the Holy
Ghost proceeds both from the Father and the Son: that the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father, the Scripture is express, Ioh. 15. 26. The spirit
of truth; which proceeds from the Father. And that the Holy Ghost also
proceeds from the Son, is there implied, Whom I will send, said Christ. If the
holy Ghost be sent by the son, then also he proceeds from the Son, for the
Father proceeding from none, is never said to be sent by any; the 1 Pet. 1. 11.
The Holy Ghost inspring the Prop^^^s, is called the Spirit of Christ.
Son proceeding from the Father, is said to be sent by the Father, 1 Ioh. 4. 9.
10. And so the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, is said to
be sent by them both: the Holy Ghost also is called the spirit of the Son, as
proceeding from the Son, Gal. 4. 6. And so Romans 8. 9. the Spiof Christ:
therefore also Christ speaking of the Holy Ghost, said, He shall receive of
mine, Ioh. 16. 14. because the holy Ghost has the divine nature communicated
unto him by the Son, even as the Son has it communicated unto him by the
Father.

Quest. But some may say, How is it said of the Holy Ghost, that he shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak? Ioh. 16.
13.

Answ. I answer, The Holy Ghost is there spoken of as a messenger, or an
Ambassador, one sent by another, who is not to speak of himself, but what he
has received from him by whom he is sent: and Christ spoke thus of the Holy
Ghost, not to derogate from the Holy Ghost, but to prevent the spreading of
error and false doctrine, under a pretense of the spirit, and to assure us,
that if any Doctrine be dissonant from that which Christ has delivered, it is
not from the Holy Ghost, but to be rejected, though they that vent it, do
never so much pretend the spirit for it.

4. In the fourth and last place we are to consider Of the operation of the
Holy Ghost.
the operation of the Holy Ghost. In respect of operation it is that the Holy
Ghost is said to be sent, or given, Gal. 4. 6. Romans 5. 5. For the Holy Ghost is
not so sent, or given, as to be where before he was not, but only so as to
operate otherwise then he did. The operation of the spirit is called, the
manifestation of the spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 7. because by the operation of the
spirit, the presence of the spirit is made manifest, the operation it self
being such as is manifest.

Now the operation of the spirit is either such as is common to the Elect and
reprobate, or such as is proper and peculiar to the Elect.

1. Such as is common to the Elect and reprobate: and that is of diverse sorts.
1. That whereby one is fitted for his particular calling, whether it be sacred
or civil. It is Judge. 11. 29. that the spirit of the Lord came upon Iephthah.
And 1 Samuel 11. 6. that the Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul. So Exodus 31. 3.
that Bezaleel was filled with the spirit of God. The meaning is, that Iephthah
and Saul by the operation of the Spirit were endued with courage and valor,
and Bezaleel with wisdom and understanding, whereby both they and he were made
meet for that office, and employment to which they were called. In the
primitive times of the Gospel, there were extraordinary gifts of the Holy
Ghost, as ability to speak strange tongues, to work strange cures, and to do
many miracles; and these gifts were common to the reprobate, as appears by
that, Mat. 7. 22, 23. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name done
many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you,
Depart from me ye that work iniquity. And when Christ sent the Apostles, giving
them power to heal the sick, to cleanse the lepers, to raise the dead, and to
cast out devils, he sent Judas among them, and gave him power in this kind as
well as the rest, Mat. 10. 1. etc. And in respect of those extraordinary gifts
of the Holy Ghost, most probably it was, that some being asked if they had
received the Holy Ghost, answered, We have not so much as heard whether there
be any Holy Ghost, Acts 19. 2. It is hardly to be imagined, that they who spoke
this, having been partakers (as they said themselves) of John's Baptism, could
be ignorant whether there were such a divine Person which is called the Holy
Ghost; but they might be ignorant whether there were such miraculous gifts of
the Holy Ghost given unto believers: It follows there v. 6. that when Paul
laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with
tongues, and prophesied. The Holy Ghost did then manifest himself in them by
extraordinary gifts which he did confer on them.

2. Some measure of illumination: This also is a common work of the Spirit; the
reprobate are illuminated in some measure by the Holy Ghost, as well as the
elect. They who are enlightened, and in that respect made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, may fall away and perish for ever, Heb. 6. 4, 6. The sin against the
Holy Ghost presupposes this operation of the Holy Ghosts illumination: None
can fall into this sin, but they that are enlightened so as to know the truth,
and to be convinced of it, and yet out of diabolical malice do impugn and
oppose it; as they that knew and were convinced in their consciences, that
Christ did cast out Devils by the power of God, and yet would blaspheme and
say, that he did it through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; which occasioned
Christ to speak of the sin against the Holy Ghost, and of the unpardonablenesse
of it, Mar. 3. 22. 30.

3. Some stirring of the affections: this is likewise an operation of the Holy
Ghost common to the wicked with the godly: thus the Holy Ghost did operate in
Agrippa, when he said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian,
Act. 26. 28. And so in Felix, when hearing Paul speak of righteousness;
temperance, and judgment to come, he trembled, Act. 24. 25.

4. Some restraining grace, whereby to withhold from acting the evil which
otherwise one would act; this also the Holy Ghost does work, as well in the
unregenerate, as in the regenerate. It is probable, that this was all that was
wrought in Abimelech, to whom God said, that he withheld him from sinning
against him, and suffered him not to touch Sarah, as he thought to have done,
Genesis 20. 6. These operations of the Holy Ghost are common.

2. There is an operation of the spirit, which is proper to the Elect. As 1.
Regeneration, whereby one is so changed, as in a spiritual sense to be borne
again, and to be a new creature. That which is born of the spirit, is spirit,
John 3. 6. Not by works of righteousness, which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost, (that is, renewing wrought by the Holy Ghost) which he shed on us
abundantly, thorough Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3. 5, 6. This work of the
Holy Ghost is peculiar to the Elect. God has from the beginning chosen you
unto salvation, thorough sanctification of the spirit, 2 These. 2. 13. In
respect of this operation of the spirit, some are sensual, not having the
spirit, Jude v. 19.

2. Direction; whereby to be guided in all necessary and saving truth, and to
be kept from all destructive and damnable error, either in opinion or
practice. I will put my spirit wtthin you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, etc. Ezekiel. 36. 27. When the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you
into all truth. Joh. 16. 13. This promise might have peculiar reference to the
Apostles, who were guided by the spirit after an extraordinary manner; but in
respect of things necessary unto salvation, it belongs to all believers, and to
them only. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of
God, Romans 8. 13.

3. Consolation and encouragement in greatest troubles and afflictions. The
Holy Ghost is called the Comforter, Ioh. 14. 16, 17, and 15. 26. and 16. 7. The
wicked and reprobate may have some comfort and encouragement, but it is frothy
and fading, whereas that which is wrought in the godly by the Holy Ghost is
solid and permanent. We glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation
works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, And hope makes
not ashamed, because the love of God, (the assurance of Gods love to us in
Christ) is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us,
Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. The spirit it self bears witness together with our
spirits, that we are the children of God; and if children, then heirs, etc.
Romans 8. 16, 17. By the spirit the Saints are sealed unto the day of Redemption,
Ephesians. 4. 30. Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the spirit in
our hearts, 2 Cor. 1. 22. As a seal serves to confirm a writing, and an
earnest to make a bargain sure; so the children of God by the Holy Ghost are
confirmed in their faith, and assured of Gods love toward them, and of their
eternal happiness.

The seven and twentieth SERMON.
HAving discoursed in general of the Holy Ghost, I come to the Doctrine which
the words of the Text do offer unto our consideration, viz. That the communion,
participation, society That which in the Text is called the Communion of the
Holy Ghost, is called, Phil. 2. 1. the fellowship of the spirit. As the same
word in the Original, that is rendered in the one place communion, in the other
fellowship.
to be desired.

The Apostle in the very conclusion of his Epistle prays for those to whom he
writes, that they might enjoy this communion, which argues that it is a thing
very precious and desirable.

The same may appear by that which we read of Elisha, who when Eliah being to
be taken from him, bad him ask what he should do for him, made only this
request, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me, 2 Kings 2.
9. The meaning is not (as some are apt to mistake it) that Elisha desired to
have twice as much of the Spirit as Eliah had, but the phrase there used, is
the same with that which is used, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. and from thence the true and
genuine meaning is to be fetched. There it is said, that the first born was to
have a double portion, word for word, the mouth of two, that is, he was to
receive twice as much of his Fathers substance as any of his brethren; So
Elisha desired, that he might be reckoned as Eliahs first borne, and that he
might have twice as much of the Spirit which was upon him, as the other
Prophets should have: Thus is the place to be understood; but still it shows
what account Elisha, who had already so much of the Spirit, as to know the
worth of it, did make of this communion of the Holy Ghost: David also, by whom
the Spirit of the Lord did speak, as he said, 2 Samuel 23 2. when his conscience
was afflicted for his foul and grievous enormities, was very sollicitous in
this respect, lest he should not enjoy the communion of the Holy Ghost, as he
had done; Cast me not away from thy presence (says he unto God) and take not
thy holy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51. 11. And v. 12. Restore unto me the joy of
thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

How the communion of the Holy Ghost is to be prized, we may likewise perceive
by those exhortations of the Apostle, Quench not the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 19.
Grieve not the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30. Be filled with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18. So
also by that commemoration which the people of God made unto him of his
singular favor showed unto their Fathers, Thou gave also thy good Spirit to
instruct them, Neh. 9. 20.

For the further confirmation of the point, let us consider,

1. The excellency of this communion, which appears by the excellency of the
Holy Ghost: This Spirit is called good, Neh. 9. 20. excellent, Dan. 6. 3. the
spirit of wisdom, Ephesians. 1. 17. the spirit of truth, Joh. 15. 26. and 16. 13.
the spirit of grace, Zach. 12. 10. Heb. 10. 29. the spirit of life, Romans 8. 2.
the spirit of glory, 1 Pet. 4. 14. the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9. the Spirit
of God Romans 8. 9. Yea, this Spirit is God, as has been proved before; and
therefore this spirit must needs be excellent, and so consequently the
communion or fellowship of the Spirit.

2. The commodity of this communion of the holy Ghost: For,

1. The Holy Ghost will teach, inform, and instruct; Thou gave thy good
spirit to instruct them, Neh. 9. 20. He is the spirit of counsel, and
knowledge, and understanding, Esa. 11. 2. We are naturally blind and ignorant
of the truth, and many errors creep in, and insinuate themselves under the name
of truth; but the Holy Ghost is the spirit of truth, and will inlighten our
minds, and teach us to know and understand the truth: Joh. 14. 26. But the
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you: Joh. 14. 26. Howbeit when the spirit of truth
is come, he will guide you into all truth, Joh. 16. 13. How ignorant were the
Apostles before they had received the Holy Ghost in that measure as afterward
they did? Are ye so without understanding also? said Christ unto them, Mar. 7.
18. when they thought that which was a plain speech to be a parable. So Christ
having spoken of his Passion, it is said, that they understood not this saying,
and it was hid from them, that they perceived it not, Luke 9. 45. So concerning
some things that were done unto Christ according as it had been prophesied of
him, S. John says, These things understood not his Disciples at the first, but
when Jesus was glorified, (and so they had received a greater measure of the
Spirit, for the Holy Ghost ^^s not yet given (in such measure) because Jesus
was not yet glorified, Joh. 7. 39.) then remembered they that these things were
written of him, and that they had done these things unto him, Joh. 12. 16. So
Joh. 20. 9. As yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again from
the dead: Thus it was with them for a while, but when the Holy Ghost was
plentifully powered upon them, then they were filled with the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, Esa. 11. 9. So much their words and writings
do make manifest.

2. The Holy Ghost will strengthen and encourage: The Prophet Je^emie
complains, They are not valiant for the truth upon the earth, Jer. 9. 3. Even
they that both know and also love the truth, yet may be so timorous and
faint-hearted, as not to dare to avouch it, and to stand up in defense of it,
though God call them to it, as is clear by the example of Peter when he denied
Christ: But the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of might and of power, Esa, 11. 2. and
2 Timothy 1. 7. How weak and fearful were the Apostles whilst they had but (as it
were) a scantling of the Spirit? They all forsook Christ, and fled from him,
when he was apprehended by his adversaries: and Peter who had professed most
courage and confidence, of all others most bewrayed his weakness, being not
able to endure the encounter of a silly damsel, as the story shows of him.
But afterward when they had the spirit in more abundant measure, they were so
full of courage and boldness, that their greatest adversaries did admire it.
When the Jewish Rulers and Elders examined Peter and John about a miracle that
t^^y had wrought in making a lame man sound, saying, By what power, or by what
name, have ye done this? Then P^ter filled with the Holy Ghost (mark that) said
unto t^em. Ye Rulers of the people, and Elders of Israel, If we this day be
examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is made
whole, Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the
dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole. This is the stone,
which was set at naught by you builders, which is become the head of the
corner. Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other name
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. Now when they saw the
boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and
ignorant men, they marvelled, and they took knowledge of them that they had
been with Jesus, Act. 3. 7. 13. So v. 31. it is said of the Apostles, that they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and spoke the word with boldness, And v.
33. And with great power gave the Apostles witness of the Resurrection of the
Lord Jesus.

3. The Holy Ghost will direct and order. Courage without wisdom and
discretion, will do hurt rather then good; but wisdom and courage joined
together will do much good, and no hurt. A wise man's heart discerns both time
and judgment, says Solomon, Eccl. 8. 5. that is, a wise man knows both when
to do a thing, and how to do it. Now the Holy Ghost being the spirit of
wisdom, will order and direct us to do things wisely, in due time, and in
right manner. Stephen being full of the Holy Ghost, was also full of wisdom,
so that although he had to do with most implacable adversaries, yet they were
not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke, Act. 6. 10. So
Christ promised unto his Disciples saying, I will give you a mouth, and wisdom,
which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay or resist, Luke 21.
15. And how they should be endued with such wisdom, we may see by that, Luke
12. 12. For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to
say. And so Mat. 10. 20. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father that speaks in you.

4. The Holy Ghost will comfort and encourage, as to do the will of God, so
also to suffer what by his permission and providence shall be inflicted for so
doing. For though the godly behave themselves never so well and wisely, yet
they may fall into the hands of their enraged persecutors, as that Protomartyr
Stephen, and so the other Martyrs did. But though they do, yet (as it fared
with Stephen and the Martyrs) as their sufferings abound, so shall their
consolations abound also, 2 Cor. 1. 5. For the spirit of glory, and of God
rests on them, 1 Pet. 4. 14. And this spirit will make them to rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. It is such a peculiar work of
the Holy Ghost to afford comfort, that he is styled the Comforter, Ioh. 14. 16.
26. and 15. 26. and 16. 7. And sound joy is called, joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans
14. 17.

3. Consider we the necessity of this communion of the Holy Ghost.

1. Without the Holy Ghost we can know nothing, viz. of the things of God, the
things that concern salvation. For what man knows the things of a man, save
the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knows no man but
the spirit of God. Now we have received not the spirit of the world; but the
spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given
unto us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. 12. and v. 14. But the natural man (who is
destitute of Gods spirit) receives not the things of the spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, for they are
spiritually discerned.

2. Without the Holy Ghost we can do nothing, viz. that is pleasing unto God.
Not pray, for the Holy Ghost is the spirit of grace and of supplications, Zach.
12. 10. Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not what
we should pray for as we ought, but the spirit it self makes intercession for
us, with groanings that cannot be uttered. And he that searches the hearts,
knows what is the mind of the spirit, because he makes intercession for the
Saints, according to the will of God, Romans 8. 2^ 27. So neither can we without
the Holy Ghost rightly hear the word, or receive the Sacrament, or perform any
other duty whatsoever. For the Holy Ghost being the Spirit of grace, without
the Holy Ghost we can have no grace: and we must have grace, whereby to serve
God acceptably, Heb. 12. 28. Whatsoever service is performed by the
unregenerate, who are not endued with Gods spirit, though in it self considered
it is pleasing unto God, yet as done by them, God is not pleased with it. They
that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. 8.

3. Without the Holy Ghost we can enjoy nothing, viz. that is truly good for
us. The Holy Ghost being the Spirit of Christ, and of God, we can have no
communion with Christ, nor with God but by the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost being
the spirit of life, the spirit of grace, the spirit of glory, without the holy
Ghost we can have no life, neither of grace here, nor of glory hereafter:
therefore we have that hope which makes not ashamed, because the love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us, Romans 5.
5. This may suffice to demonstrate what a desirable thing the communion of the
holy Ghost is.

Use 1. And if it be so, then O the wretched folly and madness of many, who
desire and labor for any thing rather then for this communion. Let Elisha, or
whosoever will seek a double portion of the spirit, so they may have a double
portion of the things of the world, of the profits, pleasures and honors of
it, it is all they desire. If the holy Ghost in the mouths of his Mi^^^ters
strive with them, they oppose and resist him all they can. Ye stiff-necked, and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, you do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your
Fathers did, so do ye, Act. 7. 51. If the holy Ghost insinuate himself a little
into them, putting good motions into them, presently they quench the spirit,
which the Apostle bids Christians beware of, 1 These. 5. 20. saying, Quench not
the spirit, that is, the good motions of the spirit, which like sparks are
kindled within you. If the holy spirit begin to search them, and to discover
their sins unto them, and to put them in mind of their estate to Godward, they
are weary of such a guest. Like Felix, who when Paul reasoned before him of
righteousness, and temperance, and judgment to come, trembled and said, Go thy
way for this time, when I have convenient season I will send for thee, Act. 24.
25. They judge this spirit to be a spirit of melancholy, and therefore to drive
it away they betake themselves to their merry company, wine, strong drink, and
the like. This is all that many do care for the communion of the holy Ghost.

Some will say, but we desire this communion more then so. It is well; but let
all take heed of deceiving themselves, as we are all apt to do. Let our desire
of this communion be proved rather then presumed; and so I come to a second use
of the point, viz. for examination and trial.

Use 2. Secondly therefore, let us examine and try our selves whether the
Communion of the holy Ghost, which is so much to be desired, be an object of
our desires or no: and let us try it thus.

1. Are we sensible of the want of the spirit? They that do not feel the want
of a thing, will never desire to enjoy it: When Elisha desired of Eliah, that
he might have a double portion of his spirit, Thou have asked a hard thing
(said Eliah unto him) Nevertheless if thou see me when I am taken from thee,
it shall be so unto thee, but if not, it shall not be so, 2 King. 2. 10. Upon
which answer of Eliah Bernard has a no less Nunqnam absque conscientia nostra
magistra unctio tollatur ^ nobis, si duplicato munere volumus non fraudari.
Bern.
pious then elegant observation, viz. that the spirit of God must never be
absent from us, but so that we are sensible of it, if we would have the spirit
to be doubled upon us.

2. Do we affect those in whom is found the manifestation of the spirit? they
that are carnal love those that are carnal, and so will they that are
spiritual love those that are spiritual. This is a special evidence of the
holy Ghost dwelling in us, if we delight in those in whom the gifts and graces
of the holy Ghost do appear and shine forth. David having much of Gods spirit
in him, and desiring still more, calls the Saints excellent, and professes
that all his delight was in them, Psalm. 16. 3. And it is said of Barnabas that
when he came to Antioch, and had seen the grace of God, which was there
bestowed upon believers, he was glad, and exhorted them all, that that with
purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord* And the reason follows
immediately why he was thus affected, For he was a good man, and full of the
Holy Ghost, Act. 11. 23. 24.

3. Are we careful to use the means whereby to obtain the spirit? It is but a
fained and frivolous desire that does not put forth it self in endeavors to
obtain the thing desired. Some pretend above others to magnify the Spirit, and
to be all for the spirit, yet vilify the word, which is the means whereby to
obtain the spirit. Surely the spirit which such vaunt of, is none of Gods
spirit, but their own spirit, not a spirit of illumination but of illusion; not
spiritus veritatis, the spirit of truth, but spiritus virtiginis, a spirit of
giddiness, Isai. 19. 14.
or as we read it, a perverse spirit: For God in his Covenant with his people,
joyneth his spirit and his word together, As for me, this is my Covenant with
them, says the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have
put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy
seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth
and for ever, Isai. 59. 21. And how did Cornelius and they that were with him
receive the spirit, but by the word? While Peter yet spoke these words, the
Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the word, Act. 10. 44. And therefore
Paul having said, Quench not the spirit, immediately adds, Despise not
prophesying, 1 These. 5. 19. 20. Prayer also is a means whereby to obtain the
spirit: Indeed we must first have the spirit in some measure before we can pray
to any purpose, as was showed before: but prayer is a means to obtain the
Spirit in greater measure. For God will give his Holy Spirit to them that ask
him, Luke 11. 13. They therefore who either restrain prayer before God, or pray
only in formality or fashion sake, thinking it enough if they can read a prayer
in a book, or say a prayer by rote, yea will scorn and deride praying by the
spirit, these, I say, plainly show how little they look after the communion of
the holy Ghost. I am not against all use of bookprayer, or of a form of drayer,
yet I may say to some in this respect, as Paul said to the Athenians, that they
are too superstitious. Whether Act. 17. 22.
we pray with a book, or without, in a set form, or otherwise, yet must we
howsoever pray with the spirit, or else our prayer is to no 1 Gor. 14. 15.
purpose.

4. Do we study to bring forth the fruits of the Holy Ghost? The fruit of the
spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth, Ephesians. 5. 9. The
fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goonesse,
faith, meekness, temperance, Gal. 5. 22, 23. and v. 25. If we live in the
spirit; let us walk in the spirit, that is, if we pretend to be endued with the
spirit, let it appear by our spiritual life and conversation.

Use 3. Thirdly and lastly, suffer the word of exhortation, and but a word: Let
this be our desire and care, our study and endeavor, that we may have the
communion of the holy Ghost. We have seen the excellency, the commodity and the
necessity of this communion; let us not despise that which is so excellent, nor
undervalue that which is so commodious, nor neglect that which is so necessary.
We have also seen the marks whereby to try whether we enjoy this communion in
any measure or no, and withal, means whereby to obtain it: let us labor to
find those marks in our selves, and let us have a care to use those means: For
so an entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly, into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Chrsst, 2 Pet. 1. 11.

The eight and twentieth SERMON.
MAT. 16. 18. And upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it.
CHrist having asked his Disciples, whom men did say that he was; they
answered, that some said that he was John the Baptist, some Elias, some
Ieremias, or one of the Prophets; and he asking them again whom they did say
that he was, Peter (in the name of them all) answered, Thou art Christ the Son
of the living God. VVhereupon Christ commending that confession, said, Blessed
art thou* Simon Bar Jona; for flesh and blood has has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say unto thee that thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it.

Upon this rock] The Papists make much ado about this place, and think it a
Rock for them to build the Popes supremacy upon. For by the Rock here mentioned
they understand Peter, and they will have the Church built upon Peter, and so
upon the Pope, as being (they say) Peter's Successor.

But first, the Scripture shows Christ and only Christ to be the foundation of
the Church: Thus says the Lord God, behold I lay in Sion for a foundation, a
stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation, etc. Esa. 28.
16. Which to be meant of Christ appears by S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. And
S. Paul is plain and peremptory, Other foundation can no man lay, then that
which is laid, Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11.

Object. Some may object that Ephesians. 2. 20. Ye are built upon the foundation of
the Prophets and the Apostles.

Answ. But first, that makes nothing for Peter more then for the rest of the
Apostles, and for the Prophets also, and so makes nothing for the Papists.

2. It is meant in respect of Christ, who was foretold by the Prophets, and
preached by the Apostles; To him give all the Prophets witness, said Peter,
Acts 10. 43. We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, said Paul, 2
Cor. 4, 5. So that Rev. 21. 14. where it is said, that the new Jerusalem had
twelve foundations, Fundamenta igitur hujus muri sunt, quia ipsi doctrina sua
and exemplo aeter^ae tranquillitatis and securitatis causa fuerunt electis.
Riber. ad loc.
and in them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb; that, I say, by the
confession of Ribera a Jesuit, is meant in respect of their Doctrine and
example, as they preached Christ, and were followers of him, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Here
therefore by Rock is not meant Peter, but Christ whom Peter confessed, or which
is to the same effect, the confession which Peter made, or the faith whereof he
made confession: Thus Augustine, Chrysostom, Theophylact, and others have
expounded it, and those of the Ancients that have interpreted it of Peter, are
to be understood as meanning not his person, but his faith and confession, viz.
in respect of Christ the object of it. Theophylact (...). Theoph. ad Mat. 16. 18
the latest of the Ancients does well show the meaning both of them and of the
Text it self: The Lord (says he) does answer Peter, and give him a great
reward to wit, that the Church should be built upon him: For because Peter
confessed him to be the Son of God, he says, This confession which thou have
confessed, shall be the foundation of Believers, so that whosoever will build
the house of faith, must lay this confession for a foundation.

2. Though the words in the Original for Peter and Rock be near akin, yet rhey
are different (...).
words, and show that Christ meant different things by them: For otherwise
Christ would have said, Thou art Peter, and upon thee, or, and upon this Peter,
I will build my Church.

Ob. It may be objected, that the word in the Syriask Tongue which Christ used
is one and and the same, viz. Cepha, both for Peter and for Rock. And that
Syriack word (only having a Greek termination added unto it) together with the
interpretation of it, is found Joh. 1. 42. When Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou
art Simon the son of Jonas, thou shall be called Cephas, which is by
interpretation, a stone.

Answ. I answer: It is true, that Cepha is both the same with Peter a proper
name, and also signifies a stone, or a Rock; but the Greek Text having one
word for Peter and another for rock, shows that by Cepha the rock is not
meant the same as by Cepha Peter, but some other thing, viz. Peter's faith and
confession, and the object of his faith and confession, Christ Jesus. This may
suffice to show what the Rock here spoken of is, and how, little this Scripture
makes for the Papists, besides what might be said to prove the vanity of their
conceits concerning Peter's supremacy over the other Apostles, and the Popes
succeeding Peter as supreme over the Church.

[ Will I build,] The Church is compared to a house, 1 Timothy 3. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
therefore it is said to be built, and Christ says that he will build it, it
being his house, Heb. 3. 6. and so here he calls it his Church.

[ My Church,] It is called the Church of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. and so in other
places, but here Christ calls it his Church: So Romans 16. 16. The Churches of
Christ salute you; Christ is God, and therefore the Church being the Church of
God, is consequently the Church of Christ. And besides, Christ as Mediator is
the Head of the Church, Ephesians. 5. 23. and the Church is his body, Ephesians. 1. 23.

Church] what is meant by the Church, I shall show at large by and by.

And the gates of hell] Christ having in the word build, compared the Church to
a house, or a City, he speaks now of another house or City which is opposite
unto it, viz. the house or City of Satan, here called the gates of hell, in
which words there seems to Ho. also speaks of the gates of hell, (...).
be a synecdoche, whereby the part is put for the whole, the gates for the
whole house or City, So Genesis 22. 17. Thy seed shall possess the gate of his
enemies. And Genesis 24. 60. Let thy seed possess the gate of thofe that hate
them.

Shall not prevail against it] viz. not so as utterly to overthrow and destroy
it. That is it which the devil and his instruments seek, but are not able to
effect; as I shall show (God willing) more hereafter.

But before I come to the observation which I purpose to raise from the Text,
and to insist upon, I will spend some time in speaking of the word Church, and
of the thing which here, and usually elsewhere is called the Church.

1. For the word Church, we find it not in the Of the word Church.
old Testament, I mean our English word is not used by our Translators in it.
Not that God had not a Church then in those times that were before Christ's
Incarnation: no, he had a Church from the beginning; and we have the word in
the new Testament with reference to times of the old Testament. This is he that
was in the Church in the wilderness, etc. said Stephen speaking of Moses, Act.
7. 38. The people of Israel, who were in the time (...)
of Moses, are there called the Church: the Hebrew words used in the old
Testament, which we (...) So the Septuagint render the Hebrew. Psalm. 26. 5.
12. and 89. 5. but commonly they use the word (...).
translate Congregation, the Greek interpreters sometimes render by that word,
which in the Text, and elsewhere in the new Testament we translate Church,
though for most part they use another word.

The Greek word, which the New Testament uses for Church, comes of a word
that signifies to call out, and so it imports as much as a company called out.
The faithful are often in the New Testament said to be called, viz. Of God,
and of Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 2, 24. and 1 These. 4. 7. and Romans 1. 6. And they are
called out, viz. of the world, or from the Camero Myroth: ad Mat. 16. 18.
likes not that the Preposition in the word (...) should be thought to have any
weight in it, but I see not why the force of it should not be weighed, See 1
Pet. 2. 9.
rest of the world. I have chosen you (and all that are chosen are called,
though all that are called, are not chosen) out of the world, said Christ to
his Disciples! Joh. 15. 19. And Ioh. 17. 14. They are not of the world. But the
word rendered Church, is used in the new Testament sometimes for any profane
assembly. The Assembly was confused, Act. 19. 32. and v. 39. it shall be
determined in a lawful assembly, and v. 40. he dismissed the assembly. In
these places the word rendered Assembly, is it, which excepting these places,
is ever in the New Testament rendered Church. And so the word is peculiarly
used to denote the company of believers, whether they be assembled together or
not.

Our English word Church, is in ordinary speech used for the place where the
people of God assemble for the partaking of Gods Ordinances, but in the
Scripture it is alvvaies used for the people. Some places there are, in which
the word may seem to import the place, as 1 Cor. 11. 18. When ye come together
in the Church, and v. 22 Have ye not houses to See Cameroes Myroth. ad 1 Cor.
11. 18.
eat and to drink in? or despise ye the Church of God* But it seems not meet to
recede from that acception of the word, in which it is generally used in
other places, there being no necessity for it. For the word may well and fitly
enough in those places also denote the people. When ye come together in the
Church, that is, in the Assembly, Despise ye the Church of God? that is, the
people of God, or the assembly of Gods people: and so in that other place,
which may be added to the former, 1 Cor. 14. 35. It is a shame for a woman to
speak in the Church, that is, in the assembly.

2. For the thing signified by the word Church, What the Church is.
the Church may be thus defined, the Church is a company of persons, whom God
has called out of the estate of sin and misery, unto the estate of grace and
salvation thorough Christ Jesus. Ye are a chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the
praises of him, who has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light,
1 Pet. 2. 9.

So does Augustine Ench. c. 56. and Polanus Symph. Cathol. c. 18. these. 1. and
Danaeus in Euch. Aug.
Some make Angels to be of the Church; but so far as I see, the Scripture
speaks of the Church as consisting of men only, and not of Angels. The Angels
are called Elect, 1 Timothy 3. 21. but they are never said to be called, which the
Original word for Church does properly import. The Angels (I speak of the
good Angels) never were in any other estate then now they are in, though now
they be more confirmed in that estate then they were at first, as appears by
the fall of the evil Angels, who kept not their first estate, Jude v. 6. They
never were in any estate of sin and misery out of which they should be called.
And for the Angels that sinned, God spared not them, as S. Peter tells us, 2
Pet. 2. 4. Again, the Angels are clearly distinguished from the Church, Ephesians.
3. 10. To the intent that now unto the principalites and powers in heavenly
places might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God.

But further, the Church thus taken for such a Of the Church militant, and the
Church triumphant.
company of persons, is diverse ways distinguished.

1. There is the Church militant, and the Church triumphant: The Church
militant is that company which is here upon earth in warfare, warring with
Satan the world and the flesh. The Church triumphant is that company which
having vanquished and overcome those adversaries, does reign and triumph in
heaven. This distinction is grounded upon the words of the Apostle, I bow my
knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in
heaven and earth is named, Ephesians. 3. 14, 15. And in other places sometimes the
Church militant, sometimes the Church triumphant is hinted; Fight the good
fight of faith, said Paul to Timothy, being a member of the Church militant, 1 Timothy 6. 12. I have fought a good fight, said he, when he was about to pass
from the Church militant to the Church triumphant, 2 Timothy, 4. 7. So it is the
Church triumphant that S. John speaks of, saying, After this I beheld, and lo
a great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and kindreds, and
people, and tongues stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with
white robes, and palms in their hands, viz. in token of the victory that they
had achieved, Rev. 7. 9. But the Church militant is that which usually is
spoken of in the Scriptures, God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Yet in the Church I
had rather speak five words with mine understanding, that by my voice I might
teach others also, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue, 1 Cor. 14. 19.
And so in many other places.

And the Church as here upon earth, consists partly of such as are indeed of
it, partly of such as only in show and profession belong unto it; For all are
not Israel, that are of Israel, Romans 9. 6. that is, all are not indeed the
people of God, who profess themselves to be of that number: No, some call
themselves Jews, that is, Gods people, yet are not, but are the synagogue of
Satan, Rev. 2. 9. Only true believers are indeed of the Church: For, if any
one have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8. 9. Profane
persons and hypocrites are rather in the Church, then of the Church, like
wooden legs that are outwardly joined to the body, yet are indeed no parts of
the body; They went out from us but they were not of us; for if they had been
of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, 1 John 2. 19. So speaks S.
John of some Apostates and back-sliders, showing that then when they professed
themselves to be of the Church, yet indeed they were not of it.

And hence is another distinction of the Church into the Church visible, and
the Church invisible: Of the Church visible and the Church invisible.
The visible Church is a visible company of people professing the Gospel,
whether they do it in truth and sincerity or no; it does consist of good and
bad, of elect and reprobate: It is compared to a ^et that was cast into the
Sea, and gathered of every kind* etc. Mat. 13. 47. etc. And to a field wherein
were both wheat and tares, Mat. 13. 24. etc. And to a great house wherein are
vessels of several sorts, some to honor, and some to dishonor, 2 Timothy 2. 20.
The invisible Church consists only of such as are elect, and are indeed that
which they profess themselves to be, like Nathanael, Israelites indeed, in
whom is no guile, Joh. 1. 47. The Church in this respect is called invisible,
because it is not visible to the eyes of men; they can see the profession, but
whether it be sincere and proceed from the heart or no, they cannot see. For
God only knows the hearts of all the children of men, 1 King. 8. 39. And so he
only knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Of a particular Church, and the Church
universal.


3. The Church is distinguished into particular and universal: A particular
Church is a company professing the faith in some particular place. Thus we read
of the seven Churches in Asia, Rev. 1. 4. that is, of Churches that were in
seven Cities of Asia, as it follows there v. 11. So we read of the Church that
was at Antioch, Acts 13. 1. the Church which was at Jerusalem, Acts 8. 1. Yea,
we read of Churches in particular houses, as in the house of Aquila and
Priscilla, Romans 16. 5. in the house of Nymphas, Col. 4. 15. in the house of
Philemon, Philem. v. 2. The universal Church This is the universal Church as
upon earth, otherwise the universal Church comprehends both the Saints on
earth, and the Saints in heaven.
is the whole company of believers throughout the world. The Apostle having
spoken first of a particular Church, Unto the Church of God which is at
Corinth, etc. presently after he speaks of universal Church, with all that in
every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 2. The
universal Church is that which is mentioned in the Creed, and is called the
Catholic Church; for Catholic is as much as general or universal. The
Church of Rome most absurdly will be the Catholic Church, Roman Catholic is
frequent in the mouths of Papists; but this is over-grosse, Catholic importing
the whole, and Roman but a part: The Church of Rome was once indeed an eminent
part, yet but a part of the Catholic Ribera ^ Jesuit is forced to confess
that by Babylon is meant Rome.
or universal Church, Romans 1. But now it is so degenerate and corrupt, that it
is termed Babylon, Rev. 17. and the people of God are required to come out of
it, Rev. 18. 4.

In the Creed the Church is styled holy, and so it is: They that are indeed of
the Church, are indeed holy; Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Wherefore holy brethren, etc. Heb. 3. 1. And they that are of the Church but by
profession, yet by profession are holy, Called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Which
becomes women professing godliness, How the Church is styled holy.
2 Timothy 2. 10. And though the visible Church contain in it hypocrites and
unholy persons, as well as those that are holy, yet the Church is called holy
from the better part; even as a heap of wheat and chafe being mixed together,
we use to say of it, this is wheat, rather then this is chafe, though there
may be more of that then of the other.

Now the Church which is so indeed, is holy two ways:

1. Out of it self in Christ, as being united unto him, and one with him, and
so having the righteousness and holiness of Christ imputed unto; For God made
Christ to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. In this respect Sine macula
deputatur, quia culpa non imputatur. Gil. in Cant. 4. 7.
Christ speaking to the Church, says, Thou art all fair, my love, and there
is no spot in thee, Cant. 4. 7. The Church is said to have no spot in her,
because no spot is imputed to her.

2. In it self from Christ: For the Church being united to Christ, and
partaking of his Spirit, it must nees be conformed unto Christ in some measure,
and be made holy, as he is holy; And of his fullness have we all received, and
grace for grace, Joh. 1. 16. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, 2
Cor. 5. 17. He that says that he abides in him, ought himself to walk even as
he walked, 1 Ioh. 2. 6. But this inherent holiness of the Church here in this
life, is imperfect; The inward man is renewed (not altogether at once, but by
degrees, by little and little) day by day, 2 Cor. 4. 16. Let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. As for that Ephesians. 5. 27. That he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish: As for that, I say,
it is not so to be understood, as if the Church were such now here in this Non
est ita intelligendum, quasi Ecclesia ita jam sit, sed quia praeparatur ut sit.
Aug. in Retract. In regno caelorum Ecclesia plene and perfect erit non habens
maculam aut rugam, aut aliquid istiusmodi. Cum enim non tantum dixit, ut
exhiberet sibi Ecclesia^^ non habentem maculam, aut rugam, sed addidit,
gloriosam, satis significavit quando erit sine macula and ruga. Beda ad loc.
life, but it is prepared, that it may be such hereafter in the life to come:
And the Apostle saying, That he might present it unto himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, sufficiently shows when the Church shall
be without spot or wrinkle, to wit, when it shall be glorious, and that is, not
here upon ^arth, but hereafter in heaven.

The nine and twentieth SERMON.
I Come now to the notes or marks of the Of the notes or marks of the Church.
Church whereby it is to be discerned, I mean of a visible Church; for the
invisible Church cannot be discerned by us, but (as I showed before) by God
only. And this consideration of the notes of the Church is very requisite, and
of great concernment: For as Christ said to his Disciples, Mat. 24. 23, 24. If
any shall say unto you, lo, here is Christ, or there: believe it not; for
there shall arise false Christ's. So though Papists on the one hand, and
Sectaries on the other hand will be ready to say, lo, here is the Church, and
lo there is the Church, yet believe it not; for there are false Churches.

First therefore let us examine the notes of the Notes assigned by the Papists.
1 Antiquity.
Church which the Papists assign, and they are principally these:

1. Antiquity: This they boast much of, their Religion (they say) is the old
Religion, and therefore the true Religion, and consequently their Church is the
true Church. But we must distinguish of Antiquity, there is a primary, and
there is a seconda^y Antiquity: Primary Antiquity is indeed a mark of the
truth; for error and falsehood being an aberration and^ deviation from the
truth, it must needs be that Id verum, quodcunque primum, id adulterum,
quodcunque posterius. Tertull. advers. Prax. c. 4.
truth is before error and falsehood. Therefore Jeremy bids, Ask for the old
paths, where is the good way. But secondary antiquity does not argue truth.
There is Vetustas erroris, an antiquity of error, as Cyprian truly observes.
Our Fathers worshipped in Cypr. Epist. 74. Edit. Paniel.
this mountain, said the woman of Samaria unto Christ, Joh. 4. 20. They could
plead prescription for what they did, yet was it not therefore right: You
worship you know not what, said Christ unto her, v 22. And Mat. 5. v. 21. and
27. and 33. Christ tells his Disciples, that so and so it had been said of old,
yet he would have them to know that it was otherwise, and which here is
chiefly to be noted, the Apostle tells us, that even in his days the mystery
of iniquity did begin to work, 2 These. 2. 7. If the Doctrine of Antichrist
(which is there spoken of) did begin to work then in those days, no marvel
if it be now very ancient, yet is it never a whit the better for all that. If
a prescription of many hundred years were sufficient to demonstrate truth,
then might the Heathens have well and justly maintained their idolatry and
superstition against the doctrine and worship of Christian Religion: and
indeed some of Iam si longa aetas autoritatem religionibus faciat, servanda est
tot seculis fides, and sequendi sunt nobis parents, qui secuti sunt foeliciter
suos. -- utar ceremoniis avitis. -- Sera and contu^eliosa est emenda^io
s^n^ctutis. Symmachus pro sa^ris Patriis.
them have used and urged this argument, which seems so plausible to our Romish
adveriaries. Let them answer the Pagans, and withal they will answer,
themselves. This therefore I say, that although the Church of Rome can plead
antiquity, yet this is not enough to prove it to be the true Church, this
antiquity which it has, being but a secondary antiquity. If they could evince
that their Doctrine is simply and absolutely most ancient, this were to some
purpose: but this they can never do.

Ob. But (say they) the Church of Rome was once a true and a sound Church, by
S. Paul's own testimony, Romans 1.

Answ. True, but as the Prophet says, How is the faithful City become an
Harlot? Isai. 1. 21. So may I say, How is Rome degenerate, and quite changed
from what it was in the Apostles time? Certainly if the Apostle were now upon
earth, he would never acknowledge the present Church of Rome, to be that, or
any thing like that, which he did so much commend in his Epistle to the
Romans. Did the Church of Rome then worship Images? did it pray to Saints? did
it pray for the dead? did it perform divine worship in an unknown tongue? did
it withhold the Cup from people in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? was the
Church of Rome then in the Apostles time guilty of these and many other such
like errors and absurdities, which are now maintained by the Romish Church?

But our adversaries think themselves able to evince any thing by the subtilty
of their wit, and their strength in arguing. They would not be accounted
inferior unto those, who would make make men believe, that snow is not white,
nor that the heavens do move, and the earth stand still, but that all is quite
contrary to what we imagine.

Ob. There is no change (say they) in the Church of Rome, but it is now the
same in point of Religion, as it was in the Apostles days. And to prove this,
they say that in every change of Religion six Bellarm. de Eccles. l. 4. c. 5.
things may be demonstrated, 1. the author of the change. 2. the new opinion
brought in. 3. the time when. 4. the place where. 5. who opposed it. 6. the
small company by which the new opinion was first embraced. Now these
circumstances [they say] cannot be showed concerning a change of Religion in
the Roman Church; and therefore [they conclude] there has been no such change
in it.

Answ. But (say I) the change may be certain and evident, though these
circumstances be uncertain and unknown; neither need we be solicitous about
them. Christ did not think it requisite to stand about these circumstances,
when he showed how the Jewish Doctors had of a long time corrupted the true
meaning of the Law, with their false glosses and interpretations, Mat. 5. So in
the parable of the tares, Mat. 13. there is no inquiry after these
circumstances, yet it plainly appeared that there were tares, and that was
sufficient, though these particular circumstances were not known. And it is to
be observed, that it is there said, that while men slept the tares were Mat.
13. 25.
sown. Errors often creep in secretly, when men are not aware, because they do
not watch and seek to prevent them as they should do. And Antichristian
Doctrine especially is called a mystery. 2 These. 2. 7. it came in slily under a
color of piety, and so was not at first so easy to be discerned. Some of the
Papists themselves are forced to confess, that great and notable change there
has been, and yet they cannot tell when it first began, nor by whom, and the
like.

Cassander confesses that in the Roman Church, Cassand. Consult. art. 22.
for above a thousand years after Christ the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was
administered in both kinds (so that people received both the bread and the cup)
now we know it is otherwise, though the first introduction of this change
cannot be showed. So for private Masses (as they call them) that is, such as
wherein the Priest alone does receive the Sacrament, the people being by, and
looking on, but not communicating with him: the same Author cites another
Romanist, viz. Hoffmester, saying, that the thing it self does show, that both
in the Greek and Latin Church, the people did use to communicate with the
Priest, and that it is a Res ipsa clamat, and quodqitomodo cessaverit, mirandum
est, and ut bonus ille usus in Ecclesiam revo cetur, laborandum. Hoffmest. apud
Cassand. Consult. de miss. Solitar.
wonder how this custom ceased, and to be endeavored that it may be restored.
Yet concerning many erroneous opinions and practices of the Church of Rome, our
Divines have by records and monuments of antiquity showed, who first brought
them in, and when they did it, as also who opposed them, etc.

But this suffices to convince them of novelty, that we can easily make it
appear that (as Christ said concerning the matter of divorce as used among the
Jews) from the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19. 8.

Ob. But however our Adversaries think to lay us flat on the ground, and to
strike us dead by saying, Where was your Church before Luther?

Answ. Truly this is as idle and ridiculous a question, as if a Mass of gold
having contracted much dross, and after being purged, one should ask Where was
that gold before it was purged? Or as if a body having been full of sores and
diseases, and after being made whole, one should ask, Where was that body
before it was made whole? Luther and others whom God stirred up and made
instrumental and subservient unto him in that kind, did not erect a new Church,
but reform the old. As it is the same gold now as before, but more pure, and
the same body, but more sound; so it is the same Church, but reformed. The
Papacy differs from the Church, as the dross from the gold, and the botch from
the body.

Quest. And hence also that captious question of our adversaries is easy to be
answered, What is become of your Forefathers, who lived and died before Luther?

Answ. Our Forefathers we hope well of, they might live and die in the Church
of Rome, and yet be free from many errors that are in it. Even now since the
Council of Trent some on their death beds, at least, are found to renounce
that grand point of Popery concerning Justification, disclaiming all confidence
in their own inherent righteousness, and flying wholly to the mercy of God in
Christ Jesus, which Bellarmine himself after a long and contentious dispute
against it, confesses Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, and periculum
inanis gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and
benignitate reponere. Bellarm. de Iustit. l. 5. c. 7. propos. 3.
to be the safest course, Because (says he) of the uncertainty of our own
righteousness, and the danger of vainglory, it is most safe to repose our
whole trust in the sole mercy and goodness of God.

Much more (may we well suppose) before the Council of Trent, when people were
more free, the doctrines and practices of the Church of Rome, being not so
established as afterward, many in this and other points did keep themselves
pure. Besides, errors and corruptions being now more clearly and fully
discovered then before, it is not safe now to continue in the Communion of that
Church, though God might graciously pass by and pardon the ignorance and
weakness of our Forefathers. It is now clear as the Sun at noon day, that the
Church of Rome is that Babylon, concerning which the precept is express, Come
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues, Revel. 18. 4.

2. Another note of the Church, which the Papists 2. Succession.
assign, is succession of Pastors and Teachers, they can show such a
succession, and thence they conclude that they are the true Church. But there
is a twofold succession, viz. personal and doctrinall, a succession of
persons, and a succession of Doctrine; the former without the latter is as
nothing. The Priests that condemned Christ had a personal succession, but
vvanted doctrinall succession. They could show how their persons did succeed
those that were before them, and they others, and so on until they came to
Aaron; but they could not show the like succession of their doctrine: so
neither can the Papists show that they hold the same faith, which was
delivered by the Apostles, and therefore in vain do they vaunt of this, that
they can show a personal succession of their Popes from the times of the
Apostles. Bellarmine Bellarm. de. Eccles. l. 4. c. 8.
confesses that the argument drawn from succession does not hold for the
affirmative, viz. that where there is succession, there is the true Church,
but only negatively, that there is not the Church, where succession is wanting.
So then by their own confession this argument makes little for them, and as
little does it make against us. For though our Divines have labored not
unprofitably to show that successively in all ages there have been some or
other who have asserted the truth which we maintain, this is sufficient, that
we can make it appear, that we hold the same faith, which was once delivered to
the Saints, and have not Jude v. ^.
departed from the Church of Rome, further then they have departed from this
faith. This the ancient Doctors thought sufficient, and though sometimes they
have alleged personal succession, yet it was still with this supposition,
that it was accompanied with doctrinall succession, otherwise they made no
reckoning of it. We must adhere unto those (says Iraeneus) who keep the
doctrine of Oportet adhaerere his, qui Apostolorum doctrinam cu(...)diunt.
Iren. l. 4. c. 44. etc. 43. he calls this principalem successionem. Non habent*
Petri hariditatem, qui fidem Petri non babent. Ambros. de pentt l. 1. c. 6. In
eadem side conspirant^s, non minus Apostolica depu(...)r pro consanguinitate
doctrine Tertul. de Praescript. c. 32.
the Apostles. This succession he calls the principal succession. So Ambrose,
They do not succeed Peter (says he) who have not the faith of Peter.

And Tertullian speaking of Churches planted since the Apostles times, says
that they agreeing in the same faith, are nevertheless accounted to be
Apostolical for the consanguinity of Doctrine.

3. They of the Church of Rome do also make 3. Amplitude.
amplitude and largeness of extent a note to discern the Church by. But this
is no true note of the Church; for error and heresy may so prevail as to have
more professors and abettors then the truth. In the time of Ahab, for one true
Prophet Micaiah, there were four hundred false Prophets 1 King. 22. 6. etc. And
Eliah complained unto God saying, The children of Israel have forsaken thy
Covenant* thrown down thine altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and
I* even I only am left, and they seek my life also, 1 King. 19. 14. So in the
time of our Savior the history of the Gospel shows how few in comparison did
embrace the truth, when it was preached unto them. He came unto his own, and
his own received him not, Joh. 1. 11. So some few hundred years after Christ,
the Sect of the Arians grew so great, Ingemuit orbis, and Arrianum se esse
miratus est. Hieron. advers. Luciferian.
that (as Hierome expresses it) the world did groan and wonder to see it self
become an Arrian. And in after Ages what marvel if Antichrist did so enlarge
his dominion, S. John having foretold that so it should be? All the world
(says he) wandered after the beast, Revel. 13. 3. And he tells us, that the
Angel interpreting unto him the mystery of the whore sitting upon many waters,
said thus, The waters which thou saw where the whore sits, are peoples,
and multitudes, and Nations, and tongues, Revel. 17. 15.

4. Our Romish adversaries amongst other 4. Union with and subjection to the
Pope as Head of the Church. See B. Mortons Book entitled the Grand Impostor.
5. Miracles
notes of the Church do much stand upon this, that the members of the Church be
united together under one head, viz. the Pope. But we have not so learned
Christ, we know and acknowledge him and him only to be the head of the Church.
So the Scripture plainly terms him, Ephesians. 5. 23. Col. 1. 18. But of any
other head of the Church besides Christ, we find nothing.

5. Miracles also are made one note whereby the Church is to be discerned. But
though miracles were requisite in the first planting of the Church Mar. 16. 20.
Yet now it is otherwise: Yea the Scripture has taught us to suspect those that
shall pretend miracles, showing that this shall be the guise of false teachers,
and of Antichrist himself. There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets,
and shall show great signs and wonders, etc. Mat. 24. 24. Whose coming is after
the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders, 2 These. 2.
9. And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from heaven on
the earth in the sight of men; And deceives them that dwell on the earth, by
the means of those miracles, etc. Revel. 13. Ecclesiam suam demonstrent, si
possunt, non in sermonibus and rumoribus Afrorum* non in conciliis Episcoporum
suorum, non in literis quorumlibet disputatorum, non in signis and prodigiis
fallacibus, quia etiam contra ista verbo Domini praeparati and cauti redditi
sumus, sed in praescripto legis, in praedictis Prophetarum, in Psalmorum
cantibus, in ipsius Pastoris vocibu^, ^ in Evangelistarum praedicationibus and
laboribus, hoc est, in omnibus Canonicis sanctorum librorum authoritatibus,
Aug. de Unit. Eccles. c. 16.
13, 14. Excellent is that of of Austine concerning the Donatists, Let them
demonstrate their Church, if they can, not in the speeches and rumors of the
Africans, not in the Counsels of their Bishops, not in the writings of any
disputers, not in lying signs and wonders; for against them we are prepared and
made cautious by the Lords own word, but in the prescript of the Law, in the
Predictions of the Prophets, in the songs of the Psalms, in the words of the
Shepherd himself, in the preachings and labors of the Evangelists, that is, in
all the Canonical authorities of the holy books, Ne dicar, quia illa and illa
mirabilia fecit Donatus, vel Pontius, vel quilibet a^ius. -- Removeantur ista*
vel figm^nta m(...)atium hominum, vel portenta fallacium spirituum. Aut enim
non sunt vera, quae d^cuntur, aut si haereticorum aliqua m^ra facta sunt, magis
cavere debenius, quod cum dixisset Dominus futuros esse fallaces qui non nulla
signa* faciendo etiam Electos, si fieri posset fallerent, adjecit vehementer
commendans, and ait, Ecce praedixi vobis. Aug. Ibid.
or the Bible. And again, Let him not say, Donatus, or Pontius, or any other
did such and such wonders. -- Let such things be waved, which are but either
mere fictions of lying men, or else strange acts of deceiving spirits. For
either those things that are reported, are not true, or if any wonders be done
by heretics, we ought so much the more to beware of them, in that when the
Lord had said, that there should be deceivers, who by doing wonders should
deceive, if it were possible, even the Elect: to let us know that this is a
fair warning, he added, saying, Behold I have foretold you.

Diverse other marks of the Church does Bellarmine insist upon, but it is not
worth the while to trouble our selves about them. These already mentioned are
they which our adversaries of Rome do make chief account of; and therefore I
pass from the notes assigned by Papists, to those which are assigned by others.

The thirtieth SERMON.
SOme there be who are averse from, and adverse to them of the Romish Church,
but they run into extremes on the other hand: And for Notes of the Church
assigned by Separatists or Semi-separatists. 1. Holiness of Church Members.
Ainsw. against Bern. p. 60
the notes of the Church, which they mainly insist upon, they seem to be these.

1. Holiness of such as profess themselves, and are admitted to be members of
the Church; for want of such holiness in Church Members, as they conceive
requisite to the constituting of a Church, some will not acknowledge us to be a
Church, but withdraw and separate from us as no Church, or a false Church,
such as they may not hold communion with: What manner of people [saith M.
Ainsworth, a Separatist] is joined together in your Church? Are there not all
sorts of profane, wicked, and irreligious persons, as well as religious, and
men of better life? And where find you in the Scriptures such matter for Gods
house? -- The Apostle Yet compare 1 Cor. 3. 9. with 1 Cor. 1^. 17, 18, 20, 21.
and 1^. 12. Ibid. p. 74. and 75.
never said to any profane or confused people, ye are Gods husbandry, ye are
Gods building. -- To be separated from the unbelievers, and to be joined
together unto a holy communion and Church is needful unto salvation: This is
neither taught nor practiced in your Assemblies, etc. By these and such like
passages it appears, that they make it a necessary mark of a true Church, such
as we may join our selves unto, to be so holy and so pure, as to have no open
and notorious transgressors in it: But how holiness belongs unto the Church, I
have Sermon. 28.
heretofore showed, viz. so as that all who are indeed of the Church, are
indeed holy; and all who are of the Church by profession, are by profession
holy, and ought to be so indeed; and that a visible Church though it has many
in it that are not holy, far more then that are holy, yet it is called holy,
being denominated not from the greater, but from the better part. This also I
willingly grant, that scandalous persons ought to be admonished and censured,
and if the case so require, excommunicated and cast out of the Church until
they show themselves penitent; Warn them that are unruly, 1 These. 5. 14. If
any obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with
him, that he may be ashamed, 2 These. 2. 14. Put away from among your selves
that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5. 13. Sufficient to such a man is this punishment,
which was inflicted of many, 2 Cor. 2. 6. But all this notwithstanding, it
follows not that it is no true Church, wherewith it is lawful to communicate,
if such Discipline either be not established, or not executed in it, but such
are tolerated as are not meet to be members of it. For we find that in all
times the Church has been so infected and polluted, as to have corrupt and
rotten members, not only close hypocrites, but also openly profane persons, yet
did it not therefore presently cease to be a Church, from which the godly were
not to make a separation, although they ought to keep themselves pure from
contagion, and in their places and callings to endeavor the reformation of
what was amiss in it. Moses speaking to all the Congregation of Israel, said,
Thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. So they all were by
profession, but many of them were far from being so indeed. And that Moses knew
very well, he had frequent and manifest proof of it. He saw how upon every
occasion they were murmuring and provoking God, and how when he was but a while
absent from them, they fell to open idolatry. As in diverse other places, so
Deuteronomy. 9. 6, 7, 8. he dealt plainly with them, and told them of their
wickedness: Understand therefore (said he) that the Lord thy God gives thee
not this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a
stiff-necked people. Remember, and forget not how thou provokedst the Lord thy
God to wrath in the wilderness; from the day that thou did depart out of the
Land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been rebellious against
the Lord: Also in Horeb ye provoked the Lord to wrath, so that the Lord was
angry with you to have destroyed you. So what is more frequent and usual with
the Prophets, then to complain of, and cry out against the notorious sins of
the Israelites? They declare their sins as Sodom, they hide them not, Esa. 3.
9. They are all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men: They bend their
tongue like their bow for lies, etc. Jeh. 9. 2, 3. Infinite of such like
passages there are in the writings of the Prophets; yet did they not therefore
deny the Jewish Church to be a true Church, to which all ought to join, they
did neither make themselves, nor exhort others to make separation from it: So
in our Saviors time the Evangelicall story shows how exceeding corrupt it
was, yet still Jerusalem is termed the holy City, Mat. 4. 5. the City of the
great King, Mat. 5. 35. And our blessed Savior did join himself to that
Church, though See Mr. Hildersham on Joh. 4 22.
not to the corruptions of it; Ye worship ye know not what, (said he to the
woman of Samaria) we know what we worship, John 4. 22. meaning we Jews, as it
follows, for salvation is of the Jews.

Ob. Some perhaps may say, although it were thus in respect of the Jews, yet
it is otherwise in respect of Christians: more holiness is now required in the
time of the Gospel, then was before in the time of the Law.

Ans. I answer: It is true, the light being now more clear, and the means of
grace more abundant, we ought to be more holy; For unto whomsoever much is
given, of him shall much be required, Luke 12. 48. But nevertheless the
writings of the Apostles show that even Christian Churches in their times were
not free from gross and scandalous offenders, and yet they were still
accounted Churches, neither were any required to separate from them: It has
been declared unto me of you my brethren, by them which are of the house of
Cloe, that there are contentions among you: Now this I say, that every one of
you says, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos, and I am of Cephas, and I am of
Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12. Ye are carnal; for whereas there are among you
envyings and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? 1 Cor.
3. 3. Now in this that I declare unto you, I praise you not, that you come
together, not for the better, but for the worse. For first of all, when ye come
together in the Church, I hear that there be divisions among you, and I partly
believe it: For there must also be heresies among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest. When ye come together therefore into one place,
this is not to eat the Lords Supper; for in eating every one takes before
other his own supper, and one is hungry, and another is drunken: What have you
not houses to eat and drink in? Or, despise ye the Church of God, and shame
them that have not? What shall I say unto you? shall I praise you in this? I
praise you not, 1 Cor. 11. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. How say some among you, that
there is no resurrection of the dead? 1 Cor. 15. 12. I fear lest when I come I
shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as
ye would not, lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings,
whisperings, swellings, tumults; and lest when I come again, my God will humble
me among you, and that I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have
not repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which
they have committed, 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. By these passages we may see how far
from that purity and holiness that was requisite, the Corinthians were, and
yet the Apostle styled them the Church of God, 1 Cor. 1. 2. and 2 Cor. 1. 1.
and blessed God for them, 1 Cor. 1. 4. so far was he from admonishing any to
separate from them, notwithstanding the errors and disorders that were among
them. So it appears by the second and third Chapters of the Revelation, how
corrupt and unsound the Churches of Asia there spoken of, were both in doctrine
and manners, yet still Christ accounted them Churches, and only exhorted them
to repent and amend, otherwise threatening to power his wrath upon them, he
never taxed any for abiding in them, so that they did not join in those
corruptions.

Ob. Some may object that of the Apostle, Come out from among them, and be ye
separate, 2 Cor. 6. 17.

Answ. But it was not the Apostles meaning, that Christians should separate
from a Church; wherein are found wicked persons, as if it were not lawful to
join with such in the use of Gods Ordinances, for then we should not know where
to find a Church upon earth to join our selves unto, and the whole series and
tenor both of the old and new Testament is against such separation: but the
meaning is, that Christians must separate from all wicked ones so as not to
join with them in their wickedness. So immediately there it follows, touch not
the unclean thing, that is, do not join with others in their pollutions. So
Ephesians. 5. 6, 7. Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of these
things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be ye not
therefore partakers with them, viz. in those things, for which the wrath of God
comes upon them. and v. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but reprove them rather.

Thus then by Scripture the case is clear, that such holiness of
Church Members as some stand upon, is not essential to the Church, nor any
necessary mark of it. And in this all our famous Protestant Divines (that I
know) agree. I will only cite one, who for his worth and excellency may be in
stead of all, viz. Calvin. the Anabaptists (says he) say, that Anabaptistae
aiunt, ubicunque mali non excluduntur a communione, illic Christianum
communicando sese polluere. Nos e contra dicimus, Christianum maestitia affici
debere, cum sacrosanctam caenam pollui videt ab iniquis and improbis, qui ad
eam admittuntur, and curare quantum in ipso est, ne id fiat, quod si fiat ipsi
tamen sese privare caena, and a communione subducere non licere; debere potius
in eo persistere, ut quamdiu in eo loco agit, cum caeteris Deum adoret, verbum
audiat, caenamque recipiat. Calvin. Instruct. advers. Anabaptist. vide Ibid.
plura.
wheresoever evil persons are not excluded from communion, there a Christian
does pollute himself, if he communicate. We on the otherside say, that a
Christian ought to be grieved, when he sees the Holy Supper polluted by the
wicked, that are admitted unto it; and that he ought to endeavor what he can,
that it may not be so polluted. But if it be, yet he may not deprive himself of
the Sacrament, and withdraw himself from communion, but must rather persist in
this resolution, so long as he abides there, together with others, to worship
God, hear the word, and receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Much more he
has to this purpose, alleging many places both of the old and new Testament
for proof of it.

2. Another note of the Church which some 2. Church Covenant.
much stand upon, is a Church Covenant, viz. an express Covenant, which all
the members of the Church must enter into, whereby they expressly and formally
bind themselves to the performing such duties as they conceive to be required
of them. This some make so necessary, as if there could be no true and rightly
constituted visible Church without it. They will not admit any to the Lords
Table, though they cannot but judge them such as have real union and communion
with Christ, neither will they admit their children to Baptism, except it
appear that by such a Covenant they are in Church Fellowship, or members of a
Church, that is, gathered together by such a Covenant. But so far as I can see,
the Scripture no where shows us, that such a Covenant is requisite. I grant,
that in some case, upon special occasion it may be meet for the members of a
Church to Covenant together about those things that concern them, viz. for the
reforming, or preserving of the Church from gross corruptions that have got,
or are likely to get into it. Thus Asa and the people of Judah entered into a
Covenant, as we read, 2 Chronicles, 15. But ordinarily such a Covenant is not
necessary. We read of many Churches planted by the Apostles, yet of no such
Covenant: only we find that the members of the Church were admitted into it by
Baptism, by which all do vertually Covenant one with another. Then they that
gladly received the word, were baptized, and the same day there were added unto
them about three thousand souls. And they continued steadfast in the Apostles
doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayers, Act. 2. 41, 42.
For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. There is
one body, and one spirit, etc. one Lord, one faith, one baptism, Ephesians. 4. 4,
5.

Having hitherto spoken of those notes of the True notes of the Church.
Church, which the Papists and others do erroneously assign, I come now to the
true notes of it, and they are these.

1. The sound preaching of the word: this is 1. The second preaching* of the
word.
a principal note whereby the Church is to be discerned. For 1. The word is
that whereby the members of the Church are begotten. Being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by the word of God, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Then
they that gladly received his word were baptized, Act. 2. 41. And (so by the
preaching of the word) the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be
saved. v. 47.

2. The word is that whereby the members of the Church are nourished. As new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, 1
Pet. 2. 2. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers* for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the ministry* for the edifying of the body of Christ, etc. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
And now brethren I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, etc. Act. 20. 32.

3. The ministry of the word being taken away, the Church cease. I will
remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent, Revel. 2. 5. As if
he should say, I will dischurch thee, I will make thee cease to be a Church,
viz. by taking away the word and ministry. For in that respect Churches are
called candlesticks, Revel. 1. 20. because they hold forth the light of Gods
word by the ministry and dispensation of it.

A false and corrupt Church is known by false and corrupt doctrine. Therefore
on the other side a true and sound Church is known by true and sound doctrine.
True it is, false doctrine may get into a true Church, and through the
prevalency of false teachers may bear sway in it; but if it come to prevail so
far, as that all must either subscribe to it (as in the Church of Rome) or else
they can have no communion with it, then it cease to be a true Church, I
mean, such as wherein it is lawful to abide, but there is a necessity of
making separation from it: Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers
of her sins, etc. Rev. 18. 4. and so far forth as any Church is infected with
false doctrine, so far forth it degenerateth into a false Church. I marvel that
you are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto
another Gospel, Gal. 1. 6. I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed on you
labor in vain, Gal. 4. 11. the Apostle feared least by that corruption of
doctrine that was in the Churches of Galatia, they would quite be dissolved and
come to nothing. And Christ speaking to the Angel (or Pastor) of the Church in
Pergamus, in the name of the whole Church, says thus: But I have a few things
against thee, because thou have there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam,
who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to
eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit fornication. So have thou also
them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. Repent, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, etc. Revel. 2. 14, 15, 16.

2. Another true note of the Church, is, The 2. The right administration of the
Sacraments.
right administration of the Sacraments: When Christ sent his Apostles to
gather his Church, he commanded them, as to preach, so also to baptize; Mat.
28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: That of the Apostle 1 Cor.
1. 17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, is not to be
taken simply and absolutely, that the Apostle was not at all sent to baptize;
for, no doubt he had the same Commission as the other Apostles had: and
besides, he there testifies, that he did baptize some, though not many, v. 14.
and 16. whereas if Christ had not sent him to baptize, he might not have
baptized any. It is therefore spoken comparatively, like that, Receive
instruction, and not silver, Prove. 8. 10. that is, rather then silver: and
that, I desired mercy, and not sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6. that is, rather then
sacrifice: So here Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel,
that is, not so much to baptize as to preach the Gospel. But though in that
Commission Mat. 28. 19. only Baptism is expressed as being the Sacrament of
initiation, that whereby we solemnly enter into the Church, yet there is also
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is to be administered in, and
celebrated by the Church: See 1 Cor. 11. 23. etc. These Sacraments as they are
seals of the Covenant which God has made with his Church, so are they badges
and cognizances whereby the Church is known and discerned; For by one Spirit
we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether
bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13.
As these Sacraments are more or less purely administered, so the Church is more
or less pure.

3. A mutual connection and due order of 3. A mutual connection and due order
of the parts and members of the Church.
the parts and members of the Church, this is also a note and mark of it: As in
a natural body the parts and members are united together, and fitly ordered:
so is it in the mystical body, the Church.

1. There must be union and connection of the parts and members: Let us not
forsake the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is. Heb.
10. 25. Mark those that cause divisions, etc. Romans 16. 17.

And secondly, there must also be order, a due order and disposition of the
parts, some to teach and govern, some to be taught and governed; Are all
Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? 1 Cor. 12. 29. Not all, but some;
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. Take heed to your selves, and to the flock
over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, etc. Acts 20. 28. And we
beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over you in
the Lord, etc. 1 These. 5. 12. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit
your selves, for they watch for your souls, etc. Heb. 13. 1.

Some may take in Discipline as a note of the Church, but I think it not
properly a note of it, because it is not of the being, but only of the
well-being of the Church: As a hedge or wall is to a garden, so is Discipline
to the Church; requisite and needful is it for the preservation of the Church
in purity both of Doctrine and Manners, and where it is long wanting the Church
will be apt to grow very corrupt, yet it is not of such necessity, but that the
Church may subsist without it; neither may we for want of Discipline conclude
that it is no Church, or not such as wherein we may continue, but must needs
separate from it: For in our Saviors time what Discipline was in the Jewish
Church, whenas they that confessed him were cast out of the Synagogue? Joh. 9.
22. and 34.

The one and thirtieth SERMON.
HAving treated sufficiently of the name and nature, the distinctions and notes
of the Church, I come to the point, which these words [ Upon this Rock I will
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it] afford
unto us, and that is this:

That the Church is so strongly built, that

This our Savior plainly and expressly testifies here in the Text; so David
speaking of the Church, says, God will establish it for ever, Psalm. 48. 8.

The strength and stability of the Church may yet further appear,

1. By Gods promises made unto it; I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every
moment, lest any hurt it I will keep it night and day, Esa. 27. 3. No weapon
that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise
against thee in judgment, shall thou condemn, Esa. 54. 17. For I, says the
Lord, will be a wall of fire round about her, and will be the glory in the
midst of her, Zach. 2. 5. In such places of Scripture as wherein God does
threaten to afflict and punish his Church, yet still he mitigates the
sharpness of his threatenings with sweet promises, that he will not utterly
destroy it, Esa. 10. 6. God says that he would send the Assyrian against an
hypocritical Nation, and against the people of his wrath, (so he called the
Jewish Nation and people, which was then his Church) and would give him a
charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like
the mire of the streets. But lest any should think that the Church should quite
be destroyed, it follows v. 20. and 21. And it shall come to pass in that
day, that the remnant of Israel and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob,
shall no more again stay upon him that smote them, but shall stay upon the
Lord, the holy one of Israel, in truth: The remnant shall return, even the
remnant of Jacob unto the mighty God. And again, v. 24. and 25. Therefore thus
says the Lord God of Hosts, O my people that dwell in Sion, be not afraid
of the Assyrian; he shall smite thee with the rod, and shall lift up his staff
against thee after the manner of Egypt: For yet a very little while, and the
indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction. Though God be
provoked against his Church, and smite it sore, yet his anger shall cease in
the destruction, not of his Church, but of the adversaries of it: So Esa. 17.
4. the Lord threatens, saying, And in that day it shall come to pass, that
the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax
lean; but v. 6. he adds, Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the
shaking of an olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uttermost
bough, four or five in the out most fruitful branches thereof, says the Lord
God of Israel. And Isai. 24. 13. Having said that there should be desolation
and destruction, to show that yet this should not be utter desolation, and
utter destruction, the like promise is annexed. When thus it shall be in the
midst of the Land among the people, there shall be as the shaking of an
Olivetree, and as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done, So Jer. 3. 14.
Turn, O backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you, and I
will take you one of a City, and two of a Family, and I will bring you to Sion,
and Jer. 46. 28. Fear not thou, o Jacob my servant, says the Lord; for I am
with thee, for I will make a full end of all the Nations whither I have driven
thee, but See the margent and De Dieu upon Exodus 34. 6. 7.
will not make a full end of thee; but correct thee in measure, yet will I not
leave thee wholly unpunished. Ezekiel. 6. 8. The Lord having before threatened to
inflict sore plagues and punishments, adds, Yet will I leave a remnant, that you
may have some that shall escape the sword among the Nations, when ye shall be
scattered thorough the Countries, And Ezekiel. 14. 22. Although he threatened to
send his four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the
noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast, Yet behold
(says he) therein shall be left a remnant that shall be brought forth, etc.

Thus Gods promises to his Church show that no adverse power shall prevail
against it, viz. so as utterly to overthrow it.

2. The same also may appear by Gods providence toward it: as he has
promised, so he has performed, as the story of the Church in all ages does
make manifest. He has remembered his Covenant for ever, the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations. Which Covenant he made with Abraham, and
his Oath unto Isaac: And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel
for an everlasting Covenant, saying, unto thee will I give the Land of Canaan,
the lot of your inheritance. When they were but few men in number, yea very
few, and strangers in it. When they went from one Nation to another, from one
Kingdom to another people; He suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved
Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm, Psalm. 105. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

The Church has been much and often persecuted by her adversaries, yet it has
been preserved; maugre all their malice and fury against it, they were not able
to destroy it. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now
say; many time have they afflicted me from my youth, but they have not
prevailed against me: the plowers plowed upon my back, and made long their
furrows. The Lord is righteous, he has cut asunder the coards of the wicked,
Psalm. 129. 1, 2, 3, 4. Pharaoh and the Egyptians did wickedly conspire against
the people of God, and did cruelly oppress them, yet could they not prevail
against them. The Church was but as that bush that Moses saw, all on fire, yet
not consumed, Exodus 3. 3. God was in the bush, he was in his Church, he
preserved it, and with a strong hand and an outstretched arm he did deliver
it. Afterward the people of God were many a time grievously afflicted in
Canaan, by Moabites, Ammonites, Philistines and others, yet still God did raise
them up one or other to deliver them, as is recorded in the book of Judges. I
will only cite one place to this purpose, viz. that Judge. 2. 14, 15, 16. And
the anger of the Lord waxed hot against Israel (because of their sins mentioned
in the verses immediately going before) and he delivered them into the hands of
spoilers, that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies
round about, so that they could no longer stand before their enemies.
Whithersoever (...)went out the hand of the Lord was against the(...)r evil,
as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them, and they were
greatly distressed. Nevertheless the Lord raised up Judges, which delivered
them out of the hand of those that spoiled them. After the time of the Judges,
when in the days of Eliah the Saints and servants of God were so persecuted by
Ahab and Jezebel, that Eliah thought they were all destroyed, and none left
besides himself, God let him know that it was otherwise then he supposed, Yet I
have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed to
Baal, and every mouth which has not kissed him. 1 King. 19. 18. After this
also when the ten Tribes were carried away captive into Assyria, as is related,
2 King. 17. besides many particular persons that remained of those Tribes,
there remained still the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin. Its said indeed, 2 King.
17. 18. There was none left but the Tribe of Judah only; but Benjamin is
comprehended in Judah. So it is said, 1 King. 12. 20. that when the Kingdom was
divided in the reign of Rehoboam. There was none that followed the house of
David, but the Tribe of Judah only. Yet 2 Chronicles. 11. 1. it is said that Rehoboam
gathered of the house of Judah and Benjamin, a hundred and fourscore thousand
chosen men, etc. And v. 12. that he had Judah and Benjamin on his side. After
this again when Judah and Benjamin were carried away into Babylon, yet besides
that some still remained in the Land, Ier. 40. 6. God caused the rest to return
after seventy years, 2 Chronicles. 36. 22, 23. Ezr. 1. 1. etc. After all this, when
that misery came upon Jerusalem, which our Savior f(...) ^ld, Luke 19. 41.
etc. besides that God did re(...)e unto himself some among the Jews, a remnant
according to the Election of grace, as the Apostle calls them, Romans 11. 5. God
in stead of the Jews that were rejected, took in the Gentiles, so that the
Church was so far from being destroyed, that it was exceedingly amplified and
enlarged. The fall of the Jews was the riches of the world, and the dimihishing
of them the riches of the Gentiles, as the Apostle says, Romans 11. 12. Thus far
the history of the Scripture does lead us; and Ecclesiastical history yet
further tells us, that the Christian Church was under fierce and fiery
persecution for a matter of 300. years after Christ, but though infinite
numbers were slain, yet still many remained, yea their Sanguis martyrum semen
Ecclesiae. Semen est sanguis Christianorum. Tertul. Apolog.
very sufferings were a means to make them increase and multiply the more. As
it is said of the Israelites in Egypt, that the more they were afflicted, the
more they multiplied and grew, Exodus 1. 12, So was it with the Christians, in
those primitive times, whence arose that saying, The blood of the Martyrs is
the seed of the Church. Thus likewise in after ages Antichrist under a pretense
of being Christ's vicar, and head of the Church, making great havoc in the
Church, yet was never able to destroy it, but it has subsisted still and
continued unto this day, and so will continue as long as the world continues,
yea when the world is destroyed, yet the Church shall continue still, even for
ever and ever. Come out of her, my people, says the Lord speaking of mystical
and Antichristian Babylon, Revel. 18. 4. Which shows that God would have a
people even in Babylon, even under the tyranny of Antichrist, and would in his
good time bring them out of Babylon from under Antichristian tyranny, as he
has in these last ages done in great measure, and will at length do in full
measure, as the Book of the Revelation sufficiently testifies.

The reasons why the Church cannot so be prevailed Reasons why no adverse power
can prevail against the Church to destroy it.
against, as to be destroyed, are reducible to these two heads, God is able to
preserve the Church, and he will preserve it.

1. God is able to preserve the Church: the Apostle argues from Gods power,
and thence proves the stability of a particular member of the Church, though a
weak member. Yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand, So
our Savior from hence likewise shows the certainty of the perseverance and
salvation of the whole Church, and all the members of it. My sheep hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them eternal life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.
My Father which gave them me is greater then all; and and no man is able to
pluck them out of my Fathers hand, I and my Father are one, Joh. 10. 27, 28,
29, 30.

2. God will preserve his Church, and that in diverse respects.

1. In respect of the relation that is betwixt him and the Church. It is his
Church. So Christ who is God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. calls it in the Text,
my Church, and 1 Timothy 3. 15. it is called the Church of the living God. In the
same place it is called, the house of God. And Psalm. 48. 8. and in other
places, the City of God. It is his Spouse Cant. 4. 9, 10, 11. his Body, 1 Cor.
12. 27. Ephesians. 1. 23. The Church having such near relation unto God, he will
assuredly look to it, and preserve it.

2. In respect of his decree and purpose in predestinating and electing the
Church. The Apostle having spoken of some, whose faith was overthrown, adds,
Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows who are
his, 2 Timothy 2. 20. Many are called but few are chosen, Mat. 22. 12. But they
that are chosen are sure to be saved. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers
pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit ye the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Mat.
25. 34. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called, viz. according
to his purpose, v. 28. and whom he called, [viz. in that manner] them he also
justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8. 30.

3. In respect of the price that he has purchased his Church with. Take heed,
etc. to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood,
Act. 20. 28. He that has paid so dear for a thing, as God has for the Church,
will not loose it, if he can keep it.

4. In respect of the Seal that he has set upon his Church, and the earnest
which he has given unto it, even his holy Spirit. Men seal things which they
would have preserved and kept safe, and by giving earnest they make a bargain.
So God has sealed his Church by his spirit, and has given it the earnest of
his spirit. Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the spirit in our
hearts, 2 Cor. 12. 22. In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with
the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, etc.
Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. And grieve not the Holy spirit of God, whereby you are sealed
unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30.

5. In respect of the great affection that he bears toward the Church.
Remember me O Lord, with the favor that thou bear to thy people; O visit me
with thy salvation, Psalm. 106. 4. That intimates that God does bear a singular
favor to his people, and so will visit them with his salvation. His soul was
grieved for the miseries of Israel, Judge. 10. 16. In all their affliction he
was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them; in his love, and in
his pity he redeemed them, etc. Isai. 63. 9. He that touches you, touches the
apple of his eye, Zach. 2. 8. These expressions are used to show how dear Gods
Church is unto him.

6. In respect of his Covenant, which he has made with his Church, and by
which he has engaged himself unto it. I entered into Covenant with thee, and
thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16. 8. But now thus says the Lord, that created thee
O Jacob, and he that formed thee O Israel, Fear not, for I have redeemed thee,
I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine [viz. by Covenant, and what
then?] When thou passest thorough the waters, I will be with thee, and thorough
the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: When thou walk^st thorough the fire,
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. For I am the
Lord thy God, the Holy one of Israel thy Savior, Isai. 43. 1, 2, 3. The people
of God being in distress, cry unto him, and plead with him thus, Not unto us O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise, for thy mercy and thy
truths sake, Psalm. 115. 1. Gods mercy moved him to make the Covenant, both his
mercy and his truth will move him to keep the Covenant. He will ever be
mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. 111. 5. My Covenant will I not break etc. Psalm.
89. 34. Therefore also Jeremy in a time of calamity and misery prayed unto God,
saying, Remember, break not thy Covenant with us, Jer. 14. 21.

7. In respect of his glory, which is concerned in the preservation of his
Church, and in the establishment of it. This people have I formed for my self,
they shall show forth my praise, Isai. 43. 21. So v. 7. I have created him for
my glory, etc. The most of the world dishonor God, and blaspheme his Name, but
God has, and will have a people, that shall honor him, and give him the glory
due unto his Name. It Is said, Psalm. 22. 3. That God inhabits the praises of
Israel. And both to provoke his people the more to praise him, and also that
his enemies may have less occasion to blaspheme, though he afflict his people,
and suffer their enemies a while to tyrannize over them, yet his eye is still
upon them, he has a care of them, and in due time will deliver them. For my
Names sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain for thee,
that I cut thee not off, Isai. 48. 9. And v. 11. For mine own sake, even for
mine own sake will I do it, for how should my name be polluted? (viz. if his
Church should be destroyed) and I will not give my glory unto another. See also
Ezekiel. 36. 20, 21, 23. Therefore the people of God make use of this as a most
strong argument, whereby to prevail with God, Help us O God of our salvation
for the glory of thy Name, and deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy
Names sake. Wherefore should the Heathen say, where is now their God? Let him
be known among the Heathen in our sight, etc. Psalm. 79. 9, 10. And v. 13. So we
thy people, and sheep of thy Pasture, will give thee thanks for ever, we will
show forth thy praise to all generations, So Jer. 14. 7. O Lord, though our
iniquities testify against us, do it for thy Names sake. And v. 21. Do not
abhor us for thy Names sake.

Use 1. This then serves to convince the adversaries and opposers of Gods
Church and people, it serves to let them see how vain their enterprise and
attempt is in so setting themselves against the Church and people of God as
they do. Come (say they) let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name
of Israel may be no more in remembrance. Psalm. 83. 4. But they do but imagine a
vain thing, Psalm. 2. 1. a thing that they are never able to effect. He that
sits in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the most High shall have them in
derision. Psalm. 2. 4. If they be able to do any thing against the Church, it is
but as they are the rod of Gods anger, as he calls the Assyrian, Isai 10. 5. as
the instruments that he does make use of for the correcting of his people. They
mean not so, neither does their heart think so, but it is in their heart to
destroy, and to cut off, etc. Isai. 10. 7. But shall the axe boast it self
against him that heweth therewith? or shall the saw magnify it self against
him that shakes it? as if the rod should shake it self against them that lift
it up; or as if the staff should lift up it self, as if it were no wood, Isai.
10. 15. In fighting against the Church they do but (...), fight against God,
Act. 5. 39. And do they think to overcome in this fight? Keep not thou silence
O God, hold not thy peace, and be not still O God, for lo thine enemies (so he
calls the enemies of Gods Church) make a tumult, and they that hate thee have
lift up their head. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and
consulted against thy hidden ones, Psalm. 83. 1, 2, 3. Their machinations and
devices against Gods people are against God himself, as it follows there, v. 5.
they are confederate against thee, So Psalm. 21. 11. They intended evil against
thee, they imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to perform.
Because it was against God, therefore they were not able to perform it. Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? said Christ from heaven, when Saul persecuted
his Church upon earth, Act. 9. 4. And v. 5. I am Jesus whom thou persecutest,
it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. When a mighty multitude came
against Asa, which he had no power to withstand, he cried unto God, and used
this argument to prevail with him, and to obtain help of him, Let not man
prevail against thee, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11.

Use. 2. Secondly, this also serves to comfort the mourners in Sion, and the
members of Sion. Though Sion (the Church) be never so sore shaken, yet it
stands sure; though it be exposed to never so many and great dangers, yet it
shall be preserved. Though the Church be a little flock, as it is termed, Luke
12. 32. Yet it has a great Shepherd. Though the people of God be as sheep
among wolves, Mat. 10. 16. Yet God who is their Shepherd can and will defend
them. Ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake, said Christ to his
Disciples, but he adds withal. But there shall not a hair of your head perish,
Luke 21. 17, 18. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed, we are
perplexed, but not in despair, persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but not
destroyed, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9. He has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee, so that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what
man can do unto me, Heb. 13. 5, 6.

Ob. Some may say, But many members of the Church are often prevailed against and
destroyed.

Answ. I answer, 1. None can do any thing to any member of the Church further
then God is pleased to permit; otherwise the devil could not so much as touch
Job, as the story witnesses, Job. 1. and 2.

2. God suffers none to do any thing to any member of the Church but for their
good. All things work together for the good of those that love God, that are
called according to his purpose. Romans 8. 28. The Saints and servants of God do
then indeed overcome when they seem to be overcome, and when their condition
seems most calamitous and miserable, then is it indeed Hac tempestate omnis
fere sacro Martyrum cruore orbis infectus ^st. -- Nullis unquam bellis mundus
magis exhaustus est, neque majori unquam triumpho vicimus, quam cum december
armorum stragibus vinci non potuimus. Sulpit.
most glorious and happy. In all these things we are more then Conquerours,
thorough him that loved us, Romans 8. 37.

Use. 3. Thirdly and lastly, This may serve to admonish those that are without,
to come in, that they may be no more strangers and forreiners, but
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. As
the condition of those that are in the Church, is most safe, so theirs that are
out of the Church, if they so continue, is most miserable. As Noah and all that
were in the Ark were preserved from the flood, but all they that were out of it
were drowned. So shall all that are in the Church, truly in Extrae Ecclesiam
non est salus.
it, so in it as to be of it, be saved, but all that are out of it shall
perish. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved, Act. 2. 47.
We are all indeed in the visible Church by profession, but that is not enough,
we must also be in the invisible Church by a real union with Christ, being
incorpoarated into him by faith, and made members of his body. And he that
says that he abides in him, ought himself to walk even as he walked, 1 John
2. 6. The foundation of the Lord stands sure, having this seal, the Lord
knows who are his: and let every one that names the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Chafe may be in the floor as well as wheat, and
goats in the fold as well as sheep; but Christ will thoroughly purge his floor,
and gather his wheat into the garner, and burn up the chafe with unquenchable
fire, Mat. 3. 12. He will divide the sheep from the goats, and will set the
sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his left, and will say to the one,
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit you the Kingdom, etc. But to the other,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc. Mat. 25. 32, 33, 34, 41.
Let us therefore have a care, and make sure, that we be wheat and not chafe,
sheep and not goats; let us have a care that we be indeed built upon the Rock,
the sure foundation, Christ Jesus, and then whatsoever happen, we are safe, the
gates of hell shall not prevail against us.

The two and thirtieth SERMON.
1 JOHN 1. 3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye
also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ.
IN the Apostles Creed (as it is called) after the Article concerning the
Church, follows the Article of the Communion of Saints. Indeed Calv. Instit.
l. 4. c. 1.. 3.
this Article Calvin notes to be for the most part omitted by the ancient
Writers, and so I find it to be by Ruffinus in his Exposition of the Creed; for
from the holy Catholic Church he passes immediately to the forgiveness of
sins. And so Austine in his Enchiridion, wherein he handles briefly the
Principles of Christian Religion contained in the Creed, takes no notice of
this Article; yet it is well and fitly inserted: for the Church being one City,
one house, one body, they that belong unto the Church, as the Saints only do
indeed, must needs have communion and fellowship together. And this communion
or fellowship S. John here speaks of, he shows those to whom he writes (and in
them all Christians) why he instructs them in those heavenly mysteries, about
which he writes, viz. that they might have fellowship with him and such as he
was; That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may
have fellowship with us: And moreover he shows what an excellent felloship
this is, extending it self even to God, and the Lord Jesus Christ; And truly
our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

Fellowship] Communion and fellowship are terms equivalent: The Greek word
which here is rendered fellowship, and so Phil. 2. 1. (...).
is rendered communion, 2 Cor. 13. 14. and 1 Cor. 10. 16.

The Doctrine arising from the Text which I

By Saints are meant holy men and women, true and real members of the Church:
As for Angels, though they be holy, as they are styled, the holy Angels, Mat.
25. 31. And Jude v. 14. by Saints seem to be meant those same holy Angels; yet
(as has been showed before) the Angels are not properly of the Church, and so
not of the Saints now spoken of, which consist only of men and women.

And these Saints are partly in heaven, where they are perfect and complete
Saints, so holy as to be without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 27. there are the
spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. Partly upon earth, where there
are true Saints, though incomplete and imperfect, such as have still sin and
corruption remaining in them: For there is not a just man upon earth that does
good, and sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1. 8. Some are so simple as to
think that there are no Saints but in heaven, when as the Scripture speaks
expressly of the Saints that are upon the earth, Psalm. 16. 3. And usually where
Saints are mentioned in the Scripture, the Saints on earth are meant: As Psalm.
34. 9. O fear the Lord all ye his Saints; for there is no lack to them that
fear him. And Psalm. 79. 2. The flesh of thy Saints [have they given] to the
beasts of the earth. And Prove. 2. 8. He preserves the way of his Saints. And 2
Cor. 13. 13. All the Saints salute you. And Phil. 4. 22. All the Saints salute
you, chiefly they that are of Caesar's household. So in many other places: Now
when we speak of the Communion of Saints, both the Saints in heaven, and the
Saints on earth are to be understood; both the one and the other have the
communion here spoken of, viz. with God, and with Christ, and with one another.

Now the ground of communion is union; first therefore, the Saints have union
with God, and with Christ, and with one another, and then they have communion
with God, and with Christ, and with one another.

1. With God: The Saints in heaven have perfect union with God, and so perfect
communion with him. They have a clear sight of God, they see him not (as here)
through a glass, darkly, but face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. And they have a full
fruition of God: In his presence they have fullness of joy, and at his right
hand they have pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. So they are uncessantly
sounding forth Hallelujahs, they are continually exercised in praising and
magnifying God; Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still
praising thee. Psalm. 84. 4. This is especially true of those that dwell in Gods
upper house, in heaven.

The Saints on earth also have union and communion with God, though not in that
perfect manner as they in heaven: The Saints in heaven have union with God by
sight, the Saints on earth have only union with God by faith; For we walk by
faith, and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7. And so the Saints on earth have communion
with God by exercising their faith, and showing forth the fruits of it; by
praising God, and praying unto him, and performing such acts of worship and
service as he requires of them. Moses speaking but of one act of communion
which the Saints here have with God, how does he admire the excellency of it?
For what Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord
our God is in all things that we call upon him for? Deuteronomy. 4. 7. And in respect
of that communion which they have with God in the observation of all his
Ordinances and injunctions, he add^s, v. 8. And what Nation is there so great,
that has Statutes so righteous, as all this Law which I set before you this
day? David also speaking of communion with God in his Sanctuary and service,
which the Saints on earth have, cries out, How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O
Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord,
my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God, Psalm. 84. 1, 2. So Psalm.
42. 1. 2. Most affectionately he expresses his desire to enjoy this communion
with God, As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after
thee O God: My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come
and appear before God!

2. With Christ: the Saints in heaven have perfect union and communion with
him. Father I will that they whom thou have given me, be where I am, that they
may behold my glory, Joh. 17. 24. Having a desire to depart and to be with
Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1. 23. The Saints on earth also have, though
not in that perfection, as they in heaven, union and communion with Christ. For
he is the Vine, and they are the branches, Joh. 15. 1. etc. He is the Head, and
they are the members, Ephesians. 5. 23, 25. By him they are reconciled unto God,
and at peace with him. Being justified by faith we have peace with God thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord. By whom also we have access by faith unto this grace,
wherein we stand, etc. Romans 5. 1, 2. And not only so, but we also joy in God
thorough our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have now received the
atonement, Romans ^. 11. Of his fullness they all receive, and grace for grace,
Joh. 1. 16. By him they have boldness to call upon God, and to make known
their requests unto him, see Ioh. 16. 23. By him all their services though weak
and imperfect, are accepted of God. Ye also as lively stones are built up a
spiritual house, an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable unto God thorough Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

3. With one another. The Saints, both they in heaven, and they on earth, are
all united together in one mystical body, whereof Christ is Head. For it
pleased God, to gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in
heaven, and which are on earth, even in him, Ephesians. 1. 10. They are all knit
together by one and the same spirit. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into
one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have
been all made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13. The Apostle there speaks
of baptizing and drinking, because the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords
Supper, are outward tokens and testimonies of the union of the Saints, as they
are here upon earth; but still he mentions the spirit, as that whereby the
union is indeed wrought. And as union, so communion which flows from union. For
as it is in the natural body, so is it also in the mystical, the members
being united one to another, have communion one with another, because as the
members of the natural body partake all of one soul, so the members of the
mystical body partake all of one spirit. Because the Saints have the communion
of the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13. 14. the fellowship of the spirit, Phil. 2. 1.
therefore they have communion and fellowship one with another.

Now the Saints being some in heaven, and some on earth, there arises a
fourfold communion or fellowship which the Saints have one with another.

1. There is a communion which the Saints in heaven have one with another. They
certainly rejoice one in another happiness, and praise God one for an other.
Here men, and even sometimes good men, through the corruption that is in them,
envy one another, as Aaron and Miriam did Moses, Number. 12. 1. But the Saints in
heaven are wholly free from this distemper, they are made perfect in love and
charity, which envieth not, 1 Cor. 13. 4. rejoices not in iniquity, but
rejoices in the truth, v. 6.

2. There is a communion, which the Saints in heaven have with the Saints on
earth. They wish them that happiness which themselves have attained to, and in
general (as we may conceive) pray for them. For though they be not acquainted
with the particular estate of the Saints here below, yet in general they know
that as they in heaven are triumphant, so their fellow members on earth are
militant, and therefore charity (as the Apostle says) never failing, they have
a fellow-feeling 2 Cor. 13. 8.
of their case (so far forth as is consistent with their own happiness) and a
care for them.

3. There is a communion which the Saints on earth have with the Saints in
heaven. They rejoice in their happiness, praise God for them, and follow their
faith and conversation, that so they also may partake of the same happiness
with them. Thus far forth the Scripture does warrant our Communion with the
Saints in heaven. For the memory of the just is blessed, Prove. 10. 7. All
generations shall call me blessed said the Virgin Mary, Luke 1. 48. And the
Apostle bids, Be followers of those, who through faith and patience inherit the
promises, Heb. 6. 12. But for praying to the Saints departed, as they of the
Church of Rome teach, we have no Scripture to countenance any such Communion,
but it is quite dissonant and repugnant to Scripture. God is he, to whom we
must pray, Call upon me, Psalm. 50. 15. As for me I will call upon God, Psalm.
55. 16. For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, Psalm. 32. 6.
After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc. Mat. 6. 9. Neither must
we pray in the name of any but of Christ only. For there is one God, and one
Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Besides, the
Saints departed do not understand our particular affairs. When a man is dead he
is ignorant of the estate of such as had most near relation unto him. His sons
come to honor, and he knows it not; and they are brought low, but he
perceives it not of them, Job. 14. 21.

4. There is a Communion which the Saints on earth have one with another; and
this is that communion of Saints, which the Scripture chiefly speaeth of. They
are kindly affectioned one toward another, Romans 12. 10. They rejoice with them
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, v. 15. They have the same care one
for another; If one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; if one
member be honored, they all rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26. They bear one
another burdens, Gal. 6. 2. As every one has received the gift, so they
minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifest grace of
God, 1 Pet. 4. 10.

More particularly the Saints on earth have communion one with another. 1. in
respect of spiritual things; they join together in the use of Gods Ordinances.
Thus it is said of the primitive Christians, that they continued steadfastly in
the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in
prayers, Act. 2. 42. And v. 46. that they continued daily with one accord in
the Temple, etc. And the Apostle exhorts saying, And let us consider one
another, etc. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is, Heb. 10. 24, 25. According to their places and callings they
teach and admonish one another, Col. 3. 16. They exhort one another, Heb. 3.
13. and 10. 25. They comfort and edify one another, 1 These. 4. 18. and 5. 11.
They pray one for another, Ephesians. 6. 18. Jam. 5. 16.

2. In respect of temporal things; they succor and relieve one another. It is
recorded of the Saints in the Apostles time, that they had all things common,
and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man
had need, Act. 2. 44, 45. So Act. 4. 32. And the multitude of them that
believed were of one heart, and of one soul, neither said any of them, that
ought of the things that he possessed wa^ his own, but they had all things
common, andv. 34. and 35. For as many as were possessors of lands or houses,
sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold, and laid them
down at the Apostles feet, and distribution was made unto every man according
as he had need. This example of the primitive Saints, the Anabaptists before
these times have abused, inferring from thence that meum and tuum, all
propriety of goods ought to be taken away from among Christians, and that all
things should be so common among them, that none should have right to any thing
more then another. But this is over-grosse. For 1. What was done by a few
living together in one City, cannot conveniently be done by all throughout the
world. Neither then in the Apostles time was that communion enjoined, none was
required to part with the interest that he had in any thing, as is clear by
that of Peter to Ananias, Whiles it remained, was ^ not thine own? and after it
was sold, was it not in thine own power? Act. 5. 4. This shows that, Anamas
might have chosen whether he would fell his possession or no; and when he had
sold it, whether he would bring the money, that he had for it, to the Apostles
or no. But thus far that example is to be followed, that they which have, must
communicate to those that want. To do good, and to communicate forget not, Heb.
13. 16. Charge them that are rich in this world, etc. That they do good, that
they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy
6. 17, 18. As we have opportunity let us do good unto all, especially unto them
that are of the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10.

Use 1. The use of this doctrine is, first, to convince and reprove such as
profess themselves Christians, and so consequently Saints, ^et do little
regard the communion of Saints, that communion which all true Saints have, with
God, with Christ, and with one another. In stead of communion with God, some
have communion with Satan, in stead of communion with Christ, they have
communion with Belial, with fin and wickedness, in stead of communion with
Saints, they have communion with the ungodly; in stead of joining in the
worship and service of God, they join in the practice of iniquity, swearing and
swaggering, drinking and revelling together, and this they account and call
good-fellowship, but it is far from that fellowship which the Text does speak
of, which indeed is the only true goodfellowship. God is light (says S. John
presently after the Text) and in him is no darkness at all. If we say that we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, etc. 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7. Be ye not unequally yoked together with
unbelievers, for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and
what communion has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with
Belial? or what part has he that believes, with an Infidel? And what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15, 16.

Some under a pretense of sanctity violate the communion of Saints; they
forsake the assemblies of the Saints, because of some in those assemblies by
whose society they fear to be polluted: but this is either great hypocrisy, or
a gross error. Let a man examine himself, (said the Apostle) and so let him
eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Therefore it is not
the unworthiness of others that can prejudice thee, if thou thy self be not
unworthy. Come out from among them, and be ye separate; how? and touch not the
unclean thing, 1 Cor. 5. 17. So separate, as to have no communion with others
in that which is evil. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5. 11.

Some will exercise communion of Saints in respect of spiritual things, but in
respect of corporal things they will have no such communion. The Hebrew Doctors
note that there are four sorts of persons;

1. Such as will say, Mine is thine, and thine is Pirke Aboth c. s. (...)
mine. They will communicate to others, but only so as that others communicate
to them again. But Luke 6. 32. 33. If ye love them that love you what thank
have ye? for sinners also love those that love them. And if ye do good to those
to those that do good to you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do even the
same.

2. Such as will say, Mine is mine, and thine is (...)
thine: They will keep what they have, and let others keep what they have; they
will neither be beholding to others, nor shall others be beholding unto them:
And this (say some) was the disposition of the people of Sodom: The Prophet
Ezekiel speaking of the sins of Sodom, mentions this for one, neither did
she strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, Ezekiel. 16. 49. They are not
taxed for robbing, defrauding, and oppressing the poor, but for not succouring
and relieving them, as they should have done.

3. Such as will say, Thine is mine, and mine is (...)
mine: They will take from others, but will not impart to others; these are
grossly wicked.

4. Such as will say, Mine is thine, and thine is thine: They will impart to
others, not expecting that they should impart to them again. This is the
disposition of the godly; it is that which our Savior requires, Love your
enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again (that is, not hoping
to receive the like kindness by borrowing afterward of those who now borrow
of you) and your reward shall be great, etc. Luke 6. 35, 36.

Use 2. Secondly, as we profess Christianity, and so sanctity, let us practice
this communion, which is the communion of Saints, and so of all true
Christians, communion with God, and with Christ, and with one another.

To this end, first, let us have a care that we be Christians indeed, and so
Saints indeed; Saints I say, in some measure, though not full measure: God is
holy, and Christ is holy, and all the true children of God and members of
Christ are holy, and so if we would have communion with them, Simile gaudet
fimili.
we must be holy also: For every thing seeks communion with that which is like
it self; Birds of a feather fly together. Follow holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

2. As we must follow after all holiness, so especially Amor. unit amantem cum
re amata.
Love, which woe(...) ^nion and so communion; And above all (...)e things put on
charity, which is the bond of perfectness, Col. 3. 14. Beloved, let us love
one another, for love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God, and
knows God: He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love, 1 John 4. 7,
8.

3. Humility is also a great means to preserve and maintain this communion:
Only by pride comes contention, Prove. 13. 10. With all lowliness and
meekness, with long-suffering forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3. Fulfill ye my
joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind: Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of
mind, let each esteem other better then themselves, Phil. 2. 2, 3.

The three and thirtieth SERMON.
Isai. 33. 24. The people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.
THe Prophet here speaking of the Church under the notion of a City, and under
the name of Sion and Jerusalem, v. 20. shows what a great benefit belongs
unto it, and to the members of it, viz. the forgiveness of sins; The people
that dwell therein (in Zion or Jerusalem, in the Church, they that are so in
it, as to be of it) shall be forgiven their iniquity. It is the happiness of
the members of the Church triumphant, of the Saints in heaven, that they have
no sin, no iniquity: It is the happiness of the members of the Church
militant, of the Saints on earth, that their sin and iniquity is forgiven. The
point which

It is a part of that new Covenant that God has graciously made with his
people; I will forgive their iniquity, and not remember their sin any more,
Jer. 31. 34. So Christ told Paul that he would send him to preach unto the
Gentiles, to that end, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, Acts 26.
18.

For the more full handling of this point, I will show by whom sins are
forgiven, for whose sake they are forgiven, what is required of those to whom
they are forgiven, and then make use and application.

1. By whom sins are forgiven: As some sins are committed against man, so they
may be forgiven by man; If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and
if he repent forgive him: And if he traspasse against thee seven times in a
day, and seven times in a day, turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall
forgive him, Luke 17. 3, 4. But sin, all sin whatsoever, being a transgression
of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. As sin is against God, a transgression of his Law, an
indignity and dishonor done to him, so only he can forgive it; I, even I am he
that blotteth out thy transgressions, etc. Esa. 43. 25. The Scribes therefore
Movet Scribas remissum ab homine peccatum. Hominem cuim tant^^m in Jesu Christo
contuebantur. -- Verum enim nemo potest dimitiere peccata nisi solus Deus: Ergo
qui remittit Deus est, qui^ nemo remittit nisi Deus. Hilar. in Mat. can. 18.
might well say, Who can forgive sins but God only? Mar. 2. 7. They were right
in the Doctrine, only they were wrong in the application; their position was
good, that only God can forgive sins, only their supposition was naught, that
Christ was a mere man, and therefore did blaspheme when he took upon him so to
forgive sins as he did. As for that which Christ said to his Apostles, and in
them to all his Ministers, Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them, Joh. 20. 23. it is not so to be taken as if they could remit sins
authoritatively, but only ministerially; they are said to remit sins in that
they preach remission of sins, and declare unto people that their sins are
remitted, viz. they performing those conditions which God requires of those
whose sins he remitteth. John Baptist was to go before the face of the Lord to
prepare his ways; To give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the
remission of their sins, Luke 1. 76. 77. And Christ after his Resurrection told
his Apostles, that they and his other Ministers should preach remission of
sins, Luke 24. 47. Be it known unto you (said Paul) that through this man
(viz. Christ) is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, Acts 13. 38. That the
Apostles did otherwise then thus forgive sins we find not. The Priest in the
time of the Law was said to make the In remittendis vel retinendis culpis, id
juris atque officii habent Ecclesiastici sacerdotes, quod olim habebant sub
lege legales in curandis leprosis. Hi ergo peccata dimittunt vel retinent dum
dimissa a Deo vel retenta judicant and ostendunt. Lombardus Hieronymum secutus,
lib. 4. did. 18.
Leper clean, Lev. 13. when he did pronounce and declare him to be clean: Our
Translators render it, The Priest shall pronounce him clean, v. 17. and so in
other Verses of that Chapter; but in the Original it is shall make him clean,
(...) (...).
and so the Septuagint have it; yet our Translators do well and truly express
the sense, for that making clean is no more but a pronouncing Mundum esse
decernet.
clean, and so also the vulgar Latin Interpreter does render it. Just so (as
Hierome and after him Lombard has observed) the Ministers of the Gospel are
said to forgive sins, when they declare whose sins are forgiven.

2. For whose sake sins are forgiven. viz. For Christ's sake: He commanded that
remission of sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations, Luke 24.
47. So Paul told them to whom he preached, saying, thorough this man is
preached unto you for givenesse of sins; And by him all that believe are
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses, Acts 13. 38, 39. He is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 2. He is
the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, John 1. 29. God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, v. 21. He was wounded
for our transgressions, he was bruized for our iniquities, the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep
have gone astray, and we have turned every one to his own course, and the Lord
has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, Isai. 53. 5, 6.

3. What is required of those to whom sins are forgiven. Although sin in
respect of us is forgiven freely, we can do nothing whereby to purchase
forgiveness of sin, yet something is required to prepare for it, and to make
capable of it. Thus there is required, 1. Faith; To him give all the Prophets
witness (said Peter speaking of Christ) that thorough his Name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins, Act. 10. 43. By him all that
believe are justified, etc. said Paul Act. 13. 39. Faith is the hand that lays
hold on Christ, and receives him, for whose sake sin is forgiven. To receive
Christ is nothing else then to believe in him, Joh. 1. 12. The nature of faith
is set forth completely, Heb. 11. 13. All these died in faith, having not
received the promises (that is, the things promised) but saw them afar off, and
were persuaded of them, and embraced them; which shows that to the making up of
Faith, justifying and saving faith, there must be first knowledge, they saw the
promises, though it were afar off, yet they saw them, they had some, though but
a dim and weak knowledge of them. 2. Assent, they were persuaded of them. 3.
Application, they embraced them,

2. Repentance. Christ commanded, that repentance and remission of sins should
be preached in his Name, Luke 24. 47. First Repeutance, and then remission of
sins; no remission of sins without repentance. So Peter preaching Christ unto
the Jews, said, Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Act. 5.
31. And Act. 3. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out. Now repentance imports,

1. Sorrow for sin. I will be sorry for my sin, said David, Psalm. 38. 18.
Ephraim repenting smote upon his thigh, Jer. 31. 19. And the penitent Publican
smote upon his breast, Luke 18. 13. This sorrow for sin presupposes knowledge
of sin, and produces acknowledgement and confession of it. I will declare mine
iniquity, Psalm. 38. 18. I Or, know, Heb. (...)
acknowledge mine iniquity, and my sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51. 3. If we
confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us, 1 John 1. 9. viz. if
with a true penitent heart we confess them: but this sorrow for sin must be
godly sorrow, that is, sorrow for sin as sin, not so much as sin is bitter unto
us, but especially as it it evil in the sight of God, a thing whereby he is
injured and dishonored. This is to be sorry after a godly manner, 2 Cor. 7.
and 11. This godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation, not to be repented
of, v. 10.

2. Turning from sin; He that covers his sins shall not prosper; but he
that confesses and for saketh them, shall have mercy, Prove. 28. 13.
P^^nitentiam agere, est and perpetrata mala plangere, and plangenda non
perpetrare. Gregor. hom. 38. in Evang. Peccati paenitentia est, ab eo quod
paenitendum intellexeris, destilisse. Hilar. in Psalm. 118. s^u 119. in Pe.
In the Hebrew, repentance is called Teshubah, which properly signifies
turning. And so these are joined the other, Repent and be converted, Act. 3. 19.

3. Forgiving of others; this also is requisite for the obtaining of
forgiveness. So Christ has taught us to pray, Forgive us our trespasses, as
we forgive them that trespass against us, Mat. 6. 12. and he adds v. 14, and
15. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses. And when Peter came unto Christ, saying, Lord,
how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? until seven times?
Christ answered, I say not unto thee until seven times, but until seventy
times seven, Mat. 18. 21, 22. And immediately he propounded a parable whereby
to show how much it concerns every one to forgive others, if he would have
God to forgive him. The parable is of a King, who having a servant that ought
him a huge debt, which he was no whit able to pay, upon his humble submission
and entreaty forgave him; but hearing that the said servant would not forgive
his fellow servants a small debt, was exceeding wroth with him, and exacted his
debt of him. So likewise [said our Savior, making application of the parable]
shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not
every one his brother their trespasses.

Use 1. Now for the use of the point. 1. What comfort is here for the people
of God? Although in themselves they be guilty of sin, both original, and
actual, though they were born in sin, Psalm. 51. 5. and have lived in sin,
Isai. 53. 6. though continually they are falling into sin, Jam. 3. 2. Yet this
is their comfort (and greater comfort then this they need not desire) thorough
Christ they are reconciled unto God, all their sins are pardoned, and done away
as if they had never been. See what expressions are used in Scripture, whereby
the forgiveness of sins is set forth unto us.

1. When sins are forgiven they are said not to be imputed: God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2
Cor. 5. 19. Sins are injuries done unto God, offenses committed against him;
but though we have offended him, and have been injurious unto him, yet if we
lay hold on the Covenant that he has made with us in Christ he will forgive
us, and not impute the sins that we are guilty of unto us.

2. Sin when it is forgiven, is said to be blotted out; According to the
multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions, Psalm. 51. 1. Sins
are debts, Forgive us our debts; so it is according to the Original, Mat. 6.
12. As God has a notebook for good deeds, A book of remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought on his Name, Mal. 3.
16. And in reference to this book Nehemiah prayed, saying, Remember me, O my
God, and wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God,
etc. Neh. 13. 14. So he has also a debt-book for sins; but if we humbly and
unfainedly turn unto him, he will blot our sins out of his book, he will never
charge them upon us, never exact payment and satisfaction of us, seeing Christ
has made it for us, having with his blood blotted out the handwriting of
Ordinances that was against us, etc. Col. 2. 14. The Prophet Esaias uses this
same metaphore of blotting out, but he fetches it another way; I have blotted
out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud, thy sins, Esa. 44.
22. There sins are compared to a cloud, a thick cloud which interposeth
betwixt God and us, and keeps off the bright beams of Gods favor and the
light of his countenance from shining upon us: Your iniquities have separated
betwixt you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, says the
same Prophet, Esa. 59. 2. But sins being remitted the cloud is blotted out, it
is dispersed and dispelled, it vanishes and is gone, that we may behold the
face of God as of a loving Father, reconciled to us in Christ Jesus.

3. Sins are said to be covered when they are pardoned; Thou have forgiven
the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their sin, Psalm. 85. 2. By
this expression is signified, that the people of God, even his true and
faithful people, have sin in them, but their sin being forgiven, it is as it
were covered and hid from the sight of God, he does no more impute sin unto
them then if he did see no such thing in them: If in this sense only the
Antinomians did hold that God sees no sin in his people, I should readily side
with them; but they have a perverse meaning in it, See Mr. Gatakers book,
entitled, Gods eye upon Israel.
viz. that a child of God cannot sin, need not, nay ought not to be humbled for
sin, which opinion is as agreeable unto Scripture, as that which is most
repugnant to it.

4. Sins are said to be cast behind Gods back when he does forgive them; Thou
have cast all my sins behind thy back, said Ezekiah to God, Esa. 38. 17. God
sets the sins of the wicked before his face, they are before my face, says he,
Hos. 7. 2. But for such as turn unto him, he casts their sins behind his back;
he will no more condemn them for their sins, then if they were quite removed
out of his sight, and he had no knowledge of them.

5. When sins are remitted, they are said to be cast into the bottom of the
sea: Thou (O Lord) wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea, Mic. 7.
19. This shows more emphatically how when God forgives sins, they are done (as
it were) quite out of his sight; that which is cast into the depths of the sea
is not like to be found again, nor to be seen any more; In those days, and in
that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and
there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I
will pardon them whom I reserve, Jer. 50. 20.

6. Sins in this case are said to be forgotten, and never more to be remembered.
I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more, says
God, Jer. 31. 34. God will no more take vengeance on his people for their sins,
then if he had quite forgotten them, and had no remembrance at all of them. All
his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto
him, Ezekiel. 18. 22.

Ob. Some may object, that after David had truly repented of his sin, and also
had the pardon of it declared unto him by the Prophet, he was punished for it,
2 Samuel 12, 13, 14.

Answ. I answer, the Papists abuse this and the like examples, inferring from
them, that God remitting the fault, yet does not remit the punishment, but that
still we must one way or other, either here or hereafter make satisfaction
unto God for sin committed against him. But as the Antinomians err in denying
castigatory punishment to be inflicted upon Gods children, so do the Papists
err in affirming satisfactory punishment to be inflicted on them. God afflicts
sometimes them whom he pardons, not as exacting satisfaction of them (for how
then are they pardoned?) but as chastening them, that they may the better learn
to beware of sin afterward, and that others seeing them to smart for it, may
beware of it. When we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, It is (...), not
(...).
that we should not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32. So that God
does execute judgment, he does inflict punishment upon his children, yet it is
but a chastening of them for their good, not that he does take vengeance on
them, or exact satisfaction of them.

Use 2. Secondly, seeing this great benefit belongs unto the people of God, let
us take heed least we come short, let us make sure that we may be partakers of
it. To stir us up hereunto let us consider, 1. How much the purchasing and
procuring of this benefit has cost, even no less then the blood of the Lord
Jesus, This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins, said Christ when instituting the Sacrament of his Supper he
gave the Cup unto his Disciples, Mat. 26. 28. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2. 3. If we make light of that, which did cost
Christ so dear?

2. What account the Saints have made of this benefit: The Prophet Mica
admiring the goodness of God in this respect, cries out, Who is a God like unto
thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant
of his heritage? he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy, Mic. 7. 18. How earnestly did David sue unto God for it? Have mercy upon
me, O Lord, according to thy loving kindness; according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions: Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, Psalm 51. 1, 2. And v. 9. Hide thy
face from my sins, and blot out mine iniquities. And Verse 14. Deliver me
from blood-guiltinesse, O God, thou God of my salvation, and my tongue shall
sing aloud of thy righteousness: And how exceedingly did he rejoice when he
was assured of this benefit? Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is
within me bless his holy Name: Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all
his benefits; Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals all thy diseases;
who redeemeth thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies, Psalm 103. 1, 2, 3, 4.

3. That forgiveness of sins is such a benefit, such a blessing, as even
blessedness it self the greatest blessedness that we are capable of here in
this life, does consist in it; Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven,
and whose sin is covered; Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity,
Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Sin being forgiven, nothing can do us hurt, all affliction
will be light and easy, death it self will be advantage to us; see Romans 8.
33, 34, 35, 36, 37. This is it that makes affliction grievous and hard to be
endured, then usually a man's conscience will fly in his face, and set his sins
before him: Thus it is sometimes even with the godly themselves; Thou writest
bitter things against me, (said Job unto God) and make me to possess the
sins of my youth, Job 13. 26. Mine iniquities (said David) are gone over my
head, and are as a heavy burden too heavy for me to bear, Psalm. 38. 4. Woe
unto us that we have sinned, said the people of God, Lam. 5. 16. And they add,
v. 17. For this our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim. O what a
happiness then is it in time of affliction to have sins forgiven, and to be
assured of the forgiveness of them! So also when death approaches: For the
guilt of sin lying upon the conscience will make death terrible, it will cause
us to say unto it, as Ahab said to Eliah, Have thou found me, O mine enemy?
Whereas if we be assured of interest in Christ, and of forgiveness of sins
thorough him, we may say with old Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy Servant
depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, Luke 2. 29, 30. This
blessedness here to have our sins forgiven, does make way immediately for
the blessedness of the life to come, for that inheritance of the Saints in
light, as the Apostle calls it, Colos. 1. 12. Forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance among them that are sanctified, are immediately joined together,
Acts 26. 18. Therefore as we desire the inchoation of happiness here, and the
consummation of happiness hereafter, as we would live comfortably, die
cheerfully, and after death enjoy immortality, and glory; let us make sure of
this benefit, the forgiveness of our sins, and then nothing can debar us from
all bliss, all happiness.

The four and thirtieth SERMON.
HEB. 6. 2. And of the Resurrection of the dead.
THe Author of this Epistle speaking of the principles of the doctrine of
Christ, as he calls them, v. 1. mentions this as one of them, the
Resurrection of the dead. And therefore also in the Creed, wherein those
principles of Christian doctrine are contained, among other articles is that of
the Resurrection of the body: and mark of the body; for there is also a
Resurrection of the soul (as has been showed * before) but that is a
metaphorical Sermon. ^0. in the beginning.
Resurrection. The soul being since the fall of Adam naturally dead in sin, is
said to rise again, when the life of grace is infused into it: but the
Resurrection of the dead spoken of in the Text, is in respect of the body, as
appears by the words immediately following, and of eternal judgment. For the
Resurrection of the body is previous to the last judgment, and accompanied
with it.

The point then to be insisted on is this, That the Resurrection of the body is
a fundamental

This is a great mystery, natural reason cannot reach to the knowledge of it,
will not yield assent unto it. When Paul preached at Athens, the most famous
Academie in the world for humane learning, the Philosophers encountered him, and
some called him a babbler; and others said, He seems to be a setter forth of
strange gods, because he preached unto them Jesus, and the Resurrection, Act.
17. 18. and v. 32. it is said again, And when they heard of the Resurrection of
the dead, some mocked, and others said, we will hear thee again of this matter:
they would demur upon it, and not be forward to believe it.

So Eusebius relates, that the Heathens persecuting Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 1
Christians burnt their bodies to ashes, and cast them into the river,
insulting over them, and upbraiding them with their belief of the Resurrection,
saying, Let us see now if they will rise again: Yea among the Jews, Gods
peculiar people, who had the Oracles of God committed unto them, there was a
sect of the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection of the dead, Mat. 22. 23. The
same day came to him the Sadduces, which say that there is no Resurrection. So
Act. 23. 8. For the Sadduces say, that there is no Resurrection. Yea and also
among Christians, there have been some who have said, that there is no
Resurrection of the dead; some such there were among the Corinthians, as the
Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 15. 12. And it seems that Hymeneus and Philetus were of
this opinion, for the Apostle speaking of them, says, Who concerning the truth
have erred, saying, That the Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the
faith of some, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. In that they said, The Resurrection is past
already, it seems that they would only have a Resurrection of the soul here,
but no Resurrection of the body hereafter. But mark, the denying of this
article, the Resurrection of the body, is called by the Apostle an overthrowing
of the faith. Whatsoever we believe, if we do not believe this, that the dead
shall rise again, is all in vain and to no purpose, as the Apostle shows, 1
Cor. 15. 12. etc.

Now the Resurrection of the dead is proved two ways, as we see by those words
of our Savior to the Sadduces, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God, Mat. 22. 29.

1. The power of God proves that the Resurrection is possible, and may be.
Power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62. 12. Even such power, as that he is able to
do exceeding abundantly above all that we can either ask, or think, Ephesians. 3.
20. And therefore, as the Apostle said, Why should it be thought a thing
impossible, that God should raise again the dead? Act. 26. 8. In the very
beginning of the Creed, we profess that we believe God Deus non a^ia lege
credendus est, quam ut omnia posse cr^datur. Tertul. de Resurr. c. 11.
to be almighty, and that he is so the Scripture plainly and plentifully
testifies, and it has been abundantly demonstrated Sermon. 3.
before. Now if God be Almighty, he can do all things, and if all things, then
this, the raising up of the dead. He that could make the body of the dust, can
Vtique idoneus est reficere, qui fecit. Quanto plus est fecisse, quam
refecisse? in^^ium dedisse, quam reddidisse? Eta restitutionem carnis,
faciliorem credas institutione. Tertul. ibid. Potest utique eadem potentia, qua
de nihilo cuncta fabricatus est, reddere quae fueraut: quia multo minus est
restituere quod fuerit, quam facere quod non fui^. Hieron. ad Pammach.
surely raise it up though it be turned into dust. He that could make all
things of nothing, can undoubtedly raise up the body, which though it be dead,
and have suffered never so many transmutations, yet is it not turned into
nothing.

2. The Scriptures show that the Resurrection is certain, and shall be; that as
God can raise the dead, so he will do it: Job made no question of it; For I
know (said he) that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter
day upon the earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me, John 19. 25.
26, 27. True it is, the words there in the original, as in many other places
of that book, are so concise, as that they render the sense obscure, and are
subject to diverse expositions, so that both the Jewish Commentatours, Mercerus
in lo^.
and also some among Christians carry the sense another way, but the most
understand the words of the Resurrection, neither do I see any other exposition
that does so well agree with them. Daniel also spoke of the Resurrection of the
dead, saying, And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
some to everlasting life, and some to perpetual shame and contempt, Dan. 12.
2. By awaking these out of the dust of the earth, he means the rising again of
the dead. And whereas he says that many shall, it is not so to be taken as if
all should not; for many sometimes are opposed not unto al, but only unto few.
So it is said, Romans 5. 19. that by the disobedience of one man (of Adam) many
were made sinners, that is, all; but those all are many, and so are they that
shall awake out of the dust of the earth, as all that sleep there shall. So the
Prophet Esaias likewise does sing the same ditty. Thy dead men shall live,
together with my dead body shall they arise: awake, and sing ye that dwell in
dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the
dead, Isai. 26. 19. And that parable in Ezekiel chap. 37. where by the raising
and reviving of the dead bones, is showed that God would Si figmentum veritatis
in imagine, imag^ ipsa in veritate est sui. Necesse est esse prius sibi, quam
alii configuretur. De vac^o similitudo non competit, de nullo parabola non
convenit. I^^ oportebit ossium quoque; credi reviscerationem, and inspirationem
qualis dicitur, dequa poss^t exprimi Judaicarum rerum reformatio, qualis
aff^ngitur. Tertull* de Resurrect c. 30.
certainly restore the people of the Jews out of captivity, though they seemed
to be quite dead, and past recovery: that parable, I say, does presuppose the
Resurrection of the dead, as a thing well known, and certainly believed by the
people of God, and therefore the parable drawn from thence is used to confirm
their faith touching the deliverance there promised unto them.

Thus the Scriptures of the old Testament give sufficient proof of the
Resurrection of the dead; but much more clearly and fully do the Scriptures of
the new Testament* speak of it. The hour is coming (said our Savior) in the
which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth.
etc. John 5. 28, 29. I know that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the
last day, said Martha of her brother Lazarus, John 11. 24. The Apostle 1 These.
4. 14. and so on to the end of the Chapter, speaks of the Resurrection of the
dead; and so 1 Cor. 15. thoroughout the whole Chapter. Besides these direct and
express testimonies of Scripture, there are diverse arguments and reasons
grounded upon, and confirmed by Scripture, which do further prove the
Resurrection of the dead.

1. That is recovered in and by Christ, which was lost in and by Adam. This
argument the Apostle uses to prove that the dead shall be raised. For since by
man came death, by man came also the Resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam
all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. viz. all
that are Christ's, as he explains it, v. 23.

2. Christ's Resurrection does necessarily infer the Resurrection of those
that belong unto Christ. How the Apostle both 1 Cor. 15. and also in other
places proves the Resurrection of Christians by Christ's Resurrection, and also
in what respect this inference is of force, I have showed before, speaking of
the resurrection of Christ (Sermon. 19. toward the end.)

3. Gods Covenant with his people, that he will be their God, Genesis 17. 7. Jer.
31. 33. this Covenant, I say, is an everlasting Covenant, death cannot dissolve
nor disannul it: after Abraham Isaa^ and Jacob were dead, yet God styled
himself their God, Exodus 3. 6. And hence our Savior confuted the Sadduces, who
denied the Resurrection; But as touching the Resurrection of the dead, have ye
not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living, Mat. 22. 31, 32. In some sense God is the God of the
dead, as the Apostle says, that to this end Christ both died, and rose, and
revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living, Romans 14. 9. But in
the Sadduces sense God is not the God of the dead, that is, not so of the dead,
as if they should be always dead, so they supposed, and should never live
again: For all live unto him, said our Savior immediately after the words
before cited, as S. Luke records chap. 20. v. 38. All live unto God both in
respect of his power, and also in respect of his purpose; he both can quicken
the dead, and also will quicken them, as that very speech shows, wherein he
calls himself the God of those, with whom he had entered into Covenant, though
now they were dead when he thus spoke of them.

Ob. Some may say, that God may be the God of his people in respect of their
souls, though their bodies never rise again.

Answ. I answer, that this is not sufficient, the soul is not the whole man,
but a part only, the body also is a part as well as the soul. But God is by
Covenant the God of his people in respect of the whole man, and not in respect
of a part only. And therefore this argument drawn from Gods Covenant, and the
everlastingnesse of it, proves a necessity of the Resurrection of the body.

4. The body is partner with the soul either in sin, or righteousness; and
therefore also it must be partner with the soul Non possunt separari in
mercede [caro and anima] quas opera conjungit. Tertul. de Resur. cap. 8. and
cap. 15. Age, scindant jam adversarii nostri car^is animaeque contextum, prius
in vitae administratione, ut ita audeant scindere illud etia^ in vitae
remuneratione. Negent operarum societatem, ut merito possint etiam mercedem
negare. Non sit particeps in sententia caro, si non fuerit and in causa. Et cap
38. Secundum collegia laborum, consortia etiam decurrant necesse est praemiorum.
hereafter either in reward or punishment: As soul and body work together
here, so they must be recompensed together hereafter; Ery one must receive the
things done in the body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
evil, 2 Cor. 5. 10. As the things were done in the body, so the recompense and
reward must be received in the body: And this is one reason (as I have showed
Sermon. 24
before) why besides the particular judgment, which passes only upon the
soul, there must be a general Judgment wherein both soul and body must be
judged.

Use 1. Now if this be so, that the dead must rise again, then even in this
respect there ought to be a respect had unto the dead, to bury them in a devout
manner: Nature it self does teach this, that the bodies of the dead are to be
committed to the earth; the Heathens generally did use it, excepting some who
were more barbarous then others. As it is said of the Hyrcanians, that they
used to cast dead bodies to dogs to be devoured.

The Romans in later times used to burn the bodies of the dead, but more
anciently (as Pliny Plin. Hist. l. 7. c 54.
testifies) they did use to inter them, and that custom of burning Sylla (as
the same Author relates) brought in, fearing least some should deal with him
and his adherents after their death, as he had dealt with his adversary Marius,
whose body he had caused to be dug up after it was buried. But to speak of
Gods people, they have showed themselves very careful to perform this office
of burial unto the dead: The Story of Abraham in this respect is recorded,
Genesis 23. where we find how sollicitous he was about the burying of Sarah when
she was dead: So it is said Act. 8. 2. that devout men carried Stephen to be
buried. It was a custom among the Jews to wash the dead body before they did
bury it, as appears by that Acts 9. 37. Whom when they had washed, Tarquinii
cor pus bona faemina lavit, and unxit. Ennius.
they laid her in an upper chamber. The same custom also was among the
Heathens. The Jews used also to imbalme the dead, as appears by Ioh. 12. 7.
and 19. 39, 40. The Heathens also have used the same, especially the Egyptians,
as both foreign History shows, and also sacred, Genesis 50. Now though the
Heathens did use these ceremonies vainly and superstitiously, yet no question
but the people of God had respect therein to the Resurrection, showing by these
ceremonies which they used about the dead, that they believed that the dead
shall rise again. Now there is no need of such ceremonies for that end, the
Article of the Resurrection being by the Gospel more fully manifested then
before: Yet this is of perpetual observation, that the bodies of the dead be
decently buried, as being in due time to be raised up again.

Use 2. Secondly, this point touching the Resurrection does teach us not to
lament immoderately for the dead: Lawful it is to mourn in this case; nature
requires it, and grace does not forbid it, as not extinguishing natural
affections, but only rectifying them, and setting bounds unto them: Yea, the
Apostle reckons it among the grossest sins, to be without natural affection,
Romans 1. 31. The Saints have expressed their affection in this kind: Abraham
mourned for Sarah, Genesis 23. 2. Joseph fell upon his fathers face and wept when
he was dead, Genesis 50. 1. The godly made great lamentation for Stephen, Acts 8.
2. Yea Christ himself wept at the grave of Lazarus, Joh. 11. 35. Whereupon the
Jews that were present said, Behold how he loved him, v. 36. But this
affection of sorrow for the dead, must be moderate, and that as in other
respects, so in this, that the dead even in respect of the body, do not perish
for ever, but at length shall rise again. This argument the Apostle uses to
this purpose; But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others that have no hope: For
if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in
Jesus will God bring with him, 1 These. 4. 13, 14.

Use 3. The consideration of this point, touching the Resurrection of the dead,
is of great force to comfort us in all afflictions, and to animate us against
the fear of death it self. This did support Job in his greatest extremity, as
appears Job. 19. 25. 26. 27.
by the words before cited, and so it may well support all that truly fear God,
as Job did: Death (which is the worst that can befall them) is but as the
pulling down of an old ruinous house, to build it again in a more excellent
and glorious manner: Or as if a statue of brass, or any other metal, being
full of rust, and decayed with age, should be cast into a furnace and melted,
that so it may be made more pure and perfect then before. Death in Scripture is
often termed sleep; as when a man sleeps, he awakes again, and rises up more
lively and vigorous then he was before, so shall the godly arise after death,
and be in a condition incomparably better then this which here they are in. The
Apostle shows what a difference there is betwixt the body as now it is, and as
it shall be in the Resurrection; It is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption: It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. The hope of this Resurrection did
encourage the Saints and servants of God to endure the greatest torments that
their enraged adversaries could inflict upon them: They were tortured, not
accepting of deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection, Heb.
11. 35.

Use 4. Finally seeing there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, it behooves us
to labor whiles we are here that we may attain unto a blessed Resurrection
hereafter, the Resurrection of life, Joh. 5. 29. which is the Resurrection of
the just, Luke 14. 14. There shall indeed be a Resurrection of all, both of
just, and the unjust, Acts 24. 15. But as Christ said of Judas, It had been
better for him that he had not been borne; so may I say of the wicked, It were
better for them that they should not rise again, because they shall rise unto
condemnation, John 5. 29. But as for the righteous, they shall so rise, as to
shine like the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13. 43. Let us labor
that we may be partakers of this Resurrection: And to this end we must here
have our part in the first resurrection, that Rev. 20. 6.
of the soul from the death of sin to the life of grace, and then the second
death shall have no power over us.

More particularly, first, we must be incorporated into Christ by faith; For he
is the Resurrection and the life, he that believes in him, though he were
dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever lives, and believes in him, shall
never die, viz. eternally, John 11. 25. Christ is already risen from the dead,
and entered into glory, and so in due time shall all that belong unto Christ,
that are members of his body; He will change their vile bodies, and make them
like unto his own most glorious body, Philip. 3. 21.

2. But if we would be thus conformed unto Christ in glory, and happiness, we
must be conformed unto him in grace and holiness; Every one that has this
hope, purifieth himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. Paul having said,
that he believed that there shall be a Resurrection both of just and unjust,
adds, And herein do I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of
offense both toward God and toward men, Acts 24. 16. As many as walk
according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, and mercy, Gal. 6. 16.

The five and thirtieth SERMON.
LUKE 18. 30. And in the world to come life everlasting.
LIfe everlasting is the conclusion of the Creed, and so S. Peter calls it the
end of our faith; even the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1. 9.

For the words of the Text, they were spoken by our Savior, and that upon this
occasion: Peter having seen how a certain rich man was rather willing to
forfeit his portion in the world to come, then to forgo his wealth that he had
here in this world, said unto Christ, Lo we have left all, and followed thee,
v. 28. Then Christ let him and the rest of his Disciples know, that neither
they nor any others should loose any thing by parting with all for his sake,
but should be well recompensed for it even here in this world, and much more in
the world to come: And he said unto them, Verily, I say unto you, there is no
man that has left house, or Parents, or brethren, or wife, or children for the
Kingdom of Gods sake, who shall not receive manifold more in this present
time, and in the world to come life everlasting, v. 29, and 30.

The point to be observed is this, That as there

Both the Old and the New Testament bear witness to this truth, life
everlasting is asserted in both, yet more sparingly and obscurely in the Old
Testament, more frequently and clearly in the New Testament.

As for the Old Testament, I do not find that everlasting life is expressly
mentioned in it, save only once, viz. Dan. 12. 2. Many of them that sleep in
the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to everlasting life, etc. Yet though
not in such express words, the Old Testament does afford many proofs, that
after this life there is another life to come, not as this, enduring only for a
time, but for ever: God did show this unto his people, first by types, figures,
and resemblances:

As first, the tree of life mentioned Genesis 2. and 3. That was a type and figure
of everlasting life, as appears by that Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do
his Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, etc. And so
Rev. 2. 7. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which
is in the midst of the Paradise of God. In these places by the tree of life is
meant eternal life, whereof that tree called the tree of life was a figure.
What further use that tree was ordained for, is overcurious, and not necessary
to inquire: As for that Genesis 3. 22, 23. where it is said, that Adam having
sinned, God cast him out of Paradise, least he should put forth his hand, and
take of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever; that (I say) the best
Expositers take as spoken only in respect of that opinion which Adam had, viz.
that if he did eat of that tree, he should never die; like as when God said (as
is there related) Behold the man is become as one of us to know good and evil;
it was spoken ironically in respect of that which the Serpent said unto the
woman, that if they did eat of the forbidden fruit, they should be as Gods,
knowing good and evil, Genesis 3. 5. Some have thought that if man had eaten of
the tree of life, he should have thereby been free from death: But certainly
the tree in it self could have no such virtue in it, only God appointed it as
a Sacramental sign of everlasting life, and man having by his transgression
made himself unworthy of the thing, God would not suffer him to meddle with
that whereby the thing was signified.

2. The Sabbath spoken of in the fourth Commandment, and in other places of
Scripture, did also prefigure eternal life, it was a figure of that
everlasting Sabbath or rest (for so the word Sabbath does signify as much as
rest) which the godly shall keep in heaven. This is evident by the Apostles
discourse, Heb. 4. where having spoken of Gods rest when the works of Creation
were finished, in memory whereof God instituted the Sabbath, he says, v. 9.
There remains therefore a rest to the people of God; the word there rendered a
rest, imports (as is noted in the Margent) a (...).
keeping of a Sabbath. So that in the very word there used there is a manifest
allusion to the Jewish Sabbath, as a type of that Sabbath or rest there spoken
of, viz. eternal in the world to come. Which is further evident by that which
follows, v, 11. Let us therefore labor to enter into that rest, etc.

3. The Land of Canaan, into which God brought the Israelites, after that he
brought them out of Egypt, as is recorded in the book of Joshua, that likewise
did typifie heaven, and that rest which the Israelites after a long and
wearisome travel in the wilderness enjoyed in that Land, did typifie that
rest, which the Saints having passed thorough the wilderness of this world,
shall enjoy in heaven. This also is clear by comparing the words of David,
Psalm. 95. 11. with the Apostles discourse upon them, Heb. 4. 7, 8. David says
that God being provoked by the Israelites that came out of Egypt, swear in his
wrath that they should not enter into his rest.

And David alleges this to deter others in after ages from provoking God in
like manner, saying, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts,
etc. Psalm. 95. 7, 8. The Apostle hence proves that by Gods rest cannot be
meant the Land of Canaan, or rest in that Land; for that the people to whom
David spoke, were then in that Land, and did enjoy that rest, and so the
Israelites had done long before: Again, he limiteth a certain day, saying in
David, To day, after so long a time, (viz. that the Israelites had rested in
Canaan) as it is said, to day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts.
For if Jesus (that is Joshua as the margent notes, who brought the Israelites
into Canaan) had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken of
another day. That is, if that rest in Canaan which Josua as their Captain and
Leader brought them into, had been all the rest which God intended for his
people, then he would not so long after by David have said, To day, etc.
threatening them that except they were obedient unto him, they should be
debarred from entering into his rest. This argues that God by his Rest meant
another rest, viz. an everlasting rest in heaven, whereof that rest in Canaan
was but a figure. Thus the Apostle there immediately infers, There remains
therefore a rest unto the people of God, v. 9. and adds v. 11. Let us labor
therefore to enter into that rest, least any man fall after the same example of
unbelief. And hence it was that the Patriarchs did make such account of the
Land of Canaan. Jacob caused Joseph to swear that he would not bury him in
Egypt, where he died, but carry him into Canaan, and bury him there, Genesis 47.
29. 30, 31. And the same charge he gave to all his sons immediately before his
death, Genesis 49. 29. etc. And they did what he enjoined them, as is related Genesis
50. where also v. 25. is showed how Joseph likewise made his brethren to swear
that they would carry his bones with them into Canaan when they went. And Exodus
13. 19. it is said that Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, when he and
the Israelites went out of Egypt. Stephen also shows that so the rest of
Jacobs sons, though they died in Egypt, were carried into Canaan to be laid
there, Act. 7. 15, 16. These Patriarks had not any superstitious opinion of
that Land, as the Jews of late times have, and so the Papists have of Churches
and Churchyards, but they both showed themselves to die in faith, not doubting
but that God at length would perform the promise that he had made concerning
the Land of Canaan, and also they looked at that Land as a type of heaven,
where eternal rest is prepared for all Gods elect people.

2. In the time of the old Testament God showed unto his people that there is a
life everlasting in the world to come, by examples of some, whom he took and
translated out of this world into the other without death intervening: Thus it
is said Genesis 5. 24. that Enoch wnlked with God, and he was not, for God took
him; That is, he was translated that he should not see death, Heb. 11. 5. So
Eliah was taken up alive into heaven, as we read 2 King. 2. These examples show
that besides this life here in this world, there shall be another hereafter in
the world to come.

3. After that Abraham Isaac and Jacob were dead, God styled himself the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Exodus 3. 6. Now as Christ said
unto the Sadduces, God is not God of the dead, but of the living, Mat. 22. 32.
God so stiling himself their God, showed that both their souls did still live,
though separated from their bodies, and also that their bodies should be raised
again, and both souls and bodies being reunited, should live for ever. And thus
is life everlasting proved by the old Testament.

But the new Testament is more full and express to this purpose. Christ has
brought life and immortality to light thorough the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10.
Before Christ's coming life and immortality lay hid, it was but darkly
discovered, but now by the Gospel it is brought to light, it is clearly
revealed. The places of the New Testament, ^ in which everlasting life is
expressly mentioned, are so many, that it were endless, and they are so
obvious that it is needless to recite them.

Now everlasting life is begun here but perfected hereafter.

1. It is begun here: He that believes on the Son, has (not, shall have, but
has) everlasting life, Joh. 3. 36. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that
hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, John
5. 24. Everlasting life as begun here is the life of grace, of which that is
meant, 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life, (that is,
from the death of sin to the life of grace) because we love the brethren: that
this life of grace is life everlasting by inchoation, S. John shows immediately
after, v. 15. Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer, and ye know that no
murderer has eternal life in him. So that eternal life does abide in the
children of God whilst they are here; it is here begun in them.

2. It is perfected hereafter; and therefore it is said in the Text, in the
world to come life everlasting, because the fullness and perfection of it is
not here in this world, but in the world to come* In respect of the soul this
life is perfected immediately after its separation from the body. For it is a
gross and monstrous opinion, that some both in former times, and also in these
times, have maintained, Vide Aug. de Here Is. cap. 83. Calvin. de Psychopanncuhia.
that the soul does either die with the body, or does sleep when it is out of
the body. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, said Christ to the
believing malefactor, Luke 23. 43. We know tht when this earthly house of our
Tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 1. And the spirits
or souls of just men departed out of this life are called the spirits of just
men made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. In respect of the body everlasting life is
perfected when the body is raised up, and of corruptible and mortal, becomes
incorruptible and immortal. And in this respect both in the Creed, and also in
the Scripture, everlasting life is put after the Resurrection of the body. See
Dan. 12. 2. and John 5. 29. because at, and by the Resurrection everlasting
life is consummated and made perfect in respect of the whole man, both soul and
body. Now as everlasting life in respect of it is inchoation and beginning here,
is called the life of grace, so in respect of it is consummation and perfection
hereafter, it is called the life of glory. That which is called the Crown of
life, Revel. 2. 10. is called the Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. And that which
in other places is termed eternal life, is termed eternal glory 1 Pet. 5. 10.
The life of grace here, and the life of glory hereafter, differ not in kind but
in degree. Grace is an inchoation and beginning of glory; and glory is a
consummation and perfection of grace.

What a life this everlasting life (considered in its fullness and perfection,
the life of glory) is, only they fully and perfectly know, who do enjoy it. It
is a glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18. It is not revealed yet, but
shall be hereafter. This life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. It does not
yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3. 2. But thus much the Scriptures plainly
show, that this life is admirable. Christ when he comes, shall be glorified in
his Saints, and admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 1. 10. And that it
consists in a clear vision of God, and a full fruition of him. Now we see
thorough a glass darkly, but then face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. When he shall
appear, we shall be like unto him; for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2.
Christ pronounces the pure in heart blessed, because they shall see God, Mat.
5. 8. And he also makes the happiness of the Angels to consist in this, that
they always behold the face of God, Mat. 18. 10. The Queen of Sheba thought
Solomon's servants happy, that they did continually stand before him, and hear
his wisdom, 1 King. 10. 8. What a happiness then is it to be for ever in the
presence of God, and to enjoy immediate communion with him!

Such is the happiness of the life to come, as that it shall be free from all
evil, and full of all good.

1. It shall be free from all evil, both evil of Posse non peccare.
sin, and evil of affliction. 1. There shall be no sin there. Adam had a
possibility of not sinning; but there shall be an impossibility of sinning: the
best here are imperfect, but there all imperfection is Non posse peceare.
abolished, just men are made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. Now if sin even in the
regenerate be so grievous, as the complaints of the Saints do show it is, mine
iniquities are gone over mine head as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for
me to bear, said David Psalm. 38. 4, And Paul by reason of those relics of
corruption that were in him, cried out, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me, etc. Romans 7. 24. How great a happiness then will it be to be
altogether freed from sin, as they are that do partake of the life to come?
Then shall the Church indeed be glorious, when it shall be without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5. 27.

2. Neither shall there be any affliction in the life to come. All tears shall
be wiped away, Revel. 7. 17. There shall be no suffering, no sorrow there.

But to be exempt from evil, all evil, this is but one and the lesser part of
happiness. To enjoy good, all good, this is it indeed, that which does make
happy. And therefore,

2. The life to come is not only free from all evil, but also full of all
good. What good can be desired, but there it shall, and that in full measure,
be enjoyed? There God is enjoyed to the full, and they that enjoy him, enjoy
all: There are riches, the true riches, Luke 16. 11. There is glory, a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. There is joy and
pleasure, even fulness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.
Peter having but a glimpse of this celestial happiness, when he saw Christ
transfigured in the Mount, was so ravished with it, that he said, Lord, it is
good for us to be here; if thou will, let us make here three Tabernacles etc.
Mat. 17. 4. How then shall they be ravished, who shall have the full and
perfect enjoyment of this happiness?

Use 1. Now if there be such a life as the Scripture speaks of in the world to
come, how great then is the folly and madness of the most, who only look after
the things of this life, but heed not the things of the life to come! They live
so as if there were no life after this, or as if it were not worth the looking
after; or as if they were sure of it, though they never labor for it: they
spend their thoughts, cares and endeavors upon the profits, pleasures and
preferments of this life, and they forfeit their hope of the life to come, for
every toy, every trifle. O ye Sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into
Ocur^s hominum! quantum est in rebus inane? Pcrs. Ocurvae in terras animae, and
coelestium inanes! Idem.
shame? how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? Selah, Psalm. 4.
2. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with
sparks; walk in the light of your sire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled,
(solace your selves in your earthly enjoyments) this shall you have of mine
hand, you shall lie down in sorrow, Isai. 50. 11. O that they were wise, and
understood this, and would consider their later end, Deuteronomy 32. 29.

Use 2. Let us be wise, and consider it. What soever we do, let us be sure to
lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. However it fare with us in this life,
let us make sure of that life that is to come. Let us consider that,

1. It is life: and skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his
life, even this temporal life, as Satan said truly in respect of the thing
which he spoke, though falsely in respect of the end for which he spoke, Job 2.
4. But what is this life in comparison of that to come? what is life temporal
in comparison of life eternal? Life and good, death and evil, are joined
together as terms equivalent, Deuteronomy. 30. 15. and so v. 19. life and blessing,
death Non est vera vita, nisi ubi foeliciter vivitur. Aug. Enchirid. c. 92. In
damnatione novissima quamvis homo sentire non desinat, tamen quia sensus ipse
necv^luptate suavis, nec quiet salubris, sed dolor poenalis est, non immerito
mors est potius quam vita appellata. Aug. de Civit. Deil. 13. c. 2.
and cursing: therefore the estate of the damned in hell is called death,
because it contains in it nothing but pain and misery: and on the other side
the estate of the Saints in heaven is called life, because there is nothing but
joy and delight in it.

2. It is eternal: Methusela and others lived many hundred years, yet at length
they died, Genesis 5. But they that obtain this life, shall never die. They cannot
die any more, for they are equal unto the Angels, Luke 20. 36. then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.
O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55.
And eternity is that which both makes the misery of the reprobate misery
indeed, and the happiness of the Elect happiness indeed: the reprobate shall
be punished with everlasting perdition, 2 These. 1. 9. But the Elect shall be
ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. all the misery and happiness of this world
is as nothing, because it is but temporal; but the misery and happiness of
the world to come is misery and happiness indeed, because it is eternal.

3. The assurance of everlasting life will make all the sorrows and sufferings
of this life light and easy to be endured: The godly here are subject to
crosses and afflictions as much as any, yea more then any; which made the
Apostle say, If in this life only we had hope in Christ, we were of all men
most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 29. But we faint not (says he) but though our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. Whilst we look, not at the things which are seen,
but at the things which are not seen: for the things that are seen, are
temporal, but the things that are not seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18.
This made the Saints take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, they knew that
they had in heaven a better, and an enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. This made
them endure the sorest torments that could be inflicted on them, they knew they
should obtain a better Resurrection, Heb. 11. 35. the Resurrection of life,
John 5. 29. even everlasting life, Dan. 12. 2.

4. Every ones portion must be either the one or the other of these two, either
everlasting life, or everlasting damnation: there is no middle estate betwixt
these, whatsoever they of the Church of Rome would persuade us. Whosoever was
not found written in the book of life, was cast into the lake of fire, Revel.
20. 15. Could we seriously consider this, that we must be either eternally
happy, or eternally miserable, it would make us to pass our time of sojourning
here in fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17. And to give diligence to make our calling and
election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

Now that we may be partakers of everlasting life,

1. We must know that by nature we are estranged from it, and have no right
unto it. For by nature we are dead in trespasses and sins, and are the children
of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 13.

2. We must be translated out of Adam into Christ. For in Adam all die; and in
Christ must all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 22. God has given unto us eternal
life, and this life is in his Son. He that has the Son, has life, and he that
has not the Son, has not life, 1 John 5. 11, 12.

3. Holiness of life here is requisite for the obtaining of the happiness of
the life to come. God will render to every man according to his deeds: To them
who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal life. But unto them that are contentious, and obey not the
truth, but obey unrighteousness indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish
upon every soul of man that does evil, Romans 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. Be not deceived,
God is not mocked; as a man sows so shall he reap. He that sows to the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6. 7, 8. Follow holiness
without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. Every one that has this
hope, purifieth himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3.

I Will only add this in a word to you that are parents. As you have been
instruments under God, whereby your children obtain a temporal life; so labor
to be instruments whereby they may obtain eternal life. As nature does teach
you to provide for them in respect of this life; so let grace teach you to
provide for them in respect of the life to come. As you are careful to bring
them up in learning and trades, that they may live a while here; so be careful
to bring them up in the Ephesians. 6. 4.
nurture and admonition of the Lord, that they may live for ever hereafter.

The six and thirtieth SERMON.
JUDE V. 3. That you should earnestly contend for the faith once delivered to
the This Sermon was preached at the Fast, which in respect of errors and
heresies was kept March 10. 1646.
Saints.
THe writer of this Epistle was Jude, or Judas, as John 14. 22. or Judah, as
the word is in the Old Testament: they are all one and the same name, though
diversely pronounced. As there were two of the Apostles that were called James,
viz. James the son of Zebedeus, the brother of John, and James the son of
Alpheus, the Lords brother Zanchius de Scriptura. Non connumeratur inter
Apostolos Mat. 10. Judam Apostolum non lego sed Iscariotem.
( Gal. 1. 19.) that is, his near kinsman; so there were also two of them, that
were called Judas, viz. Judas Iscariot that betrayed Christ, and Judas the
brother of James (viz. James the son of Alpheus) and he it was that wrote this
Epistle. I marvel much at a learned Divine, who thinks that the Author of this
Epistle was no Apostle, and says that he finds no Judas to have been an
Apostle, but only Judas Iscariot: Nothing to me is more clear then that this
Jude (or Judas) was one of the twelve Apostles, viz. the same that is called
Thaddeus, Mar. 3. 18. and Lebbeus, Mat. 10. 3. For Luke 6. 16. amongst the
Apostles is expressly mentioned Judas the brother of James, and so also Acts 1.
13. And the writer of this Epistle styles himself J^de the servant of Jesus
Christ, and brother of James.

This Apostle after the inscription, v. 1. and the salutation, v. 2. tells them
to whom he writes how desirous and careful he was to write unto them, and for
what end, v. 3. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you, of the
common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you,
that you should earnestly contend for the faith, which was once delivered to
the Saints. And he shows why there was such need that he should thus write
unto them, and exhort them, v. 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares,
who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the
grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ. I will add no more concerning the Epistle, but will come to
the words of the Text:

That you should earnestly contend.] The simple (...)
Verb of which this here used is a compound, signifies to strive, as they used
to do in the Olympian games, or such like exercises, wher^^n by wrestling,
running, and the like, they did strive for mastery, as the word is rendered, 1
Cor. 9. 25. It is used metaphorically, Col. 4. 12. for striving (...).
with God by prayer, it is rendered, laboring fervently: (...).
The Compound in the Text is more imphaticall, the Preposition adds to the
signification of the word, and increases the force o(...) And therefore it is
well rendered, not simply to contend, but to contend earnestly.

For the Faith] There is faith, by which we believe; Fides qua creditur.
thus is faith taken, Rom^ ^. 1. justified by faith; and so in many other
places: There is also faith which we believe, viz. The Doctrine of Fides quae
creditur.
Faith; thus it is said that Paul preached the faith which once he destroyed,
Gal. 1. 23. And so is it here taken; for faith whereby we believe is infused
into us, but it is faith which we believe, that is delivered unto us.

Delivered] viz. first, by preaching, and then by writing: The Apostles did
deliver the faith to the Primitive Christians both ways, Gal. 1. 23. Ioh. 20.
31. But to the Christians of succeeding ages they delivered the Faith only by
writing; for being dead they could not deliver it by preaching, neither can we
tell what they preached, but only by seeing what they have written; Therefore
this delivering of the faith here spoken of, as it concerns us and the Church
ever since the Apostles times, must be understood of delivering by writing. As
for Popish unwritten Traditions, how groundless they are, and how injurious to
the written Word of God, I shall show more anon*

Once] That is, fully and perfectly; as 1 Samuel 26. 8. Let me smite him, I pray
thee, with the spear to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the second
time: Heb. 10. 10. it is expressed once for all. This is not so to be taken, as
if the faith were not again and again, even continually while the world lasts
to be delivered; but it must be no new faith that is delivered, but the same
that was before delivered by the Apostles; they have delivered the faith once,
that is, the whole faith, whatsoever is in matter of Religion to be believed;
we must hold that which they delivered, and (according to our callings) deliver
it, but not any thing, as matter of faith, besides it, much less against it;
Timothy, keep that which is committed unto thy trust. Upon which words an
ancient Writer does thus descant, That which is committed Quod tibi creditum,
non a te inventum; quod accepisti, non excogitasti. -- Cum dices nove, non
dicas nova. -- Profectus sit fidei, non permutatio. Vincent. Lirin.
unto thee, not that which is invented by thee; that which thou have received,
not that which thou have devised. -- When thou speak after a new manner, do
not speak new matter. -- Let there be a growing in the faith, not a change of
the faith.

To the Saints.] So Christians are termed, Ephesians. 1. 1. Phil. 4. 21, 22. All that
are called to be Christians, are called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1, 2.

The words being thus explicated, afford first this observation, That the
Doctrine of Faith is

The Law of the Lord is perfect, says David, Psalm. 19. 7. That is, the
Doctrine of the Lord, as the word there used does import, and the Doctrine (...)
comprehended in the Scripture. The Rabbines indeed speak much of a Law given
only by (...)
word of mouth, besides that which is written: And there is nothing almost so
frivolous, but they will have it a thing delivered to Moses from (...)
Mount Sinai, and so continued by Tradition. But we know no such traditionall
Law as they talk of: Whatsoever things were written before, were written for
our learning, Romans 15. 4. Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have
eternal life; and they are they that testify of me, ^oh. 5. 39. From a child
thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation, thorough faith which is in Christ Jesus: All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thorough furnished unto every good work, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.

Use 1. This then serves first to confute the Papists, who charge the Scripture
with imperfection, and hold that many things are necessary to be believed which
are not contained in the Scripture; and that therefore the defect of the
Scripture must be supplied by unwritten Traditions. But if the Scripture be the
Word of God which they do not deny, then by the testimony of God himself (as
the places before cited do demonstrate) the Scripture is so complete, that we
have no need of Traditions.

Ob. They object that the Apostle commended 1 Cor. 11. ^.
the Corinthians for keeping the traditions (so the word signifies, though we
read it Ordinances) (...).
as he delivered them unto them.

Answ. I answer, all doctrine that is delivered, though it be written, is a
tradition, that is, a thing delivered. In the same Chapter v. 23. I have
received (...).
of the Lord, that which I also delivered unto you, etc. the word is that from
whence is derived the other that signifies Tradition. That which the Apostle
there says he delivered, was delivered not only by speaking, but also by
writing, as is evident by that which follovveth in the same place. See also, 1
Cor. 15. 3. and Act. 6. 14.

Ob. But (say they) the Apostle bade the Thessalonians hold the Traditions,
which they had been taught, whether by word, or by his Epistle: and therefore
unwritten Traditions are to be held, as well as those that are written.

Answ. It follows not; that because Paul delivered some things to the
Thessalonians by word, which he did not deliver by writing, therefore some
things are to be received by Tradition, which are not contained in the
Scripture, For 1. Paul's Epistles to the Thessalonians are but a part of the
Scripture, so that many things are contained in the Scripture, which are not
contained in those Epistles. 2. Paul might deliver something to the
Thessalonians, which was requisite for them, and yet was no matter of faith,
necessary for all to hold. If it were of such concernment, the Papists for all
their Traditions, are as far to seek as we. For I presume they can no more tell
then we, what it was which the Apostle delivered to the Thessalonians merely by
word, which he did not deliver by writing: But no marvel if the Papists so
contend for Traditions, when as they hold and maintain many Doctrines: as
Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, Prayer to Saints, and a hundred more, which
have no ground at all in Scripture, but are most repugnant to it: they are like
(...).
the Pharisees, who (as Josephus relates of them) delivered many rites and
customs to the people which were not written, but received only by Tradition.
And so much also the Scripture shows of them, Mar. 7. 3, 4. But see how our
Savior censured them for this, Mar. 7. 7, 8, 9.

Again, they of the Church of Rome will not allow us to build upon the
Scripture, but upon the authority of the Church, that is indeed upon the
authority of the Pope, for so they resolve all at length into him. His decrees
and determinations they will have all to submit unto without any more ado,
without examining or considering whether they be consonant or no unto
Scripture. But to the Law and to the Testimony (says the Prophet Esaias) if they
speak not according to this Isa. 8. 20.
word, it is because they have no light in them.

Ob. They object that heretics allege Scripture; and therefore it is not safe
to rest in it.

Answ. I answer, so the devil did allege Scripture, yet did our Savior
confute him by Scripture, Mat. 4. and so by Scripture must heretics be
confuted, although in defense of their heresies they allege Scripture. See
Act. 18. 28.

But again, they of the Romish Church withhold the Scripture from people, and
will not without special dispensation allow them to look into it, and how then
should their faith be grounded upon it, as it ought to be? They pretend that
the Scripture is dark and difficult, and so by misunderstanding it people fall
into error and heresy, but we will believe the Scripture rather then them; and
the Scripture tells us, that though there (...) ^ Pet. 3. 16.
be some things in it, hard to be understood, yet that neither all things in
it, nor the most are such, but that as there is that which may puzzle the most
learned, so that which may instruct the most simple. The testimony of the Lord
is sure, making wise the simple. Psalm. 19. 7. The entrance of thy words gives
light, it gives understanding to the simple, Psalm. 119. 130. therefore God
would have the book of the Law read before all the Congregation of his people,
men, women, and children, that says he, they may hear, and that they may
learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the words of this Law:
and that their children which have not known any thing, may hear and learn to
fear the Lord your God, etc. Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12, 13.

2. To confute the Enthusiasts, who rely on immediate inspirations and
revelations of the spirit, and so vilify and despise the Scriptures: but let
them boast of the spirit as much as they will, certain it is, that whilst they
contemn the word as they do, the spirit which they are led by, is not that
spirit which Christ promised, the Spirit of Joh. 16. 13. Spiritus veritatis.
Isa. 19. 14 Spiritus vertiginis. Vulg.
truth; but that which the Prophet says the Lord had mingled in the Egyptians,
a perverse spirit. God in his perpetual and unchangeable Covenant has joined
his spirit and his word together, Isai. 59. 21. And therefore most presumptuous
are they, who will disjoyn them one from the other.

3. To confute many opinions that are started up among us in these times, they
are called new lights, but whether they be new or old they are falsely called
lights, being opposite to that true light, the Scripture, to which we must take
heed, 2 Pet. 1. 19. Isai. 8. 20.
as to a light shining in a dark place: they that broach these opinions, speak
not according to the Law and the testimony, and therefore there is no light in
them. That the moral Law is now of no use to a believer; that he is not to
confess sin, nor to be humbled for sin; that the soul is not immortal, that
Christ is not God coessentiall with the Father: if these and many such like
doctrines, which are now spread abroad in the Land, be lights, I wonder what we
shall call darkness. Certainly the Prince of darkness, even in the darkest
times of Popery, did never devise such damnable heresies, and hellish
blasphemies, as are now maintained: I say with S. Peter, Seeing you know these
things before, beware least ye also be carried away with the error of the
wicked, and fall from your own stedfastness: But grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 17. 18.

Use 2. Secondly, if matters of faith be fully contained in the Scripture, let
it be our care to acquaint our selves well with the Scripture* to embrace the
doctrine therein delivered, and to hold it fast. There are 3. branches of this
Exhortation.

1. Let us acquaint our selves well with the Scripture. Search in the book of
God, and read, Isai. 31. 16. Search the Scriptures, John 5. 39. Let us
consider, 1. That God has ordained the Scriptures for this end, that we might
be instructed and edified by them. They were written for our learning, Romans 15.
4.

2. That it is a singular mercy that we have the Scriptures. David magnifies
the goodness of God toward the Israelites in this respect; He has given his
word unto Jacob, his statutes and his Ordinances unto Israel. He has not dealt
so with any Nation, etc. Psalm. 147. 19, 20. So Paul notes this as the great
privilege which the Jews had above others, that unto them were committed the
Oracles of God, Romans 3. 1, 2. The greater the mercy is, the more grievous is
the contempt of it. I have written unto them (says God) the great things of my
Law, and they were counted as a strange thing, Hos. 8. 12.

2. Let us embrace the doctrine delivered in the Scripture. Not every doctrine
that is preached or printed; no, take heed of that. Believe not every spirit,
but try the spirits, whether they be of God; for there are many false Prophets
gone out into the world, 1 John 4. 1. Prove all things, 1 These. 5. 21. And how
must we prove and try every doctrine but by the Scriptures? so the Bereans did,
and they are commended for it, Act. 17. 11. But having 1 Pet. 2. 8.
tried a doctrine, and found it agreeable to the Scripture, we must embrace it,
we must take heed of stumbling at the word, as Peter ^aith some do. Some
stumble because of the many opinions that are abroad, because some hold one
thing, some another, therefore they will hold nothing. Take heed of this;
consider 1. That it has been thus of old in matters of Religion: In our
Saviors time there were several opinions concerning him, Some said he is a
good man; others said, nay, but he deceives the people, Joh. 7. 12. See also
Joh. 7. 40. -- 43. and Mat. 19. 13, 14.

2. The Scripture has foreshewed, that there shall be false doctrines and
heresies; There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, etc. Mat. 24.
24. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be
false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, etc. 2
Pet. 2. 1.

3* Such is the malice of Satan, that he will do what he can to pervert the
truth: where God sowes good corn, he will sow tares, Mat. 13. 39.

4. God suffers it to be so, first, to try those that are his; There must be
heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest, 1 Cor.
11. 19. See Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.

2. That the truth may be more cleared and confirmed then otherwise it would
be, if it were not impugned and opposed: See Acts 15. 1. 2. 6. 7, 22. etc. 30.
31. It is observed, that the Doctors that were before Pelagius, wrote more
securely concerning grace and free will, but when Pelagius arose, and asserted
free will, so as that he overthrew grace, then Austine and others bestirred
themselves, and made it evident, that without Gods grace man has no power nor
ability in him to do any thing whereby to please God.

But again, some stumble at this, that such as were eminent for profession,
fall into gross opinions; but neither is there any cause to stumble at this:
For thus also it has been even in the Apostles time, Nicolas was of no mean
repute in the Church, as appears Acts 6. 5. Yet (it seems) he became the Author
of a detestable Sect called the Nicolaitans, Rev. 2. 15. So what account Paul
made of Demas, we see Col. 4. 14. and Philem. verse 24. yet he proved an
Apostate, 2 Timothy 4. 10.

2. This also is foretold: The Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 1. The falling away of Professors should make us take heed to our
selves, and cleave the more close to the truth, as Peter admonishes, 2 Pet. 3.
17. Take heed lest ye also be carried away with the error of the wicked, and
fall from your steadfastness. So I come to the third branch of the Exhortation.

3. Therefore let us hold fast the truth delivered in the Scripture; Buy the
truth and sell it not, Prove. 23. 23. Hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.
21. Hold fast the form of sound words, etc. That good thing which was committed
unto thee, keep, etc. 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14. Let us hold fast the profession of our
faith without wavering, Heb. 10. 23.

To this end, first be well grounded in the truth; false Teachers easily lead
captive silly women, that are ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. That we henceforth be no more children,
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, etc. Ephesians. 4.
14.

2. Be sincere in the profession of the truth: Because they received not the
love of the truth, etc. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion,
that they should believe a lie: That they all might be damned who believed not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.
Superbia est matter omnium haereseon.


3. Be humble: Pride (says Austine) is the mother of all heresies. And Calvin
found it verified in Servetus a wretched heretic; he notes of him, that he was
exceeding proud, and being desirous to get himself a name, thought this the
fairest way Lusitanico fastu inflatus, magis etiamnum propria arrogantia
turgens, hanc sibi comparandi nominis rationem optimam esse statuit, si omnia
religionis principia convelleret. Calvin. advers. Servet.
whereby to attain unto it, to shake the very foundations of Religion: So the
Scripture testifies of Simon Magus, who bewitched the people of Samaria, (and
as Ecclesiastical Writers record of him, was the Author of diverse heresies)
that he gave out that himself was some great one, Acts 8. 9. Doubtless, this
is a main cause why many in these times fall into gross and monstrous errors,
they are puffed up with a conceit of themselves, and they would be eminent
above others; and therefore rather then they will be content with plain truth,
they will embrace palpable error. Besides, the proud trusting in themselves,
God leaves them to themselves, and so what is so absurd, but through the
suggestion of Satan, and the corruption of their own heart, they are ready to
embrace it? A scorner seeks wisdom, but he finds it not, Prove. 14. 6. For
God scorneth the scorners, but gives gracee unto the lowly, Prove. 3. 34. God
resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble, Jam. 4. 6. and 1 Pet. 5. 5.

4. Beware of covetousness and worldlymindednesse; earthly advantages are of
great force to withdraw from the truth. This was it that drew away Demas, 2 Timothy 4. 10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present world: Peter
speaking of false Teachers, shows that this does set them on work, And through
covetousness shall they make merchandise of you, 2 Pet. 2, 3.

5. Beware of all sin whatsoever. For it darkens the understanding, perverts
the will, disorders the affections, alienates from God, and gives advantage
unto Satan. What Solomon says of a strange woman, may be applied to a strange
Doctrine; Who so pleases God, shall escape from her, but the sinner shall be
taken by her, Eccles. 7. 26. The Apostle therefore bidding hold faith, adds,
and a good conscience, which some having put away, concerning faith have made
shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1. 29. And so he notes, that they are not only silly women,
but such also as are laden with sins, that are usually led captive by false
teachers, 2 Timothy 3. 6.

6. Labor to increase grace more and more; Take heed lest ye also being
carried away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness;
but (as a means to avoid that mischief) grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18.

7. Pray continually unto God to guide and keep you in the truth, except God
lead us into it, we shall never find it, and except he keeps us in it, we shall
soon lose it: The God of al grace, etc. make you perfect, stablish, strengthen
settle you, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling,
etc. Jude v. 24. and so much for this point.

Again the words of the Text hold out unto us this, That Christians ought
earnestly to contend to be fellow-helpers to the truth, 3 Jo. 8. Such are
commended as do this: I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and
how thou can not bear them which are evil, and thou have tried them which
say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them liars, Revel. 2. 2.

Such are reproved as neglect this. But I have a few things against thee,
because thou have them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, etc. So have thou also
them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate, Repent etc.
Revel. 2. 14, 15, 16. Good reason there is why Christians should do this.

1. Out of zeal for Gods glory. As wicked practices, so also wicked opinions
dishonor God. Heretics especially set their mouths against heaven: and
therefore they that are zealous for God will set their mouths against them, and
do what they may to repress them.

2. Out of compassion toward others. Compassion is to be showed toward an ox
or an ass that goes astray, Exodus 29. 13. How much more toward the souls of
men, that either are already, or are like to be seduced and carried away with
errors?

3. Out of compassion toward themselves. For it being a duty required of them,
a necessity is laid upon them to do it, and woe unto them if they do it not, 1
Cor. 9. 16. Whatever it be that God injoyns us to do, if we have no respect
unto it, we reward evil unto our selves, Isai. 3. 9. but as all must do this,
so not all one and the same way, but severally according to the places and
callings God has set them in.

1. Magistrates must do it. The care of the Custodes utriusque Tabulae.
Church and of Religion belongs unto them, as well as of the Commonwealth and
of civil justice: otherwise how are they nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers,
as God has said they shall be? Isai. 49. 23. How by their means do we live a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty? in which respect the
Apostle bids pray for them, 1 Timothy 1. 2. Magistrates therefore must do their
endeavor to preserve and maintain the truth. and that 1. By making Laws and
Ordinances for the profession and preservation of it. Thus did the good Kings
of Judah, not only David and Solomon who were Prophets, as well as Kings, but
also they Kings only, and not Prophets, as Asa, Jehoshaphat, Ezekiah, and
Josiah: and memorable to this purpose is the example of Artaxerxes though a
heathen. See what a decree he mad^, Ezr. 7. 25, 26. And how Ezra blessed God
for it, v. 27. and 28.

2. By providing Orthodox Ministers to teach the truth, and by encouraging them
that do it. Thus Jehoshaphat sent Levites who taught in Judah, and had the book
of the Law of the Lord with them, and went about thoroughout all the Cities of
Judah, and taught the people, 2 Chronicles. 17. 8, 9. And Ezekiah spoke comfortably
unto all the Levites, that taught the good knowledge of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30.
22. Moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the
portion of the Priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the
Law of the Lord, 2 Chronicles 31. 4.

3. By repressing such as pervert the truth, and divulge errors. The
Magistrate is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil, Romans 13. 4. Now if they do evil that hurt the body, and prejudice
the temporal estate; how much more they that hurt the soul, and prejudice the
eternal estate?

2. Ministers must do it, and that 1. By preaching and teaching the truth with
all diligence: See Act. 20. 28, 31. and 2 Timothy 4. 1, 5. and Tit. 1. 10, 11.
with 2. 1.

2. By refelling such as oppose the truth, and (...). Non loquintur diserta,
sed fortia. Cypr.
confuting their errors: a Minister must not only be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.
2. but also able to convince gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9. To this end he must
preach, not with entising words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the
spirit, and of power, 1 Cor. 2. 4. Apollos was eloquent, and that is good, but
withal he was mighty in the Scriptures, Act 18. 24. And so he mightily
convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures, that Jesus
was Christ, v. 28.

3. Private Christians must do it: And 1. By praying for good and sound
teachers: they must pray that they may be sent, Mat. 9. 38. And that they may
do the work for which they are sent, 2 These. 3. 1. Col. 4. 3. Ephesians. 6. 19, 20.

2. By affording them all encouragement that may be: See 1 These. 5. 12, 13. and
1 Timothy 5. 17. and Heb. 13. 17.

3. By giving no assistance, showing no countenance to false teachers, but
doing what they may to restrain them: See 3 John 10, 11. Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 9.

4. By instructing and admonishing one another, Col. 3. 16.

5. By humbling themselves, and mourning for the errors that are vented, and
for those that are seduced; See Psalm 119. 158. and 136.

Use. Let us then according to our places and callings be mindful of this
duty, and careful to perform it: to this end let us consider, 1. That truth
(especially the truth of Religion, the truth of the Gospel) is a thing most
precious and excellent, Col. 1. 5.
most worthy to be contended for with all earnestness, and to be maintained
with all care and diligence: God is the God of truth, Isa. 65. 16. Christ has
styled himself the truth, John 14. 6. the Holy Ghost is the spirit of truth,
John 16. 13. The Gospel is the word of truth, Ephesians. 1. 13. If therefore we
contend for other things, which in comparison are vain and frivolous; how much
more should we contend for this which is of such worth, of such excellency?

2. That the Saints and servants of God have ever showed great zeal in this
kind. How zealous Paul was for the truth, his Epistles every where show. See
especially Gal. 1. 8, 9, and 2. 5, 11, 12, 13, 14. and 4 and 3. 1, 3, 4, 11,
19. and 5. 7. 12. of S. John it is recorded by Eusebius, and before him by
Irenaeus, that being in a bath, and hearing that Cerinthus (one who besides
other heretical opinions, denied Christ's divinity) was come into the place, he
would stay no longer, but departed with all speed, saying to those that were
with him, Let us fly, and be gone, least the building fall upon us, in which
this enemy of the truth Cerinthus is. So it is said of Polycarpus (S. John's
Disciple) that meeting with Marcion another Arch-heretike, and being asked by
him, if he knew him, answered, Yes, I know thee to be the first born of the
devil. And such was the zeal of Hierome against heretics and heresies, that
in his second Apology against Ruffinus he writes thus; In this one thing I
cannot In uno tibi consentire non possum, ut parcam haereticis, ut me
Catholicum non probem. Si ista est causa discordiae, non possum tacere, non
possum.
yield unto thee, that I should forbear heretics, and so not prove my self a
sound and true believing Christian. If this be the cause of our difference, I
cannot hold my peace, I cannot do it.

4. That wicked opinions are rather worse then wicked practices; corrupt
Doctrines more dangerous then corrupt manners. Some do well observe, that he
who had the leprosy in his head, is pronounced not simply unclean, as others,
but utterly unclean, Levit. 13. 44. Whence is collected, that corruption in
judgment is worse then corruption in practice. And so it is; the understanding
is the eye, and so the light of the soul; and if the light be darkness, how
great is that darkness? Mat. 6. 23.
Sound doctrine is a means to reform a corrupt conversation; but corrupt
doctrine is a means to mar a good conversation. Evil communications corrupt
good manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33. Whosoever shall break one of the least
Commandments, and teach men so, etc. Mat. 5. 19.

4. Great need especially at this time to be earnest for the truth, and to do
what we may for defense of it. For, first, when was it ever more opposed then
now it is? What heresy almost was ever broached, which is not now taken up,
and maintained by one or other? Scarce any truth in all the sphere of Christian
Religion is so sacred, as to remain inviolate.

2. These wicked opinions that are among us cause the name of God to be
blasphemed, and the way of truth to be evil spoken of. Hereupon Papists take
occasion to traduce our Religion, and profane persons to despise all Religion.

3. These are times wherein God expects, and we pretend Reformation: Therefore
that now in these times should be such Sects and Heresies amongst us, is the
more heinous; I said surely, thou will fear me, thou will receive correction,
etc. but they rose up early, and corrupted all their ways, Zeph. 3. 7. Thou
said, I will not transgress, when on every high hill, and under every green
tree thou wandredst, playing the Harlot, Ier. 2. 20.

4. We have solemnly sworn unto God, and covenanted with him to endeavor in
our places and callings the preservation of the truth, and the extirpation of
heresy, and whatsoever is concrary to sound Doctrine: Let us remember that of
David, Psalm. 76. 11. Vow and perform unto the Lord your God. And that of
Solomon Eccles. 5. 4, 5. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it;
for he has no pleasure in fools: Pay therefore that which thou have vowed.
Better is it that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not
pay. Some have showed themselves very zealous against Superstition, Popery,
Prelacy, etc. but concerning Sects and Heresies, which swarm in the Land, have
been remiss enough: Why is not one part of the Covenant regarded as well as
another? Zeal if it be not impartial, is not right, howsoever we may please
our selves in it, and vaunt of it as Iehu did; Come, see my zeal, 2 King. 10.
16. But Jehu regarded not to walk in the Law of the Lord with all his heart;
for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the so^ of Nebat, who made Israel
to sin, v. 31. Had his zeal been sincere, it would have showed it self as well
against the Idolatrous Worship of the Calves set up by Jeroboam, as against
that of B^al set up by Ahab.

Let us consider these things, and let the consideration of them incite us by
prayer and humiliation, and all good means (as our places and callings require)
to endeavor that truth may be preserved, and error suppressed; that such as
are yet in the truth, may persist in it, and such as are swerved from the
truth, may be reduced to it, or at least may not seduce and draw others from
it. In a word, let us do what in us lies, that the land may be purged, as from
other pollutions and defilements, so from these Sects and Heresies, that are so
rife in it; that so the Lord may not (as otherwise we must needs fear he will)
abhor us, and depart from us, but may still continue his gracious presence with
us, and rejoice over us to do us good.

FINIS.

