ISREAL'S peace with GOD BENIAMINES Overthrow.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at their late
solemn Fast, August 31. 1642.

By William Carter.

Published by Order from that House.

NEHEM. 8. 10. The joy of the Lord is your strength. LONDON, Printed for Giles
Calvert, and are to be sold by Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the Crane
in Paul's Churchyard. M. DC. XLII.

Die Mercurij, ultimo Augusti, 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the COMMONS House of PARLIAMENT, That M. Sollicitour
and M. Salloway, do return thanks unto M. Carter for the great pains he took
at the entreaty of the House, before the Members thereof at S^. Margarets
Westminster this day of the public Fast, and that they do entreat him from
this House to Print his Sermon: And it is also Ordered and required that no man
shall presume to print this Book or Sermon but he whom M. Carter shall assign
under his hand.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint Giles Calvert to Print the aforesaid Sermon.

WILL. CARTER.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
YOur commands have hardened me, against the conscience of my poor abilities,
to offer to you my two mites, one from the Pulpit, this other from the Press.

The wise God is pleased to trust the treasure of his Gospel, in earthen 2
Cor. 4. 7.
vessels. Such glorious and sweet discoveries of himself the Lord has given
us in it, that the weakest 2 Cor. 10. 4.
may by it be helpful instruments unto the strongest. The weapons of our
warfare are mighty, not from our selves, but through God, who glorifieth
strength in 2 Cor. 12. 9.
weakness.

This truth of his, concerning reconciliation with him, is one of the
principal; by it the souls of men are overcome to do for God ('its called
justification of life, Tit 2. 11, 12.
(Romans 5. 8.) because the putting forth of spiritual life in us begins in
that,) and God himself is overcome to do for men.

I studied how to speak a word in season: as for a day of Fast, it is the
business of that day, to make atonement; As for your selves, of all the
preparations you can make, for that great work you have in hand, it is the
chief. This ingageth heaven for your assistance, fits you for the work,
rayseth your affections to it, continually gives a Ps. 23. 3.
new and fresh increase of strength; it restores the soul, which otherwise
grows weak in all it is acts, by decays of nature in the body, and the guilt
of sin upon the conscience; when sin is pardoned our youth returns, and
Ps. 103. 5
is renewed like the Eagles: It will knit you all together in a mutual and an
heavenly love. The Thebans in their (...). Athen. l. 3
Armies had a band of men they called sacra cohors, which consisted of such
only, who were joined together in the bonds of love; these they esteemed the
prime of all their strength in battle: This is the privilege of those who are
at peace with God; they are an holy band, all knit together by that heavenly
bond.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. This is the prayer of

Your daily Orator and humble servant in Christ WILL. CARTER.

ISREAL'S Peace with GOD, Benjamines overthrow.
JUDGES 20. 26, 27, 28. VERSE. 26. Then all the children of Israel, and all the
people went up, and came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before
the Lord, and fasled that day until even, and offered burnt-offerings, and
peace offerings before the Lord.

27. And the children of Israel inquired of the Lord, (for the Arc of the
covenant of God was there in those days.

28. And Phinehas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in
those days) saying, shall I yet again go out to battle against the
children of Benjamine my brother, or shall I cease? And the Lord said, go up,
for to morrow will I deliver them into thine hand.


IN this Chapter we have the History of the War of Israel against his brother
Benjamine; The occasion of the War we have in the former Chapter, the sin
about the Levites Concubine; A fact so foul, as all the Congregation of God,
the men of Israel, held themselves obliged to see it punished. The like
engagement was acknowledged by the people, upon supposall of a sin committed
by the two Tribes and half, at the banks of Jordan: Had they built that
Altar, with intention to have used it in the worship, the people had been bound
to war against them; as we see in that they make the case to be the same,
with that of Achan, and of Peor, Josh, 22. 17, 20.

The cause here, for which the people took up arms, was just, and their call
was good, it was from God; besides, what they had, for it, of the mind of God,
either by precept or example, the Lord did countenance the action by an Oracle
from Heaven, verse. 18. and ^3. Shall I go up to battle against the children
of Benjamine my brother? The Lord said, go up against them. Yet the success
was ill. Twice was Israel smitten by the rebels, to the loss, well nigh, of
forty thousand men. Good success in war depends much upon the goodness of
the cause, but not only upon that; nor is always the justice of a cause a
warrant for a man to take up Arms, there must also be a lawful call; both
these are not enough to bring an happy issue; That we shall see in the Text, in
which we have two things,



Secondly, the success of that their practice.

Their practice is laid down,

Then all the children of Israel, and all the people went up, and came unto the
house of God, and sat there before the Lord; When Eccles. 12. 7.
Gods people leave this world they go to God, and when the world leaves them,
that is, when crosses come, and the comforts of this life forsake them, they
do the like, they go to him; Afflictions drive the wicked farther off from
God, but bring his people nearer to him; Come, say they, let us return unto
the Hos. 6. 1.
Lord our God, for he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he
will bind us up.



cause and his call must be good, himself must also be at peace with him. The
Israelites were right in what they did, they were not right themselves that
went about it, they had their Idols, and false worships, still among them,
unrepented of; therefore God went not forth with their Armies. At last they set
upon the making of their peace, and that they do in three things.

God resists the proud, he gives grace to the humble. If James 4. 6.
my people humble themselves (says God) and pray etc. I will forgive their
sin and heal their land, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.

Heb. 9. 14.

Thirdly, They give up themselves in covenant with God; that was the intent of
their peace offerings, the word (...) signifies as well a pay-offering, or
thank offering, as a peace offering: the nature of this sacrifice we have
explained, Lev. 7. where we find it, either for thanksgiving unto God for
mercies received, v. 11. or in case of a vow, or voluntary offering, v. 16.
Prove. 7. 14. I have peace offerings with me, this day have I paid my vows,
these two sacrifices, burnt-offerings and peace offerings, still went together,
in c^se the Lord was sought to in some great distress, Judge* 21 4. this people
was in di^tresse for Benjamine, after they had killed so many of that Tribe, v.
2. they lif^ up their voice and wept fore; and v. 4. they built an Altar, and
offered burnt-offerings and peace offerings, Again, 1 Chronicles. 21. 25: David was
in distress because of the plague, he offers burnt-offerings and
peace offerings, and called upon the Lord: and how often do we find, how in
their distress, they made vows to God, what they would do if he would help
them! The Apostle therefore says if we would seek to God intime of trouble,
this our peace offering must not be omitted; Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, make
your request known to God. Would we know the reason why a sacrifice of
thanksgiving, or of a vow to God, should be called a peace offering, we have it
in the next words of the Apostle, namely, because the fruit of it is peace; do
this, says he, and the peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall
keep your hearts and minds, through Christ Jesus. Well, what were the thanks
this people gave to God? not only some good words, they gave themselves a living
sacrifice; besides that which has Romans 12. 1,
bin said, the nature of the duty now in hand implies as much; as we see in the
like case of prayer and fasting, Nehem. 9. 1, 7* 38. We are in great distress
and because of this, we make a sure covenant, and write it, and our Princes,
Levites, and Priests, seal unto it. Thus I say they endeavor the making of
their peace with God.

Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of Benjamine my
brother, or shall I cease? Now to have desisted, when they were advanced so
far, and that at Gods command, were very hard; But such is the temper of a
broken heart, to be content with what appears to be the mind of God, though an
occasion of an heavy cross.

This suite of the people is set forth by circumstances.

1. Of place where the Arc was. 2. Of the Person by whom, Phinehas the son of
Eleazar.
These circumstances are brought in, I suppose, chiefly to show the time when
this war fell out; it was before the Arc was taken captive by the
Philistines, for (says the Text) the Arc of the covenant of God was there (that
is, at the house of God, or at the Tabernacle of the Congregation) in those
days, and it was in the time that Phinehas stood before it; so as however this
History be here placed, at the end of this Book of Judges, yet was it of more
antiquity. But this I shall not need to stand upon. Thus we have the first
thing in the Text, the practice of the people.



go up, that is, to battle against Benjamine. From whence we may observe, How
ever war be a bloody work, a civil war especially, yet in some cases it is
Gods command.



victory, I will give them into thine hand Good cause the people had to make
their peace with God, he is the Lord of hoasts who orders at his pleasure,
what event shall be in any enterprise. There are (says Solomon) many devices
in the Prove. 19. 21.
heart of man, but the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand.

to morrow. God makes have to help his people now their peace was made: he was
at hand before, and ready to have done it, they were not ready for the mercy;
the Lord is a God of judgment, therefore will he wait that he may be gracious
to his people. Isa. 30. 18.

Thus have we the words unfolded, and you see, we find them full of heavenly
matter, each of these particulars affording something to us, by way of
observation. I shall insist only upon that, which rises from the whole of this
history, and it is this,

That the work of God does prosper best in such men's hands, whose sins are
pardoned, and whose peace is made with him.

It was not the number of the forces, thirteen to one and more could carry it;
it was Isreal's repentance, his tears and fasting, his burnt-offerings and
peace offerings, that was the ruin of those wicked men. When Israel by tears
and supplications first had conquered Heaven, the conquest of the Benjamites
was easy, which before they found so much beyond their strength; it is true, God
serves himself sometimes upon his enemies, and they shall do his work, but
still his business prospers best with such who are his friends. Therefore do
we find that when the Lord did po^nt forth to his Prophet in a vision, Iosuah
the high Priest as the instrument, whereby he Zach. 3 1. 3, 4, 5.
would do great things for his people, he sets him out as one whose sins
were pardoned; That is the scope of that phrase in the vision, Joshua stood
before the Angel of the Lord in filthy garments, and God commands them to be
taken from him; so is the phrase interpreted by God himself, v 4. he said to
them that stood by, take away the filthy garments from him, and unto him he
said, I have caus^d thine iniquities to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee
which change of raiment. Thus also was it with the Prophet Isaiah, what
complaints Isa. 6. 5. to 8.
he makes of his unfitness for the office, and employment of a Prophet! Woe is
me (says he) I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips; God does but
assure him that his sins were pardoned, and how ready is he, and forward to
the work? v. 6. one of the Seraphims touched his lips with a coal from the
Altar, that is, he was touched by that Spirit of grace and life Romans 8. 1. Heb.
1^. 1^.
which is in Christ, our Altar, whereby (as the Apostle says) we are made free
from the Law of sin and death, and says unto him, thy iniquity is taken
away, and thy sin purged, then when God cries, whom shall I send? and who
will go for us? here am I (says the Prophet) send me. See what a pardon does,
to fit us for the work of God; not that now he began to be a Prophet, or that
now his sins were first pardoned, but this fresh evidence of pardon, gave to
him a new strength, and courage to the work. Another instance we have of this
in Saul, and David. Saul was a man of the goodliest person, and for gifts of
nature, was the likeliest of all the men of Israel to make a King, and such a
King, as should deliver Israel from oppression by his enemies; he was higher
than any of the people from the shoulders upward, 1 Samuel 10. 23. the testimony
that Samuel gave of him was this, see him whom the Lord has chosen, that
there is none like him among all the people, v. 24. He was a man of such hopes,
and Samuel himself had such expectations, what God would do for Israel by his
hand, as we see how he mourns for Saul when God had cast him off. But this man's
sins were never pardoned, he never made his peace with God in all his life,
and how ill the work of God succeeded in his hands! he does his work to halves.
God sends him to destroy Amalek, (against whom he had an ancient quarrel,)
Saul spares Agag, Exodus 17. 16.
and the fattest of the cattle. Israel, in the time of his reign, was brought
to such a bondage to the Philistines, as that there was not found a Smith in
Israel, and 1 Samuel 12. 6. 19.
the people hid themselves in caves, in thickets, and in rocks, and high
places; it is true, at the beginning of his reign, something he did, but yet,
if Saul slew his thousands, David his ten thousands; and what was David? a man
but of a slight appearance in comparison, but a man after Gods own heart, one
that had 1 Samuel 13. 14. Ps. 63 1.
his sins pardoned, and could say, O God thou art my God, and of Gods favor,
that it was better than life to his soul; he slayes Goliath with a sling and a
stone, 1 Samuel 17.
when Saul stands trembling in his tent: and how did he prosper against the
enemies of God throughout his reign! Well, this David breaks his peace with
God, and then how feeble and how weak he grows! that sin in the matter of
Vriah, he confesses broke his bones, Ps. 51. 8. Again at ver. 12. see what he
says, Restore to me the joy of thy Salvation, and establish me with thy free
Spirit, then will I teach transgressors thy ways and sinners shall be
converted to thee. David was a Prophet, but he could not teach the ways of
God, until the joy of Gods Salvation was restored him; The joy of the Lord is
our strength, Nehem. 8. 10.

Now in handling this Point, however that in my Text, from whence it rises, be
an instance only of a war, that Israel under-tooke for God, yet I shall not
there confine my self, but insist upon it in the general, as it is a truth in
any case whatever; nor shall I so desert my Text, not only, because the truth
is universal, and holds parallel in all cases, wherein we appear for God, but
also, because as the Nation of the Jews, was a type of the Churches of the
Gospel, so such like passages of providence and dealings with that people,
have in them much of the mind of God, about the most spiritual affairs of the
Churches of the New Testament, as we see the Apostle Paul applies that great
Deliverance of the people out of Egypt, at the Red Sea, and in the
Wilderness, to the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 10. 1. Therefore (I say) I shall
handle it, as that which holds true in any work we undertake for God, it
prospers b^st with those whose peace is made with him.

For the further clearing of it, take first, one demonstration, that it is a
truth; then I shall give the Reasons, whence it comes to pass. That it is a
truth appears in this, because a man not reconciled to God, ere long, grows
weary of his work; The house upon the Sand, our Savior says, will fall; and
the stony Mat. 7. 26 Mat. 13. 20.
ground, that is, an heart wherein there is no through work of grace, will
bring forth fruit but for a season. Sooner or later, at least in some degree of
Apostasy, a man unsound falls off from God; The ways of the Lord are right, and
the Righteous walk in them, but Hos. 14. 9.
the Transgressors shall fall therein; which is an evidence, his work did
never kindly prosper in his hands; that is one cause of all Apostasyes, when
men will do for God, and what they do comes off with loss and disadvantage:
For instance, when a man will pray, but looses of the tenderness of his heart
by prayer; or hears the word, and, for a season, hears with joy, yet is the
worse for hearing, or ventures himself for God, in standing for his cause, and
every time with less content and comfort in his venture; in every duty driving
still the Christians trade to loss; what follows upon this? At last he is
discouraged quite, and says in his heart, that he shall not do good upon the
way, turns Apostate and falls away from God. Look into men's Apostasyes, you will
find this still has been one cause thereof; Despair is ever an ingredient in
that sin, and that arises partly from such like experiments. What is said of
God in that he does for man, in his conversion and salvation, is true of us, in
that we do for God, Heb. 10. 38. If any man draw back, says Heb. 10. 38.
God, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. He speaks it of such persons,
who come forward kindly in conversion, unto such a pitch, and then fall off.
Now (says the Apostle) thus it is with Christ in this particular; A man that
is, as it were, betwixt his hands, in fashioning and moulding to salvation, so
long as he comes kindly on, in his conversion, Christ takes pleasure in him,
and rejoices over the work of his own hands upon his soul; but if he prove a
knotty piece, that comes not forward in the work, resisting still the Holy
Ghost, He takes no pleasure in that Act. 7, 51. Genesis 6. 3.
soul, and throws him by; His Spirit shall not always strive with man;
therefore the Apostle says, it is a drawing back to perdition, Heb. 10. 39.
And thus it is with us in that we do for God, what prospers in our hands, and
comes on well and kindly, it is a pleasure to a man to be employed about it, but
if it runs cross, and thrive not with us (as, sooner or later, is the case of
every man, not reconciled to God, that labors in his work) we take no
pleasure in it, and cast it by. This therefore being found to be the case of
such in laboring for God, that they will run well a while, and afterward draw
back, it is a demonstration that the work of God succeeds not well in such
men's hands.

Now if the Question be, what is the Reason why this is so?

I answer, an account thereof we have 2. ways, partly from the nature of the
work, partly from the enemies that will oppose it.

From the nature of the work, because it is such as must have for it a man, 1.
Of Courage. 2. Of Wisdom. 3. That aims at God in what he does and not
himself.

a guilty conscience fills them with amazement and confusion, if any opposition
comes. We know what John did once by Herod, though he was a King, he Mar. 6.
20.
feared John, as poor and despicable as he was: such is the Majesty of Truth,
it sets the Patrons of it, far above the greatest in the world. Look upon
the most notorious miscarriages upon record you will find that this was still the
cause that men would not appear; when Christ was crucified, did not all
forsake him? Had but a few of that unconstant multitude, which but a while
before had cried Hosanna, stuck Mat. 26 31.
close to Christ, in likelihood, they had delivered him; Pilat was willing to
release him, but not a man or woman would appear for him. Therefore is it,
that the Lord is so exceeding earnest with his people to be valiant, Deuteronomy. 20.
1. When thou go out to battle against thine enemies, and see Horses and
Chariots, and a people more then thou, be not afraid of them, for the Lord thy
God is with thee. And what provision does he make, ver. 8. that all the
fearful might be sent away. When God would choose a Company for Gideon, many
qualifications did he look at in his Judge. 7. 3.
choice, but in the first place, all the fearful must be gone. Christ says,
he will not own that man, that is a coward in his cause. Whosoever shall deny
me, says Christ* before men, him will I deny before my Mar 8. 38. Mat. 10 33.
Father which is in Heaven. And of those whom Christ will cast into the
burning lake, when he shall be avenged of his enemies, ( Revel. 21. 8) the
fearful are in the first place mentioned, even before the Sorcerers,
Murderers and Whoremongers. The Reason of all this is, because of that
opposition the work of God will always meet with in this world; God loves
this way to try his people; he knows what is in their hearts, therefore he
furnishe^h his peoples enemies with strength, that others may know it too,
namely that how ever men that have no more but nature in them will go far,
and do much in a good cause, yet there is a principle in his peoples hearts,
that will go farther, such as no preferments in the world can bribe, nor any
fear dishearten, such as is the same in ^oule vveather as in fair, that goes
through good report and ill report, that baulkes no duty to be done for God,
what ere it cost: This God loves to make appear to be in his, therefore does
he exercise them with such oppositions in his work. Thus we see the man
employed for him has need of courage.

Well, let us see what pardon of our sins and peace with God does for a man
in this. What says Solomon? Pro 28. 1. The wicked flees when none pursues him,
but the righteous is bold as a Lion; a guilty conscience always makes a
coward. Esa. 33. 14. The sinners in Syon are afraid, fearfulness has
surprised the Hypocrites. As for the Righteous, behold their privilege at such
a time, in that speech of our Savior, (Luke 21. 25.) There shall be distress
of Nations with perplexity, men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking
after those things, which are coming on the Earth, then lift up your heads,
says Christ, for your redemption draws nigh. The reason is, because a guilty
man has two mischiefs at once to gr^pple with, oppositions from without, and
within the wrath of God upon his soul: both which put together is a burden
that will vvound and sink his spirit, The spirit of a man will bear his
infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18. 4. Therefore is it
that the Wiseman also says: A just man falls seven times and rises again;
whatever opposition be without, yet his heart is whole, his courage is
unbroken; but, says he, a Prove 24. 16.
wicked man falls into mischief; that is, being not at peace with God, he
has not vvherewithall to stay his soul, but when he sinkes he falls into
despair, and cannot raise his spirit up again. The Heathen man could say, a
man of an ill conscience, fears himself, he cannot give an account to his
own soul, how can he look death in the face, the Messenger of God, the
righteous Judge? Inprimis reverere teipsum, was Pythagoras his rule. We read
how Charles the ninth of France, after his bloody Massacre of the Protestants,
was more terrible to himself, then ever he had been before to others. Thus
you see this is one Reason, why the work of God does prosper best in such
men's hands whose sins are pardoned; because that peace with God will make a
man courageous in his cause.

Heb 3. 13
vvisdome in it. The enemies of God are crafty. Sin is a deceitful thing, and
Satan very subtle, besides it is no easy matter to understand his work; 1
Cor. 2. 14.
The natural man receives not the things of God, for they are foolishness
unto him. Moreover, he that labors in his work shall ever and anon be at a
plunge, Zach. 4. 7.
Mountains will rise-up before Zerubbabel; in all these cases there must be
vvisdome. The work of God in this world is like a Ship that sayls in a
tempestuous Sea, that needs much skill to guide it right, and keep it on!
especially is vvisdome requisite in those who will be Saviors to a people,
if that be the work God would have done; our Savior Christ is the vvisdome
of the Father, that makes him so able for his undertakings. In a degree it
holds also true in you (Honorable and Worthy Senators) whom God has called
to be Saviors of this Kingdom; the Reason's clear, you must do it for many
that will ill requite you, ingreatefull and unworthy persons, such as consider
not your faithfulness nor travel, nay, even for such as will revile you, and
reproach your actions, for base minded men that will do nothing for
themselves; thus does Christ, and thus must you. Now what wisdom is here
requisite, whereby in the face of such discouragements in patience to possess
your souls? Looking beyond these things, and so discerning how the time will
be that those very mouths which now are opened against you, will speak of
your renown and praise, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
how the child unborne shall bless God for you, And how these afflictions,
which are but for a moment, work for you a far more exceeding and eternal
wait of glory: In the mean time carrying matters so as not to give offense to
God, nor so to lose with man, as to lose the cause; here I say is wisdom thus
to possess your selves with patience; therefore the Apostle having made his
exhortation, to let patience have Jam. 1 4, 5
a perfect work, adds in the next words, If any of you want wisdom, let him
ask of God. Wisdom always is the mother of such a daughter. Now do but
consider what advantage is in point of vvisdome in a pardon and in peace with
God; and this second Reason of the point will also be exceeding clear. You
see here Israel having made his peace with him found out a stratagem against
the Benjamites, which before, either for want of courage or of prudence, or
rather both, they did not use: the taking of the City by an ambush, as they
did. Solomon's wiseman, so often mentioned in his Proverbes, is the holy man,
and the wicked man is the fool, not only in point of spiritual, but even of
moral vvisdome. Guilt upon the conscience, brings confusion into the soul,
that brings darkness upon the understanding. A wise man always knows his
end and scope in any business; a wicked man is not able to judge of his own
ends 1 John 2.
or aims, he walks in darkness, says the Apostle, and knows not whither
he goes, that is, he is not able to trace the vvayes of his own heart,
therefore wicked men are said to be given over to an unjudicious mind, the
word which is translated a reprobate (...) Romans 1. 28
mind, signifies a mind void of Judgment. And indeed this follows upon the
former, a spirit of fear is never severed from an unsound mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, of love and of a sound
mind. Prove 2. 7, 8. The Lord lays up sound wisdom for the Righteous; lays
it up for him, that is, when he is in straits, when as a man of a guilty
conscience is confounded, at his wits end, as we say, then has the righteous
man such quietness of spirit, soundness and presence of mind, as he shall
have the use of solid reason for his guide; Thus God lays up sound wisdom for
the righteous.

quite out of the way, or take them off. And such are those who are not
reconciled to God and pardoned; we Luke 15.
see it clearly in the Prodigal, he was no sooner out with his Father, but he
became his own slave, and served his own base lusts, those were the swine he
kept, whereby to keep himself alive. And in this Parable we have the state of
every man not reconciled to God, the reason why this is his case, is this,
because man, being but a creature, must be servant unto something, he is not
able to subsist alone, or to set up of his own stock, it is Gods prerogative
alone to be independent, and not to serve; the happiness of creatures lies in
service, the Angels themselves would be undone without it, therefore I say
every man is a servant unto something; and being out with God he serves
himself; self is the next in reason that will challenge it when God's denied
it. Now this self-love, I say, will spoil the work, that such a man shall
undertake for God, Israel is an empty vine, says God, Hos. 10. 1. he brings
forth fruit unto himself; the reason is, because Gods ends and his will seldom
or never stand together, they run counter, and one destroys the other. This
now is a third reason of the point, The work of God will prosper best with such
whose peace is made with him, because they only are the men, that make the
glory of the Lord their scope in what they do; the reason is, because God is
the portion of that man whose sins are pardoned; he can say, that God whom I
serve is my God, my Father, my hope and joy, my glory, my salvation; he can
say, that God is so his own as that his best being is in God, so as that which
he does for himself, without relation unto him, he loses quite, and what he
does for God, or gives to him is his own still, as our Savior says, He that
saves his life shall lose it, and Mat. 16. 25.
he that loses his life for my sake the same shall find it. Therefore does he
aim at God in all his ways, and therefore does his work thrive best with him.

Thus have we an account of the Reason of this point from the nature of the
work.



1. Satan. 2. The sin of a man's own heart.
wrestle not only against flesh and blood, but against principalities and
Ephesians. 6. 12.
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickednesses in high places, that is, he shall have all the power of all the
Devils in Hell against him. When Joshua was poynted to, as an instrument for
God, Satan was said to stand at his right hand to resist him, Zach. 3. 1. we
had come to you even once 1 These. 2. 18.
and again (says the Apostle) but Satan hindered us. We may say the like, such
and such things had been done for God by us, such and such a blessing h^d we
enjoyd, even once and again, but Satan hindered us. It is his nature to be doing
mischief against God, and against his work, in the hands of his people;
therefore when he is cast out of men's hearts, and so cut short in that regard,
he is said to be thrown down like lightning from Heaven, the hearts of men is
Luke 10. 18.
that heaven from whence he is expelled, and because it is against the nature of
lightning to go downward, is he in his fall compared to that: therefore also
when he Mat, 8. 29 Mat. 12. 43.
was cast out, he said himself he was tormented; and our Savior says, that
being dispossessed he walks in dry places, seeking rest and finding none, not but
that the dry and wet are both alike to him, but it is a phrase fitted to our
apprehensions, signifying that discontent, and restless state wherein he is at
such a time; so the same is used, Ier. 17. 5. Cursed be he that makes flesh
his arm, he shall inherit the parched places of the wilderness; that is, he
shall have no content or satisfaction: thus it is with Satan, therefore it
follows, seeking rest and finding none. Therefore I say, if any man be set on
work for God, all the power and subtilty of Satan and his wicked instruments
are set against him.

Christ is the light of the world, sin is the darkness of it; the flesh
therefore fights and strives for life against him, because as he prevails that
is ^^stroy'd. Therefore is it said, that when he comes into his Temple, men will
not abide his coming, Mal. 3. 2. no, even those that seek it and delight in
Christ, so far as sinful flesh prevails, will not abide it, v. 1. The Lord
whom ye seek, shall come to his Temple, that is, to his Church, and to the
souls of men in his Gospel, for they are his Temples also, even the messenger
of the covenant whom ye delight in, but who can abide the day of his coming?
be it his coming into a Kingdom, or into a Congregation, or into our own
souls, we Romans 7. 22.
must say as the Apostle says in a like case, I delight in the law of God
after the inward man, but I see another law in my members warring against the
law of my mind; so we delight in Christ after the inward man, the spirit
indeed is willing, the spirit Rev. 22. 17.
and the bride say come, yea, come Lord Jesus, come quickly; but the flesh, or
that sinful nature, the remainders whereof are in the best, will not endure
the thing. Even those that seek for reformation, will be shie of entertaining
Christ, afraid of being reformed too far; thence are those pretenses that are
made against it: that carriage of the Church to Christ, Cant. 5. 2. seems to be
ours at this day. He knocks at the door, and cries, open to me my sister, my
love, my dove, my undefiled, for my head is filled with dew, etc. No, she had
put off her coat and how should she put it on? she had washed her feet and how
should she defile them? so say we, how shall we do this? and how shall we do
that? and what distractions will this reformation cause? etc. Now whence is
this? is it indeed a truth, that reformation of Religion will endamage common
wealths? was it ever known that strictness in Go^s service, the most powerful
preaching of the word, the truth and purity of worship ever hurt a nation? what
says Christ? By me Kings reign, and Princes degree justice: No, no beloved,
Pro. 8. 15.
these are but excuses, arising from the sin of the hearts of men; what ever
you would do for God, ye shall be sure to have all the strength of the sin of
your own hearts against you in it.

You will say, suppose all this be true, that sin and Satan will oppose, yet
how is this a reason of the point in hand? I answer yes, because in both these
cases, such persons only who are pardoned and reconciled to God, are able to
withstand this opposition.

First for Satan, it is not every man can deal with him; there is no resisting
him without an holy heart, there is no getting that without a pardon; the self
same faith that justifies the person, purifies the heart, Act. 15. 9.
and makes it holy; therefore the grace of Christ, is said to reign through
righteousness unto life, Romans 5. 21. Where there is no righteousness, that
is, no pardon, the grace of Christ bears no sway in that soul; and then that
man who still is in the gall of bitterness Act. 8. 23.
and in the bond of iniquity, however for the present he may in a manner, be
engaged for God, what ever is that way pretended, he will be found at last to
be of Satan's party; and though he go exceeding far in a good cause, he will not
be through in the work, and when it comes up to the main and principal, he will
fail, and that is as much as Satan wishes or desires; therefore is he said to
stand at Iosuahs right hand to resist him, though no doubt he wrought with both
hands, because his opposition principally lies against the main and principal
of the work, he passes not if you hear Sermons, so you come not near to God
in hearing, which is the main thing in the duty; or if ye pray, and draw not
near to God in prayer; or if the Kingdom be reformed, so Religion may be still
corrupt, he passes not so much; now I say, when once ye come unto the main in
any kind, that man will fail you there. The Prince of this world comes (says
Christ) and he has nothing in me, Joh. 14. 30. If a man be unregenerate, and
has no hold upon the covenant of grace, Satan then has something in him, nay
all that is in him, is his own, and what ever the man's design is now, Satan
knows the man is his, and that in time it will be seen, yea that such a man
shall do him better service than another can, and so much the more, by how
much he seemed at the first, to be against him. We see what use the Devil
makes of men's apostasies, whereby men sin away their consciences, the
tenderness of their hearts, the goodness of their natures, blemishing
themselves in the eyes of God and men, till they grow desperate in sin and all
perfidiousnesse, losing that very ingenuity which once they had. And besides
all this, through their experience of the ways of God, becoming skillful to
do mischief more than any, as we read of Julian the apostate, how he did
more hurt to the Church of God, then all the persecuting Emperors that were
before him. And there is no way for a preventing this, but by building upon the
Mat 7. 24.
rock; the house built upon the sand will surely fall, and the fall thereof is
great. Let a man get into Christ, get pardon, get peace with God, and as for
Satan, he shall have him, in some measure, at a distance, as our Savior had,
when he said that he had nothing in him, or otherwise he will get into his
heart, and so insinuate himself, and sway him by his lusts insenfibly, until
he overthrows him quite, and he repent of what he did for God.

1 Cor. 15. 5, 6.
it but by a pardon, the strength of sin is the law, that is, so long as the
guilt of sin, and so the curse of the law, has hold upon the soul, the soul is
weak, and sin is strong. Therefore the Apostle says, Heb. 9. 14. that the blood
of Christ does purge us from dead works, to serve the living God So long as God
is looked upon as one not reconciled, what heart can any man have to his
service? what man will suffer, or will venture any thing for one, whom he
accounts his enemy? the secret despair of his acceptance, or of ever doing
good upon it, will lay him naked to the power of the sin of his own heart, to
keep him off, and to engage him quite the other way: It is a pardon that
destroys our sins, Titus 2. 12. The grace of God which brings salvation
appearing, teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world.

cause wherein you are engaged is just, your call to this engagement is as
clear, take heed the third thing be not wanting, pardon of your sins and
peace with God. Think upon the point that has been opened. God has put into
your hands, a work of his, the greatest that has been on foot for God in
these Islands, for many hundred years, the safety, peace and welfare of the
Kingdom, I may say the three Kingdoms, nay in a great degree of all the
Kingdoms of the world, wherein the true Religion is professed, and that not
only in respect of temporal things, but even of such as have an influence
into eternity, the true Religion, the Gospel of our Salvation, God himself;
take away Religion and the Gospel, and our God is gone, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. Israel
was without the true God, when he was without a teaching Priest, and without
the Law God has called you to the purging of the Land of those Locusts and
Caterpillars, I mean the Romish factours now amongst us, that would not have
left so Joel 1. 9.
much as a meat offering for our God; I may call them Locusts, the Scripture
puts that name upon them; In the book of Joel there is a Prophecy Joel 2. 11,
20.
of a Northern Army, that should cause a Day of darkness and gloominesse, of
clouds and of thick Joel 2. 2, 3
darkness, and that the Land which was as Eden before should be as the
wilderness behind it; This Army we see was a multitude of Locusts, and such
like things, Joel 2. 25. I will restore to you the years that the Locust has
eaten, the Canker-worme, the Caterpillar and the Palmer worm, my great Army
which I sent among you: This was verified in the Letter to the Jews, the
fruits of their Land were for a season spoiled by such an Army, but under the
type of Joel 1. 6. and 2. 2, 3, 4 5, 6, 8.
Locusts, it is a Prophecy of the mischief done to the whole world,
especially to Europe, by Popish vermin, as we see, Revel. 9. where we Rev.
9. 2, 7 8, 9, 10. Occidenta les Locustae sunt monachi, monia les frater culi,
numerosa c^hors religiosorum, Cardinales cum tota Hierarchia pontifi^ia, Brigh.
Fox. Pisc. etc. Rev. 9. 10. Joel 1. 4.
have the self same Locusts with the same descriptions as they are set forth
in Joel, compare the places and you will say they are the same, which by
Interpreters are applied to the Saracens in the East, and to the Monks and
Friars, and whole Popish Hierarchy, in these Western Kingdoms: it is true, the
time of thejr chiefest power is past, as it is said, Their power should
continue for such a time; yet multitudes we have amongst us still, and the
design is that they may again prevail, until there be not left so much as a
meat offering for God, it is not long since we had experience how they grew upon
us, so as what the Palmer-worme left, the Locust eat, and what the Locust left,
the Cankerworme eat, and what the Canker-worme left, the Caterpiller eat; And
how slender was the meateoffering left for God, when as so many burning and
shining lights were quite put out, such a famine of the word in most places of
the Kingdom, and such bondage laid upon men's souls? This work I say the Lord
has called you to, the cleansing of the land from these, and blessed be his
Name, who rayseth up your hearts to undertake it; The blessing of the GOD of
Heaven rest on you, your Families and Children unto all Posterity. Well, would
you prosper in this work? then say not, it is enough that both your cause and
call is good, and thus and thus you are in strength; fail not to make your
peace with God this day; take heed of Isreal's case against the Benjamites. Me
thinks I hear this sad example of Gods dealing with his people, speaking to
you as the voice of Joel 2. 12.
God in Joel, Turn ye, even to me, with all your hearts; with fasting, with
weeping and with mourning, and rend your hearts and not your garments, and
turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness, and repents of the evil; Who knows if he will
return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him, even a meate-offering and
a drink offering to the Lord your God? I may say the same to you, if you but
do the work indeed that now you come about, who knows what God may do? What
blessing he may give to your proceedings? what ruin he may bring upon your
enemies? Ps. 56. 8.
he will put all your tears into his bottle, and they shall do more against the
rebels, then so many thousand bullets from the Cannon. Or otherwise, who knows
what God may do against you? if you neglect the making of your peace with him
this day, alas it may soon cost many thousand men their lives, and for a
season, it may lose the cause; does it not make your hearts to bleed, the very
thought of this? what will those Egyptians say? what blasphemies will they
belch forth? and what shall the Lord our God do for his great Name? much cost
and care and Josh. 7. 9.
travel has been spent in making up of strength, and it is well there has,
God will reward you for it a thousand fold; should your endeavors prove
abortive, God looks upon them as an acceptable service to him; as we find it,
Cant. 5. 2, 5, 6. when Christ had knocked, and cried unto his spouse, to open
and to let him in, and she neglected, afterward when she arose and opened
the door, she could not find him, Christ had withdrawn himself, (v. 6.) yet
those endeavors of the spouse were very pleasing unto Christ, and full of
comfort to her self; I rose up (says she) to open to my beloved, and my hands
dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the
handles of the lock: If God should thus withdraw himself from us, and for a
season dash our hopes, it would be just, for our delays; but your endeavors,
with such zeal and forwardness, to let in Christ amongst us, will be very
sweet to Christ, and sweet to you; your hands drop myrrh, Isa. 49. 4.
and your fingers sweet smelling myrrh upon the handles of the lock; Though
England be not saved, yet shall you be glorious in the eyes of the Lord; your
judgment is with the Lord, and your reward with your God. Therefore I say,
this is well, this should be done, but leave not the maine undone, the making
of your peace with God; Oh take some care and pains about that work this day;
that left undone by you, may possibly undo us all; think upon the Israelites
condition; God is resolved upon it, he will have the Locusts purged the land,
I mean, so as they shall not hurt his people; as he resolved here, how
Benjamine should smart for what he did; now what was Isreal's case? had they
made their peace with God at first, he might have trusted them in doing of
that work, without delays; and out of love and zeal to God, they had done
that which afterward, from passion and desire of revenge, in some respect they
over did: which peace when they neglected, God was put upon it, to let Israel
be beaten, that so the people being thus incensed, might do full execution
upon Benjamine their brother. Thus if you make your peace with God this day,
he then may trust you in this work, so as you may prevail at first, without
the spilling of much blood; if not, then least it should be done to halves, God
will be put upon some such device, whereby to make you through in his work, and
how sad and heavy that may prove who knows? Moreover, do ye not consider how
God deals with people many times, according as their carriage is upon such
days as these? see what he said to Israel once upon a like occasion, Exodus
33. 5. put off thine ornaments (says God,) that is, humble your selves by
fasting and prayer, that I may know what to do to thee; he speaks it after
the manner of man, as if the Lord were at a stand in point of executing
judgment, till he saw their carriage in that duty; and who knows but God may
be at such a stand with us, and that his sentence shall go forth against, or
for us, as your carriage is this very day, in turning from your evil ways,
and making of your peace?

Now if it be demanded, what is to be done? the Israelites example is before us
let that be your pattern.

1. They humble themselves. 2. They flee to Christ for pardon. 3. They give up
themselves in covenant with God.
humiliation, and you must be active in your own abasements; If my people
humble themselves, etc. (says God) I will forgive their sin and heal their
Land; Now be persuaded 2 Chronicles 7. 14.
therefore, and set all your strength on work, to lay your selves low before
the Lord this day; be not satisfied with outsides, with shadows or with
ceremonies of repentance; Israel did not only fast, but weep, and so must you;
Turn to me (says God) with fasting and with weeping and with m^urning; and
for this p^rpose, call up to remembrance all your sins, make them to appear
before you both in their number and their greatness, and make swords and
spears of them, to wound your hearts; call to mind your sins of youth, of elder
years, of all sorts, and take to your selves such words, in your confessions,
such thoughts and meditations, as may cause your souls, now in the presence of
your God, to melt and bleed; I will not name particulars, it would be too long,
I need not; I will only name some few considerations in the general, which if
the Lord shall thoroughly set home, and cause to take impression; though they
are but two or three, like Jonathan and his Armor-bearer midst an army of
corruptions and sins, yet many more things of the like importance, toward
this humbling of our selves will come in also, and do their part upon our
souls.

Consider therefore sin,

1. In the Root. 2. In the Fruit. 3. In the Cure. 4. In the Object against whom
it is committed.
nature; we brought it with us when we came into the world, Borne in sin,
conceived in iniquity, Ps. 51. If any thing will break our hearts the thought
of this will do it, this original corruption of our natures; Ps. 51.
David when he set himself to humble his soul, in that his penitential
Psalm, he brings in many things whereby to do it, as that his sin was
against his God, Against thee, says he, have I sinned, against his knowledge,
even that hidden wisdom, which the Lord had given him, but in a special
manner does he mention his Original corruption, that he brings in with an
Ecce, Behold (says he) I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me. And the Apostle Paul what bitter moan he makes for this! he
suffered great afflictions in his time. In stripes above measure, in prisons
frequent, in deaths often: much more he says, but never does he so complain 2
Cor 11. 23, 24, 25.
as at the mention of Original sin, Romans 7. 24. having first discoursed how
he found a Law, that when he would do well evil was present with him, and a
law in his members warring against the Law of his mind* and bringing him into
captivity to the law of sin, See how he cries out, O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

And there is reason for it, why the thought of this should wound so deep, a
threefold mischief comes upon it, that our natures are thus sinful and
corrupt.

1. It makes our persons odious and loathsome unto God; that is it which makes
a Toade a loathsome thing, because poison is the nature of a Toade; poison in a
Dog makes him an object of our pity, because it is his disease; so also sin
in Gods people is their disease, therefore God pitties them the more, because
of sin, Psalm. 103 13. As a Father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth
them that fear him; but where sin is nature to a man (which is the case of
all men unregenerate) there is no Toad or Serpent so odious in the eye of man
as such a man is in the eyes of God; and this is every man's condition, as he
comes into the world (as the Prophet says) no eye pitties us, but we are
thrown out into the open field, to the loathing of our Ezekiel. ^6. 5
persons in the day that we are borne: We are not objects of compassion, but of
detestation, think upon it well, and let it humble us; is this a small thing
in our eyes, that we by nature are a lump of filthiness, and that the God of
Heaven and Earth, the righteous Judge, abhorrs our persons?

Secondly, sin being nature to us, this also follows that it works exceeding
powerfully in us, so as, we are the slaves of sin, it leads us captive; what
works by nature, works with power; therefore is it said that we are
captivated to the Law of sin, that Romans 7. 1. v. 23.
is, to the natural working of it in us, and that we find a Law, that when we
would do well, evil is present with us, that is we find an irresistible
course of nature in us that way tending. The courses of nature, in Scripture
are called a Law; the natural motions of the heavenly bodies, are called
Ordinances of Heaven, Ier. 31. 36. The nature of every creature is the Law of
it is creation, therefore the new nature is expressed by that phrase, The Law of
God written upon the heart, Ier. 31. 33. and it is called, the Law of the
Spirit of life which is in Christ, Romans 8. 2. So as this is our misery, by
nature we can as well forbear to eat and and drink, or any duty that we owe
to nature, as forbear to sin; shall not the thought of this abase and humble
us? What more unworthy of a man than slavery? No slavery to that of sin; it
sets us to the basest drudgery in the world; it keeps us always at it, and
it gives us nothing for our pains; What fruit had you in those things whereof
ye are Romans 6. 21
now ashamed? It puts us to an endless toil, about a base employment, and the
wages that it gives is shame and death.

Thirdly, since it is our nature, allbeit the misery be such it brings upon us,
far beyond what we are able to express, yet we by nature are secure and
feel no burden; nature is no burden: We may stand amazed to see how men
endued with admirable gifts of reason, able for to judge of matters in the
world, when they have heard how sin will utterly destroy them, souls and
bodies, how it will be bitterness at last, and sink them into hell, yet can
go on in wickedness without remorse or trouble, nay can give up themselves to
such notorious vvayes of sin, as they can see apparently will ruin bodies
and estates, without an a king conscience, I say we may be well amazed at
this, but here is the reason, sin is our nature, and what ever nature gives
us is no burden to us; of all mischiefs, is not this one of the greatest to
be most miserable and not to feel it? this keeps a man in that his misery,
all the means of grace are fruitless by it to his soul, and that which made
our Savior bleed upon the Cross, and brought him to his agony and sweat of
blood, cannot obtain a tear from us, but is despised and slighted in our
hearts; and thus it is with us all, so far as we are unregenerate and sin
prevails. O let the thought of this, at least in this our day of Fast, do
something toward the humbling of our selves before the Lord!

Angels of light they were, Job ^8. 7. Jude v. 7.
sin entering once upon them made them heaps of everlasting darkness and
confusion, as for man it cast him out of Paradise, stripped him of his beauty,
bereaved him of the right use of his reason, and fills his heart Eccl 9. 3.
with madness whilst he lives; the wisdom of God is foolishness unto him: it
destroys the tenderness of 1 Cor. 2 7, 14 Heb. 3. 12 To. 1. 31 Ioh. 3. 36.
his heart, and by degrees extinguisheth his natural affection, and eats out
all good nature in him; it lays him for ever naked to the wrath and curse of
God, and sinkes him down to hell; that which is worst of all, it makes a man
despise a pardon and to trample under foot the son of God, how often would I
have gathered you (says Christ) as an hen gathers her chickens under her
wings and ye would not. Who would nourish such a viper in his bosom? this do
we; but shall it not afflict our souls, whilst we consider how it is with us,
and what miseries we have brought upon our selves thereby? if all this will not
make our hearts relent, let us a little turn our thoughts upon the temporal
afflictions that it brings, there we have an object of affinity with sense,
which is a great advantage unto tears; Look upon the miseries of Ireland, the
blood which there is spilt, by cruel, blood-thirsty and deceitful men; the
doleful miseries we fear in this our Land, from war; me thinks I hear the
little children, the infants now unborne, to call for tears this day from
parents, trying if possibly the Lord will be entreated by us, and such woe and
misery may be prevented; but what ever is already, or hereafter comes upon us
in that kind, should it be (which God forbid) the ruin of our Cities,
destruction of the people, corruption of Religion, loss of all that is dearest
to us, and the overthrow of Kingdoms, all is the fruit of sin. Look upon it
therefore in the miseries and desolations it has caused in all the world, and
let it so provoke your souls to mourn before the Lord this day.

The precious blood of Christ, that surely will make our hearts to yield: the
blood of Abel cried against the wicked Cain, much more the blood of Christ
against our sins; such is the vileness of it, as no other sacrifice but
Christ could pacify the wrath of God; all the creatures in the world, Angels
and men, could not make up the price of man's redemption, Psalm. 49. 7, 8. None
of them can by any means redeem Romans 5. 9, 10. Gal. 3. 13,
his brother, nor give unto God a ransom for him, for the redemption of the
soul is precious, but, was not the holy life of Christ enough? No, he must
dye, and it must be a cursed death, nor will his body's death suffice, his
soul must dye, Isa. 53. 10. His soul Mat. 26, 38.
was made an offering for sin, and v, 12. He powered out his soul to death;
nor had all this been sufficient, had not the blood of Christ been the blood of
God, Act. 20. 28. God purchased his Church by his 1 John 3. 16.
own blood. Well, have our sins cost Christ his blood, and shall they not
cost us some tears? think upon him how he bled upon the cross, and how he
hung while all was finished, and for shame let it do something toward the
breaking of our hearts. It will wound the deeper, if

4. In the last place, we consider who it is we have Act. 17. 28 Mich. 7. 15
Ezech. 33. 11. Ezech. 18. 31. Jer. 13. 17. Luke 15. 10. Luke 19. 41.
offended, even this Christ who thus has shed his blood upon the cross for
sinners, that God in whom we live and move, that makes our lives so sweet by
many mercies, that pardons iniquity, and reteineth not his anger for ever,
because he delights in mercy, that calls upon you with such tender bowels of
affection, why will ye dye? and will ye not be made clean? when shall it once
be? that when you are converted unto life rejoices, when you stand it out by
unbeleefe, weeps over you: (To you who are his people I may say,) that God who
has engaged himself to love you, and to be your portion, husband, friend and
father. Well, shall not all this love of his make us relent, and mourn for
sin, whereby we have abused him? shall he weep for us, and we not for our
selves? his Spirit grieveth when his people sin, what hearts have we that are
so little moov'd for what we do against him! Thus have we dispatched the first
thing in the making of our peace, this humbling of our selves. I have stood the
longer upon this, because it is a principal and main part of the duty of this
day, and that indeed, on which the rest will much depend. You heard in opening
of the Text, there is no peace to an unbroken heart; therefore we find it in the
first place called Lev. 23 27 2 Chro. 7. 14.
for by God in days of Fast, and the first thing put in practice here by
Israel his people.

The second is, our fleeing unto Christ for pardon, let Jer. 31. 32, 33. Ps.
89. 33, 34. Ps. 16. 5. Ephesians. 5. 32. Joh. 15. 15. Isa. 9. 6. Act. 8. 36.
this also be a part of this days work. Are we sensible in any measure of the
misery of sin, and weight of Gods eternal wrath? let us then stir up our
selves to take hold of his mercy which he freely offers; let every one of us
thus reason with himself, as once the Eunuch said to Philip, lo here is
water, what hinders me to be baptized? so let us say, see, here is a Christ, a
Savior, a pardon offered, why should not I believe? a fountain for sin and
for uncleanness, Zach. 13. 1 2 King. 5. 13.
what hinders me from stepping in? had he commanded me some great thing to be
done, for life eternal, should I not have done it? how much rather when he
says, wash and be clean, believe and be saved? and why should I defer a
work of such importance, that may now be done more easily than ever, should I
live a thousand years, since every day without repentance adds something to
the hardness of my heart; and why do I neglect eternity, and dote upon these
transitory things below? when Jesus Christ has shed his blood for pardon, why
do I refuse to sue it out? thus let us plead, and overcome our selves, and
run to Christ for mercy and forgiveness: nor do I speak this only unto
such who are yet strangers to the life of God, but even to all. The Number. 28. 3.
burnt-offering was the daily sacrifice, morning and evening it was renewed;
and it is the business of our morning and evening prayer, to renew our peace
from time to time with God; repentance is the constant work of every believer,
especially it must be done upon a day of fast.

Covenant with God, that is the peace offering or thank offering he expects
this day, even your selves given up to him a living Romans 12 1 Romans 6. 13.
sacrifice, your members as instruments of righteousness to God, to be
possessed by his Spirit, to be governed by his will; give up your hearts into
his hands, and let him work his will upon them, let him bring what light he
please into your understandings, let him kindle what affections he desires in
your hearts, let godly sorrow have a perfect work, and let him bring into your
souls, the strongest cosolations of his Spirit, do not put them by, however
heretofore you have neglected this salvation, yet now betake your selves to
Christ, and venture life and soul, and all upon his mercy, say, if we perish
we perish, Jesus Christ shall be our stay, his service our employment, there we
will set up our rest for ever, we will be his servants, he shall be our God.
Thus in these three things, we see what must be done in making of our peace, oh
that the Lord would now persuade your hearts to do it! You especially that
never tasted of the sweetness of a pardon; God is about to do great things
for the Kingdom, yea for the whole world; it is a time of bounty with him, put
you in for mercy for your souls. And why should any heart refuse? what is the
cause? do we doubt his willingness to pardon? he is more ready to embrace
than we to come. Have you not considered what complaints he made about his
casting off an unrepenting, apostatizing people? Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give
thee up O Ephraim (says God?) how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set
thee as Zeboim? that is, as the Cities which the Lord destroyed with Sodom and
Gomorrha: My heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together, he
says as much of you that stand demurring, and pretending, yielding to the
secret desperate misgivings of an unbeleeving heart; whilst you cry out, O how
shall God accept of us? he cries as fast, how shall I cast off such a people,
such a soul? does he not entreat you to be reconciled? what can you desire
more? 2 Cor. 5. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Do ye think
there is no contentment in the ways of God, and you must live a sad
uncomfortable life? like those in Malachy, that say, It is in vain to serve
the Lord, and what profit is it? Is Mal. 3. 14.
this the matter? then what think you of all those glorious things the
Scripture speaks of, joy unspeakeable 1 Pet 1. 8. 1 Cor 2. 9, 10.
and full of glory; that which neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor has
entered into man's heart to conceive, what God has prepared for them that love
him, and reveals unto his people by his Spirit? what think you of Christ? did
he dye to delude his people with Joh. 6. 55.
a phansy? no, they know his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink
indeed. Ask among the Saints, if ever any of his servants yet, repented him of
his condition or employment; they will tell you, that the comforts which they have
in Christ, are more worth than a world of sensual delights. It Is true some
prove Apostates, They went out from us, but they were 1 John 2. 19.
not of us (says the Apostle John,) if they had bin of us, they had no doubt
continued with us. Do but try once if it be not thus, taste and see, as the
Psalmist says, that the Lord is good: You are like to Solomon's buyer, Ps. ^4.
8. Prove. 20, ^4.
it is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, but when he is gone his way he
boasts; so let what can be said in praise of Christ, he is but low in your
esteem, till you have made your covenant with Christ, and then you boast and
say, you could not have thought that Christ had been so good, and his ways so
sweet as now you find them; then you will say that all his ways are pleasant, and
his commandments sweeter then the Pro. 3. 17. Ps. 19. 10.
honey and the honey comb. Be persuaded therefore beloved, and set upon this work
this day, it is true, the heart will hold off, no other is to be expected, else
we need not so to strive to enter in at the straight gate; the Apostle Paul
says of himself, that when he would do well, evil was present with him; it
is the case of all the Romans 7. 21.
Saints of God; you heard before, the sin of our own hearts will certainly
oppose, in any thing we do for God: Set therefore to the work, and drive along
the heart with violence; say not, you shall never do good upon it, because you
find your selves so listlesse and so backward, make once your peace with God,
this work shall also prosper in your hands, even the destruction of your
sins, and cleansing of your hearts from wickedness; God shall disarme that
wicked and malignant party in your souls; the strong holds of sin shall fall
before the weapons of our 2 Cor. 10. 4. Romans 8. 26. Ps. 57. 2, Romans 8. 2.
warfare, they shall be mighty through him, to overthrow all carnal
reasonings, and to bring into captivity every thought, to the obedience of
Christ, he will help your infirmities, he will teach you how to pray, and what to
pray for, he will perform all things for you, he will dwell in your hearts, and the
spirit of life which is in Christ, shall make you free from the law of sin
and death. Oh that you did Luke ^9. 42.
but know, even you, who are the greatest strangers unto God, that live without
him in the world, at least in this your day, though you have despised his
mercies many years, and would not be reformed, the things which belong unto
your peace, how ready Christ is to receive you, how sweet his embraces are, how
helpful to you in his service. And me thinks in case you should forget your
own soul, your love unto your country, your desire of a good success of that
great work you have in hand, should even engage you not to rest until ye find
your sins are pardoned, and Christ is yours; this gives increase of fortitude
and wisdom, it makes you to be imploid for God, fit to encounter Satan and
histroopes, and to resist the sin of your own hearts; that will betray you,
and the cause, if it be suffered; but whenas together with so great a blessing,
the salvation of your soul, and life eternal is comprised, what heart would
not be gained by such an argument? and who knows but some of you the Lord has
thus engaged in his work, that so by being thus, as it were, constrained to
seek him, you may be brought to his acquaintance, and an happy closing with
him to eternal bliss and glory; otherwise, suppose you have the day, yet, if
what has bin said will not prevail, and you neglect your peace with God,
alas, when you shall stand before the righteous Judge of all, how sadly will
the soul complain? woe is me will that cry out, such pains and care was taken
for my country, my estate, my family, but none at all for me, such hazzards did
I run, such noble acts I did, such honor and renown I got, but now I see I
perish, and must for ever lie in hell. O what pity is it, such as do such
things for God should not be saved! what shall it profit a man if he gains the
whole world and lose his own Mar. 8. 36.
foul?

And let me add yet one thing more, either make your peace with God this day,
or else this work which here you are about, will no way prosper with you; this
your coming here together, will not be for the better but the worse; by such
fasting and praying, 1 Cor. 11.
you shall lose much of the tenderness of your hearts, and set your selves at
greater distance from repentance: You heard before what God says by his
Prophet; The ways of the Lord are right, and the Hos. 14. 9.
righteous shall walk in them, that is, they shall go on and prosper, they
shall not be the worse for prayer, nor hearing of the word, nor any duty, but
the trnsgressours shall fall therein. The good Lord deliver us from such a
doom: I will stay no longer in this exhortation, the Lord persuade your hearts
to listen to it!

that the work of God does prosper best in those men's hands, whose peace is
made with him? then having made your peace, take heed that in your doing of his
work it be not broken. It is true, that ordinarily what care you take in
seeking to be reconciled, you will take to keep it being gotten, because thereby
your strength and resolution will increase, the having of a pardon, teaches us
to prize it; therefore I said before, that such the Lord may trust in doing of
his work; but yet because of humane frailty, since there is flesh as well as
spirit in the best, there is also place for this advise, beware that what ye
do for God, ye do it so as you offend him not in doing of it.

Three ways especially that may be done,

Father upon earth (says Christ,) Mat. 23. 9. not but that our parents must be
honored; our Savior means not them, it is meant in matters of faith, that no
man should impose upon us by his own, or any man's authority; therefore it
follows, neither be ye called Master, that is, expect it not from others, that
they should take up things on trust from you: our Savior adds the reason, v.
9. for, says he, ye have one Master even Christ, that is, his word must be the
bottom of your faith, and all (...). Id est, (...)
ye are brethren, that is, in point of being Masters over one an others faith
and conscience, ye are all equal and alike. Three words our Savior there
uses in this matter, 1 Rabbi, that is, Master, Joh. 1. 38. 2 Father, ^ Doctor
or Leader, in which he compriseth all such personal respects whcih might carry
it with men, and he forbids them all; not that these titles are unlawful, but
not lawful in this way, namely, by any personal respects what ever, either of
learning in the first, or of antiquity in the second, or of example in the
third, to put things upon men in doctrine or in practice; our Savior
determines that question, how far the doctrine of the Pharisees should be
regarded, you see he is upon it, v. 1. and he gives them that which is their due,
as sitting in Moses chair; that is, that the people should observe what they
taught from Moses; here he takes order they should not have too much authority,
they might be helpers to, not masters of their faith. Not that we are to make
no difference of men learned and unlearned, far be that from us; give due
respect unto the learned and the ancient, do not soon reject what such shall
say; if they go cross to our opinions, let it be a strong inducement to
examine, and to search into the matter further: too apt we are to dote upon
our own conceptions; but make them not the ground or bottom of your faith; No,
if many learned me^ agree upon a thing, Romans 14. 5, 23.
yet receive it neither to your practice nor belief, because they say it is so,
until your selves are able to discern it; use counsels as Counselors and as
helps, use them not as Lawgivers to your faith: or otherwise, if that were the
way that God would have us take, to pin our faith upon our teachers, then he
that is Mat. 15. 24.
misled must be excused, no (says our Savior) if the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch. Nay it would follow that the Lord has given to
us in vain, our reason and abilities to judge; the Apostle says, the
spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15. again you have an unction
from the holy one and ye know all things, 1 John 2. 20, 27. Though we (says
the Apostle, Gal. 1. 8.) that is, the Apostles of Christ or an Angel from
Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you* then that which we have preached unto
you, let him be accursed: how should they know what is preached, or whether
it is another Gospel, if they try it not? and if they ought to try it, ought
they not to judge it also? Yea, the Apostle says, the Preacher shall be judged
accursed: nor does it belong to Ministers alone, the Apostle speaks it to the
Churches of Galatia, and to all believers; as also that Gal. ^. 2.
command is universal, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they are of God. And 2 These. 5. 8 Prove all things, hold fast
that which is good.

God has cause to be offended with you, if you fail in this, this very thing
has done to him a world of injury already; it is the pillar upon which the
Popish religion stands; take away that which they call the authority of their
Church, let men allow themselves Jud 16. 29.
the use of reason, and not be compelled to see with other men's eyes, and not
their own, it will be like to Sampsons removal of the pillar, which brought
down the house upon the Philistines; the whole structure of that Romish Babel
will fall at once. Besides, when things are taken upon trust from man, suppose
you hit upon the right, yet you appear not for it as the truth of God, but as
the opinion of such and such a man, for that is all that you can say, that you
know such learned men do say it is his, but whether it be so or no, you cannot
(of your own knowledge) say. In case you suffer for the truth, thus taken upon
trust, it is not, formally, for God or for his glory, that you give your
testimony, it is only for the credit and the honor of those men, on whose
authority and credit your faith is pinned, therefore be exhorted, as you would
keep in with God in doing of his work, take heed of this; we condemn it in the
Papists, let us not fall into it our selves. I have bin something large in this,
because it is of such importance, the other two I shall but name and so
conclude.

2. Take heed how you abate him any thing, to save your selv^; saving is
loosing in this case, you loose what you think to save and loose him too: when
God shall bring you to an hour wherein by your estates, or by your persons,
you may stand him insome stead, say not so much, father spare me from this
hour, spare me in this cross, dispense with me in that, and let me step Ioh
12^ 27, 28.
it over, i will take up the next, say as our Savior did, for this cause came I
to this hour, to these abilities, to such a fitness, to this opportunity,
that I might be his instrument to do his work, to advance his Gospel, the
(...) Christ, the glory of his Name; say, Father, glorify thy Name, thy Power
in supporting, Joh. 12. 27, 28.
thy Mercy in forgiving, thy Wisdom in contriving all things for the best, and
let that suffice, that such a God he is whom you serve, so good, so wise, so
powerful, so faithful to his people.

3. Do no^ the work of God negligently, or to halves; it will provoke and
grieve the Lord exceedingly; and little comfort shall you have in what ye do,
or have already done. Cursed is he that does the work of God negligently, Jer.
48. 10. I speak not this to accuse, but to warn you of a rock where many
have, and we are very apt to split and suffer shipwreck of that peace and
comfort we desire; for let me tell you, God will have his work done; as
Mordecai once said to Hester, so I may say, should you be backward, deliverance
Hest. 4. 14.
will arise some other way, and that may cost you dear: You know what once was
said of Caleb, Number. 14. 24. My servant Caleb (says God) because he had an
other spirit with him, and has followed me fully, him will I bring into the
land, and his seed shall possess it; accordingly we find, he had a double
portion given him, Josh. 14. This had he, whenas the people that neglected God
and followed him to halves, were all cut short and came not into Canaan; would
you have a Calebs portion* in the comforts and the blessings which we hope for?
then do as Caleb did; follow the Lord your God fully. God has not in the least
neglected you, how often, how many ways has he delivered you, what great things
has he done for you, and for the Kingdom? I conclude all with that
exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 8. Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know that your labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

