Mr. Baxters APHORISMS EXORIZED AND ANTHORIZED.

OR An Examination of and Answer to a Book written by Mr. Ri: Baxter Teacher of
the Church at Kederminster in Worcestershire, entitled, Aphorisms of
Justification.

TOGETHER WITH A vindication of Justification by mere Grace, from all the
Popish and Arminian Sophisms, by which that Author labors to ground it upon
Man's Works and Righteousness.

By JOHN CRANDON an unworthy Minister of the Gospel of CHRIST at Fawley in
Hant-shire.

Ipse fecit nos, and non ipsi nos. Ipsi nos justos and salvos fecit and non
ipsi nos. August. de verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 11.

God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Gal. 6. 14.

Imprimatur,

Joseph Caryl.
Jan: 3. 1654.
LONDON; Printed by M. S. and are to be sold by T: Brewster at the three Bibles
in Paul's Churchyard: And L: Chapman at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1654.

ALthough it be matter of a very sorrowful resentment to see Theological
wars renewed among Brethren, yet it is a duty to contend earnestly for the
faith, which was once delivered to the Saints. And although I heartily wish
that in these contentions all personal reflections were laid aside, and
opinions only dealt with; which latter consideration (How-ever this Author, I
doubt not has satisfied his own Conscience, and labors much to satisfy his
Readers about it) has a little checked my thoughts in giving an explicit
testimony to the work; yet the doctrinal points therein maintained and
vindicated, The present freedom of believers from the Curse of the Law, and
their free justification by Faith without works, yea without Faith as it is a
work through the alone satisfaction of Jesus Christ, are of such moment and so
fundamental in religion for the comfort of poor souls, that I cannot but
judge any essay tending to the clearing of them, much more this large and
elaborate discourse, profitable for the Church of God, and worthy of the
public View.

The 3d of the 11th month 1653. Joseph Caryl.

The Printer to the Reader.
Courteous Reader;
BY Reason of sickness and many infirmities of Body, dis^bling the Author often
from Revising the Sheets as they came from the Press, during the whole time
that the Book was in printing; The work comes not to thy view without many
mistakes in Printing: The most considerable of them I have here collected to be
amended with thy Pen before thou beginnest to read; The rest confisting mostly
in mis-pointing and mis-spelling, I leave to thy judgment and candor to
Rectify in Reading the Tractate.

M. S.

Errata.
Preface.
PAge 4. line 1. it is not distinguished by the Italick Character which are Mr.
Brs, and which the Authors words, the quoted place of Mr. Br. will show it.
Page 10. line 26. for [ Catalogus] read [ Catalogus] p. 14. l. 7. for [ Tenet]
r. Tenets. p. 17. l. 19. r. intrinse^al. p. 20. l. 8. r. Communing. p. 33. l.
38. to the word [ Logick] add [and the Metaphysicks] p. 35. l. 2. r. puritate,
and l. 11 r. Doctrinae. p. 36. l. 39. r. for.

Part 1.
Arg. of Cha. 1. for [ doctrine] r. doctrines. p. 4. l. 5. r. imagine. p. 12. l.
38. r. person. p. 19. l. 11. r. stuttering. p. 26. l. 35. for [ nor] r. not. p.
29. l. 9. for [ sinns] r. sin. p. 39. l. 7. for [ and] r. in. p. 45. l. 35.
add [ us.] p. 64. l. 40. for [ Covenants] r. commandments: p. 76. l. 3. for [
piece] r. pierce. p. 101. l. 13. r. controvertible. p. 140. l. 23. dele in. p.
227. l. 40. for [ for] r. to. p. 235. l. 13. for [ united] r. merited. p. 256.
l. 1. for [ the] r. their. p. 257. for [ fruition] r. futurition. p. 264. l. 3.
for [ innocent] r. nocent. p. 314. l. 33. for [ me] r. us. p. 330. l. 1. for [
first] r. fifth. p. 331. l. 30. for [ vindicate^h.] r. vendicateth.

Part 2.
P. 7. l. 19. for [ make] r. made. p. 8. l. 2. for [ the] r. this. and l. 24.
for [ spitted] r. spittled. and l. 34. for [ him] r. the Reader. p. 5. l. ult.
for [ latter] r. letter. p. 11. l. 26. dele not. p. 18. l. 26. add [ them] p.
39. l. 32. r. scripture. p. 49. l. 26. for [ as] r. or. and l. 30. dele to. p.
51. r. operation. p. 54. l. 37. dele the. p. 76. l. 27. for [ so to] r. to so.
p. 81. l. 9. for [ heare] r. here. and l. 36. for [ affection] r. affectation.
p. 87. for [ in] r. upon. p. 97. for [ Mortuum] r. mortuam. p. 139. l. 2. for [
is] r. is not. p. 140. l. 33. for [ controvertibly] r. convertibly. p. 203. l.
ult. to [ Protestants] add that use the word Condition, in Justification, and
salvation. p. 206. l. 8. for [ given] r. gives. p. 313. for [ and] r. the. p.
240. l. 9. dele there. and l. 32. for [ if] r. of. p. 241. l. 22. for [ their]
r. them. p. 244. l. 17. for [ have] r. have made. p. 212. l. 10. dele end. p.
313. l. 12. for [ and] r. he. p. 361. l. 6. r. Restriction. p. 381. l. 28. for
[ O] r. so. p. 395. l. 35. for [ Gratia] r. Gratiae ibid for paraeum] r. parum.
p. 382. l. 32. dele and.

TO THE REVEREND, THE FAITHFUL AND Pious MINISTERS of the Lord Christ within
this Nation.
Much honored and highly Beloved.
IT might be Construed self-arrogance, that so despicable a person in parts,
newly broken out of the black Cloud of Obscurity, should (not only publish to
the world, but withal) tender so rough-hewen a work to the special view and
scrutiny of them whom Christ has made and named the Lights of the world. But
this imputation will appear undeserved, to as many as shall consider that what
is here presented to so great a fulgor of judgment and learning, comes with a
request not of Patronage alone, but of Correction also. Of Patronage where it
defends the Truth in the Truth: of Correction where it halteth into the defense
of error in steed of the Truth, or of the Truth but not in the Truth. The work
it self will sufficiently speak me out not fit to be registered inter Doctos,
yet has it been still my study not to commit any thing by which I should
deserve to be pronounced indocilis, untractable to learn where the Lord holds
forth a faithful Teacher. It is the height of my ambition and patheticall
heartiness of my humble request, not so much to all of you Collectively (which
is unattainable) as to every of you divisively, who in these slippery times
(Honored Worthies) stand fast in the truth of Christ, to be recalled by you
into the way from which you shall find me any where straying: but so that by
the Authority of the Word you lead me into it, that I may gladly be a follower
of such a leader. As to the Book to which this answers, whatsoever Fate this
shall have in men's judgments, surely that must have a stinch with all the
judicious and orthodox. Neither could it so long have stood unshaken, had he
not cunningly prepossessed the minds of his Readers with Affection and
prejudice, the two worst Clouds which often bemist the judgment of them that are
both pious and prudent, that in seeing they do not, because they would not
perceive the truth for a season. The Affections of many he attracted to himself
by professing himself a zealous Presbyterian. This pretext made not a few to
look over and beyond his Contagious doctrine, to behold and regard the person
of the man for his unanimity with them in discipline. This vizzard is at length
so fallen from his Face* that the most do and all may see him under this
profession, to have been but as the Anabaptized Jesuit, taking his station
there from whence he thought to have most advantage to promote his Popish
doctrines, Concluding that under that name his Fraud would not be so easily
espied. And is there now any which sees not he would be Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent, for any Government, for no Government, helping him
to drive home to the head his soul-subverting doctrines into the hearts of men?
Prejudice against the sacred Truth which he oppugneth, he fomented by aspersing
the whole Doctrine of the Gospel and the reformed Churches of Christ with the
black brand of Antinonianism, reserving only the Papists and Arminians, whom
he follows, free of it. How much he has prevailed in sowring with the leaven
of Scribes and Pharisees which is hypocrisy, the vulgar sort not only of the
people, but of the Ministers also, with this gross imposture, would be
incredible, if experience did not manifest it. Therefore finding this Feat so
sovereign to the attainment of his ends, as soon as he heard of exceptions in
the Press against his Aphorisms, his first endeavors have been to fill with
prejudice the minds of men against the both work and Author thereof, dispersing
through this City by his Printer that it is the Hant-shire Antinomian that
excepteth so against him. How irrational and malicious this his indictment
against me is, may appear hence, that I dwell in one of the obscurest nooks of
this English little world, so unknown as he is famous, that he could not so
much as hear of my name, saving by some one of his Circumforaneous Legates
(which having their Provinces assigned either of one or more Counties, are
still Circling and Compassing them, first to disperse this his Mystery of
iniquity with such accurateness, that there may be no one that has the repute
of a pious Gentleman or Minister a stranger to it; and then by their frequent
visitations to examine how the Baxterian Faith thrives in each person, and to
hold them fixed to it) These returning once in six or seven Months out of
their Circuits to their Grand Master may possibly speak in things which they
know not, what they think may be plausible to him. It has not been unknown (I
acknowledge) to some of these that I disrelished his doctrine, and did hinder
the embracing of it: But might not this my dissenting be as properly termed
Treason as Antinonianism?

Yet because I understand that these sparks of false* fire have no sooner fallen
than taken in some, I am forced to Apologize somewhat (and that with the more
Confidence because to you that have the eyes of your understanding most clear
rightly to Censure or judge) that prejudice may be no hinderance to the truth.
What I shall speak herein must relate partly to my self, partly to Mr. Br. and
partly to the doctrine it self which he has drawn into Controversy Condemning
it of Antinomism.

1 What I shall speak of my self shall not be with an heart and a heart, the
one open to let out what it lists, the other reserved to retein in secrecy
what is not for advantage to the ends sought after: but in plainness and
simplicity I shall deliver the whole and naked truth of my judgment as before
the Lord my Judge and Justifier. Neither is there need of hiding and
Tergiversation, for I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: It is the power
of God to salvation etc. And as sweet to me as the salvation which it brings.
I therefore profess my self clear from all that is rightly Called, and has
been judged by the reformed Churches and their Champions Antinonianism, i. e.
oppositeness to the Law. These things I acknowledge my self to hold and teach: 1
That Believers are not under the Curse of the Law as the Curse. 2 Nor are the
Afflictions which befall them so the Curse of the Law, or revenging punishments
for sin, but the fruits of the tender Love of a good and provident Father
working for good to them. 3 That they are not under the Law as a Covenant of
works. If these things be Antinonism I acknowledge my self an Antinomian: yet
such as only the blindness madness and malice of men possibly may account so,
but that I have the Apostles and all the Protestant Churches and Writers
(without any exception) under the same aspersion with me, having all stoutly
maintained all these as Gospel Truths against the false Apostles, Papists, and
Arminians, in their several generations, without the Contradiction of any
except Papists and Arminians, to whom Mr. Br. not without some fellows, has
lately Apostatized. 4 Yet I still grant the preaching of the Law, and that in
its full perfection and all its terrors, useful to shake in pieces all the
carnal Confidences and self righteousness of man, that despairing of safety in
himself, he may be forced to seek it out of himself from mere Mercy, in another
which is Christ the Savior. 5. That the Law is still a perfect rule and
directive of all moral righteousness and obedience both to believers and
unbeleevers, so that in both all variation from it is sin, but Conformity to
it is regularity and obedience. In respect of my judgment therefore about the
Law, I question not my discharge from the imputation of Antinomism among the
truly wise and orthodox, except to be a Christian be Antinonianism.

2 As to Mr. Br, it is evident that he asperseth the innocent with the Fault
whereof himself is guilty. He denies Christ to require under the Gospel, the
perfect holiness and righteousness which the Law commands, and Consequently
that it is not either our duty to perform it, or our sin to fail in it, or
that the Law is an adequate and Competent rule of moral obedience, Because it
Commands more than it is our duty to perform. He says not Christ requires it
not in order to this end, but simply and absolutely he requires it not. If this
be not Antinomianism Part. 1. p. 213. etc.
then Islebius himself has been unjustly Charged with it.

3 As to the matter yet remaining Charged by Mr. Br. and others with
Antinomianism, it may be reduced principally to four heads. 1 Justification as
an Immanent Act in God; As actually Completed in the redemption which is by
Christ and in Christ; (both these before we believe:) 3 The absoluteness and
irrespectiveness of it, freely without Conditions: 4 Christ's satisfying for
man's sins against the Gospel as well as against the Law. Though I have spoken
of all these enough, of each in its proper place within this Tractate, yet
somewhat for the fuller Clearing of my meaning may be said here also. The first
and second I shall for brevity join in one as of no small Cognation. As far as
I hold and have declared my self to hold them; 1 I have also manifested in due
place, how they are or seem at least to be grounded upon the Scriptures; 2 They
are expressly and boldly asserted by many of the most Conspicuous Divines in
piety and Learning, that any of the Protestant Churches have enjoyed ever since
the Reformation. 3. And that without the Contradiction or exception of any
Church or Orthodox Writer for well nigh a hundred years, made against it: A
great and probable Argument that it was the Common Judgment of all the
Churches. 4. Mr. Rhaeterfordt in his Exercit. Apolog. holds it forth not as the
private opinion of some particular men, but as the Common Judgment of all the
Churches. And the Remonstrants take it as such: For so I remember they often
argue in their Apol. and elsewhere, Justificatio est purus putus Actus in Deo
immanens etc. not that they express what Arminius his judgment and theirs after
him is in this point: but that from this as a conclusion which they knew common
to, and would not be denied by any Protestant, their Argument would stand firm
against them. Neither know I any one of the Protestants that has written
against them, excepting against it. 5 I never read any (to make me dissent in
judgment from these Worthies) that has given his reasons against it save Mr.
Br. alone: and he handles the question, like a man spoiled with Philosophy and
vain deceit (as the Apostle terms the use of exotic learning in purely
Gospel matters) after the traditions of men and Rudiments of the world, not
after Christ; Col. 2. 8. And his nakedness in such his arguing is enough
discovered by a learned Writer whose worth I shall still honor, but have not
so much as an Ambition ever to match. Mr. Kendal.
He tells us indeed that Dr Downham has written against it as delivered by Mr.
Pemble. But I could not get the book to see his reasons, nor know I any thing
which he has written but as I have heard from others. Besides I have been told
that some of the late Reverend Synod, disrelished the doctrine, but cannot
find that any one of them has published his reasons for such a disrelish. And
Charity will not permit me to harbor the lightest imagination that any of
those grave Divines culld and selected out of the whole Nation for their
eminency in godliness and learning, should without any means used for
information and conviction, exercise a Tyranny over the Consciences of their
lesser brethren to force them into an implicit Faith to believe as themselves
believe: specially when doing it they shall put out that which they think at
least to be the light of the word in their conscience, and in consenting with
them without hearing a reason, they shall dissent from others (whom their
Modesty will confess to be of no less deservings in the Church) who have given
their reasons.

Yet still I hold, 1 that those Scriptures which treat of Justification by
Faith do all relate to the transient justification which no man partakes of
till he believes. 2 That no man is personally justified, but only in Christ
the public person, till he be by Faith united to Christ. That righteousness
and life so descend to us from the second Adam, as sin and condemnation from
the first. As by the offense of one judgment came upon all to condemnation: so
by the Righteousness of one the free gift came upon all to Justification of
life, Romans 5. 18, 19. In Adam the public person we were all represented, he
was all, and we all considered in him, God saw us in all our individual
pers^ns in him, though we through Adam saw it not: so that A^am sinning we all
sinned in him and became dead in law and guilty of condemnation before God, as
if we had been then being and actually sinning. Nevertheless as to our selves
we were not personally sinners and guilty, until we had a personal being in
and from Adam. So in Christ satisfying Gods justce for sin, the Elect were all
represented as in a public person, satisfying in him and by him, and so all in
him and by him justified and absolved in all their individualls from sin and
condemnation before God: Nevertheless we are not personally so justified,
until we have a personal being and new being in Christ and from Christ. 3.
That this Transient Justification is a justifying or being justified before God
passed at Gods Tribunal set up in man's Conscience, from which he pronounces
absolution to a poor sinner denying himself and resting upon Christ alone for
Mercy. So that now, and never until now he has boldness to pierce by Faith
into the Holiest, and plead his righteousness before him that sits on the
Mercy-seat. Thus our justification which was before in God and in Christ, is
not at all derogatory to the justification which is by Faith: but only
prevents that this latter may not be derogatory to the praise of Gods Grace and
Christ's merits, which have completed all without our subserviency for us: and
thus God is all, seen to be all, and our boasting excluded. This hitherto is my
judgment until I shall be better instructed -- Tu si quid novisti rectius
istis, Candidus imperti.

And at length if it shall be granted to be an error, yet it cannot be
Antinomism, being a deviation not from the doctrine of the Law but of the
Gospel. It was not the judgment but malice of Mr. Br that gave it this brand
of ignominy.

3 To the free absolute and unconditionall Justification, I need not to
Apologize for my self at all. It is to the truly pious of the Ministry to whom
my words are directed, who (among other) have given this evidence of your
godliness, that ye have not forsaken your first Faith by declining to Popery
or Arminianism, what others judge of me is to me a small thing (says the
Apostle of such) I weigh it not. But ye no doubt teach that the very
promulgation of Justification runs upon no other condition but Faith alone, and
upon Faith, not as a quality or virtue, but isntrumental to apply the
righteousness of Christ to Justification, that works and the universal
conditional Justification which Mr. Br. has learned of his Masters, are to be
excluded. In this your doctrine is one and the same in sense and substance with
theirs that affirm Justification to be unconditionall. And it is indifferent to
me to deliver the same truth in their words or yours: Only I find that they
make use of both the former and this Conclusion, as strong Fortresses against
Popery and Arminianism, which causes Mr. Br. with so much impetuousn^sse and
impotency to use his Mounts and Mines against them. Neither can I see any
ground of objecting that either of these two doctrines can in any respect dull
the affections to good works, since it is confessed that they have no
co-officiating with Faith to Justification.

4 To Christ's satisfying for sins against the Gospel as well as against the Law,
I doubt not but ye see both the nicity and falsity of Mr. Brs Negation thereof.
The chief Doctrines of the Gospel are Grace and Gratitude, Justification and
Sanctification. If Christ has not satisfied for our long unbelief and contempt
of the word of Faith before we believe, and of the infirmities of our
Sanctification and Thankfulness when we have believed; or that there are sins
against the New which are not sins against the Old Testament also; or that the
Lord Jesus is not the Mediator of the New Testament but of the Old only; or
that in any of these it should be Antinomianism to dissent from Mr. Br: These
all are so gross Paradoxes that your gravity and wisdom cannot without
Nauseousness smell them: plainly enough declaring indeed that whatsoever
stands in his way of Babel building he will curse it (though never so sacred)
and fright them that are as feeble as fearful, with his scar crow of
Antinomianism, though he make himself never so ridiculous thereby to the
intelligent and prudent.

I have no more to say upon this subject, and what I have said has been before
him that being omniscient knows that I have spoken singly the whole truth,
and nothing but the Truth. Neither can all the strength of my jealousy suspect
any least or greatest thing besides these wherewith either Mr. Br. or any of
his Disciples c^n charge me as with Antinomianism, so that I do with some
confident boldness appeal to your judgment whether I deserve from them this
imputation. Inded such soul-reviving comforts have flown in upon me from the
Grace of God in Christ, that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will
speak, and I can scarce Preach any other thing then Christ and him Crucified;
yet in holding forth a wounded, I hold not forth a maimed Christ to the people,
but Christ with all his benefits, in particular to Sanctification no less then
to Justification. If it be Antinomianism so to reduce all to Christ, and derive
all from him, I must undergo the worlds condemnation for Christ's sake that has
justified and will at length receive me.

One thing more I have to add, and I shall be no further tedious. It may be a
Charge against me that I am too plain, broad and unsparing in my words against
Mr. Br. throughout this Tractate. That which I have to say for my self is,

1 That it arises not so much from my own temper, as from the occasion thereof
given by Mr. Br. I am ready for Christ's sake to become the footstool of the
meek, but where I find a self* exalting, I cannot cry Abreoh. When I see Mr.
Br. usurping the Chair to pass sentence and censure upon all the Divines that
have written, these are learned, those unstudied Divines, to exalt and degrade
better men than himself as they are more either concurrent with or abhorrent
from his Bellarmin and Arminius: I cannot, I dare not use words that might
strengthen but rather vilify the self* confidence and arrogance of the man. So
when the Wolf comes in sheeps clothing to devour, when under the profession of
a Protestant and Presbyterian Divine, he vends his Popish and Arminian under
the name of Protestant Tenets, dissembling his confederacy with the enemies
thereof,

Si natura negat facit indignatio versum. The view of such hypocrisy is enough
to make a sheep a Satyrist. Had I been to deal with a Papist or Arminian, that
had discovered themselves unmasked, I should have spoken in another Dialect.

2 It sprang from other men's yea Ministers too much admiration and almost
adoration of him, when from all parts there was such Concurse in a way of
Pilgrimage to him, to bless him or be blessed by him, and the admirers
returned to the deceiving of others, with no less applaus and triumph, than
the Turks from visiting the shrine of their Mahomet at Mecha; It was requisite
to discover whether he were a God or an Idol to whom such honor was presented.

3 I have herein Christ and his Apostles my leaders, from whom though we
seldom hear a course word against any other sort of men, yea of sinners, yet
when they speak against Impostors and Heretics, specially such as bring their
own works and righteousness to Justification, they so speak as if they were
made up of bitterness and invectives. Ye hypocrites, sowred with the leaven,
and whose doctrine is the doctrine of hypocrisy, Mat. 16. 3. 6. 12. Ye
Serpents, a Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the judgment of Hell, Mat.
23. 33. Woe unto you, woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye shut
up the Kingdom of God against men, ye neither go in your selves, nor suffer
them that would to enter, etc. Mat. 23. 14, 15, etc. Children of hell, blind
guides, fools and blind, whited Sepulchers, ver. 15, 16, 17, 27. The Publicans
are justified rather then you, enter into the Kingdom before you, Lu. 18. 14.
Ma. 21. 31. More joy is in Heaven for one sinner repenting, than 99 such, etc.
Lu. 15. 7. False brethren, Gal. 2. 4. Subverters of souls, Acts 15. 24.
Grievous Wolves, not sparing the flock, Acts 20. 29. False Apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, Satan's
Ministers transformed into Ministers of Righteousness, as Satan transformed
himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. Dogs, evil workers, the
Concision, Phil. 3. 2. Let them be accursed, Gal. 1. 8. I would they were cut
off, Gal. 5. 12. with many other the like passages. It savours not of the
spirit and zeal of Christ and his Apostles, not to speak home to this kind of
men above the rest. But if I have not fully proved Mr: Brs principles and
doctrines to be the same in substance with these false Apostles, as elsewhere in
this Treatise, so specially Part 2. Chap 19. I acknowledge my self not to
understand either Saint Paul or Mr. Br.

My Request now shall be such as has equity in it, that as far as ye find this
Tractate Orthodox and Consonant to sound Doctrine, ye will be pleased to grant
it and the Author of it your Patronage, and prayers for a blessing upon it, and
where ye see it otherwise, to vouchsafe to its Author your Admonition, not
suffering him to stray, whom charity binds you to reduce into the way. This is
desired as from all so from every of you, by

From my Lodging in Aldersgate* street, December. 24. 1653. YOUR Humbly devoted
Servant in the Lord Jesus. JOHN CRANDON.

To the truly Virtuous and Religious Lady, Margaret Hildesley of Hinton, in the
County of South-Hampton, the Author wishes all Grace and perfections in the
LORD JESUS.
Madam,
IT abides (I know) in fresh remembrance with you, by whom, and with what
transcendent praises both of the Work and its Author the Aphorisms in this
ensuing Tractate examined, were commended to your perusal, to be an
Enchiridion or Manual still in your hand, or rather a Pectorall and Antidote
next, your heart to defend it against errors and inward Anguish. But so
abundantly has God enriched you with the knowledge of, and zeal for that
precious Mystery of Christ, that you quickly saw the Mystery of iniquity that
lurked in it, therefore cast it aside as unprofitable, yea noxious. Yet
afterward finding some of the Ministers with whom you had acquaintance,
deceived by it, you entreated me to take it, and give you my judgment of the
work, and my exceptions against some Mistakes in it. And as the deceit was
^urther propagated, so you urged me to increase my exceptions, and now at
length that which was not purposed at first is come forth to public view, an
Answer to Mr. Brs Aphorisms. Alas that we are brought forth in such an Age,
wherein the defense of Christ's cause is left to fools and carcasses of men, the
Learned and potent declin^ng the service; that in the midst of our Civil, or
rather uncivil broyls one against another, there should be found such as fall
foul with the Grace of God and Merits of Christ also: that to preach the
Gospel of Christ purely, after the example and precepts of Paul and Luther
should render a man in the opinion of so many, an Heretic; but to follow
Arminius and Bellarmine, gets applause: that we are forced to see men violent
and using force to subvert, not to enter into the Kingdom of Christ. If this
^reatise shall by the assistance of Gods mercy, be in any degree helpful to
cure this Malady, they that find or see the benefit, are bound to praise God
for you, that by you as a special instrument instigating, it came to see the
Light. Whatsoever weakness there is in it, will redound to the shame of the
Author, not at all reflect upon you, whose desire it was (could you have
attained it) to have had the best Patron employed in the defense of the best
Cause.

I expect that Mr. Br. will come forth, and that speedily with a vehement
Reply. But whatsoever he says, I shall follow the precept of the Apostle, Tit.
3. 10, 11. He has had a first, and two hundred of Admonitions (as they report
which come from him) which he lays as heaps of sand, not answering any of
them, how should I follow the Apostles precept in not rejecting, in having any
thing more to do with him. The present Work had no other relation to him, but
as to the undeceiving of the simple which had received infection from him. But
if my beloved and Reverend Brother in the work of the Lord, which commended to
you Mr. Brs Aphorisms, and has made it long his work to propagate it through
many Counties, yea undertaken in the Western Counties to be the def^nder of all
that Mr. Br has written in that Book (the performance whereof is by many
Ministers there expected) will take it up as his task to Apologize for him, and
affirm the Apology (as in his name) so to be his own; I shall in despite of
all infirmities of mind and body, so long as breath lasts, by Gods assistance
Anti-apologize for Christ, and that not in such an expression of words as I
have used to M. Br (whom I look upon as an Impostor) but in such a spirit of
meekness and Reverence, as is meet to be used toward so pious and learned a
Divine, who cannot, dares not against the light of his conscience hold any
Truth of God in unrighteousness.

The Lord give unto you to keep your station firm in the Light and heat of the
Sun of Righteousness, that the splendour thereof may more and more shine into
your understanding, and the heat thereof more inflame your affections to the
pure Gospel of Christ, that you may be able to comprehend with all Saints what
is the breadth and length and depth and height: And to know the love of Christ,
which surpasses all knowledge, and be filled with all the fullness of God. This
is the request of

From my Lodging, December. 24. 1653. MADAM Your humble servant and daily
Remembrancer at the throne of Grace, J: C:

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IF thou know me as well as I know my self, thou will also wonder as much
as my self, to see me appear in Print, specially in so Momentous a Cause, and
that against so formidable an Antagonist. But the ground of our wondering may
somewhat differ. That which affects thee may be, that a man of so despicable
parts should dare to brandish a weapon (though the Lords) against so great and
incomparable a Champion, as flesh and blood accounts him. But the thing which
affects me is, that the Heroic Worthies of our Land hide their heads, and Come
not forth to help the Lord against the mighty, Jud. 5. 23, but leave the
defense of Christ's cause to contemptible and unqualified persons for such a
performance. In excuse of my self against the imputation of rashness and
presumption, I can say, Mr. Baxters Aphorisms had been extant full three
years, before I put pen to paper to except against him. A strong expectation
still possessed me of seeing something come forth against him from an abler
hand. When my expectation failed, and I found his Tractate of all other that
have come forth these many years, most perilous, and pernicious, as
destroying the very foundation of a Christians hope and comfort, at length I
thought it fit to do my endeavor for the undeceiving of some private Friends
either taken, or in danger to be taken in his snares, not ceasing still to
expect the publication of some work by others, openly to vindicate the grace of
God from his injurious warring against it. At length, having finished what I
thought fit to be communicated privately to some friends, and not withholding
the view thereof from any that craved it; I suffered it to sleep many months,
in hope still to see a more learned answer to his work. What should I do more?
May not I justly say with David, when all the armed Worthies of Israel either
fled, or at least shunned the encounter, was there not a cause to stand forth
(for lack of better weapons) with a sling and a smooth stone, trusting in the
name of the God of Israel, whose grace this man had defied? When the wise and
prudent, the high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees oppugned the grace of God in
giving Christ to be the justifier of Publicans, Harlots, and Sinners, the
spirit of Christ enlarged the hearts of the illiterate and vulgar to sing their
Hosannahs, and out of the mouths of babes and sucklings ordained praise to
himself: Nay, if these should hold their peace, the very stones should cry
out, says our Savior. When the case is like it at present, and the Angelici
Doctores are silent, it is the fit season for Christ to animate the very Terrae
filios, to speak in the defense of his grace. I held my self the unfittest of
many (if not of all) to come upon this stage; yet not so unfit, but if none
else would, I took my self obliged to ascend it. Yea such is the power of
Truth, this Truth of Truths, this great and cardinal truth here controverted,
that I fear not by the word, and in the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, to enter the
Lists with all men and Devils that shall oppugn it; so vain a shadow is all
the wisdom and sophistry of men, and depths of Satan, when opposed to the
Gospel of Christ which is the power and wisdom of God.

It will next be objected, that this Tractate of mine comes forth into public
view more raw, rugged, incompendious, and unpolished, than befits the Majesty
of the Doctrine whereof it treats. I do not, I cannot deny it. I saw what
should have been done more, but was not in a capacity to do it. That which I
can say for my self is, 1. That it was written for private use, without any
purpose to make it common, until I came to the latter part, and almost the end
of it. 2. My acquaintance knows how many, and how long interruptions of
sickness I had in the writing thereof, that I was but Canis ad Nilum, did all
by snatches, which much hindered the right composure of the whole, and
connection of its parts. 3. I could not find one man about us that vel prece vel
pretio, was fit and willing to transcribe one Copy thereof, neither was in
strength of body to do it my self: So that what was first done, in the same
Crasso filo in which it was first done, without any abreviations, alterations,
or polishings, is now presented to the Printer to be made use of: My judgment
telling me that rather a course piece, then nothing at all should appear
against Mr. Baxter, at least to invite others that excel in abilities of mind
and body, to come after with a more exact Treatise. If all this excuse not, and
that the Velle be no fit Apology to take off the crime of Non Posse, I am
contented to lie under Censure: yet with this comfort, that the less of man,
the more of God is to be found in these fruits of my Labors; All that is
therein being grounded upon the sure word of God, whose plainness has more
excellency in it then all man's accuratenesse.

It remains, that before I descend to give my particular exceptions against the
Doctrine of this Tractate of Mr. Baxter, something be premised. 1. Of the
Author, 2. Of the work in general, 3. Of my intention in excepting against
it. The mistake of the two former more deluding some unwary persons (as I have
observed) then all his arguments of themselves could do. 1. Then of the Author.

I can speak nothing of him from my own acquaintance with him. For, Albus an
ater, homo sit nescio, I was never so happy or unhappy to see his face,
therefore must speak of him partly as he has been represented and described by
others, partly as he makes out himself.

1. Touching his learning, as he has been magnified by others, such he
manifests himself. He that shall peruse this one Tractate of his, must be
forced to cry out, Quantus, quantus, nil nisi sapientia est, a deep and mere
Philosopher (I say not Philosophaster) yea Grammaticus Rhetor Geometres, etc.
In all partt of humane learning a Cathedral Doctor: But his Masterpiece is
Sophistry, in this way of the worlds sublimated Divinity; he is not behind the
Angelical and Seraphicall Doctors, Thomas and Scotus, and their followers. As
for that lower and meaner region of Learning, viz. Scripture, and more
specially Gospel-knowledg, himself tells us that his standing and
understanding is mounted above that mentioned, Job 8. 9. That for lack of other
work, and through the defect or absence of better Books, he once read the
Scripture six days together, in Append. page 110, 111.
which time he sucked much more out of the Word, then ever God breathed into it,
which he confesses he could not have done of himself, without the help of
other Books which he had formerly read, i. e. without the glosses of the
Schoolmen and Jesuits, which know so much of Christ, as their Master Aristotle
could teach them. And that this man understands the Scriptures no less
completely than the worst of them in a Catholic sense, we shall find I doubt
not, when we come to examine the Texts which he brings to prove his Catholic
Justification.

2. As for his piety, strictness, mortification, holiness, zeal, etc. in
respect whereof some have even canonized him for a matchless and super-eminent
Saint (as I have understood by many in the Western parts, before I ever saw any
of his works) I should say enough in saying over what Dr. Twiss. has written
in his Answer to the Preface and Prefacer unto Arminius his
Anti-perkinsinianism, where the Prefacer in the same manner exalts the parts
and virtues of Arminius, thereby to make way into the hearts of men to receive
his Doctrine. The Dr. acquitting himself first of any dislike that he has of
the piety of children in advancing their Fathers praise, and affirming his
desire herein to proceed no further then to lay down a caution, that the truth
may receive no damage by the superlative praise of any man; answers, That
although there might be opposed against Arminius that dissent from him in
judgment, even the whole cloud of Protestant Divines, the very lights of the
Church, that in parts and virtues were no way behind Arminius, if not his
superiors; yet he will not do it, because neither has God commanded, nor is
it safe for us to make the splendour of men's persons, but the infallible word of
the most High, our rule to judge of Doctrines, and try the opinions of men.

But I add secondly, That it has been usual to Satan in all ages to employ
whited Sepulchers, beautiful without, to broach and defend Heresies in the
Church. He wants not his depths, is not ignorant that men of vicious lives are
unfit to deceive and pervert consciences. Therefore when himself will deceive,
he puts off his Devils face, and transforms himself into an Angel of Light:
No marvel then if he teach his Ministers, when they are about to seduce, to
transform themselves into Apostles of Christ, and Ministers of Righteousness,
2 Cor. 11. 13. -- 15. Where has there ever been more appearance of holiness
(and men cannot search the heart) then in the Scribes and Pharisees? Then in
the Monks and Friars? then among the Socinians, yea among the very Turks?
Shall then the outward varnish of their seeming virtues, befool us to drink
down their damning doctrines?

3 Though Paul or an Angel from Heaven preach unto you another Gospel, let him
be accursed, Gal. 1. 8. says the Holy Ghost; but whether Mr Baxter does in
this Treatise bring us another Gospel, his Doctrine in the Examination thereof
will manifest.

4 I would that this his Treatise did speak him out to be so strictly and
tenderly conscientious as his friends proclaim him; I should then either in
person have made recourse to him, to communicate my thoughts to him, or written
in another tone, in the spirit of meekness to him, to have received fuller
satisfaction from him, if my impotency could not have ministered some
information to him. But we shall find in what he writes, many things that may
work in us a jealousy of the sincerity of a sanctified Conscience in him. I
shall here mention some generals, leaving the rest until we come to except
against the particulars.

One thing that occasioneth this jealousy, is the want of ingenuity, truth and
simplicity in his Assertions. For one instance hereof we need not step further
then to the title of the work, where he affirms it to be published especially
for the use of the Church of Kederminster in Worcestershire. Can any man that
has but glanced an eye on the surface of humane literature, think him to mean
as he speaks? Either we must conclude that he has the very spirit of all
Philosophical and Metaphysicall learning, which he breaths forth as
effectually upon his Disciples, as Knipperdoling did the Holy Ghost upon his
Anabaptists; or else his Church for the greatest number of its members is not
in a capacity of understanding him. That his Church by his presidency in it, is
on a sudden become a Najoth in Ramah, every Saul that comes near it does
philosophari, if not prophetare, so that ex ejus Ludo tanquam ex equo Trojano
innumeri principes exiere (Paul's Princes, I mean Princes in secular wisdom
and learning, 1 Cor. 2. 6. 8.) else if his people have no such inspiration
above other Churches, surely the most of them stagger at the first word in the
title of the Book, understand not the tenth part of his sacred subtle
distinctions, but in most things that he says he is to them a Barbarian, and
they to him. Nay Mr Baxter is not a novice, he knows where and for what mouths
to chew his morsels, and to whom to give them to be chewed. It was especially
for the nimble wits and logical Teachers of the Churches, that this broth was
boiled (as I shall show more fully afterward) that having misled the leaders,
he might by them mislead their flocks also. 2 And as little ingenuity and truth
is there in him, where he quoteth some whom he (against his stomach) calls
Orthodox Divines, and from some locutions and fragments of their sentences,
concludes them to be of his Judgment; when he knows their Doctrine about
Justification, to be so diametrically opposite to his, as hell to heaven, and
Antichrist to Christ: so that if they be Orthodox, himself must needs be
Hetorodox. This he well knows, but his ingenuity and single-heartednes hides
it, and pretends the contrary. 3 Is not his face Ferry-man-like one way, and
his motion another, when the whole tenor of what he writes is not to set up any
new opinion, but to erect again, and put life into that cursed Heresy of the
Papists, Justification by Works; yet to hide his purpose from them that see
not, or will not see, he sometimes solemnly professes before God, that it is
no affectation of singularity that drew him to this Judgment; at other times
falls foul with the Papists, telling us that no advantage is to be given to the
Papists in this Doctrine of Justification, when himself all the while is
ploughing their field, and strengthening their hands to the offense of all the
truly wise and godly: what hypocrisy, sembling and dissembling is this? Why
does he acquit himself of that which no man charge upon him? What
understanding Reader of him can harbor one thought of his bending to
singularity / It is plain to every eye that is open, that he walks not
solitary, but has thronged himself into the communion of the Holy Mother
Church, and fellowship of all her Saint Popish Schoolmen, Monks, Friars, and
Jesuits. That his study is to lay an odium implicitly and in the dark upon
us, I mean not only all the Orthodox Divines, but also all the Reformed
Churches that have been, or now are, that they are all guilty of singularity,
separation and Apostasy, in departing from the Romish Synagogue in the Doctrine
of Justification; therefore has he spread his nets to catch as many as he can,
to carry them back into Babylon again. Let Mr Baxter have (as he has) a
confident and swelling opinion of his own abilities, but let him not so abuse
all others, as if star-like their light must be totally dazzled at the approach
of his supposed sunbeams. Wretched England, if all her Seers are become blind,
and none can discern Christ from Antichrist, even in his mystery. Nay let him
know that there are many which see and detest what he has written, no less
then if it had been sent by the Popes own Legate, to beguile. Ingenuity, truth,
and sincerity would have acted another way. Mr Baxter if he had been seasoned
therewith, would have plainly acknowledged, that he had examined the
Controversy between us and the Papists, about Justification; that as far as
his comprehension can reach, he finds them in the truth, and us erroneous: and
then should have alleged the Scriptures and other Arguments which they produce
for the establishing of their Tenants, and the Exceptions which in the Reformed
Churches have been made against such Arguments; and showed the invalidity of
those Exceptions, in no wise answering or weakening the Popish Reasons, by means
whereof his judgment and conscience force him to side with them, and not with
us. Thus candor and conscience would have wrought upon him; for he cannot
deny, but that both he closes with them in the same conclusions, and that all
the Scriptures, Arguments and distinctions (scarce any excepted) which he
brings for the promoting of such Conclusions, are taken from the Papists, and
have been answered over and over a hundred times, by our Divines. Therefore to
set forth his Assertions as new, and to annex his Reasons for the confirmation
thereof, as now first heard of, argues intolerable impudency in his daubing and
dissembling. To have dealt thus heartily and conscientiously, would have
excited many learned and holy men to a lovely conference with him, which now
contemn him as a seducer, and seduced; but if this had been done, where should
the crooked Serpent, and working of Satan, and Deceivablenasse of
unrighteousness, which still accompany that Man of sin, and those that bear
his mark, have appeared? 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10.

4 And his doubleness and liegerdemain is no less exercised, in that
thorow-out his Treatise, he is ever and anon sparkling his firebrarnds against
the Antinomians, thereby secretly instilling into his unwary Readers, that it
is against them this his work mainly levelleth; when contrariwise under this
name and mask, his War is against all the Orthodox Churches and Divines that
are or have been since the Reformation.

These all with him are Antinomians, as himself sometimes when they stand in
his way and stir his passion, does somewhat inconsiderately speak out, telling
us that he means that Antinomianism, whereof Dr. Twiss and Mr. Pemble bear up
the pillars, page 73. and consequently whereof Luther, Calvin, and the rest
Divines and Martyrs employed in the Reformation have re-edified the walls, yea
Paul and Christ himself have laid the foundation. But this craft he learned (as
the rest) from his Masters the Monks and Jesuits, who when they set themselves
to batter the truth of Christ, cry out in their Pulpits and Writings against
the Huguenots, Lutherans, Heretics, laying such slanders on the truth and them
which teach or hold it, that they may stir an Odium in the people, among whom
there are some so ignorant, that dwelling at a distance from the Protestants,
and having never seen any of them, they think them not to be men (having heard
so much evil of them) but some Monsters and Devils flown lately out of the
bottomless pit, to trouble and deceive the world. Therefore are filled with such
prejudice against their Doctrine, that if they were told these Heretics say
Christ is the Son of God and Savior of the world, they would (in hatred of the
supposed Heretics) be ready to reject both Christ and salvation, lest they
should seem to hold with them. Mr. Baxter needs not the incitation of any spurr
to follow, having such Leaders, and the opportunity also served to his ends. He
has taken full notice, that in these last years among the greatest, i. e. the
vulgar part of our Ministers, the name of Antinomianism has been the worst
abomination, and that they have so inveigled their credulous congregations
with the fear and hatred of it, that any Pharisaicall, Monkish, or Jesuiticall
spirits, that would but cry aloud and lift up their voice against Antinomians,
found welcome not only to their persons, but to the whole galley-maufry of
formalities, moralities, wood, hay, and stubble that they scattered among the
people. When contrariwise, if any should but often name Christ and Grace in his
Sermon, all were shie of him, turned their heels in stead of their faces
toward him and his Doctrine, though never so precious and wholesome, fearing
some tincture therein of Antinomianism. This advantage therefore has he taken
to batter the Doctrine of the Gospel, under the name of Antinomism, knowing
that if Christ himself should again descend from heaven to preach it in his own
person, he should under this vizard, find contempt of himself and his Doctrine
among the vulgar. I acknowledge every divine truth to be so sacred and precious,
that we ought to defend and redeem it from oppression with our very blood.
Whatsoever therefore of errors against the truth the Antinomians (truly so
called) have broached, we ought with all our strength to resist and reject.
And hereof I shall have occasion to speak more fully afterward. In the interim
I may lay down safely and truly these two assertions.

1. That Mr. Baxters principal aim is by this odious term to fright weak and
inconsiderate persons from the truth of Christ.

2. That all that catalogue of errors which Sleidan in his Commentaries
ascribes to the Antinomians of Germany about 100. years sithence; and a^l the
tenants of those that among us are or have bin Antinomians indeed (as far as
in my acquaintance with them I could ever gather from them) contein not a
molehill in comparison of that mountain of evil and mischief, that by this
Treatise Mr. Baxter would hurl upon us.

A second thing which ministers occasion to us to doubt of this man's spiritual
conscientiousnesse, is his profaning and vilifying of holy things. We find him
often in this prost^ating religion, conscience, and the word of God it self, to
the censure and sentence of reason, yea of natural and carnal reason: and
that, those very things which reason cannot comprehend, even things which eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart, but are
revealed only by the word and spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 9, etc. These are the
mysteries of the Gospel, Justification, Adoption, etc. when Mr. Baxter at some
times cannot possibly evade such Scriptures as discover his errors, with what
vehemence does he forthwith lay hold on them to sacrifice them to sense and
reason, yea to that which is worse then sense and reason? Flectere si nequeat
superos, Acheronta movebit, when heaven is against him, he appeals to hell to
speak for him, summoning together not only the Jesuits, but the very Ghosts of
the most cursed Heretics by their authority to settle his conscience, and
subject the word to it. I^ not here wanting that trembling at Gods word, which
is required and found in the Saints? He does rarely indeed mention the Authors
whom he follows as his Masters, but that is of craft, that he might not cast
an Odium upon his Doctrine, he thinks it more fit to offer it as some sacred
thing spun out of his own brain, that there might be the less suspicion of it.
But that it is drawn out of those channels which I have mentioned, I shall be
ready to show in particulars, if any doubting shall demand it of me. Neither
let it offend, that in gross and course terms I speak the truth of the Author.
It is wholly against the bent of my disposition so to do, were it not that it
is the very foundation of all our hopes that is by him battered, and that the
profuse commendation which some have given of the man, to draw Disciples to
him, did not force me to speak unsparingly (while truly) to undeceive some of
my friends, that through credulity either are or might be seduced.

Thus far of the man as he has been represented by others, I shall say
something of him also as he renders himself to us by this Treatise. I cannot, I
will not think him one that is wilfully apostatized. But finding him a man of
excellent both natural and acquired parts, of a very rational brain,
delighted more in depths than in shallows, in the logical deep and serious,
than in the lighter, and superficiary parts of learning. I conceive him to have
been carried out by his own Genius to the reading of the deepest Scholastic
writers, with the purpose that Virgil once applied himself to the reading of
Ennius, though not with the same success. The purpose of both probably was to
fetch out e stercore gemmam, a jewel out of the dunghill. But this man meeting
with learning perfectly agreeing with his natural Genius, became impotent to
obtain his purpose; for being delighted with the dunghill, he has made it his
sphere and element; the depth of rationality which he found in his Authors,
has drawn and captivated him to their most cursed opinions: so that we find
him in stead of a Gemm, bringing forth a Cockatrice-egg, which if it be not
destroyed in the shell, will ruin himself and many others. It is an infirmity
that has made impression in points less momentous, upon some persons of great
note in the Church. I shall mention one Hierom in stead of the rest. In his
works as they are set forth by Erasmus, Tom. 1. there is a Book entitled,
Catalogos Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum; in which Hierom mentioning Tertullian,
and not being able to deny his falling into Montanism, he thus at least minceth
his fault. Invidia and contumeliis Clericorum Romanae Ecclesiae ad Montani
dogma delapsus est (says he) i e. through the envy and reproaches which he
suffered from the Clergy of Rome, he declined to the opinion of Montanus.
Erasmus in his Scholia upon these words thus writes, Vt favit Hieronimus
ingenio Tertulliani, etc. i. e. See how Hierom favored Tertullians wit, almost
excusing him for falling into the faction of the Montanists, laying the fault
upon the envy and reproaches of the Roman Priests. So far Erasmus. He might
have further added [so far he delighted in Tertullians wit, that he did not
only excuse him, but also] was carried by the pleasing stream of his wit and
learning, into the very dregs of Montanism as deep as Tertullian himself. So
shall we find him discovering himself at the full, in his first Book against
Jovinian, as Erasmus himself in his Antidote prefixed thereunto does hint, but
the work it self makes it notoriously plain. It contents not that good Monk
Father, there to produce as his own, all Tertullians arguments, except he also
delivers them for the most part in Tertullians very words, so that there were
not wanting such as excepted against him as a very Montanist. I speak not to
lessen the worth of those two ancient Writers, but to manifest in these two
great and sublimated Wits, when the Genius of one man so conspireth with
another, as to delight abundantly, it is as the Loadstone and iron to draw and
to follow into falsehood as well as truth, except there be interposed much of
the spirit of grace and meeknes, and so high an esteem of the Word, that the
mind explodes all other learning as base in comparison of it. No marvail then
if Mr. Baxter having immixt himself into whole troops of Schoolmen, Jesuits,
and others of the same Scholastic train with himself, has been carried away
in the crowd captive to their basest errors. Some would marvail rather how
there should be found in England any Divines professing antipathy to Rome,
applauding the very worst piece of Romes Herisies, as soon as Mr. Baxter has
breathed upon and blessed it. But the case is the same. Mr. Baxter well knew in
what water to angle that he might catch, he perceived that the Doctrine of
Justification for these fifty years has been too little preached in England.
That since the heat of controversy betwixt us and the Papists about it abated,
this Doctrine sounded in few Pulpits, which before sounded in all, that the Pia
fraus (as they termed it) prevailed every where, a godly deceit to withold
from the people the knowledge of the liberty which they have by Christ, lest
they should turn it into licentiousness. That as this pions fraud passed from
hand to hand among the Ministers, many of them while they were deceiving, were
themselves deceived, and verily thought it the right art of profitable
preaching to hold out the Law, and keep in the Gospel, to wash the utter part
of the cup and platter, leaving that which is within full of guilt and
corruption. Hence it came to pass that the Law by many was turned to a twofold
use, like the sword of Achilles to Tilephus, to wound first, and then to heal,
to cast down and to erect again, to kill and make alive, to damn and then to
save also. First, it was so brandished for conviction, that all men by the
light and curse thereof might be compelled to see themselves under sin and
condemnation, and then held forth as a sovereign remedy against damnation, and
means of salvation; such repentances for sin, such degrees of contrition and
reformation prescribed out of the Law, which being practiced, pardon of sin and
eternal life must needs follow. Thus man was made not only his own condemner,
but his own Savior also; his evil works in transgressing the Law pursuing him
with vengeance, and his returning by repentance to good works in strict
obedience to the law, restoring him to life and salvation. In mean while Christ
was left in a corner to look upon all, but without interposition of his
operation or Passion. Sometimes indeed much might be heard of the riches of
Gods Grace, of the efficacy of Christ's merits to save the chief of sinners, so
that the people might even see the door of heaven open to them; but in
conclusion, the Preacher as if he had been deputed to the office of the
Cherubims, Genesis 2. ult. to keep the way of the tree of life, with his flaming
sword turning every way, affrighted the poor souls from all hope of entering,
crying procul hinc, procul ite prophani, no profane or unclean person has
right to meddle with this Grace. No, first they must have such
heart-preparations, purifications, and prejacent qualifications, before they
draw near to partake of mercy; must first cleanse and cure themselves, and then
come to Christ afterward; must be clothed with an inherent Righteousness
first, and then expect to be clothed upon with a Righteousness imputed. Such
has been and still is the Doctrine delivered in many Congregations within this
Nation. I neither fain nor aggravate. It is that whereof my self not without
grief have been often an ear-witnesse, and that from the mouths of very zealous
Ministers. And I fear the Lord has a controversy against the Ministry, and
will more yet obscure and vilify many of them for their obscuring of his grace
and his Christ. Now when so many of them were by the tide of their own
judgments moving before, not a little in Mr. Baxters way, no marvail if they
have admitted him among themselves to hoyse the sails and carry them hastier
and further than they before had purposed; specially when all the way along and
thorowout his whole Treatise he deals with them as Elisha did with the Syrians,
telling them that he is leading them to Dothan, to Jerusalem, holding their
eyes and wits suspended until he has brought them into the streets of Samaria,
of Rome it self, 2 King. 6. 8, etc.

This I thought fit to premise of the Author, the next thing promised was
touching the work it self.

Whether we consider the matter or the artifice of it, I cannot in general
otherwise give a livelier character or description thereof, than in the words
of Mr. Fox, in his Tractate De Gratia gratis Justificante, against Osorius and
others, where he gives his censure upon a book of the same argument with Mr.
Baxters, set forth by Osorius, not as this man under the name of a Protestant,
but ingenuously professing himself a Papist. Among other I may as fitly apply
these passages of Mr. Fox to Mr. Baxters work, as he did it to the popish
Bishop. Si quisquam alius preter Osorium, etc. If any other man save Osorius
had published this Book (says he) but I say were it not that some
unexceptively learned and godly Divines, did through (I know not what mistake)
favor and even patronize this Tractate, Diceremei aperte atque in os, Pestem
publicae Christianorum saluti, labem Religioni graviorem, majorem D. Paulo,
Scripturis and Prophetis, injuriam infer neminem unquam potuisse quam his
libris ostenditur. i. e. I would tell openly, and to his teeth, that no man
ever could bring in a more grievous plague to the common safety of Christians,
or blemish to Religion, or greater injury to St. Paul, the Scriptures and
Prophets then is held forth in this Book. And p. 4. Ita sentio, etc.
Philosophum t^ quidem satis Platonicum, and Rhetorem non male Ciceronianum
video; at Theologum vero parum, mihi Creed, Evangelicum, neque ad Causam ipsam
justitiae Christianae perorandam, satis exercitatum. i. e. This is my opinion,
etc. [in the frame of this work] I see thee a Philosopher enough Platonicall,
and a Rhetorician not much beneath Cicero: but a Divine little seasoned with
the Gospel, and unfurnished to treat of that Christian Righteousness [that
tends to justification.] And page 11. while he disputes and teaches us many
things of righteousness and justification, there is nothing for us to learn
that comes home to the matter, not a mite that may further, but very much that
may hinder salvation. And page 6. he likens him to Celsus and Antipho,
mentioned by Origin, who when they wrote most eagerly against the eruth, called
their Books (...), a word or treatise of truth: so this man entitles his Book [
A discourse of Justifying Righteousness.] I had almost said Aphorisms of
Justification, at ita ut nihil contra Veram Justitiam [vel justificationem]
dici possit hostilius. i. e. But so that nothing can be spoken more hostilely
or hatefully against true righteousness and justification. All this is no
less true of, and pat unto Mr. Baxters than B. Osorius his work. But much more
pernicious in Mr. Baxters, because he hides his poison under the name and
pretense of an Orthodox and Cathedral Divine, and a great Antagonist to Popery.

But of the matter of the work I have delivered my judgment before, and shall
have occasion to examine it when I come to the bulk of his Treatise. Only at
present I transmit the Reader (that would in a breviary find what the substance
of his Doctrine is) to the second part of this Answer, Chap. 16, 17, and near
the end of Chap. 22. where he may read in how many particulars he holds the
same Tenet with the worst, and transcends in many things, the more moderate of
the Papists, yea of the very Jesuits.

Here I shall speak only of the form and artifice of the work, upon what
foundation he has laid, by what pillars he supports his own assertions, and
with what Engines and Machinations he oppugneth the sacred truth, and judgment
of all Orthodox Divines, whom he makes his adversaries. In all this he
follows his Masters the Schoolmen and Jesuits, baulking the Scriptures, and
laying maxims of Philosophy and carnal, or at least humane Reason as the
foundation of his whole building, and walls and pillars it up with sophistical
Arguments, Distinctions, and quodlib^tary subtleties, raising every where dust
and vapors to cloud and darken the Sun of truth, that he may have the
opportunity with his ignis fatuus, to toll men out of the safe and sure way
into the boggs and most excrementitio^s parts of Popery. Indeed sometimes he
quotes Scriptures in heaps, (as they were prepared to his hands by Friars and
Jesuits) and lets them out without measure or tale, telling us that he will
stand to and be tried by the Scriptures: but scarce at any time vouchsafing to
make known what he would diduce thence, and how; and many times not affording
the labor to name the words, and then hyeth back to his Sanctuary St.
Sophistry again: declaring both at how cheap a rate he valueth the sacred word,
not deigning either to cite the words, or at best to tell us what he thinks he
has found in them (when contrariwise if he cite any thing out of the heathen
Philosophers, or their followers, the Popish Doctors unnamed, he is very busy
to press and improve it to his advantage) and withal, that his meaning is to
be tried by the boon sonns of the unholy Catholic Church: therefore turns us
over to them for our in formation what may be gathered from the Scriptures
produced, himself passing by it as a thing already done to his hands by them.

Now because the main strength of Mr Baxter and his leaders in fighting against
the verity of the Gospel, consists in this subtle and unscripturall way of
disputation, it shall not be impertinent to digress a while in discussing what
force there is in sophistical, (or to use milder words) Logical,
Philosophical, and Metaphisicall argumentations, to confirm or infirm
Evangelical Doctrines. In Natural, Moral, Civil, and Oeconomical questions they
may be (I acknowledge) very useful. Yea Logic in its sober and moderate use,
applied as an instrument to assist in the contexture and retexture of
Scriptures to find out the sense and meaning thereof; and further, as by
discreet joining of Gospel positions together, it helps to elicite sure and
sound conclusions, (not at all drawing the question out of its own sphere the
Scriptures, to be judged and concluded by the nicities and quiddities of other
besides Scripturelearning) may be profitably used in Evangelicall questions.
But neither Logic it self beyond this, nor Philosophy or the Metaphysics at
all, have any force to prove any thing in Gospelmatters.

I know what to expect for such a discourse upon this subject. I shall be
jeered at to be the Fox in the Fable, that being without a tail, to lessen his
shame in a general counsel of Foxes, made an Oration, declayming much against
the discommodities which Foxes had by their tails, and laboring to persuade
them all to rid themselves of such a discommodity, that he might make the shame
common, and then not the whole, but a share of it only would be his. Gal. 6.
14. 1 Cor. 2. 2.


Be it so, I neither arrogate nor usurp to my self the praise of humane
learning. In reference to salvation and justification, God forbid that I should
glory in any thing but in the Cross of Christ, or should determine to know any
thing save Christ and him crucified. To plead my righteousness; before God, and
against Satan, the simplicity of the Gospel plenarily furnishes and contenteth
me; leaving it to Mr. Baxter (if he think it safe) with sophistical subtleties
to dispute himself into heaven.

Nevertheless the position stands firm even in the fall of the credit of the
assertor, That such humane learning is of no force to decide, judge, and
conclude any thing in questions merely Evangelicall, such as is Justification,
and all other Gospel-graces and privileges. This may be with much facility
evidenced to as many as have not their eyes blinded by the God of this world as
yet, and that by these following reasons.

1. All the Doctrines of the Gospel are transcendent, high, and above the reach
of the most sublimated reason. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has
it entered into the heart of man to know them, 1 Cor. 2. 9. The natural man
receives not, cannot receive the things of the Spirit of God, because they are
spiritually discerned. ibid. Verse. 14. They are mysteries hid in God from the
beginning of the world, from ages and generations, but at last made known by
the Spirit in the preaching of the Gospel, not only to the Saints [on earth]
but also to the Principalities and powers in heavenly places, i. e. to the
Ministering Angels and Spirits before God in heaven, Ephesians. 13. 9, 10. Col. 3.
26, 27. So that at the revelation thereof by Christ and his Apostles, the very
Angels desired to look into them, as learners of that sacred Doctrine which
before they had not attained, 1 Pet. 1. 12. But all this humane learning
whereof we speak, is natural, flowing originally from natural and heathen
men, who in their either most profound or most sublime speculations, could not
see a span above Nature, no nor to the top of Nature by many fathoms. Therefore
is there a total invalidity in it to discern one ray of Evangelical and
spiritual things. To produce any thing therefore out of this humane literature
to discern and judge of Gospel-doctrines; is no less folly than to make a blind
man judge of colors, or a deaf man of sounds, or to set a dead man to running
of a race. Yea to hold forth any thing hence, to clear up and evidence
spiritual things, is but to hold a candle, nay a dark Lanthorn to the Sun, for
the clearing of its beams that we may see it.

If any object, that Spiritual and Evangelical Doctrines are by none brought
(as Spiritual and Evangelical) under the Trial of this humane learning, but as
they fall under some Topics of this or that Art or Science, as E^s,
Substantia, Accidens, Actio, Relatio, etc. and so far only they are disputed
of by and according to the Maxims and Canons of those places.

I answer, that even this is to subject supernatural Doctrines to the judgment
and censure of Natural Reason. It will not be denied that the first Founders of
these Arts and the precepts thereof were merely Natural and Moral men, and
neither did nor could accommodate their precepts and rules to any other but
natural and Moral things; were so far unable to reach them to things
supenatural, that they left them in many things unperfect as to things natural:
so that after all the amendments of all their followers, not a few of their
Canons remain disputable and controverted (as to Natural and Moral things)
still. Therefore to prostrate spiritual things to the judgment of this Natural
learning, is to subject the Authority of Christ to the Authority of men, the
wisdom of the Spirit to the wisdom of the Flesh, and that which is infallible
to that which is both fallible and fallacious. Nay all the doctrines and
precepts of Philosophers are to be tried by the word; but in no wise are the
dictates of the Spirit, and doctrines of the word of grace to be tried by the
precepts of Men. I forbear to speak here, that otherwise not Christ but
Aristotle must in matters of salvation be made our Ipse Dixit: or that none but
Scholars can have any stable setlednesse of faith, the unlearned in humane
literature remaining incapable thereof, because they cannot prove the truth of
what they believe as well by the rules of Art, as by the Testimony of the word
of Christ. I only say, when Christ by his word has said and determined, here
not to subject and rest satisfied, but to consult with flesh and blood, with
the rules of humane Art for my fuller resolution, is no less indignity to
Christ, than to set man's wisdom in the Chair, and to prostrate Christ to be
his Footstool.

2. If it have any power and efficacy to this end, it must be either from some
natural and intrinsicall virtue of its own, or else by Gods ordination and
infusion. Not by any natural virtue of its own, as appears by what was last
said, and by this that none ever by such secular learning attained one least
spark of Gospel-knowledg, nor yet by Gods ordination, and inspiring strength
into it to operate for such an end. For let it be declared in what Scripture
God instituted or owned it as an in-strument useful and effectualized for such
a work. And if neither of these ways it be powerful, or in a capacity either to
declare or confirm Gospel-matters, then has it no power at all to such a
purpose.

If any thing be excepted against in this Argument, it must be the latter
disjunctive particle thereof in the Assumption which denies the humane
learning before mentioned to be ordained of God, or qualified by him as
instrumental and effectual to determine any thing in Evangelical and Spiritual
Doctrines. But this may be cleared and confirmed by the Reasons following.

1. Because neither the Lord Christ nor any of his Apostles or Prophets have
made use of it to this end. Not his Prophets under the Old Testament: For when
they sp^ke any thing of the Mystery of Christ and his Gospel that were
afterward more fully to be revealed, they did it by inspiration from God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. and the revelation of the spirit of Christ which was in them, 1
Pet. 1. 11. not as having dipped the same, from the broken Cisterns of humane
inventions and learning. And when they will add a confirmation to such
Doctrines, the only authority which they produce is divine. Thus says the
Lord, The Lord of Hosts has said it, the holy, the lofty, the mighty one of
Isroel has spoken it, without any Philosophical or Metaphysical Arguments to
prove it. No less is to be said of Christ himself our own and only Mr. when he
descended from Heaven to reveal his Gospel in its fullness and glory, affirming
his doctrine to be only and wholly that which his Father taught him, Joh. 8.
28. which he had seen with his father, Joh. 8. 38. as he had commandment from
his father, Joh. 10. 18. even as the father said unto him, Joh. 12. 50. as he
heard from his father, Joh. 15. 15. Lo all from heaven, from the Father;
nothing from earth from men, in revealing the Gospel. No nor to the
confirmation of it being revealed, save his own and his Fathers testimony,
Joh. 8. 18. Joh. 5. 31, -- 37. Let there be but an iota produced of this kind
of literature whereof I treat, that our Savior any where used for the
confirmation of the Gospel-doctrines which he delivered. Nay, he denies all
ability and possibility, that any man by natural or acquired parts should see
or show forth (until he has received divine revelation) one ray of
Gospel Light; Therefore when Peter had made but a course and confused or
obscure confession of Christ, he answers, Blessed be thou Simon Barjonah, for
Flesh and Blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in
heaven, Mat. 16. 16, 17. Insinuating that the very threshold of Gospel-knowledg
is transcendent and above all the reach of humane Arts, and fleshly or natural
wisdom, to find it out for themselves, or make it out to others. Hence are the
universal conclusions and assertions which he lays down to this purpose. No
man can come to me except the Father draw him. It is written, they shall be all
taught of God: Every man that has heard and learned of the Father comes to
me, Joh. 6. 44, 45. No one knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any
man the Father but the Son, and he to whom the son will reveal him. What he
speaks of knowing the Son and the Father, he means of knowing the mind and
will of God touching the Gospel-way in which he has purposed to bring sinners to
salvation. This is a wisdom not borrowed of, but hidden from [most of] the
wise and prudent [in secular learning] and revealed to babes, Mat. 11. 25-27.
And the Scripture gives reasons why there is no power in the wisdom and
learning of men to dive into the Mystery of the Gospel, and Evangelical
knowledge of God. No man has seen God at any time: The only begotten son
which is in Joh. 1. 18.
the bosom of the Father has declared him, Joh. 1. 18. No man has ascended
to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the son of man which is in
heaven, Joh. 3. 13. What man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of
man which is in him. Even so the things of God knows no man but the spirit of
God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. What is here spoken of the knowledge of God, is to be
understood as in the former Texts, the knowing of Gods will and mysterious way
of bringing many sons (ere while enemies) to glory. The scope of the
Argumentation in these Scriptures runs thus. None but such as have seen God,
seen into him, have been in heaven with him, nay have been in his very heart
and bosom, can possibly know the mind and purpose of God hidden in himself
touching the justification and salvation of men. But Christ only and the Spirit
of Christ have been, and are still in heaven, have seen God, and are in the
bosom of God reading and knowing all the purposes of his mind. Therefore none
but Christ and his Spirit alone know and can reveal this mind of God to us.
The Scripture here speaks of Teachers, none has been in heaven to come
thence as a Teacher into the world of what he has seen in the bosom of God,
but the Son and the Spirit: And the teaching or revealing of which it speaks,
is meant original teaching and revealing. None can reveal the mind of God but
the Son and the Spirit, or they to whom the Son hy his Doctrine and Spirit has
first revealed it. What weight then can there be in the Testimony or learning
of the Heathen Philosophers, or of the Angelical and Seraphical Doctors of the
Romish Church, who never ascended the Heavens to look into Gods bosom, and are
as void of Christ and his Spirit as those Heathens themselves; that any thing
of Gospel-wisdome should be grounded upon their authority?

From Christ descend we to the Apostles, and first he that chose them to go
forth into the world to bring forth fruit, Joh. 15. 16. ( i. e. by the
preaching of the Gospel to bring home many souls to God) to furnish them with
abilities for so great end noble a work, promises to send unto them the
Spirit, and to what end but to lead them into all truth, Joh. 16. 13. into the
clear and full knowledge of the mysterious truths of the Gospel, bidding them
not to go to Athens to learn from the Philosophers in their Schools any thing
that might further their illumination herein, but to tarry at Jerusalem until
they were endued with this power from on high, Luke 24. 49. And if we look to
the accomplishment of the promise, Acts 2. 1, etc. we shall find that the Holy
Ghost discending in a glorious manner upon them, wrought on them, if not only,
yet principally these three effects as abundantly sufficient to enable them for
the Apostleship and Ministry of the New Testament, as the Apostle terms his
Office, 2 Cor. 3. 6.

1. A sudden and wonderful irradiation of them with all the depths of
Gospel-knowledg, that without communion with flesh and blood, they had the
sacred secrets of the Gospel made out in an instant to them by the revelation
of Jesus Christ, as afterward Paul manifests the Lord Jesus to have dealt
with him in like manner, Gal. 1. 12. 16. And thus they that were but mechanic
and illiterate men, were filled suddenly with light and knowledge enough to
enlighten the whole world then in darkness.

2. The gift of tongus, by which they were enabled to spread abroad unto all
men of all nations, in their several Languages the wonderful things of God,
i. e. the glorious, and until then hidden ways of salvation, Act. 2. 11.

3. A magnanimous and celestial boldness to hold forth, defend and maintain
those sacred and saving truths revealed to them in despite of all the powers
of Earth and Hell banding against them, Act. 4. 13.

Here, as there is none that will deny the Apostles to have been sufficiently,
yea abundantly gifted for the execution of their function: so I do not so much
as suspect there will be any found that supposes them to have received among
the Abundance of their Revelations any inspiration of the beforementioned
humane learning as useful and needful to plant the knowledge of the Gospel in
the hearts of men, or to confirm it after it was planted.

And 2ly. with that learning and power so received, they went on in the
execution of their Ministry, so far from using, as that they purposely rejected
the use of humane reason and wisdom, holding fast to the word alone as the
mind of God therein was revealed to them by the Spirit, for their rule in
preaching, and authority in confirming the truth of the Gospel which they
taught. In stead of all, attend we to Paul, that labored more abundandantly
then they all. Romans 15. 19.
When he had fully preached the Gospel from Jerusalem in the regions round
about even to Illyricum; he gives this account of his labors, that he had
believed nothing, nor witnessed or taught any thing, save what is written in
the law of Moses and the Prophets, Acts 24. 14. and 26. 22. That whatsoever
Churches he had planted, were built by him upon the foundations of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20.
Nothing here of Aristotle and Plato, but of the Prophets and Apostles, i. e.
the Doctrine which Christ had revealed to them and by them, laid to support the
Churches in the Faith of Christ. That he had utterly exploded all humane wisdom
Arts, and inventions, as incompetent with the Gospel of Christ. That whether he
laid in the hearts of men the principles and beginnings of Christ, having to
deal with such as were but yet in converting, or else but babes in Christ, he
totally abstained from the words of man's wisdom, from intermingling any of the
artificial disputes of the Philosophers, that their faith might not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God: or whether he treated with them
that were perfect, i. e. grown to a high stature in the knowledge and faith of
Christ, even when he spoke wisdom, delivered doctrines of the greatest depth
and misteriousness to them, yet was it not the wisdom of this world, i. e.
neither was the matter thereof the doctrine of the profound Philosophers and
Disputers that were held the Princes of the world for wisdom, but the mystery
of Christ. Neither for the confirmation thereof did he use the words which man's
wisdom teaches, i. e. that way of philosophical and dialectical disputation,
whereof the Philosophers give their precepts, but in the words which the holy
Ghost teaches, etc. 1 Cor. 2. 1. -- 13.

Now if neither Christ nor his truly inspired Ministers ever used, or would use
this kind of learning in Gospel-matters, the conclusion will necessarily follow
that it was never of Gods ordination. For Christ was faithful in his house the
Church, Heb. 3. 2, 6. and finished the work which his Father had given him to
do, Joh. 17. 4. And the like may be truly affirmed and confirmed of the
faithfulness of all those truly inspired Ministers of Christ, according to
their measure, that with Paul they were stewards of God, and studied so
earnestly to be found faithful, that they knew nothing by themselves to accuse
themselves of falsehood or neglect, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. 4. That they kept back Act.
20. 20. 26, 27.
nothing which was profitable to the people, but declared to them the whole
Counsel of God, therefore were pure from the blood of all men: so that it must
follow, that either the use of the aforesaid humane learning in Gospel-matters
is no ordinance of God, and at the best unprofitable: or else that Christ and
his Apostles not using it, yea rejecting the use of it, were not faithful. But
all will deny the latter, therefore must grant the former.

A second Reason to prove it not to be an ordinance of God, etc. I may draw
from the slighting, abasing, and invective terms which the Holy Ghost in
Scripture uses against it. The wisdom of the Holy Ghost does in no wise
slight any ordinance of God qualified and blessed by him to Gospel-ends. But
the use of those humane pieces of learning whereof I am speaking is much
slighted and aba^ed by the H: G: as impotent and unusefull to Gospel-work and
ends, Ergo, etc. That the H: G: does thus slight it in Scripture, to omit what
the Lord Christ speaks against the traditionary learning of the Jewish Rabbis,
Mat. 15. 1. - 9. and 23. 13, etc. and 11. 25, 26. Joh. 9. 29-41. I shall
mention only how contemptuously the H: G: by the Apostles pointing directly to
this Gentilizing learning, speaks of it. They became vain in their imaginations
(says he) and their Romans 1. 21-23.
foolish heart was darkened; Professing themselves wise, they became fools, and
changed the glory of God into a corruptible image, etc. What more to the
abasing of their learning? he calls it at the best, the very froth of light
fancies and imaginations, the darkness of foolish hearts, a profession of such
wisdom as made them gross fools; that as it acted about religion and the way
to happiness, it made both it and them a very abomination to the Lord.

Again, The preaching of the Cross is to them that perish, foolishness. As it
is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is
the disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world? For after that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God,
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, etc.
1 Cor. 1. 18-21, etc.

How differing is the spirit of our Sophisters from the Spirit which wrought in
the Apostle? He pronounces this Sophistical learning, to be so far from being
a furtherance to the only true which is the Gospel-way of salvation, as that it
is an enemy to it, rejects it as foolishness.

2. Them that follow it as their rule and authority what to believe and do,
that they may be saved, to be in a perishing condition, in the ready way to
damnation. They that perish account the simplicity of the Gospel without the
fulture, or rather tainture of their Arts, foolishness.

3. He affirms God to be an enemy to it, to detest any patronage from it to his
mysterious Doctrine of the Gospel. He has left it upon record to curb wanton
wits, that he will destroy the wisdom, etc.

4. That according to his threat, he has executed, and will still fulfill,
therefore challenges the Sophisters to give answer from their own experience
at last, whether God has not, does not always so curse this wisdom of theirs,
that it turns to ruin and foolishness? Where is the Scribe? where the
Disputer? etc. Has not God? etc.

5. That it is a knowledge by which men know not God, which while they pursue,
they lose utterly the saving knowledge of God.

6. That in contempt of this secular learning, God will by the simplicity and
foolishness of Gospel-preaching save them that believe, leaving the Disputers
to reason themselves into Hell. It pleased God, etc.

Unto this I shall add but two Testimonies more; the one, when the Apostle has
to do with a company of Christians dwelling among the Philosophers, in great
jealousy and fear of them, he cries out, Beware ye be not spoiled with
Philosophy, Col 2. 7. and vain decit. He speaks of no possibility of any good
that there should accrue unto them by the help of Philosophy, but of great
danger to be spoiled and corrupted by it; and when is there such hazard of
being corrupted by it? he answers, when men intermingle this learning, which is
but of humane invention and tradition, after the Rudiments of the world, after
and not above carnal and worldly Reason, with the Scripture, in measuring out
to themselves the saving Gospel, and take not it up after Christ simply and
unmixedly as Christ has taught it, and put the impresse of his authority upon
it, Coloss. 2. 8. The other that for prevention of corruption by this secular
learning, the Converts of Ephesus, while the Apostle was yet resident among
them, and consequently consenting with them, burnt their books of curious
Arts, which though some will have to be understood of conjuring books, yet I
cannot assent to them, because this cursed rather then curious Art, was proper
and almost peculiar to the more Eastern people, Jews, Samaritans, Egyptians,
and Babylonians; the Greeks very little or not at all studying it, but placing
all their wisdom in the Arts whereof I have been hitherto discoursing, and
these were Greeks that burnt the books of those curious Arts which they
studied, Act. 19. 19. If then any conclude that the H: Ghost at any time does
so much abase and deface an Ordinance of God; Let him also conclude this kind
of learning and disputation to be ordained of God for the confirming and
promoting of the Gospel.

A third Reason to prove that God has not ordained this Sophistical or
Philosophical learning to be isntrumental for the promoting of the Gospel,
may be drawn from experience it self. That which we never find to be blessed, but
still blasted of God to the hurt both of the Churches that have been admirers
and followers of Sophistical teachers of the Gospel, and of such teachers
also, cannot be the Ordinance of God; for he always accompanies and breaths his
blessing in greater or lesser degrees upon the due execution of his own
Ordinances. But God has never blessed, but still so blasted and brought to
naught and naught, etc. the use of this philosophical and philosophastrous
learning. Ergo, It is not of Gods ordination, I mean to be intermingled with
spiritual, and Evangelicall Doctrines. For hence alone we banish it, not
denying it to be useful in natural and moral things, as I have before
granted.

That it has been so blasted as intermingled with Gospel-doctrines, experience
it self evidenceth. Trace we down from the very primitive age of the Gospel
Church until our times, Gods operations, in the Gospels and Churches w^xings
and wainings, and we shall find his blessing to have been upon the pure
preaching of the Gospel; his curse upon the mixings and medleys of m^ns wisdom
with it. Begin we with the Apostles times, when the^e went forth acting only by
the authority of Christ's mission, and according to the rule of his Commission,
the very Devils became subject to them, and Satan fell as lightning before
them, at the sound of the Gospel which they had charge to preach alone, and
ground upon the authority of the Scripture alone, while this charge was
faithfully put in execution, whole Nations either after the other, yea the
whole world [almost] came to be discipled to Christ. God working mightily with
them by many signs and wonders to make their Ministry succesfull. But when
anon there entered into the Churches rightly grounded and stablished, false
Apostles of the Jews that preached a legal and natural righteousness that
reason and natural conconscience could suggest (if the Law of Moses had been
silent) as necessary to be joined with the Gospel-righteousnesse of Faith to
Justification: And on the other side there arose out of the Churches of the
Gentiles some of themselves that spoke perverse things seeking to introduce the
like natural righteousness out of the Ethics of the Philosophers, and to
maintain their Doctrines, mainly if not wholly by Aristotle's dialectick
subtleties: And both these began to be favored by wanton wits within the
Churches: Now the Lord turned his hinder parts to them on whom erewhile the
light of his countenance shined, the glory of the Gospel became more and more
clouded, the Churches rended and torn in pieces, abounding more with Apostates
than with Christians indeed, as may be largely manifested from the New
Testament if there were need.

From the Apostles time descend we to the next ages or age after the Apostles,
and I find not among the Writers of note any one much studious of Philosophy
(much less spoiled with it) Clemens Alexandrinus only excepted, and he enough
moderate in the use of it. But shortly after him sprung up Origin, a great and
copious Writer: in his youth beyond his age hopeful, but in his maturity
carried with full sails to the study of secular Arts, and with such success,
that Hierom in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers renders him in such
learning unmatchable by any going before, or following him; as one thoroughly
seen in all the differing opinions of all the several sects of Philosophers, a
notable Logician and Disputer, and fully read in all the Liberal Arts, and as
remarkable for the practical part as the Theory of all.

Now from a man so accomplished in so many perfections (as some term them) would
possibly be expected a greater success of his preaching and writing than ever
Paul attained, because so much more learned then Paul: But the case proved
contrary. Out of his brain thus filled, issued errors and heresies as thick as
hailstones from the Clouds. Nothing of Scripture, Law or Gospel could escape
his depravation, and a Religion he set forth, like Mahomets Alcaron, a mere
galleymaufry of Heterogeneous fancies, some Jewish, some Heathenish, and some
in show at least Christian, compounded and confounded one with the other, so
that there could not be a fouler abomination then such a Religion. Why?
because he had attained so much secular learning? not so, but because he
wrought with untempered mortar, mixing Philosophy and Christianity together,
which close as sweetly as light and darkness. Hence was it that all the
Churches at length exploded him for an Heretic, and his writings as
Pseudo-Christian; and Hierom so wounded his reputation among the learned and
godly, for writing somewhat in the praise of him, that with all his palliating
and recanting, he could not fully repayr it to his dying day. Yea the stinch
of him has offended all the godly Divines of our Reformed Churches,
notwithstanding his antiquity, that they reject him. From the pen of one Beza,
we may know the mind of the rest, who calls him hominem impuram sometimes, and
sometimes hominum impurissimum, an impure or a profane man, yea the prophanest
of men, for profaning Scriptures, Gospel, Religion, and all other sacred
things that he meddled with.

At no long distance after Origin lived Tertullian, who finding the Church by
the evil Artifice of Origin, and other Philosophical Christians like him,
over spread with heresies, applies himself to seek the cure thereof. And a
principal means he prescribes hereunto, is a fast adhering to the doctrine of
Christ, all other authority in divine things being rejected. It is not lawful
for us (says he) to bring in any thing [of faith or worship] out of our own
will or judgment, nor to admit any thing what another has introduced of his
will and judgment. Apostolos Domini habemus auctores, qui nec ipse quicquam ex
suo Tertul. l. de prescript. advers. Haereticos.
Arbitrio quod inducerunt, elegerunt, sed acceptam a Christo disciplinam
fideliter nationibus adsignaverunt, i. e. We have the Apostles of the Lord
herein our authors or patterns, who neither made choice of any thing from their
own invention, to impose [upon Christians] but faithfully delivered to the
Nations the discipline which they had received from Christ. So that if an Angel
from heaven shall preach any other doctrine let him be accursed. And having
mentioned some doctrines not of Christ's prescribing, pronounces of all such,
Hae sunt doctrinae hominum and Daemoniorum prurientibus auribus natae, de
ingenio sapientiae saeculi, etc. i. e. These are Doctrines of men and Devils
sprung forth from itching ears, of the nature of the wisdom of the world,
which the Lord calling foolishness, has chosen the foolish things of the
world even to the confusion of Philosophy it self. Ea est n. Materia sapientiae
saecularis, etc. For this [Philosophy] is the matter of worldly wisdom: a rash
interpreter of the nature and dispensations of God, from it Heresies are
suborned. And having particulariz^d what several heresies have been foysted
into the Church from the several sects of Philosophers, and what from all
conjoined, and inveighed against Aristotle's Logic as an enemy to Christian
Religion, he thus breaks forth. Quid ergo Athenis and Hierosolymis? Quid
Academiae and Ecclesiae? Quid haereticis and Christianis? Nostra institutio de
particu Solomonis est, etc. Viderint qui Stoicum and platonicum, and
Dialecticum Christianismum protulerunt, etc. i. e. what then has Athens to do
with Jerusalem? the Academy with the Church? Heretics with Christians? Our
Institution [in Religion] is out of the porch of Solomon, etc. Let them look to
it that have hatched out a Stoicall, Platonicall, and Logical Christianity to
us. We have no need of curiosity after Christ, nor of inquisitivenesse after
the Gospel. When we believe [viz. Christ and his Gospel] we desire nothing
beyond believing. For this we believe first, that there is not [viz. in
Philosophy or other Arts] any thing that we ought to believe [unto salvation]
beyond [the Gospel of Christ.] And a little after, he that is not sati^fied
with the Scripture, but seeks further authority from reason and Philosophy,
his curious inquisitivenesse argues him either not to believe, or else to be
vainglorious in seeking after the praise of worldly wisdom, therefore annexeth
this counsel, Cedat curiositas fidei, cedat gloria saluti, i. e. let curiosity
give place to faith, and vainglory stoop to salvation. So much and much more
not unworthy the reading, has Tertullian in this Book. And none will easily
affirm that Tertullian condemns that learning which himself wanted, to hide
his own nakedness. All his polemicall works or controversall writings declare
the contrary, specially his book against Hermogenes, where having to deal with
one that little regarded the Scriptures, sets upon him in his own fortress,
and assails him with his own weapons, and philosophically convinces the
Philosophaster, and dialectically the Sophister, in his own arts and element,
confuting and confounding him.

But some may object, that seeing he holds the use of these arts unnecessary
and hurtful to Christian Religion, why does himself make use of them? Himself
both moves and answers the question elsewhere, and thus puts the question,
Whether ohere be not some Tertul. de Anima. lib.
truths to be found in philosophy? and 2ly. whether a Christian may not in some
case make use of it in his disputations?

His answer is somewhat large, the sum and brief of it runs in this tenor:
That it is not to be denied but there are some truths delivered by Philosophers
in the more common and open things of Divinity, i. e. (as I granted before) in
natural and moral things, and those we are to take up, not for the authority
of the Philosophers, who by the groping light of Nature have by a kind of blind
happiness found out and delivered the same: but for the authority of God, who
by his undeceiving word has manefested it to us, and further that in our
disputes with such to whom the prescripts of philosophy are more authoritative
and authentic than the oracles of the word, when it may be done without
prejudice to the word, we may retort upon the adversary his own arguments, and
stop his mouth with testimonies of Philosophers, which to him are most
authentic. Nevertheless it is the safest and most pious way when we treat
with Heretics that profess Christians, to hold them close to the Scriptures.
Aufer Haereticis quae cum Ethnicis Tertul. lib. de Resur. carnis.
sapiunt, says he, ut de solis scripturis questiones suas sistant, and stare
non potuerint, i. e. Take from the Heretieks those arguments which they draw
from heathen learning, that they may state their questions from the Scriptures
alone, and they will not be able to stand.

With Tertullian consented the judgment of the sound and orthodox Fathers which
lived after him, during the first six hundred years in the Christian Church,
and my purpose was to demonstrate it from the very words of such of them as I
have read; but finding the Preface swelling above its measure already, and the
little or no use which they make of these pieces of learning, in their works,
enough declaring their judgments, that they held the same useless and
superflou^ at least: in all their writings holding thewselves fast to the word,
not meddling with profane arts to help or back the Gospel of Christ, saving
when they were necessitated to disabuse the people, in discovering the
fallacies of the Manichees, Arrians, and other sophistical Heretics: I think
it more pertinent to ease my self of this burden. By the way only noting that
as Julian, when he gave his mind once inordinately to the study of philosophy,
and coveted to be a learned and philosophical Christian, did quickly declare
himself to be an Apostat, and no Christian: So the like apostasy (no doubt) by
the like means befell many others, though not openly declared. And this must
needs follow in part upon all such as make not the word to be the whole
foundation of their faith, but so far only as it has reason and philosophy
consenting with it. But the word of the Gospel is transcend^nt above the reach
of Philosophy and natural reason, they cannot comprehend it to give testimony
to it, so that to make reason the touchstone of Gospel-doctrines and truths,
is the ready way to apostatize from Christ and his Gospel, although the
self-deceivers declare not their apostasy, but profess Christianity still. To
be a Christian only so far as the very extracts and spirits of natural reason
suggest cause so to be, is to be a Christian only in name, but as void of the
truth and power of Christianity, as are the very Pagans that never heard of
Christ.

I come now to speak of the fatal (if I may so term it) and almost total
ruin of the Church and Gospel. Toward the end of that which is called the
Primitive Church, and of them which are dignified with the name of the ancient
Fathers of the Church: As the Saracens invaded the Eastern Churches, so a most
stupendous and barbarous people, not only unchristian, but also inhumane, the
Goths and Vandals, made incursions upon these Western Churches with one
swelling tide, carrying all at once before them, and made impression into Italy
it self, and seizing on Rome, made it their imperial City; and reigning over,
or at least molesting all those nations which in this western part of the world
were then termed Christians, made it their work for more then a hundred years
not only to raze out the very being of christianity from the earth, but also
all polite learning, filling all things and places with their barbarism, which
also in length of time they accomplished almost to the utmost.

Now when at length by the valor of Carolus Magnus they were discomfited, and
wholly driven out of these christian Lands, after their subversion, there
sprung out of the Barbarism which they left behind them, a Barabarian sect of
Divines, more pernicious to Religion then the Goths and Vandals had been. In a
general term they are usually called Schoolmen or School-Doctors. These like
the Babel-builders erected upon other foundations, and of other materials a
Babel-Church, with such barbarous slime in stead of cement and mortar, as was
never before used since the first building of the old Babel; who exauctorating
Christ and his Gospel from having any sovereignty in matters of Religion, and
permitting them but now and then to peep for their advantage, canonized
Aristotle the most subtle, but until then the least regarded of all the sects
of Heathen Philosophers, to be their ipse dixit, chose Peter Lombards sentences
to be their Text, themselves to be the Commentators. The matter of their
Commentary, a Miscellane, partly of the excrements of their own brains, partly
of moralities, legalities, formalities; and partly of superstitions, idolatries
and heresies borrowed, some from the Jews, some from the Heathen, and the rest
from Hell it self. The Language in which all is set forth, no Language, but
being cought out in syllabical, barbarous, and bombastical sounds of their own
coining, would better fit the bellowing of a beast, than the utterance of men;
or if the utterance of men, more beseeming Conjurers and Charmers than Divines.
The God whom they serve and sacrifice unto in all is not Christ but Antichrist,
whose commands and decrees as soon as they have received, they must and will
with all their Hyperborean conjurations of ghastly words, defininitions,
argumentations, and a cell or hell full of distinctions, maintain them to be
from heaven, though they smell of nothing but hell it self. Nimble workmen,
leaving a glory upon their disputes when they meet with sublunary matter, with
a subject not above the comprehension of natural reason, but such whereof all
men have an idea or image within their Synterisis, or natural conscience; but
when they meet with Gospel-doctrine, that makes men wise to salvation, blinder
than Balaam, that saw less than his Ass which he rode upon. These have
erected and held up many hundred years a religion which can save none, but
damneth all that cleave strictly to it, and they have this peculiar virtue that
they have still waxed wors and wors, the second generation more impure than the
first, and the third than the second, and so lineally every generation almost
until now: save that in these last times they have attained so much of the
subtlety, falsehood and impiety of Satan, that there is scarce a possibility of
receiving a further addition. If then any man will read how far the humane
Learning of which I am speaking, may be helpful to propagate and maintain the
truth of the Gospel, let him but look back to the fruit of these sophistical
Doctors Labors these many hundred years last past, and by that which he sees
he shall be able to answer himself, viz. that it has been and is powerful to
deface and subvert utterly the whole truth and salvation of the Gospel in
relation to their Disciples that rest upon their Learning and Precepts: for
look what of Religion, worship and ordinances there is in the Popish Church,
the praise of it redounds to philosophy and sophistry the main instruments of
laying its groundwork, and the sole instruments (unless ye will annex to it
the fire and faggot, and tyrannical inquisition) for the maintenance thereof.

Having seen how great a corruption, and how long a desolation of the truth of
Religion there has been, while Sophistry was made its perfidious Advocate. We
are now in the next place to consider how the same truth of Christian Religion
thrived when delivered out of the captivity of, and communion with this secular
Learning.

After the long holding of the purity of the Gospel in unrighteousnes, by these
Theologasters, it pleased God to raise up to himself for the reformation of his
Church, men of his own choice, and gifted with a measure of the Spirit,
answering so great a work to which they were deputed; as Luther, Zuinglius, and
many other learned and godly men, some their contemporaries, some their
followers. These restored the Scriptures to light again, which had been many
hundred years buried in darkness, and preached again the true and clear Gospel
which had been long also clouded with men's inventions, traditions and
superstitions. What success this their Ministry had, cannot be unknown to them
that know any thing of the history of those times. Disciples came in by
thousands and ten thousands unto Christ, being totally revolted from
Antichrist. Whole Kingdoms, Nations, Dukedoms, that ere while worshipped the
Beast, now fell flat at the feet of Christ to submit to his Scepter. And this
not as constrained by the command of their Magistrates or Laws, but even while
Magistrates and Laws slept, yea when Magistrates and Laws persecuted with Fire
and Sword all that went this way: even then the Kingdom of heaven suffered
violence, and the violent took it by force, i. e. by an unresistible
conviction of the word, and wonderful operation of this Spirit upon their
souls, they were carried out in contempt of all dangers and persecutions to
receive the Lord Jesus Christ purely revealed in his righteousness, beawty and
salvation to them. So that in few years, maugre all the malice of the Pope,
Emperor, Kings, Princes, World, and Hell, Christ might be even seen reigning
in the midst of his Enemies, and whole Lands, at least great multitudes of many
Lands which were darkness, became light in the Lord, even so far as we see the
Protestant Religion at this day propagated.

If it be demanded here, how it came to pass that the word and truth of
Religion in so short a time, so mightily grew and prevailed, that so great a
part of the world from so small and even despicable a beginning, became so
fully and so quickly seasoned with it? It were a full answer (I acknowledge) to
say, It was the Lords time, and he would so have it.

But because the Lords operations are all done in wisdom, truth, and
righteousness, an inferior subordinate cause visible to our eyes may be also
alleged: when the Lord had purposed to do this great work, he ordained and
fitted instruments for it. The Ministers which he employed the first threescore
years and upward about the work of Reformation, were such as clave only and
wholly to the word, both in preaching and defending the sacred truth of the
Gospel, minding only Christ Jesus, not seeking their own things, their own
greatness, glory and praise, but the things of Christ. Denied all other
authority save Christ's, knew no other, admitted no other Master, to define and
determine any thing in matters of Religion but Christ alone. Therefore whether
they provoked the Adversaries, or were provoked by them to disputation, their
challenge, or receiving the challenge, was still upon this condition, that the
Word alone must be umpire in all things. Thus they had Disputes before the
Emperor Charles the 5. so they offered themselves to be disputers in the
Council of Trent. But still refused the authority of Aristotle, and his genuine
sons Thom: Aquinas, John Duns, Scotus, and the whole rabble of their followers,
and all the testimonies and learning of such, as incompetent Judges of heavenly
things. Thus these holy men ploughed the Lords field, with his own Heyfers, and
sowed it with his own seed, therefore he gave so large an increase. They
preached (as they had commandment and commission from him) only his Gospel, and
all and only whatsoever he had commanded them, therefore according to his
promise he was with them giving a blessing.

But if it be further demanded, how it came to pass at last that there was a
stop to the glorious proceedings of the success of the Ministry of the Gospel
these last sixty years, that we see not any further propagation of the truth,
but Antichrist rather regaining strength than losing, and the kingdom of Christ
rather declining than increasing?

I answer, that as about that time the new sect of Loyalla, the Jesuits, came
to some maturity, who being spes ultima Romae ruentis, the last subsidiary help
of the Romish nodding and falling power, perceived that they might seek but not
find any fulture from the Scriptures to their fainting cause; therefore applied
themselves to the study of Aristotle the Pagan, and the Schoolmen the
Semi-pagans, drinking into themselves their sophistry, and refining it into
som-what a purer Language, (though most of them retain a scholastical style
still): And being thus furnished, they provoke our Divines to a dispute,
objecting against them, that through their ignorance and illiterate
sottishness, they dared not to dispute scholastically, therefore still cried
Scripture, Scripture, to hide their want of Schollarship from the eyes of men.
As about that time (I say) there were in such an operation, a new kind of
Antagonists against the power of the Gospel: So on our part in many Churches,
there succeeded the former Worthies, about the same time, Pastors in their own
eyes possibly of a more noble, but in spiritual eyes of a baser metal: who to
evade that scandal laid upon us by the Adversaries, that we destroyed good
works by our Doctrine of free Grace through Christ, preached some men's
inventions, superstitions, and traditions; others mere moralities, legalities,
or duties after the tenor of the Law, scarce touching upon the strings of the
Gospel to tune up the Justification, Life, Liberty, Peace, Joy, and other
privileges which are by Christ: And to gain to themselves an applause and
opinion among men of their universal Learning, assented to the forenamed
Challengers to descend to them in their own Field, and to traverse their
Disputes about heavenly things after the rules of worldly wisdom, thus basely
prostituting the cause and doctrine of the Lord Christ, to the censure and
arbitration of Heathen Philosophers, and of John Duns, and other enemies to the
purity of the Gospel. For in trying all by their learning, by the light of
Reason which they have dazzled and sophisticated with their rules and precepts,
is to make them judges of Christ and his Gospel, how far they shall stand or
fall. Who can deny, but in stead of the former Eagles which the Church had,
that still beheld the Sun of righteousness, to fetch their light from his beams;
we had now Owls that looked downward, and pitched upon the elements and
rudiments of the world and worldly learning (as the Apostle terms them, Col. 2.
8.) to fetch light and authority thence in pretense to maintain the truth, but
in deed and success to betray it? No marvel if in this case Christ has
withdrawn himself and his blessing from such Apologists for his Cause, which
plead for him with such a kind of argumentation as is worse then total
silence. For what of Christ is there in such disputes? when the first
syllogism, or its prossyllogism, or a distinction, diverts the question from
all the lists of Divinity, into Philosophy or Metaphysics, etc. and not the
least parcel or particle of Scripture is any more heard of through the whole
disputation? It is but as it falls ou^ sometimes between two Apes, that having
a heap of shells cast before them which they take for nuts, inconsiderately break
out into a skirmish, rending in pieces either the others jackets, and then with
tooth and nail wound either the others hides, until the weaker yield the
victory to the stronger, and the Conqueror by his victory gets nothing but
shells to break his teeth, not a kernel to stay his hunger: So when a question
in Divinity once translated and removed into Logic, in this element to be
tried, there is notable jangling, until one of the Antagonists that has the
stronger front, and more subtle brain, and clamorous voice, has put the other
to silence, and then one is as wise and as great a gainer as the other. For the
question is adhuc sub judice, where it was, it was above all logical and
metaphysical notions to dec^de it. I acknowledge that in such disputes it has
much delighted me sometimes to find the sophistical fallacies of an adversary
detected and shamed in a logical way by some of our Divines. Yet this in no
wise either does or should satisfy me as touching the question, until I find
the true assertion confirmed ^y Scripture it self. One testimony from above in
this case is of more worth and weight than a thousand volumes of Arguments
drawn out of worldly wisdom which is from beneath.

And lest I should be taken as singular in this piece of prattle (as Mr. Baxter
will term it) I shall mention in stead of many, two famous modern Writers, the
one speaking with reference to the times past, the other to the time present
and to come.

Palam est (says Amesius) Patres ex Philosophia introduxisse in Ecclesiam
Ames. Bellar. Enero. Tom. 4. Lib. 6. Cap. 1. p. 136.
varios modos loquendi, precipue de meritis humanis, and de Justitia Evangelij,
qui in scripturis non comparent; and inde occasionem datam and arreptam
Scholasticis fuisse, perniciosos errores fabricandi. i. e. It is apparent that
the Fathers have out of Philosophy brought into the Church, various ways of
speaking, especially of man's merits, and of Gospel-righteousness, which do not
appear in Scriptures: And that occasion has been thereby given to, and caught
or raught by the School-Doctors to frame many Errors. And Bullinger seeing this
way of disputation beginning to peep and show it self in its time, within the
reformed Churches, having before described them that give their minds overmuch
to the study of Philosophy and Logic, that they became such as are unuseful
for the edification of the Church, and in stead thereof, Disputatores rixosi
fiunt, censores superbissimi, nihil aliud quam disputationes and rixas
spirantes, omnia aliorum, etc. arrogantissime consentes, arrodentes, and
malign cavillantes, Scholarum and Ecclesiarum pestes, ex quibus venenum
altercationum, simultatum, etc. effunditur in Ecclesiam, i. e. become brawling
disputers, proud censurers, breathing nothing but disputes and janglings, most
arrogantly censuring, snarling, and malignly cavilling at other men's labors,
nisi quod eorum capitibus gravidis admodulatum sit prescriptisque regulis
congruant, if they be not tuned to their heads great with Child, and congruent
with their rules and precepts [of Art;] The very plagues of Schools and
Churches, out of which the poison of brawlings, divisions, and distractions is
powered out into the Church: Having thus described them, he thus concludes in
reference to the times past, Equidem feliciter nunquam cessit Ecclesiae, quando
homines docti and studiosi, deserta simplicitate and puritati verbi dei, alio
converterunt oculos, neque hos unice in solum verbum Dei collimarunt, i. e.
Verily it has never thrived well in the Church, when learned Bulling. Ser.
Decad. 5. Sermon. 10.
and studious men, forsaking the simplicity and purity of Gods word, have
glanced their eyes on some other thing, and not fixed them only upon Gods word.
And thus in reference to the times to come and present; Si hodie quoque
pergamus scripturis sanctis ma^e copulare philosophiam, and illas superstitiose
ad disputationes revocare, ac sub regulas cogere humanas, vel Artium;
corrumpemus and ipsi in scholis, grandi cum Ecclesiae detrimento, sinceritatem
doctrinem Apostolicae, i. e. If in our times also we proceed evilly to couple
together the Scriptures and Philosophy, and to call the Scriptures but
outsidely or in a show to our disputations, reducing them to the rules of men,
and of the Arts, we also shall to the great disadvantage of the Church, corrupt
the sincerity of Apostolical doctrine in the Schools. So much said Bullinger, a
Classical Divine of his time neither without eminent learning, nor an enemy to
it, for more than a 100 years sithence, in the last of those decads of Sermons
which he set forth in print, Anno 1549. how long before the Edition thereof it
was preached is uncertain. Ye^ gives after all this to humane literature its
due praise: Interim certum est (says he) bonas Arts vel literas plurimum
facere ad per spicuitatem and evidentiam; sed moderate cum judicio, religiose
adhibitas, ut imperium relinquatur sacris literis, serviant autem omnes Arts
exoticae, i. e. Mean while it must be granted that good Arts and Learning
contribute much to the clearing and evidencing [of things] so that they be
moderately, judiciously, and religiously made use of, and the Scripture be
still left as Empress, and all extraneous Arts as handmaids (not to justle it
aside, or sit in Chair with it, but) to do service to it.

In some things, in many things I grant the rules of these Arts, (when agreeing
with Scripture) to be useful to make out the absurdity or rationality of a
man's reasoning about divine things: But except they could be proved
universally, and in all parts perfect and indeficient, it is neither safe nor
warrantable to yield up our faith and judgment in Gospel-matters to their
determination.

This ingenuity therefore is to be attributed to M. Baxter, that he does
(though not professedly, yet actually) to this end come armed a Cap ad Pe, with
this kind of learning, to destroy, not to maintain that sacred and fundamental
point of the Gospel, Justification of mere grace. Yet to show how much more
confidence he has in his Sophistry than in his Divinity, and to tell out aloud
that he has deserved to have the title of Subtilissimus Doctor, which Scotus
hitherto has worn, he has affixed to the end of his Aporisms a Table of
Distinctions, to spe^k out himself to all that will not otherwise see it, that
he is whatsoever he is, Sophistry it self, that distinctions flow from him as
thick as Bees from the Hive. Only this one thing seems wanting in him, that he
sets not so much as an Asterisk upon any of these distinctions, to tell us that
either it is grounded upon the Scripture, or that it distinguishes him from a
sworn enemy to the Doctrine of Grace.

I do not expect to be free from censure for so much length in my discourse
upon this last subject, to show the impotency and impropriety of secular
learning to bear any authority in spiritual things. But I have to answer
against such censures, 1. That I have written therein nothing but words of
soberness and truth; and I had rather with tediousness make clear a truth, than
to drop errors with concisenes^. 2. That it was not against my purpose to be so
large, nor yet beside the mark aimed at. For should I here put a period, Mr.
Baxters falsities are more than half answered; because that more than half of
his Book consists of merely sophistical questions, definitions, arguments,
evasions, equivocations, distinctions and fallacies. In all which, if there be
no force to prove or refute in Gospel-matters; and that God is so far from
commanding or allowing such slights in handling Gospel Truths, as that he
explodes, hates and curses the same (as has been manifested) then the greater
part of his work is hereby manifested to be vain. As for the residue of the
Book, wherein he seems to confine himself to plain Scripture, he seldom and
little meddles this way, but in confidence of his Sophistry that he has at
hand in ambush, to succenturiate and help him at a dead lift, else all the fat
will quickly be in the fire, his Scripturall reasons for the most part cutting
the throat of his own caus^, and stoutly defending the truth which he
oppugneth, as we shall find when I come to examine them.

One thing yet remains which I promised to premise, viz. what my intention is
in excepting against Mr. Baxters book. This is not either to oppose him in all
things which he has written therein. For sometimes he looks out through truths
casement, that we might take him so a son of truth, and the less suspect him
when he vends his false wares. In this case I will not jangle with him whether
he speaks truth of envy and subtlety, or of good will and sincerity. Or 2. in
all that shall seem to my judgment Heterodox in his Treatise, but only or mainly
in those things wherein he joyneth with the Romish Synagogue to maintain their
damning doctrine, against the truth which is and has been professed in all the
Reformed Churches about Faith and Justification. Or 3. in every particular
passage wherein he discovers himself in this point to be for Antichrist against
Christ; for sometimes he delivers himself with such ambiguities and
aequivocations, like Apollo of old in his Oracles, that in pretense of another
sense of his words than the more Grammatical and usual, he may leave a way of
issue to himself, in case he cannot maintain his words in that sense wherein he
would be understood that he may deceive. Let it not therefore be thought all
granted that shall not be here excepted against, and that I approve all
whatsoever I do not oppugn. For method, I desire no other may be expected from
me, than to follow Master Baxter in order as he has written, and to take up
his Paradoxes and most profound and learned mistakes as they fall from him,
examining them, not by the rules of Sophistry, but by the touchstone of the
sacred Word.

These things thus premised, we are now to begin to examine the unsavory
particulars occurring in the Book it self.

Mr. Baxters APHORISMS Exorized and Anthorized: OR, An Examination of, and
Answer to, a Book written by Mr. Rich. Baxter, Teacher of the Church at
Kederminster in Worcestershire; ENTITVLED, Aphorisms of Justification.
THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I.
Arg. In which Mr. Baxters Popish Doctrine of Implicit Faith is examined; and
whether the people may admit Doctrine upon trust from their Teachers.

THE first passage wherein he shows himself to smell of Popery in the point of
Faith and Justification, is (before the work it self) in the farewell of his
Epistle to the Reader, page antepenult. of the Epistle, where he does not
obscurely manifest himself to like well enough the Papists doctrine of Implicit
Faith, and to wish it more favored, and taken up at home among us. His words
are these, speaking to his Congregation,

Bax. Who I hope do understand that to take upon trust from your teachers, what
you cannot yet reach to see in its own evidence, is less absurd and more
necessary than many do imagine. A very proper insinuation to a people whom he
would have to swallow such Doctrines as in the following Treatise he offers to
them to be swallowed. As far as he prevails, or prevails not with this
insinuation, so far he has or has not men his Disciples. This is the very
foundation of Antichrists kingdom, the authority of men, as the foundation of
Christ's kingdom is the authority of the Scriptures. If Mr. Baxter can persuade
men to admit and suck in this Doctrine, his whole business is finished, and all
his ends attained. If they take upon trust even fundamental doctrines from
their teachers, Let Mr. Baxter bring what doctrines he will with him of men and
Devils, nothing shall be refused, all shall be taken upon his Credit. By this
slight he knew the Pope had gathered, and many hundred years held under his
vassallage in blind obedience many nations of the earth, therefore will not Mr.
Baxter baulk it, when he goes about to propagate the Popes doctrine among us.

But let us see what the Popish implicit faith is, and then compare Mr. Baxter
with the Papists, to see whether there be not in both one mind and spirit. The
Papists distinguish betwixt Faith and Faith, telling us there is an Explicit
and there is an Implicit Faith. By the Explicit Faith they mean a clear and
distinct knowledge, apprehension, and believeng of all the Articles and
Doctrines of faith which the holy Mother Church of Rome has prescribed to be
received to salvation, and that not in a bunch only, but in particulars also.
This Faith they hold needful and expedient in the Clergy (as they term their
Prelates and Priests) who are to rule over, more than to teach the people. By
the Implicit Faith they mean a general and confused apprehension and
believing of all that the Church has commanded to be taught and believed; that
it is all good and true, though they that so believe, know not in particular
what the Church has commanded, otherwise than they take it upon trust of their
Priests which tell them such and such things are commanded by the Church to be
believed. This Faith they hold sufficient for the Laity to salvation, to
believe what the Church believes and enjoyneth to be true, though they neither
know what it is, nor are acquainted with one least parcel of the word by which
they may know it to be true, which they have so taken upon trust to believe. By
the Church they mean the Pope and his Clergy, by the Laity the people: So that
by their Doctrine, if the Popes decree things in religion successively never so
contrary, and contradictory either to other, and the titular Clergy follow
them, and go to Hell for it; yet the people have this one supereminent
privilege that their Implicit and Colliers faith saves them (as being still the
same and unchanged) that they believe as the Church believes; though they know
not either with the Church or what believing is, or what the things are which the
Church believes.

Compare we now Mr. Baxters words with this popish doctrine, and see we if
there be any difference. I hope (says he) you understand. When Mr. Baxter
says I hope, we are not to doubt but a man of such rare parts has good
grounds for his hope. He knew there was means used to make them understand,
else would he not say, I hope you understand; and what means but teaching? and
who should teach them but Mr. Baxter their Teacher?

But what is it he hopes they understand? it follows: That to take upon the
trust of your Teachers, what you cannot yet see in its own evidence, is not,
etc. Here is the Implicit Faith, not to ground their opinions and belief in
matters of salvation, upon the known word of God, but upon trust from the
Teachers, to believe because their Teachers say they belive it. And what are
the Teachers, but what in Popish phrase is termed the Church, the Clergy, which
is in their account at least the Church representative. And Mr. Baxter to
decline envy uses the plural number, Teachers, not (as I conceive) that the
people of Kederminster have more Teachers in ordinary besides himself, for he
names himself in the Title of the book their unworthy Teacher, not one of their
Teachers, so that his purpose is to deliver a general rule for all Churches:
His congragation to take upon trust from him and other Congregations from their
Teachers, what they themselves cannot reach to see in its own evidence, i. e.
such doctrines as they themselves by their own light and knowledge cannot tell
whether they be white or black, true or false, from Heaven or from Hell. And to
do this, is less absurd and more necessary then many imagine. Mr. Baxter is
scarce yet beginning to discover himself, therefore we have yet Bona Verba from
him, we hear him speaking modestly; afterward vires acquirit eundo, we shall
when once he is hot in his discourse hear him speak in the full of the mouth;
here only he says less absurd and more necessary than some imagine. But who
knows not his meaning to be, that for the people thus to pin their Faith to the
sleeves of their Teachers, specially to such profound Teachers as Mr. Baxter,
is so far from being absurd as that it is necessary (I suppose he means to
salvation) though some imbegin otherwise.

Here I would demand (not of Mr. Baxter, for I desire not familiarity with him
while such an Aphorist) but of any knowing man indulgent to him, when he says,
less absurd and more necessary, than some imagine; whom can he mean by those
some, but the Protestant Churches and Divines, who at all times with one
consent have cried out against the absurdity of this doctrine, in their
disputations against the Papists? And if so, what does he less therein than
pronounce the Popish Doctrine herein necessary, and the doctrine of all the
Protestants in opposition to it, a mere imagination?

But it may be objected, that the Papists lay down this doctrine of Implicit
Faith, or believing upon the authority of the Church, or their Teachers, for a
continual rule to the people. But Mr. Baxter proposes it but as a temporary
rule, useful only for a season. Therefore the difference between him and them
is considerable: For so much may be gathered from Mr. Baxters words, to take
upon trust from your Teachers, what you cannot Yet reach to see in its own
Evidence. It is but while they are yet weak, while they cannot yet reach, etc.
But when once they are strengthened, and have attained to see truths in their
own evidence, thenceforth they are to take up such doctrines upon their own
evidence, not upon trust from their Teachers any longer.

I answer, This difference is but supposed, not real. For if we compare his
words here with that which he has written in the next Section of this Epistle
before, and with the whole frame and current of of his disputes, throughout his
whole book, we shall find that he does equally with the Papists labor to settle
the people in an implicit faith to believe as the Church believes still. For
in the former Sect* he that knows best his own congregation, acknowledges it
to be in the number of those, the greatest part whereof is incapable af
understanding such controverted points as are treated of in his book. He says
not only that they understand them not, but also denies them to be in a
capacity to be brought to the understanding of them, viz. in their own
evidence, therefore they must still hold them upon trust from their Teachers.

Besides, if we look to the frame of his Disputes in this Treatise, we shall
find him concurring with the Papists, in his endeavors to keep the people in a
perpetual incapacity to understand such Doctrines in their own evidence. For
what else can he mean by seeing a point of divine doctrine in its own evidence,
but one of these two things, to see it in the evidence and clear testimony of
the word by which God has set it forth? or to see it in the evidence of
Sophistical learning and disputes, by which Mr. Baxter and the Sophisters whom
he follows, pretend themselves to set it forth? But by neither of these will
Mr. Baxter or the Popish Sophisters (if they can hinder it) suffer the vulgar
people to know any Evangelicall truth in its own evidence. Not by the evidence
of the Scriptures, by which God has cleared up, and so plainly revealed the
fundamental truths of salvation, that even babes and sucklings may in good
measure comprehend them, Mat. 11. 25. 1 Cor. 1. 26. For here with his Masters
the Romish Sophisters, he raises vain and distracting questions, making
difficulties where the wisdom of God has left none, and so puzling weak and
tender consciences, that even what before they had attained by the pure and
simple light of the word, seeing now such a thick fogg of doubts interposed,
they think themselves to have lost what light once they had, and so sink into
sadness and despair, concluding it utterly unattainable. What zeal Mr. Baxter
has thus not only to match, but also to exceed all the locusts of Rome in
darkning such truths as Christ has in Scripture left clear and open to all,
shining in the very Sunbeams of the Gospel, we shall find in examining the
following parts of his Treatise. So that in this respect he hinders, as much as
in him lies, his Kederminsterians from seeing the truth of Christ in its own
evidence.

Nor by the latter (Mr. Baxters sophistical way of quenching under a pretense
of confirming Gospel Truth) can the vulgar ever attain to know them in their
own evidences, not only because this humane Learning has no power to search
into them, but also because it is not to be expected that illiterate men should
ever attain any depth in this learning. For if it be true what is generally
held by Mr. Baxter and his side, that without great acquaintance with
school-learning, the marrow of Divinity can never be effectually pierced into;
and what a great Scholar once told Erasmus, that one of these School-Doctors
John Scotus, can in no wise be understood under nine years study at the least;
and what a 3d affirms, that a man must have Aristotle's Metaphysics ad
unguem, before he can be capable of understanding one sentence of Scotus;
Farewell then all hope of saving knowledge ever to be attained by unscotified
miserable idiots, in its own evidence, or by the Ministerial help of such
Teachers as have crept here below upon the Doctrine of Christ his Prophets and
Apostles, and not had so much time and patience as Mr. Baxter has bestowed in
the sublimated study of Aristotle, Scotus, and their fellows.

But what if Mr. Baxter herein speak the same things (may some say) with the
Church of Rome, and the same in opposition to the judgment of all the Reformed
Churches, yet this does not certainly prove that it is savouring of error which
he here delivers, except it be manifested that he speaks against the
Scriptures. Does the word any where forbid us to take up points of Faith on the
credit of our Teachers, though we understand not the points which they teach,
much less can produce any Scriptures surely and soundly to confirm them?

I answer, that the Scriptures are very full and punctual against taking upon
trust of mere men any doctrine to be believed to salvation. Be not ye called
Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ, Mat. 23. 10. q. d. Dare not any
of you to suffer any to take up matters in Religion upon your trust or
authority? For there is but one unerring Mr. whose authority is authentic,
Christ Jesus. If Paul or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel to you,
etc. let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8. therefore not trusted. Prove all things,
hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5. 21. Believe not every Spirit, but try
the spirits whether they be of God: For many false Prophets are gone forth into
the world, 1 John 4. 1. When the Holy Ghost says, Prove all, Try all, he
implyedly forbids to take up any thing on trust from men. My sheep hear my
voice, the voice of a stranger they will not hear, for they know not, i. e. own
not the voice of strangers, Joh. 10. 4, 5, 27. They know and own the voice of
Christ alone: If any preach with another voice, another doctrine than that
which is originally from Christ, they fly from him, explode him. Here is
nothing taken upon trust but from Christ himself. They are built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the head
cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20. A more noble foundation than the trust and authority
of men.

I might annex many like testimonies of divine Scripture to the same purpose,
but to what purpose? They are Deceivers, such as the Apostle numbreth among
grievous wolves, speakers of perverse things, i. e. perverters of the Gospel of
Christ, that seek to draw Disciples after them, i. e. to settle men in a Faith
upon the authority of their learning, wisdom, and holiness, Acts 20. 29, 30.
But Mr Baxter and his peers are necessitated thus to do, if in teaching such
doctrines they will draw after them Disciples; For being destitute of the
authority of God and his word, if they should not urge men to a credulity upon
the authority of men, their doctrine would be hissed at as having no authority.

To conclude then; the doctrine which Mr. Baxter here more than obscurely holds
forth is,

1 Against Christ, and all the Reformed Churches which condemn it, borrowed of,
and owned by the apostatized Synagoue of Rome only.

2 Against the Scripture, as has been manifested.

3 It is a doctrine that brings with it an unsetledness and instability in
Faith and Religion. Whosoever takes it up from Mr. Baxters credit, must be
always learning, and never know, be whirled hither and thither with doubts and
uncertainties, without any firm station, never attaining rest. For he that
takes upon trust from his Teachers what to believe and do to be saved, will
one day be of Paul, another of Apollo, and a third of Cephas, as his fancy tells
him, this or that Teacher is most worthy to be trusted. In great probability
Mr. Baxters predecessor taught not the same Justification with Mr. Baxter, and
he that shall succeed him will hold out the same grounds and way of
justification with Christ and his Apostles which Mr. Baxter declineth. And I
know not but either of them may be as worthy of Trust as himself. In what a
maze must that people then be led, by what turnings and returnings must they be
dragged forward and backward, who are taught to take up doctrines on the trust
of their Teachers? what joy in believing can they ever have, whose rule in
believing is to be never settled in their faith, but to be still wavering? His
Disciples must needs be mere weather-cocks, tossed to and fro with every wind
of doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craf^inesse, whereby they lay in
wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14.

4 It is a doctrine that makes way for all Heresy, Blasphemy, and Impiety into
the hearts of the people. For when Religion is taken upon trust from the
Teachers, Satan will transform himself into an Angel of light, and his
Ministers themselves into Ministers of Righteousness, to gain credit and
opinion of wisdom and holiness above others among the people, that upon their
trust at last the people may swallow all falsehoods under the name of Truth,
whatsoever they shall commend to them, 2 Cor. 11. 13-15. See whither the
Galathians were carried by taking upon trust from their seemingly Angelical
Teachers doctrines of faith. Christ is become of no effect to you, ye are fallen
from grace, says the Apostle to them, Gal. 5. 4. Surely the doctrine of Mr.
Baxter is the same in general and substance, with theirs that corrupted and
seduced Galatia. The Lord avert the like success from Kederminster.

5 It is a Doctrine pernicious in it self, and brings a curse upon them that
receive it in the very receiving of it. For cursed is man that trusts in man,
and makes flesh his arm, whose heart departs from the Lord, Jer. 17. 5. If
so in earthly, much more in spiritual things. So much of this point, in which
having found what Mr. Baxter is before his entrance upon the bulk of his work,
we may easily conjecture what a one we shall find him, being entered.

CHAP. II.
Mr. Baxters Sophistical way and Method of dispute to obscure, and not to
clear the truths of the Gospel, discovered: And that therein he imitates the
Papists.

IN the former Chapter we have found Mr. Baxter before his entrance upon his
Treatise, somewhat discovering with whom he joins in opinion, so far that we
may discern and guess ex ungue leonem, by one little piece of the man, what he
is in his whole bulk and frame. It contents him not to be one and the same with
the Papists in his judgment, but that he will next also discover himself to be
the same with them in their slights and artifice, to bring all others into the
same judgment and opinion with them. That generation of the Popish Schoolmen
are fitly likened by Sir Francis Bacon, in his Advancement of learning, to
Spiders, which spin out their webbs out of their own bowels. So these spinn all
their doctrines in religion out of their own brains, their own reason, naming
Christ sometimes therein, but rather hiding and darkning the authority of his
word, than following it as their leading thread in all their doctrines. All
their writings about Evangelicall and saving points of knowledge, are but as so
many webs of their fancy to catch and carry away from the purity of Christ's
Gospel; not so many well-ordered threeds of sacred Scriptures to guide and
bring us to him. Who is there of all that have but cursorily read their works,
that finds them not consisting of large heaps of needless and superfluous
questions, to obscure the light of the word, and to bring all to the trial of
reason, yea sophistical and sophisticated reason, surmounting the reason and
capacity of the people to comprehend? And these questions which they spin and
spit out by dozens, yea hundreds and thousands, as they are mostly superfluous,
vain, useless, and many of them presumptuously and arrogantly proposed, about
things which the Lord has kept secret in his own bosom, not revealing them by
his word: so are they often no less peremptorily and audaciously by these men
answered and determined out of their Philosophical and Metaphysicall fancies,
without one particle of the word to ground their determinations upon. Thus by
their questionary sophistry they have both obscured, if not totally quenched
all true Divinity, i. e. the Doctrine of the Gospel, and have foysted in a
confused Chaos of titular Divinity, that has nothing of light or life in it,
such as the Scripture owns not, from their own reason.

Compare we now Mr. Baxter with these, to see whether as the Apostle calls
Timothy his own, or his natural son in the faith, 1 Timothy 1. 2. because he
walked directly after him in the steps of his faith: So Mr. Baxter does not
also declare himself the own and natural son of these sophisters, by walking
directly after them in the steps of their cunning and subtlety to destroy the
Faith. The Poets feigned that Minerva was begotten and born of Jupiters brain,
because she was all wisdom it self. And I think Mr. Baxter would be offended,
if it should be denied that all the quintissence of sophistical learning that
has been in all the brains of all the Schoolmen and Jesuits, were not so
extracted from them, as to have its residency now in his. He was (as far as I
can understand) born and brought up in the Protestant Church within this
nation, as Costor, Pollux, etc. were in the house of Leda; but by a new and
strange generation or adoption of eggs laid by these Serpents, he discovers
himself now in a manner to be wholly theirs: so fully does he resemble, yea
parallel them, that unum noris, omnes noris; you may read in him alone, the
Genius and the Craft of them all. Attend we else to his own words in his
explication of his 7th Thesis, page 25, etc. All that he has written before, I
pass by without exception against it, page 19. he lays down his 7. Aphorism
in these words:

Bax. Jesus Christ, at the will of his Father, and upon his own will, being
perfectly furnished for this work, with a Divine power and personal
Rigteousness, first undertook, and afterward discharged this debt [ viz. man's
debt to God] by suffering what the Law did threaten, and the offender himself
was unable to bear. To this as to the rest he adds that which he calls an
Explication, i. e. an Exposition, explainning or making plain of the Aphorism
or point so laid. Let us trace him how now he makes it plain, beginning at the
25. p. before mentioned. I should be too large to write all his words, yet
shall not wrong him by writing any save his own words, or the very substance of
them.

Bax. Here we are cast upon many and weighty and very difficult questions. 1
Whether Christ did discharge this debt by way of solution, or by way of
satisfaction? 2 Whether in his suffering and our escape, the threatening of the
Law was executed, or dispensed with? 3 And if dispensed with, how it can stand
with the truth and justice of God? 4 And whether sinners may thence be
encouraged to conceive some hope of a relaxation of the threatenings in the
Gospel? 5 And whether the faithful may not fear lest God may relax a promise
as well as a threatening? 6 And whether if the Law be relaxable, God might not
have released his Son from the suffering, rather then to have put him to so
great torment, and to have freely pardoned the offenders? And p. 27. The
resolving of the first question depends upon the resolving of two other
questions, both great and difficult 1 What it was which the Law did threaten? 2
What it was that Christ did suffer? Various are the judgments of He means the
Popish Doctors specially, for they with him are the Divines.
Divines about the former, etc. 1 Whether Adams soul and body should have been
annihilated and destroyed, so as to become in sensible? 2 Or whether his soul
should have been immediately separated from his body, as ours are by death, and
so be the only sufferer of the pain? 3 Or if so, whether there should have been
any resurrection of the body, after any space of time, that so it might suffer
as well as the soul? 4 Or whether soul and body without separation should have
gone down quick into hell, ar into any place or state of torment short of hell?
5 Or whether both should have lived a cursed life on earth, through
everlasting, in exclusion from Paradise, separation from Gods fav^ur and
gracious presence, loss of his image, etc. 6 Or whether he should have lived
such a miserable life for a season, and then be annihilated or destroyed? 7 And
if so, whether his misery on earth should have been more than men do now
endure? And the more importance are these questions of, because of some others
that depend upon them: As 1. What death it was that Christ redeemed us from? 2
And what death it is that perishing Infants dye, or that our guilt in the first
transgression does procure? For it being a sin against the first covenant
only, will be punished with no other death than that which is threatened in that
Covenant. And page 31. Besides it is needful to know what life was the reward
of that Covenant, that we might know what death was the penalty [and this also
comes into question about the reward] whether (if he had not fallen) he should
after a season have been translated into heaven without death, as Enoch and
Elijah, or whether he should have lived for ever in this terrestrial Paradise
without addition of further bliss to that which he had at his first Creation?
And as touching the death which Christ suffered, whether it were the same that
was threatened to Adam? Pa. 33. If we take the threatening at its full extent, as
it expresses not only the penalty, but also its proper subject and its
circumstances, then it is undeniable that Christ did not suffer the same that
was threatened. For the Law threatened the death of the offender, but Christ was
not the offender. Adam should have suffered for ever, but so did not Christ.
Adam did dye spiritually by being forsaken of God, in regard of holiness, as
well as in regard of comfort, and so was deprived at least of the chief part of
his image, so was not Chrst.

Yet [neither is this certain that Christ's death was not the same, etc. for] It
is disputable whether these two last were directly contained in threatening or
not? whether the threatening were not fully executed in Adams death, and the
eternity of it were not accidental, even a necessary consequent of Adams
disability to overcome death, and deliver himself, which God was not bound to
do? And whether the loss of Gods image were part of the death threatened, or
rather the effect of our sin only, executed by our selves and not by God?
whether God did take away his image, or man did thrust it away?

Admirable profoundness and learning! but after all this stir, and such
egregiously deep speculations as preparatories to the determining of the first
question, whether Christ did discharge our debt by way of solution, or by way
of satisfaction? how does he at length determine it?

Bax. P. 29, and 30. Much may be said, this seems, that is unlikely, one
thing probable, another possible: But for a final conclusion, p. 31. It is
hard to conclude peremptorily [any thing] in so obscure a case. And so he
leaves us so wise, as if he had slept and said nothing. But afterward
recalling himself, though he can conclude nothing as to the forementioned
particular preparatories to the determination of the question; yet p. 35. to
the substance of it in general he thus answers.

Bax. I canclude then, that in regard of the proper penalty, Christ did suffer
a pain and penalty of the same sort, and of equal weight with that threatened;
but yet because it was not in all respects the same, it was rather satisfaction
than the payment of the proper debt, being such a payment as God might have
chosen to accept. I list not to quarrel with him about the conclusion, it being
not a point mainly controverted between us and the Papists. Only who sees not
that he might as easily have thus concluded, without meddling with so many
frivolous and arrogant questions, leaving them where he found them, as not
giving the least fulture to such a conclusion? And when he has thus determined
the question, they that lock up to themselves his Conclusion as a treasure,
shall gain so much by it as he that rejoices of a chip in his pottage.
Possibly it may do no hurt, but certainly it will do no good to salvation.

But the answer to the second question comes without the help or push of a
leaver to heave it after, viz. whether the threatening was executed, or relaxed
and dispensed with?

B. The answer to this is plain in the Answer to the former, p. 35. Both alike;
for were it worth the scanning, we should find both either answered or
unanswered: and the things searched after, no less plain to be seen and taken
up than a needle in a bottle of hay. And so much M. Baxter sees, for he comes
after, 1 with his distinction.

B. In regard of the mere weight of punishment considered as abstracted from
person and duration, it was executed, [and to avoid the mistake of the Printer,
I conceive it should be] not relaxed. Yet taking the threatening entirely as it
was given out, and we must say [viz. if we say after Mr. Baxter] it was
dispensed with, for mankind does not suffer all that was threatened. When I
attain the meaning of the words, I shall be able to judge of the strength of the
reason therein contained. And 2ly he brings in a doubt, viz.

B. If the death threatened did consist in our present miseries, and temporal
death only, then the answer must be recanted, etc. And a little further
Conference with these Diviners rather than Divines (it seems) would make him
of their minds. And so the answer to the question depends upon ifs, if Mr.
Baxter change his mind, his answer must fall after him. In the mean while the
third question must depend upon the uncertain answer to the second.

B. If the threat be dispensed with, how it can stand with the truth and
justice of God so to dispense with it? Lo the answer to the former question is
stuck so deep in the mire, that the best Team in Worcestershire cannot draw it
out. Nevertheless such an artizan is Mr. Baxter, that with the spell of a few
distinctions, he does it while a man would wipe his mouth, thus.

B. Concerning the justice of God the question is not difficult, and I shall
say nothing to that. See, he is half out of the labyrinth already, and never
moves a finger for it. O rare dexterity! It costs a little more labor to get
free from the other half, and thus de does it.

B. The question is, how to reconcile this dispensation with Gods truth? Here
you must distinguish, 1. Betwixt the letter of the Law and the sense. 2.
Betwixt the Law and the end of the Law. 3. Between a threat with exception,
either expressed or reserved, and that which has no exception. 4. Between a
threatening which only expresses the desert of the sin, and what punishment is
due, and so falls under the will of precept; and that which also intends
the certain prediction of event, and so falls under the will of purpose also.
And now I Answer.

1. The end of the Law is the Law, and that being the manifestation of Gods
justice, and hatred of sin, etc. was fulfilled, and therefore the Law was
fulfilled Let the Judge of assizes then chide, and lay by the feet a murderer
for an hour, declaring thereby his justice and hatred of the offense. M. Baxter
must conclude him to be a just Judge, and to have fulfilled the Law, if hereupon
he forthwith discharge him.
. 2. Most think that the threatening had this reserved exception. Thou shall
dye, i. e. by thy self or thy surety: and though it be sinful for man to speak
with mental reservations, when he pretends to reveal his mind, yet not in God,
because as he is subject to no law, so he is not bound to reveal to us all his
mind, nor does he indeed pretend any such thing. 3. So that the sense of the
same is fulfilled. 4. But the special answer that I give is this, when
threatenings are merely parts of the Law, and not also predictions of the event,
and discoveries of Gods purpose thereabouts, then they may be dispensed with
without any breach of truth. For as when God says, Thou shall not eat of the
tree, etc. the meaning is only, It is thy duty not to eat, and not eventually
that he should not eat. So when he says, Thou shall dye the death, the meaning
is, Death shall be the due reward of thy sin, and so may be inflicted for it at
my pleasure; and not that he should certainly suffer it in the event This
Doctrine wipes off all fear from scandalous sinners having this plea put into
their mouth by Mr. Baxter: God has said, thou shall not so offend but his
meaning is not that I should eventually abstain, and has said, Thou shall be
condemned, not meaning eventually to execute it. Ergo, I may go on in sin
without fear.
.

Read the rest he that loves it, I have enough even to nauseousness. What
Jesuit reading this will not cry out, O delicatum animulum, a babe of the same
mould with the Scholastic Doctors of the holy mother Church, li^ked by them
Bear like into their own form. If Scotus could now awake to see how this man
has improved and perfected his method in disputing, it is a question whether
envy or joy would more work in him. It was his rule to evidence ignotum per
ignotius, an obscure point by that which is more obscure. This man has
proceeded further, to illustrate and prove Notissima, per ignotissima, that
which is most clear of it self, by that which is as dark as darkness it self.
For what more evident and plain than the Aporism or Doctrine which he does here
pretendedly explain? but the explication it self a dark labyrinth. Let Aquinas
now and his Cajetan riding him with his Comments, both together, yea the whole
rabble of the Scholasticks appear, and show whether among them all there be any
that in so short a room and narrow a compass couched together so many subtle
questions, backed them with so many dainty distinctions, and then answered them
with so much profoundness as this one Mr. Baxter? Oh happy Kederminsterians
that have attained such an Expounder and Explainer of sacred things, whom when
they have heard and read, if they attend exactly to him, what they saw before
clearly of Christ, they shall so see no more! How can they ever stray which
have such a leader guiding them with a dark Lanthorn? By that time that Master
Baxter has so fully and learnedly explained all other doctrines of the Gospel
to them as he has this Aphorism, they shall be able to see so far into the
mysteries of Christ, as they can kenn at Sea through a planck six inches thick.

Nevertheless Mr. Baxter (I suppose will not deny but that he has left unto
others (if there be any that have so much wantonness in the quirpo of their
fancies, and such profligated consciences, that they dare to play with sacred
things) a power to derive from the Schoolmen whom he follows, so many
pertinent or impertinent questions, so many vain and sophistical distinctions,
that their gleaning shall match his vintage; and with these may stand in
opposition to Mr. Baxter so stoutly, that they may conclude in all things no
less uncertainly than himself: so that after many and long disputes in this
Scholastic way, wholly in contradiction to him, they may prove themselves to
be as far estranged from the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel, as himself
seems ambitious to be found.

CHAP. III.
Queries about this questionary and distinctionary way of Dispute, too much
used by Mr. Baxter, whether it be warrantable, and not manifoldly hurtful. To
which is added a brief examination of what Mr. Baxter has of Christ's Active
and Passive righteousness.

BUt having spoken somewhat largely of this kind of learning in the Preface to
prevent length and tediousness in the following discourse, I shall here only
oppose some questions to his questions, and pass away. And in these questions I
shall be an appealer to Mr. Baxters conscience only.

1. Whether he has learned this Art of subtle, superfluous, and unscriptural
questions and distinctions to explain holy and evangicall dioctrines, from the
Lord Christ or his Apostles, or from any solid, humble, and orthodox Divines
ancient or modern? and not wholly from the Popish Doctors and their adherents,
Grotius, Socinus, Arminius, and their Disciples?

2. Whether in this questionary and distinctionary way of dispute, his purpose
be not contrary to what he pretends (the explication of Divine truth) even the
same with the Papists whom he follows, to dim the truth, that having left it
in a mist, he may take the advantage to foyst upon men's consciences the fancies
and errors of his own brain under the name of truth?

3. Whether it be not intolerable arrogance and presumption against the Most
High God, not to rest contented with that which he has revealed by his word,
but audaciously to search into his secrets which he has kept hidden in his own
bosom? himself acknowledging that the H: G: speaks in Scripture very
sparingly ( i. e. indeed not at all) of many things that he here has so
peremptorily questioned and disputed of, yet has the front from sophisticated
reason to argue and determine of them. Is not this proudly to pry into the Ark
of Gods presence, and uncalled, to make himself of Gods Cauncell? If the Lord
Jesus in a way of rebuke tells his Disciples, It is not for them (though
deputed to a greater and higher charge than Mr. Baxter) to know the times and
seasons which the Father has put in his own power, when they sought (not from
their Rabbis, nor from pur-blind reason, nor from their own deceitful brains,
but) from the oracle of Christ's lips, when the kingdom should be restored to
Israel; under what rebuke lies Mr. Baxter and his fellows, which audaciously
search after the things which the Father has put in his own power, to be there
hidden until he shall be pleased to reveal them, and them to search after, not
from the lips of Christ, but from their own mad reason and reasonings? Is not
this knwledg a forbidden fruit? and will not the lusting after it bring
vengeance?

4. Whether this were not the sin of Elimas the sorcerer, who being full of
subtlety and mischief, perverted the right ways of the Lord, Act. 13. 10. What
were the right ways of the Lord, but the pure Gospel which the Apostle had
preached in its simplicity and plainness? And what was Elimas his perverting
thereof, but the use of his subtlety and mischief, in his disputes to make that
which in Paul's preaching was plain, right and straight, to seem absurd,
abstruse and crooked? does Mr. Baxter either here or throughout his whole book
cease to use the like subtlety? what more plain and straight than the Thesis or
point here laid down by himself? or what is his endeavor in his explication
thereof, but with his subtle questions and distinctions to leave so crooked and
so manifold windings upon it, that he makes it a very Labyrinth; that without
his Clew, or with it, there is scarce a possibility of passage in safety through
it? And the like operations of his we shall find every where in this book.

5. Whether he be not in such his disputes captious of praise to himself,
seeking his own, not Gods glory? and as it tickled the ear of Demosthenes to
hear the people whispering, yonder comes the eloquent Demosthenes: So whether
he has not an itching ambition to be accounted and called the profound and
learned Mr. Baxter, the great Reader, the man of deepest speculations and
matchless comprehensions? I do but appeal to his Conscience. For my part I
cannot with my dull apprehension as much as conjecture, what else he can in some
passages of this work aim at in using so much sophistry, when there is no need
of it, neither does it as far as I can see, any whit further him to the end at
which he drives, unless it be his own praise among unspirituall men, and to
make his authority the greater to deceive.

6. Whether he offends not here and elsewhere against the rule of the Apostle
who enjoyneth upon all to take heed of high thoughts of themselves, and to be
wise to sobriety, Romans 12. 3. i. e. not to mount above their reach and measure.
And what shall be accounted a wisdom without and against sobriety, if not that
which intrudeth it self into the things of God which it has pleased him not to
reveal, pretending an ability with the key of secular learning to unlock the
Cabinet of ^ods Counsels to which the most glorious Angels never dared to
approach? The Christian Spirit is the meek and modest Spirit, where the
Scripture is not the instructor, contents it self to be ignorant, concluding
with Tertullian, Quis revelabit Tert. lib. de Anima fere in Principio.
quod Deus texit? unde sciseitandum est? unde and ignorare tutissimum est.
Praestat per Deum nescire quia non Revelaverit, quam per hominem scire, quia
ipse presumpserit, i. e. Who shall reveal what God has covered? whence [in
such case] shall we make enquiry? ^ea hence to be ignorant is most fafe. It is
better not to know by [the will of] God, because he has not revealed it, than
[to seem] to know by man because he has presumed.

7. Whether he does not cross another precept of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 20.
peculiarly appropriated to all Ministers under the name and person of Timothy?
O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and
vain bablings, and oppositions of science falsely so called. He cannot, none can
deny the thing committed to Timothies trust, to be the Gospel in its verity,
purity, and simplicity. This therefore he is charged to keep, to make it his
business to preserve it alive and inviolated within him, to keep and hold
himself closely to it, without deviating to any other studies as helpful to
salvation. Therefore to avoid vain bablings and oppositions of science falsely
so called. Neither will Mr. Baxter deny, and all Commentators affirm the thing
to be avoided here, to be sophistical and philosophical disputes; which if
intermixed with the Doctrine of the Gospel, are here termed profane and vain
babbling, which has the name and opinion of science or wisdom in the opinion of
men, but is falsely so called and reputed. Does not Mr. Baxter here see himself
set aside by the Holy Ghost for a profane and vain babbler? and his learning
and wisdom exploded as shady and false, having nothing of substance and truth
in it?

8. Whether he does not by this way of disputing (as much as in him is)
uncanonize and make void the word? For if he hold with the Apostle that the
holy Scripture is sufficient and able to make men wise to salvation through
faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3. 15. why does he not stick to it? what
else does his so often and foul digressions from it, to fetch aid from his
sophistry, but argue that he holds the Scripture to be invalid to save, and
that there is either an equal or greater power in his sophistry to make men
wise and perfect to salvation?

9. Whether it does not bewray his Cause to be naught, that he knows it to be
naught, therefore seeks to bear it up with such slights and feats as a good
Cause needs not? When we see a house propped up on every side, at every end
with posts, stakes and pillars, who concludes not, surely it is a ruinous and
rotten building that needs so many supporters? It is not for the maintenance of
the Aphorism or Doctrine which Mr. Baxter does here pretendedly explicate, that
he does tie knots and unty them, bind and loose with such a hurry of questions
and distinctions. This doctrine stands firm enough upon its own bottom.
Conscious he is therefore of a rotten building, which he means in the following
part of this Treatise, to erect, and therefore furnishes himself with so many
posts and stakes to under-prop it. It is well observed by Mr. Pemble out of
Erasmus, Male res agitur ubi opus est tot remedijs. It is a certain Pemb. of
Justis. Sect. 2. Cap. 1 p. 37.
sign of an untrue opinion when it must be bolstered up with so many
distinctions. And if the Cause be naught, and the defender know it, yet
persists to defend it, then are the Cause and the man both alike.

10. Whether this kind of Argumentation does not declare Mr. Baxter to be of
another spirit from Christ and his Apostles, Christ came into the world to
preach the Gospel to the poor, Lu. 4. 18. to give sight to the blind, that they
which see not might see, Joh. 9. 39. And Paul descended low nurslike with
flattering speech unto the weak as to babes in Christ, feeding them with milk
and not with meat, until they became capable to digest it, 1 Cor. 2. 1. -- 4
and 3. 1, 2. likewise also the rest of the Apostles. But this man soareth on
high unto the upmost region of the Airy element, above the kenn and reach of
weak Christians, such as he acknowledges them (for the greatest part to be)
for whose sake chiefly he wrote this, speaking not to the comprehension of any,
save of such windy ones as himself, at least to the delight of no other; so
elevated seems he with the vainglory of his own excellencies. And do not these
contrary operations somewhat argue a contrary spirit moving him? I mean contrary
to that which moved in Christ and his Apostles.

11. Whether it tends not to the quenching of the comfort, and hazzarding of
the salvation of weak Christians? 1 to the quenching of their comfort. For when
from the pure word of God, not sophisticated with the intermixture of man's
wisdom and inventions, they have attained to believe and joy in believing, and
living by faith in Christ, rejoice in the grace and light of Gods countenance
shining upon them through him; meeting with Mr. Baxters work, and finding
therein, so holy, so incomparable a man for learning and piety, scattering so
many doubts, and puzling questions about the very beginning, and foundation of
our redemption, that himself cannot answer himself otherwise than by
conjectures, peradventure it may be thus, and it may be it is so: The poor
souls are apt to fall foul upon themselves, for that they have been so
audacious to believe any thing, seeing now so many doubts and uncertainties;
and to account all their former joys in Christ to be a delusion: and being
unable to make out the mystery of their redemption to themselves in his
sophistical way, they lie down and sink under the burden of their sorrow as
hopeless. It tends to the hazzarding of their salvation also. For while he goes
about to make them philosophical Christians, Popish and Socinian Christians,
to live not by faith but by sense, not by the word of Gods mouth, but by
reason, so far only to believe as they see reasons in nature to support their
faith (for hereunto all Mr. Baxters disputes are levelled) he makes indeed all
that will be his Disciples no Christians. And suppose that Mr. Baxter has a
great confidence by his sophistical distinctions and arguments even to wrest
from the Lord Christ a crown for himself in the day of judgment: yet what
shall become of his unlearned Disciples, that are not so nimble Sophisters, nor
have their d^stinctions at the fingers end so ready as their Master? These must
sink under the sentence of Christ, having the word against, and not being able
to plead reason enough artificially and subtlely for themselves.

12. Whether it tends not to the corrupting and depraving of all the people of
God within the Land? Mr. Baxter is no longer a student, but the highest
graduate in policy, in that piece of policy at least now most in use, to see
and prosecute the nearest and readiest way to the attainment of his own ends.
His end in this work who sees not to be the poisoning of this whole Nation with
the worst of Popish errors. For the attainment hereof his whole endeavor and
wit is employed to poison therewith the Ministry (as I have before showed) For
his sophistry is of little force to beguile the ignorant which understand it
not. Therefore notwithstanding all his specious pretenses he lays, and spins
out his webbs, to catch the learned, them at least that have some pieces of
learning in them. These he knows to be the pipes and sluices through which the
water of life is to be conveyed through the Land: If these be poisoned or
tainted, the tainture and poison will be conveyed to all that come to dip the
water of life from them. They are the light of the world; if he can prevail to
turn this light into darkness, how great will be the darkness of this our
little world?

13. Whether that kind of learning which he venteth so abundantly, and trusts
in so confidently, be not that secular wisdom which the Lord has even cursed,
and threatened to destroy and bring to nothing, and turn it into foolishness or
madness, 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20. If so, both he and we shall see in good time whose
counsel shall stand, either Mr. Baxters in counter-working against God, setting
up his wisdom and learning against the wisdom of God, the wisdom of the
word: or Gods counsel in destroying Mr. Baxters wisdom and making it, i. e.
discovering it to the world to be mere foolishnes, so turning his glory into
shame and baseness.

Lastly, whether this threat be not in some measure already executed upon him
from heaven? I would I could deny, that I had good grounds upon which to deny
it.

But since Mr. Baxter not contented with the light and wisdom of the word, has
rolled himself into the pits of heathen and Popish learning, out of their
darkness to digg to himself such light as is not cohering with, but
prejudicial to the wisdom of God and his word, whether the Lord has not
turned this wisdom of his into foolishness, and yielded him up to be stifled
with the most pernicious of their errors, and to hug the same in his bosom as a
treasure, so that he is become one of those some of whom the Apostle speaks,
which while they profes this sophistical and philosophical learning, falsely
called science or knowledge, being indeed merely profane and vain babbling,
have erred concerning the faith, 1 Timothy 6. 20, 21. The sequel of this his
Treatise in our examination thereof will somewhat declare.

I have here spoken once for all in answer to his sophistical disputes, as they
are sophistical and imitating the School-Doctors of the Popish Church, having
reference therein not only to what in this place he says, but to all of the
same kind, which we shall find flowing from him in full tide^ elsewhere
frequently in this book. So that as often as we meet him speaking again in the
same tone, I shall either pass him by with silence, or else turn him over to
that which I have here said.

There remains yet one question more in the explication of this 7th Aphorism,
and the same of as great importance and usefulness, as most of the former are
vain and superfluous. Mr. Baxter thus proposes it.

B. Whether we are justified by Christ's passive righteousness only, or also by
his active? p. 44. Here he mentions 3. opinions; the first he utterly
explodeth, viz. the imputation of Christ's active obedience unto Justification.
The second, viz. the efficacy of Christ's sufferings to make satisfaction to the
justice of God for our sins, whereupon we are forgiven and constituted
righteous in the sight of God, he kindly saluteth and passes some plausible
Complements upon it, and so Bids it farewell, without any purpose to be in love
or familiarity with it. And then takes up the third as best agreeing with the
end he drives at, though in substance it be the same with the first which he
shook off and trampled under foot with great defiance as the absurdest of
absurdities.

What my judgment (as to the two former) is, I need not here express, because
it is not a question controverted between us and the Papists. It is a question
not of very long standing. Mr. Beza in his Exposition of the Epistle to the
Romans, by appropriating the several parts of Christ's righteousness to make up
the several parts of Justification, gave the occasion of the dispute, as I
conceive. And the difference has hitherto made no breach of communion and
amity between stable and able Divines or Christians. Nay among them that hold
for the active righteousness also, there have bin and are still at present not a
few so learned and pious, that it would be no disparagement to Mr. Baxter and
my self to be admitted as their Amanuenses. And therefore I question the truth
of that accusation which Mr. Baxter lays on Mr. Walker, page 53. (whom he
principally not only means, but also names, when he tells us of ignorant
men, that are strong revilers, and weak disputers, reproaching them for
heretics that dissent from them in judgment. I doubt much that Mr. Baxters
main end here in declaiming against Mr. Walker, is to Apologize for himself,
and that his anger against Mr. Walker is, because he finds the strokes which M.
Walker levelled against Mr. John Goodwin, do now more wound Mr. Baxter than
they did Mr. Goodwin then. I remember I once saw that little Tractate of Mr.
Walker in a friends house, and read cursorily some part of it, in which he
charged Mr. Goodwin with Socinianism, and Arminianism. But if my memory fail me
not (as too often it does) it was not upon this score, that Mr. Goodwin
maintained Justification by the Passive righteousness of Christ only, but upon
this, that he upheld the (...) or act of believing, or rather Faith as it is a
part or act of our sanctification to be the very thing that is imputed to us
for righteousness. And Mr. Baxter cannot deny but this opinion was first
broached by Socinus, and afterward promoted by Arminius. But because Mr. Baxter
has taken it up from them, end speaks it out in this his Tractate, more in the
full of the mouth, than Mr. Goodwin had done, (as we may see afterward)
Therefore to prevent the like imputation of Socinian and Arminian heresy to
himself, by his chafe against Mr Walker, he affrights all from charging him
therewith. And yet howsoever he seems to decline such an imputation, who
sees not that he will, yea does more readily take up a cursed Heresy from any
of these learned Sophisters, then a blessed truth from such ignorant and
unstudied Ministers, that glory in nothing but the foolishnes of Christ's Cross,
and dare not to be wise unto salvation, beyond the rule of the Gospel?

Hence he passes to his third opinion, which is wholly one with Page 54.
the first in substance, and a little d^fference only made in the sound of
words; for the Question was thus propounded, Whether we are justified by
Christ's passive Righteousness only, or also by his active? The Assertors both
of the first and of the third opinion, answer both with one consent, we are
justified by both: Only Mr Baxter that he may show his wit and force of his
Sophistry, that he can at his pleasure exauctorate any Tenet in Divinity,
laying it all defiled and dead in the dust, to be trampled under foot, and then
give it a resurrection with a new body, to show it self as an eminent and
orient Pearl, to adorn Christian Religion; does annihilate, and vilify it in
one sound of words, and after Cannonize it in another. And what is the
difference betwixt the opinion which he spewes out as filth and garbage, and
that which he sucks and swallows as the bread of life, and food from heaven?
Forsooth, this only, that the one opinion makes the active righteousness of
Christ, together with his passive, to be imputed to us for righteousness; the
other makes the active, together with the passive righteousness of Christ,
satisfactory to Gods justice, to put us into the participation of Righteousness
or Justification. A vast difference in sense, no less then that was, between
Doctor Martin, and Doctor Luther, or that which one put betwixt the operation
and working of Pepper, that it was hot in the one, but cold in the other. Mr
Baxter knows that the most judicious Assertors of the first opinion, urge no
further then to have it granted, that the active as well as the passive
obedience of Christ, is meritorious to our redemption and justification. That
they are but the more inconsiderate sort that will have it so imputed, that we
should be accounted before God as those that have fulfilled all the
righteousness and duties of the Law, in and by Christ fulfilliing the same.
Therefore his taking up this opinion as a third opinion, under the name of
truth, is but a taking up again as holy and savory, that which before he had
rejected as the embryon of ignorant and unstudied brains, full of the greatest
absurdities.

But he tells us, page 55. that for ten years together he held the passive
righteousness only effectual to justification, but since that, he has been
converted. Should I demand, how it came to pass that so Eagle-eyed a man so
long doted upon a cloud, in stead of Juno, and by what means his eyes were at
last opened, that he saw the delusion, and shunned it? Himself gives us a hint
what to answer; and I hope he will not be too angry if we guess, so far that
our conjecture has his own conscience (if awaked) giving consent. 1 Then (to
speak nothing of Mr. Bradshaw, whom either by face or writings I never had
acquaintance with) that great wit Grotius, with his deep and sublimated
speculation^, over-poised him in his late reading of him. And how hard a thing
is it for Mr. Baxter, so great an admirer and adorer of humane wit and
learning, to meet with a brave Sophister indeed, and not to close in judgment
with him, though a Papist, an Apostate, and more then a Semi-Atheist? so far do
acute and fine-spun distinctions prevail with him, more then the honorable
Authority of the plain word of God. 2 It is most probable that during these ten
years Mr. Baxter held Justification by Faith only according to the Scriptures,
and judgment of the Orthodox Churches, therefore stuck so long to the Doctrine
of Justification by Christ's sole passive obedience, as cohering very
harmoniously therewith. But since he has cast himself into the Channels of
Popish Writers, and thence derived Justification by works, it concerned him to
cast off his former Opinion, for the sole passive righteousness, as being much
repugnant to Justification by works, and to take up this as authentic, and
somewhat conducing and helpful to his Cause. For if Christ's active obedience
should not be held meritorious and satisfactory to God, with what face could
Mr. Baxter attribute a prevalency and power herein to our best works and
actions? I purpose not to trifle away time and labor to refel this Doctrine,
or to show the weakness of his fine and plausible Exceptions which he makes
against the Objections that he thinks will be made against it* himself knows
that some of his forementioned Questions being granted and cited Opinions
which he neither denies nor opposes, would turn his Grotian distinction of
idem and tantundem, into wind and smoke. As for the rest which he speaks,
we may grant there is some plausibility; but if it were searched to the
bottom, there would be little of solidity found therein. But my purpose is (as
I have said) only or chiefly to except against his apparently Popish
Doctrines, and with these he so much abounds, that I shall not want matter to
take up more time and labor then my other Employments can well afford.

CHAP. IV.
What the immediate effects of Christ's sufferings are, which redound to the
Redeemed? Whether Believers are under the Curse? And whether their Afflictions
in this life be a part of the Curs, and have the wrath of God in them? With Mr.
Baxter's Arguments to prove them such.

IN this ninth Thesis, and its Explication, Mr. Baxter hewes out crooked timber
enough for many of the discreetest Divines to employ their time and labor
therein, until they are tired, and yet they shall not be able at last to
straighten it. It is like Pandera's box, which being opened, let out all
miseries and mischiefs into the world, as the Poets feign. Whatsoever the
Papists teach of the deficiency and maimednes of Christ's, and of the necessary
supplies of man's satisfaction to be made unto God, of Purgatory, of the
uncertainty of Salvation, and many other errors depending upon these, are all
couched and compassed here within a very narrow circuit, some expressed, and
some employed. But so that while he hastes to bind together suddenly (that he
may not be seen) so much dreggish Popery in one fardle, in his greatest have he
leaves not his wits behind him, but craftily delivers to us Papisticall
Doctrine, yet not in the Papists words, lest he should be espied and shunned.
Thus run his words.

B. These. 9. It was not the intent either of the Father or Son, that by this
satisfaction the offenders should be immediately delivered from the whole curse
of the Law, and freed from the evil which they had brought upon themselves, but
some part must be executed upon the soul and body, and the creatures
themselves, and remain upon them at the pleasure of Christ, Rev. 1. 18. 1 Cor.
15. 26. The phrase and words of this Position are not a little ambiguous, lest
I should seem to wrest them to an evil, when a good sense may be given them, I
will not so much as descant upon any thing therein, with the least paraphrase,
but take all in his own Explication, which thus follows.

Explication.
B. The Questions that are here to be handled for the explication of this
Position, are these. 1 Quest. Whether the Redeemed are immediately upon the
price paid, delivered from any of the Curse of the Law? if not from all? Quest.
2. Whether the sufferings of the Elect before Conversion, are in execution of
any part of the Curse of the Law? 3 Whether the sufferings of Believers are
from the Curse of the Law? or only afflictions of love, the Curse being taken
off by Christ. 4 Whether it be not a wrong to the Redeemer, that the people
whom he has ransomed, are not immediately delivered? 5 Whether it be any wrong
to the Redeemed themselves? 6 How long it will be, till all the curse be taken
off the believers, and redemption have attained its full effect? I have often
heard, that one fool may put more Questions in an hour, then a whole University
of Divines can answer in an age. If it be true, what are we to conclude of the
Questions of Mr Baxter, the mirror of his age, for wit and profoundness in
learning, who sits in the Chair alone, passing his censure upon all the
Divines that are or have been, such are ignorant and unstudied, such judicious
and learned, etc. his Questions surely will try the brains of men: and oh that
he were so dexterous in Answering as in Questioning! Then (to use his own
words) we would take him for a Divine indeed, yea for a Teacher sent from
Heaven, for no mortal weight upon Earth can answer many things which he
questioneth. Let us therefore hear himself answering himself.

B. To the first Question I answer. In this case the undertaking of
satisfaction had the same immediate effect upon Adam, as the satisfaction it
self upon us or for us. To determine what these are, were an excellent work;
it being one of the great^st and noblest Questions in our How pro^e^ he that
Adam and Eve were then existent, when Christ undertook?
controverted Divinity, what are the immediate effects of Christ's death? He
that can rightly answer this is a Divine indeed, and by the help of this may
expedite most other controversies about Redemption and Justification. In a
word, the effects of Redemption undertaken, could not be upon a subject nor yet
existent, and so no subject, though it might be for them None but Adam and Eve
were then exist^nt, yet as soon as we do exist, we do receive benefit from it.
The suspending of the rigorous execution of the sentence of the Law, is the
most observable immediate effect of Christ's death: which suspension is some
kind of deliverance from it. Of the other effects elsewhere. A complete and
profound answer, who so stupid or way-ward, that he rests not satisfied with
it? The Question was, Whether the redeemed are immediately upon the price paid
delivered from any of the curse of the Law, if not from all? He answers, in
this case the undertaking of satisfaction had the same immediate effects upon
Adam, as the satisfaction it self, upon us, or for us: But what were those
immediate effects upon Adam? He answers, a riddle, unriddle what this is,
what these effects are, and eris mihi magnus Apollo, such a one shall have a
Temple built unto him, from which to give answer and resolution to all other
questions and doubts in Divinity, Oracularly. And who more deserving of this
honor, then Mr. Baxter? Who more able to unriddle his own Question, than
himself? That he therefore may be taken for the Divine indeed, he so resolves
the Question, as his own words above declare. The benefit which Adam and Eve
forthwith received upon Christ's undertaking to make satisfaction for them, is
the most remarkable immediate effect of Christ's death, whereof the redeemed
partake. But the suspension of the rigorous execution of the sentence of the
Law, was the benefit that Adam and Eve upon such undertaking of Christ for
them, forthwith received. Ergo, The suspending of the rigorous execution of the
sentence of the Law, is the most observable immediate effect of Christ's death,
whereof the redeemed partake. The Proposition he proves thus, because there
were none else existent besides Adam and Eve, when Christ so undertook;
therefore the effects of his satisfaction must be upon them, or upon none. The
assumption he takes to be clear by its own light, only he adds, that this
suspending was a kind of deliverance.

If this be not the sum and force of his answer to the Question, Capiat qui
capere potis est, I must plead my self not guilty of understanding him. But it
is enough evident that this is his meaning. Now if I listed to answer his
Argument, I should tell him that both premises labor of one and the same
fallacy, which is in Schools termed Petitio principij, an assuming of that as
granted, which is in Question. The validity of both Propositions depending upon
these begged Principles, that Christ first undertook to make satisfaction to
God for the sin of Adam and Eve when they were existent, and that they were in
the number of the redeemed ones, as soon as they had sinned, for so was the
Question, whether the redeemed, etc. are freed from any of the Curse of the
Law? Now what Mr. Baxter goes about to prove, he does it by the example of Adam
and Eve, which is in no wise a competent proof, unless they be proved first to
have been existent when Christ undertook to satisfy, and secondly to have been
then redeemed. For the most observable effects of Christ's death pertain to the
redeemed, not to the world. Both propositions then being faulty, the Conclusion
is not worth a button In charity indeed we do not in any wise question the
redemption and salvation of our first parents, (though the time of their
conversion be disputable whether before the curse inflicted) But not the
judgment of charity, but the undeceiving word of God must be made the ground of
our Faith. Until therefore he bring some proof of Scripture that Adam and Eve
were existent when Christ undertook then also and redeemed, in all that he
says, he says nothing.

Yet because this still leaves sub judice litem, and certain Conclusions
cannot be inferred upon premises left uncertain. I should answer secondly,
That the Curse pronounced and inflicted upon Adam, related to him not as a
private but public person. For so he fell, and so was he sentenced. As
comprehending the Elect, he had the blessing of the seed of the woman, but as
representing those that perish, so he had the Curse. But touching those things
which he and the other godly do suffer, the learned Sadeel (Adver sus humanas
satisfactiones) answers this Popish Argument here proposed by Mr. Baxter, out
of Augustine. Posset aliquis dicere, (says Augustine) Si propter peccatum Deus
dixerit homini, In sudore vultus tui edes panem tuum, and spinas and tribulos
proseret tibi terra, etc. Cur fideles post peccatorum remissionem eosdem
dolores patiuntur? Respondemus (says Austin) Ante remissionem esse supplicia
peccatorum post remissionem esse certamina exercitationesque justorum, i. e.
Some one may say, If for sin God said to man, In the sweat of thy face thou
shall eat thy bread; and the earth shall bring forth to thee briars and thorns,
etc. Why do the believers after the remission of sins suffer these sorrows?
We answer (says Austin) Before remission these are punishments of sins, after
remission they are trials and exercises of the Righteous. Whereunto Sadeel
adds, Non sequitur, si mors and vitae praesentis aerumnae per se sunt peccati
poenae, quippe propter peccatum in mundum ingressae; eas esse propterea
peccatorum paenas ipsis etiam fidelibus, quibus peccata sunt propter Christum
condonata. i. e. It follows not if death and the sorrows of the present life
be in themselves the punishments of sin, because they entered into the world
for or by means of sin; that they are therefore punishments of sin to the
very faithful also, to whom their sins are forgiven for Christ's sake.

But to do him a pleasure should we give him his Argument, forgiving the
unsoundnes of it; what does he conclude? Thus much that the suspending of the
rigorous execution of the sentence of the Law is the most observable immediate
effect of Christ's death, that the redeemed of the Lord partake of. By
suspending the rigorous execution of the Law, he means, that he does forbear an
hour or a day, or some short time, to destroy their lives and cast their souls
into hell: But so that every moment they must stand in expectation of it, and
that to their greater torment at last, as their sins during the time of the
suspension is increased. Whosoever now of Gods redeemed ones receives comfort
by this doctrine, will (I doubt not) give his verdit for Mr. Baxter, having so
nobly and divinely resolved this question; that He is a Divine indeed.

He tells us there be other effects of Christ's death, etc. But he is not at
leisure now to communicate them. But if they have no more sweet and marrow than
this, let him keep them to himself, we will not be inquisitive after them.

P. 68. B. To the second Qu^stion. The Elect before Conversion do stand in the
same relation to the Law and Curse, as other men, though they be differenced in
Gods Decree. Ephesians. 2. 3, 12. Very short, yet not so sweet as short. He says it,
but he proves it not. For the Scripture which he brings for proof, does only
declare what the Elect are by nature before conversion, not what they are
before God in relation to his Covenant of Grace. But Mr. Baxter purposes to
speak more largely hereunto in another place, which will give me occasion to
enlarge my answer. At present he is in travel with his answer to the third
question, and cannot be at rest until he be delivered of so beautiful a
Monster, and thus it comes from him.

Bax. To the third question. I confess we have here a knotty question; The
common judgment is, that Christ has taken away the whole Curse (though not the
suffering) by bearing it himself; and now they are only Afflictions of Love,
and not punishments. I do not contradict this Doctrine, through affectation of
singularity, the Lord knows; but through constraint of judgment; and that
upon these grounds following.

1 It is undeniable that Christ's taking the Curs upon himself did not wholly
prevent the execution upon the offender. Ge. 3. 7, 8, 10, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

2 It is evident from the event, seeing we feel part of the Curs fulfilled on
us: we eat in labor and sweat; the earth does bring forth thorns and brayars;
women bring forth their children in sorrow; our native pravity is the Curs upon
our souls; we are sick, weary, full of fears, sorrows and shame, and at last we
dye and turn to dust.

3 The Scripture tells us that we all dye in Adam, (even that death from which
we must at the Resurrection be raised by Christ,) 1 Co. 15. 21, 22. And that
death is the wages of sin. To. 6. 23. and that the sickness and weakness and
death of the godly, is caused by their sins. 1 Co. 11. 30, 31. And if so, then
doubtless they are in execution of the Law, though not in full rigor.

4 It is manifest that our sufferings are in their own nature evils to us, and
the sanctifying of them to us, takes not away their natural evil, but only
produces by it, as by an occasion, a greater good: Doubtless so far as it is
an effect of sin it is evil, and the effect of the Law also.

5 They are ascribed to Gods anger, as the moderating of them is ascribed to
his l^ve. Psa. 30. 5. and a thousand places more.

6 They are called punishments in scripture, and therefore we may call them so.
Lev. 26 41, 43. Lam. 3. 39. and 4. 6, 22. Ezras 9. 13. Hos. 4. 9. and 12. 2.
Lev. 26. 18, 24.

7 The very nature of affliction is to be a loving punishment, a natural evil
sanctified, and so to be mixed of evil and good, as it proceeds from mixed
causes. Therefore to say that Christ has taken away the Curs and evil, but
not the sufferings, is a contradiction, because so far as it is suffering it is
to us evil and the execution of the Curs. What Reason can be given why God
should not do us all that good without our sufferings which now he does by
them, if there were not sin and wrath and law in them? Sure he could better us
by easier means.

8 All those Scriptures and Reasons that are brought to the contrary, do prove
no more but this, that our afflictions are not the Rigorous execution of the
Law, that they are not wholly or chiefly in wrath; but as the common love of
God to the wicked is mixed with hatred in their sufferings, and the hatred
prevails above the love; so the sufferings of the godly proceed from a
mixture of Love and Anger, and so have in them a mixture of good and evil; But
the Love overcomes the Anger, therefore the good is greater than the evil,
and so death has lost its sting, 1 Co. 15. 55, 56. There is no unpardoned sin
in it which shall procure further judgment, and so no hatred though there be
anger.

9 The Scripture says plainly that death is one of the enemies that is not yet
overcome, but shall be last conquered. 1 Co. 15. 26. And of our corruption the
case is plain.

10 The whole stream of scripture makes Christ to have now the disposing of us
and our sufferings, to have prevented the full execution of the Curse, and to
manage that which lies on us to our advantage, and good; but no where does it
affirm that he suddenly delivers us.

We have here an Antiscripturall, and an Antichristian Conclusion; yea a
conclusion that has many Antichristian and Popish Conclusions involved
therein. Therefore Mr. Baxter being extremely ambitious that an assertion of
that nature should stand, has pillared and propped it up with no less than ten
Arguments, delighted more (as it seems) with number than with the weight and
strength of them. And that he may go orderly to work, he forelaies such a
stating of the question as may not disadvantage him, leaving the question
obscure and ambiguous still. The Common judgment (says he) i. e. The
Consenting judgment of all the reformed Churches is, that Christ has taken
away the whole Curse, (though not the sufferings) by bearing it himself, and
now they are afflictions of love and not punishments. Who can persuade the
Serpent to be straight, and ceas from Crookednes and winding in his motions? He
that mainteineth a good Cause needs no shifts; simplicity, ingenuity and plain
dealing suffices him. Shall we think that Mr. B: minceth and maimeth the
judgment of the Orthodox Divines, but for the advantaging of the Popish Cause
which he mainteins against them? With a Counited Judgment they assert a total
freedom by Christ, both from the Curs and the sufferings also, as they have
reference to the execution of the law, yea from the law also as it threateneth
and curses them that are in Christ: so that their sufferings are chastisements
and trials, flowing from the same grace and love from which Christ himself and
the redemption which we have by him have issued, dispensed toward them by a
gracious and reconciled father, not inflicted upon them by an incensed and
unreconciled Judge. But Mr. B: casts a veil over their judgments, and lets
but a corner thereof to appear; because if he had set forth their judgment at
the full, it would have marred most of his Arguments wherewith he fights
against them.

CHAP. V.
The question stated between Mr: Baxter (and the Papists and Arminians whom he
follows) and the Protestants whom he opposes. Scriptures and Arguments from
scripture produced by the Protestants to prove. 1 That Believers are not
subject to the Curse: 2ly, That their sufferings have not the wrath and hatred,
but the love of God in them, are not vindicatory judgments but Chastigatory
trials.

LEt us now a little more fully state the question, by showing wherein that
which Mr. B: calls the Common judgment, and that which is his own
(pretendedly at least) private judgment, do consent together, and wherein they
differ either from other, and so we shall avoid all impertinencies and strife
about words, which are besides the question.

It is agreed then on both sides,

1 That the Curse is the penalty, or the revenging Judgment, or an effect of
Gods revenging wrath, by the execution whereof he takes satisfaction to his
justice upon Transgressors for the breach of his Law; so Mr. B. makes it out,
p. 17.

2 That the justice of God is so fully satisfied by bearing this Curse or
penalty, as by a complete fulfilling of all the righteousness which the Law
requires, p. 48, 50.

3 That the Lord Christ has undertaken and made full satisfaction to God for
all the sins of believers, bearing the curse due to them, and paying (if not
the idem according to Mr. B. yet) the tantundem that their debt did amount to.

4 That God rests as fully satisfied with this satisfaction of Christ, as if
it had been made personally by the believers themselves. These two last Mr. B:
so frequently asserteth that there is no need to quote the places.

To which I may add, 5 That Afflictions are incident to the believers as well
as to the unbeleevers, so that Love and hatred are not discernable to the
lookers on, by that which befalls men in this life, Eccle. 9. 1.

6 That these afflictions have in them a smart and bitterness, as they befall
the very Saints, so that oft-times in their apprehension the very wrath and
curs of God seems to be in them. These two things we grant Mr. B: so that
hitherto the judgments consent. Heb. 12. 11.

The difference then betwixt him and us consists principally in these two
things.

1 Whether when Christ has by doing their law, paying their debt, and bearing
their curse, satisfied the justice of God for the sins of believers; when God
has accepted the satisfaction given, when the believers have by faith
apprehended and laid hold on it: They do yet remain liable to the curse of the
Law in whole or in part to be inflicted upon them?

2 Whether the afflictions which God inflicteth upon believers in this life,
are the effects of Gods revenging justice, the Curse which the law threateneth,
and so consequently whether after that God has taken full satisfaction from
Christ, he does in whole or in part require and take satisfaction from them
also; Mr. Baxter with the Papists and Arminians mainteins the affirmative of
both these questions, we the Negative: He that 1 after Christ has born the
Curse of the law for believers, they are liable to bear it in whole or in part
themselves also. And 2 that the afflictions which they suffer are from the
revenging justice of God, the effects and Curse of the Law, vindictive
punishments of sin, full of the wrath of God; as in this his answer to the 3
question he declares himself. But we utterly deny both these propositions,
either that the believer is any more after his union to Christ, subject to the
Curse, or that the afflictions which he suffers have the Curse of the law and
revenging justice of God in them, but proceed (not from the wrath of an angry
judge, but) from the tender grace and love of a most wise and indulgent Father.
Both these assertions we ground upon evident Testimonies of Scripture.

First, that believers are no more liable to, but wholly freed from the Curse,
we have the Holy Ghost affirming, Gal. 3. 13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from
the Curse of the law, being made a Curse for us, etc. that the blessing of
Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive
the promise of the Spirit, through faith. What can be said more clear and full
to the Confirmation of our assertion, or refuting of Mr. Baxters? The Holy
Ghost says not, Christ has purchased to us a liberty for the future that in
time we may be delivered from the Curse, but he has redeemed us, has obtained
a present freedom for us, from the Curse of the Law. And how? being made a
curse for us. He has made present payment that we might have present
deliverance. Even as a surety making full satisfaction to the Creditor for the
principalls debt, obteins thereby for him a present discharge from his
obligation: not that he shall be for a season liable to arrests and
imprisonments, and after much fear and sufferings in this kind, be at last
discharged. This were enough, but the wisdom of the Holy Ghost proceeds yet
further to evidence this truth, and to stop every mouth that shall presume to
open it self against it. That the blessing of Abraham might come [even] upon
the Gentiles [beleeving] viz. the promise of the Spirit, or Spirit promised, by
faith. All must acknowledge that the entrance of the blessing, and removeall of
the Curse by the virtue of Christ's death, are coaetanea, of one time and
standing. But the blessing which is the receiving of the Spirit, is actually
and often in the believers own spiritual feeling, existent and working in him
as soon as by faith he is united to Christ. Therefore also as soon as he is
united to Christ, he is actually freed from the Curse of the Law. Again, Romans
8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. It will not be
denied here that condemnation is either put for or includes in it the
punishment to which the offenders are adjudged or condemned, and so the meaning
of the words must be this: that there is remaining, no curse, no vengeance, to
which they that are in Christ might be condemned; nor any sentence to adjudge
or condemn them to it, viz. because Christ has born both for them, and in
their stead. This is fully confirmed in the second verse, but I forbear to
annex it, because it is capable of many interpretations, which would be too
long here to insert, but all tending to the Confirmation of this truth laid
down in the first verse. And if there be no condemnation, no vengeance, no
curse to which believers are subject, than are they freed from the Curse as
well in its parts as in the whole. So Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion
over you, for ye are not under the Law but under Grace. In what respects shall
not Sin have dominion over believers? It is expressed partly ver. 12. It shall
not so reign that they should obey it in the lusts thereof. And more fully
before cap. 5. 21. It shall not so reign, as formerly it has reigned unto
death, i. e. to expose them to the curse and wrath. Why? Because they are not
under the law but under grace. The law denounces and Gods revenging justice
inflicteth the Curse, yet upon none besides them which are under the law. But
believers, having done their law in and by Christ, come no more under the
dominion of the law to be cursed by it, but ever after they are in Christ, they
are under Grace, at the disposition and under the dispensation of Gods grace,
from which all blessings, but no curse has its derivation. No less absurd
therefore is it to say, that believers are liable to the Curse, than to affirm
that the Curse is an effect of Gods grace, and not of his revenging justice.
And is there any thing less to be gathered from thapostle, affirming Col. 2.
14. That Christ has blotted out that Handwriting of ordinances which was
against us, and contrary to us, and taken it away, nailing it to his Cross.
What was there in that handwriting of Gods laws and ordinances, more against
us and contrary to us than the curse? but this the apostle affirms Christ to
have blotted out, cancelled, crucified, in respect of any further power that it
can challenge over the Saints. Or when the promise of God is thus gone forth, I
will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their
iniquities will I remember no more, Heb. 8. 12. Who will give any other
interpretation to these words but this, that God will not be wanting in his
grace to remember the iniquity of believers to purg them from it, yet he will
never more so remember it, as to inflict the curse and wrath upon them for it?
Not to heap up scriptures beyond measure to this purpose, I shall conclude with
that of the Apostle, Romans 8. 15. Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage
again to fear, but the Spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba, Father, When was
their time of bondage and fear, but when they were under the law? or what did
they fear, but the curse, death, and wrath, which the law threatened? But now
being in Christ, and freed from the law, they have received together with a new
Condition or relation a new Spirit, a Spirit not of fear but of Confidence, not
of fear, because they have a freedom from the law and curse which before held
them all their life time in fear: but of Confidence, because that being in
Christ they are adopted to be the children of God, no more to fear the curse
from him as a Judge, but to dwell upon his mercies as the mercies of an
indulgent Father.

Enough for the confirmation of the first assertion, and in all that has been
said, there is nothing of the fallacies and querks of man's wit and learning,
but the very demonstration of the Spirit by the word. The proof of the second
is included in this. If true believers are not obnoxious and liable to the
Curse and wrath of God, it must follow by necessary Consequence, that then the
afflictions and sorrows which befall them here, are no parts of the Curse or
effects of Gods vindicative justice upon them. But further to manifest that
they are fruits of Gods love, and discending from the grace of God, I shall
annex some Scriptures that give their suffrage hereunto.

First, that in Heb. 12. 5.-8. may stand in stead of all, in which the Apostle
does so fully dispute and determine this question, as if it had been in his
days Controverted. He will not have us to forget that exhortation which
speaks unto us as to children; My son, despise not thou the chastening of the
Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth and scourges every son whom he receives. If ye endure chastening
God deals with you as with sons, for what son is he whom he chasteneth not?
But if ye are without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, ye are bastards
and no sons. Three Arguments eminent above the rest we here receive from the
hand of the Apostle, full to our purpose. 1 He calls the afflictions of the
Saints Chastenings or Chastisements, not punishments or judgments, insinuating
that the troubles which they suffer, toto coelo differunt, have a vast
difference from those which fall upon the ungodly. Chastisements tend to the
amending, spirituallizing and perfecting of those that are exercised therewith,
as appears by the 11 verse of this Chapter. But the judgments which proceed
from the Law and revenging justice of God, work to the tormenting and total
destruction of them upon whom they are inflicted. 2 He affirms them to have
their rise from that new relation unto God whereunto by faith they are
advanced, viz. to be the Children of God. They that are not Children undergo in
their afflictions the vengeance of God, But the Children are under the sweet
discipline and loving Chastisements of a Father, a most wise and most provident
Father that seeks and in all his discipline works for the bettering, not for
the destroying of his Children, judges, i. e. Corrects them, and by
correction holds them in from evil and apostasy, that they may not be
condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32. 3 He pronounces their troubles to the
effects of Gods love, whom he loves, he chasteneth, etc. but the Curse and
revenging judgments of the Law proceed from his hatred. The Law brandisheth its
Curse against enemies whom God hates, 1 Timothy 1. 9. not against the Children of
his bosom, of his love. Against these there is no law, i. e. no power in the
law to Curse and Condemn, Gal. 5. 18, 23. Or when the Holy Ghost Calls the
afflictions of believers, Trials, fiery trials, such as is the trial of the
gold, 1 Pet. 1. 7. and 4. 12. does he not denote a Contra-distinct difference
between the afflictions of the believers and the unbeleevers? Men cast wood and
stubble into the fire to Consume them, but the gold and silver into the
furnace, to try, refine, and purify them, that they may be of precious and
honorable use to them. The one they cast from themselves, the other they fit
for their use and service that they may never be lost. Such difference is there
betwixt the fire of the curse into which God casts the wicked from himself to
be devoured, and the fiery trial, or fire of trial, into which he casts his
Saints for the further purifying and perfecting of their faith and
sanctification, that they may become vessels of honor in his house for ever.
And when the Scripture speaks so often of Rejoicing in afflictions, pronouncing
it the duty of Christians so to do; as Mat. 5. 11, 12. Col. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 4.
13. is it not employed that their sufferings are altogether flowing from and
dispensed by the grace and love of God. For who can or ever was directed by the
holy Ghost to rejoice in the wrath of God, or in the effects of Gods wrath
against him, such as are the curse and vengeance? Or when the Lord Christ
affirms the eternal Father to be the Husbandman of his Vineyard the Church,
using his hook to cut off and cast away the fruitles branches, i. e. the false
Christians, but his pruning knife to better and perfect the fruitful branches,
i. e. the true believers, Joh. 15. 1, 2. Does not this declare his
administrations to be in hatred and defiance to the one, but in love and
blessings to the other, even when he pruneth and wounds them? And when the
promise of God is gone forth in relation to the believers, not to exempt them
from, but to support them in, and bless unto them all their sufferings; when
they pass through the waters, to be with them, and through the Rivers, that they
shall not overflow them, when they walk through the fire, they shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon them, Isa. 43. 2. Surely these
waters and fires are not the curse as the cause, in which God w^^l so accompany
and perfect them, but as his preserving them in it, so his leading them into
it, is from his love and not from his hatred. From all which we may boldly
conclude, that the sufferings which befall believers in this life, are not the
penalty or Curse of the Law, or any part of it, nor yet proceed from Gods
revenging justice: but fatherly Chastisements proceeding from the love and
Grace of their heavenly Father.

CHAP. VI.
Mr. Baxters ten Arguments for the contrary assertions examined and answered.

TO the ten Arguments of Mr. Baxter, by which he goes about to fortify his
two contrary assertions, I answer in their order. To the first drawn from Gods
dealing with our first parents, I have answered before. He must first prove
these two things; first, that they were believers, which a mere and dark
promulgation of a Savior, Genesis 3. 15. does not evince, (for many thousands
have had the Gospel more fully and clearly preached to them, yet have continued
in unbeleef) Secondly, that the sufferings to which his quotations direct, were
inflicted upon them as a Curse by Gods revenging justice; and until he has
proved both these, his Argument is besides the question. It being not denied by
that which he calls the Common judgment, either that unbeleevers are under the
Curse, or that believers are subject to sufferings, though not to the Curse;
but a full answer to this Argument was given before out of Austin and Sadeel.

To the second I answer, that it laboreth of the same fallacy with the former.
That the wicked feel all those sorrows that he mentions, and bear the curse
and hatred of God in them, is not denied. But the godly have their part in the
same sorrows, yet they bear not the curse and hatred of God therein. This he
was to have proved, and until he has proved it, he says nothing but slides
from the question; which (if he will but look an inch backward to his own
words) he thus stateth. That the Common judgment is that Christ has taken away
the v^^ole Curse, being made a Curse for us, yet exercises his own people with
sufferings, which unto them are only afflictions of love, etc. Against this
opinion he opposes himself, undertaking to prove that these also have not
only their sufferings, but also the Curse of God in their sufferings. Now the
second argument which he brings to prove this, is that the godly suffer the
same things which are inflicted upon the wicked as a curse. What is this to the
purpose? he does herein but beat the air, and fight against the wind, and bark
at the Moon, comes not near them whom he makes his adversaries in this
question. For they confess the sufferings, but deny the curse. He must
therefore prove that the curse as the curse, is inflicted upon the Saints, else
he comes no nearer the question, than, Ararim Parthus bibit aut Germania
Tigrim. For all that is here said denies not all the sufferings of the Saints
to be chastisements and afflictions of love. What the Apostle says of one of
them is true of the rest also, viz. women's bringing forth of their children in
sorrow. She shall be saved by childbearing, (...), 1 Timothy 2. 15
is the Original, though our Translation has it [and not by] childbearing, if
she continue in faith and charity, and holiness with sobriety. The meaning is
(notwithstanding the Popish false gloss given it) that although sorrow in
Childbearing was first inflicted upon that sex as a part of Gods Curse for
sin, yet as many as believe shall find the Curse removed, and a blessing in
the place thereof. It shall be made a happy furtherance to their salvation,
putting them in mind of their sin that first brought the sorrow, and so
filling them with self-denial and self-abhorring, that they shall cleave the
faster to Christ for salvation by Faith, as knowing themselves forlorn in
themselves, and stand the more fixed and steadfast in charity, holiness, and
sobriety. The like is to be concluded of the rest of the sufferings which he
particularizeth, God so dispenses them that they may be furtherances of
salvation to believers, by working in them humblednes and self-denial, bearing
up themselves by faith in Christ alone, both for salvation and increase of
their sanctification. The very pravity of our nature of which he speaks is
left in us not as a curse in wrath, but as a means in Gods wisdom and love
more to humble us, to make us more to cleave unto Christ, and an Antagonist
against which fighting in the power and spirit of Christ we may overcome, and
having overcome may obtein the Crown. So that these two Arguments are
impertinent and nothing to the question.

To the third, I answer that there is nothing else in it but a wresting of
Scriptures from their proper sense that they may be subservient to Mr. Baxters
ends. First that of 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. makes nothing to his purpose. It only
testifies that as by man came death, i. e. by Adam, so by man, i. e. by Christ
came the resurrection. But how far both of the members of this proposition
reach, is manifest by the following words. For as in Adam all dye, i. e. all
that live and die in Adam perish hopelesly and everlastingly: So in Christ all
shall be made alive, i. e. All that are translated out of Adam into Christ. The
one man being the root of death to himself, and all that are in him: the other
the root of life to himself, and to all that by faith shall be ingraffed into
him. That this is the genuine meaning of the words is evident by the next
verse, which amplifieth what the apostle had said in this, viz. who are these
all that shall be made alive in Christ? First, Christ (says the Apostle) as
the first fruits, then they that are Christ's at his coming. Here is no mention
of the resurrection of them that are not in Christ. Not that these shall not
also be raised by Christ, but that the Apostle speaks here not of
resurrection in general, but of resurrection to life, whereof those that are
in Christ do alone partake: Even as of those which dye in Adam he speaks of an
everlasting death, whereof the unregenerate alone partake. So that there is not
any mention here expressed of the death of believers, much less of the curse
and wrath in their death. Touching the second Scripture which he quoteth and
cites, Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death: who doubts but it is so to them
that are under the guilt and dominion of sin? But what is this to believers?
And the third Scripture is as pat as the two former. For this cause many of you
are sick, many weak, many sleep. The Apostle here writes to a visible Church,
in which it appears there were some true, and some but formal and temporary
believers. Christ is in the midst of this Church dispensing his discipline. The
true believers by the contagion of the formal professors had somewhat
profaned the Lords Table by resorting to it somewhat disorderly. The other had
totally violated it by coming to it drunken (and so were worse than beasts)
from their own Tables; here now had Christ inflicted chastisements of sickness
and weakness for the humbling and amending of those that were his, but death and
vengeance upon them that while they professed faith in him, yet were indeed
despisers of him and his ordinances. What is this to the Curse of the Law upon
believers? Therefore I shall add to Mr. Baxters [And if so] my [and if so,] if
so that wresting of Scriptures will serve the turn, Mr. Baxter will surely have
the water run in his ground, and his fancy stand, though Gods truth thereby
fall to the earth.

To the fourth. That his phrase is ambiguous, and it is not easily understood
what so cunning a sophister means by evils. Until therefore he has
discharged his bushel of distinctions, putting a difference (after his manner)
between a natural and a metaphysicall good, whereof this evil is a privation,
between an evil physical, and an evil moral, and an evil in a theological
sense, between the evil of sense and the evil of loss, and a whole bundle
more of evils that he can distinguish into their kinds, we know not what he
means when he says that sufferings are in their own nature evils to us. If
I should answer in one sense, he has the slight quickly to evade to another:
and to study out all his evils would cost more labor than a hundred such
Arguments and all his evils to boot are worthy of. As for that which he
adds, Doubtless so far as it is the effect of sin, it is evil and the effect
of the Law also. It is as much as if he had said, doubtless so far as the Sun is
made or is the effect of a thunder cloud, it is black and dark, and the effect
of the Thunderbolt also. We deny it to be the effect of sin as the meritorious
cause thereof, so that the suffering of a believer should be the curse or
revenging punishment of his sin, [Christ has born that] and so it shall not be
(in this respect) evil, nor the effect of the law neither. We grant a
believers sin to be often the occasion, never the proper cause of a believers
sufferings.

To the fifth. We deny not the sufferings of believers to be often in Scripture
ascribed to Gods Anger. But it is so ascribed, 1 (...) to set forth Gods
dealings to man's dull understanding by a similitude of man's passions, that they
might be the more easily comprehended. Because man in his anger and wrath does
correct most severely, therefore the sufferings of the Saints when they are
great and grievous are said to come from Gods anger, and therefore said to be
from his anger, to speak out that they are great afflictions, such as children
receive from their parents when they are most hot in their passion: Not that
there is indeed any such passion in God. 2 In respect of the sufferers
apprehension, who being weak in faith and too much prejudiced by sense, is apt
for a season sometimes in great trials to conclude himself to be cast out of
Gods favor, and overwhelmed with his wrath and fury. Not that it is so really,
For God has forgiven their sins, Therefore after his forgiving to retain
wrath and anger may be ascribed to malicious men, whom we shall hear saying, I
will forgive but never forget him: But in no wise to the most righteous God,
who so forgiveth the sins of believers as that he will never more remember
them.

To the sixth. I will not fall into a (...), a strife and dispute about words
and names. Let Mr. Baxter agree with us in the matter, and we will not stick to
close with him in the name and words; Let him deny all malignity and curse in
the sufferings of the godly, and to do him a pleasure we will call them
punishments as he does. After that God had new named Jaakob calling him Israel,
he remained ever after indifferently called either Jaakob or Israel still, the
new name made it not a sin to make use of the old also. So though the
sufferings of the Saints which under the Law were usually termed punishments
and judgments are now under the Gospel as it were baptized with new names which
more set forth their nature, such as are, Chastisements and Trials; yet is it
no sin to use the old as well as the new names still, for we see the penmen of
the New Testament to have done it before us.

To the Seventh. Mr. Baxter is here returned again to his evils; and either I
understand not what his meaning is, or if I do understand him, I find a pack of
little sense, and much arrogance, a compound of absurdities and presumptions,
Absurdities in the Argument it self, arrogance and presumption in that which he
speaks for the confirmation thereof. First we have his absurd nonsense. The
very nature of affliction (says he) is to be a loving punishment, a natural
evil sanctified, and so to be mixed of evil and good, as it proceeds from
mixed causes. Let him that can, make sense and truth here meet together, I
cannot. By evil I must needs conjecture he means the evil not of sin, but of
punishment. For the evil of sin, as sin, cannot be mixed of evil and good,
being altogether evil. By affliction ever since I understood words, I have
concluded to be meant any vexation, trouble, sorrow, anguish, or torment, that
a man has inflicted upon him by God or the Creature. If this be not
affliction, I never knew affliction. If it be so, it is a mere absurdity to
affirm every affliction to be a loving punishment, a natural evil sanctified,
mixed of evil and good, etc. Pharaoh afflicted Israel, and the Devil
afflicted Job, did either Pharaoh or the Devil mean or act love in afflicting?
or sanctify the evil which they inflicted? or had the evil which they
inflicted either love or good in its own nature? who but a man in a dream will
affirm any of this gear? It cannot be pronounced and concluded that the
afflictions which are from the Creature, as from the Creature, to have such
qualifications as Mr. Baxter ascribes to them, either from their own nature,
or from the will and infusion of the Creature inflicting them. And no less
absurd is it to attribute such qualifications to affliction universally as it
proceeds from God, either immediately, or mediately by the Creature. The
torment of the reprobate men, and Devils in Hell, must be granted to be an
affliction, and that it is God which afflicts them. To conclude hence because
it is an affliction, an affliction from God, it is a loving punishment, a
sanctified evil, mixed of good and evil, as proceeding from mixed Causes, is
such an absurdity, that although Mr. Baxter in words affirm it, Abhorret a
sensu comuni ut benefiat ei a quo poenae sumuntur. Cham. Panstr. T. 3. l. 23.
Cap. 6. Parag. 11. Monstrum judicij, etc. id. ibid. Paragr. 30.
yet would he be as loath as any of the opposite opinion to try it. If he had
said Chastisements are in their own nature so qualified, we should have born
with it; but he shunneth that word as a rock upon which he might have dashed
the Curse against believers, wherewith as with a treasure he has laden the
Barque of his disputation in this place. From such false and absurd premises
therefore to infer this Conclusion [ Therefore to say that Christ has taken
away the Curse and evil but not the suffering, is a mere contradiction, because
so far as it is a suffering, it is evil to us and the execution of the Curse]
is as fallacious, as the premises absurd. Fallacious many ways, 1 in jumbling
in the execution of the Curs, which was neither expressed nor employed in the
premises. 2 In couniting together evil and the curse as equipollent terms,
which are often disparates. No man besides Mr. Baxter will conclude every evil
of suffering to be the Curse. Christ mourned for the sins of Jerusalem, Mat.
23. 37. Lu. 19. 42. Paul had continual heaviness and sorrow in heart for the
unbelief of Israel, Romans 9. 2. Jeremy had his soul weeping in secret, and his
eyes running down with tears, for the sin and afflictions of his people. Jer.
13. 17. This mourning, heavines, and weeping, were sufferings, made impression
of evil (I mean with Mr. Baxter the evil of pain and sorrow) upon them, yet
were not these sufferings the execution of the Curse upon them. 3 In an employed
insinuation that we deny all evil of pain in the sufferings of believers, so
making them as stocks, and stones, insensible, or as glorified persons,
impassible. Which none ever held, though Mr. Baxter would lay it as an
absurdity upon all that dissent from him, to make the truth which they maintein
odious. Now Mr. Baxter is not a Child, he sees well enough these absurdities
and fallacies, and does not either through ignorance or inadvertency commit
them. His use of them therefore does insinuate to us two things.

1 His abasing opinion of others in the superlative confidence that he has of
and in himself. If he thought not almost all others to be mere Terrae filios,
Clods of clay in comparison of himself, he would not thus shake out upon his
very absurdities, and grossest fallacies to be treasured up by us as Oracles,
because his.

2 His suspending of conscience that while he pretends unto truth, yet takes
the reins by any absurd false tricks utterly to subvert it. As for his
arrogance against God in the Conclusion, What reason can be given, etc. ut
supra. No marvel if he take the chair to himself alone from thence to judge
of all other Divines, when we find him here as it were usurping the throne of
Heaven, thence to sentence and censure the wisdom of God in his proceedings.
In answer to him I shall use no other but Mr. Pembles words against the like
arrogance of the Papists. Such Questions (says he) are vain and curious,
prosecuted by idle and unthankful men, who not acknowledging the riches of
Gods Wisdom and Grace, in that course of our redemption which God has
followed, would accuse God of indiscretion, for making much a^ do about
nothing, and teach him to go a more compendious and easy way to work then [his
wisdom has chosen]. These Criticisms upon Gods glorious and wonderful
proceedings in his [administrations,] we leave to Socinus and Arminius with
their followers. It is our part sapere ad sobrietatem, and to understand what
God has, not to tell him what he might or should have done?

To the Eighth. Because he knows his assertion false, he therefore says
something, but conceals from us what it is, tells us that all the Scriptures
and reasons which are brought against his opinion, do not hit it nor hurt it,
but will not let us to know one particular of all those Scriptures and Reasons
that he has heard or read urged against him, lest that some one answering
might manifest the falsehood of the assertion. This is safe disputing, to speak
so as ^o leave no footing for an answer. Such baits may catch Froggs possibly,
but never a Fish. And (as he affirms) neither Scriptures not Reasons prove
more then this, That our afflictions are not the rigorous execution of the Law,
what Scripture or Reason can be given why that believers shall not be damned in
hell together with unbelievers? For what is the rigor of the Law but the
infliction of the Curse in its utmost extent and extremity. But if the Saints
be beaten with few stripes when the rebels are beaten with many, and be damned
but to the uppermost when the other are cast into the nethermost hell, then is
not the Curse of the Law executed upon them in its utmost rigor? If this be not
to abase the merits of Christ that has purchased, and abuse the grace of God
that promises, and abate if not to destroy the hope and comfort of believers
that shall receive (according to Mr. Baxter) no better privileges then this,
surely then nothing can do it. As for that which he adds of a mixture of love
and hatred in God when he curses the wicked; and of love and anger when he
curses the godly. This is a mere Chimaera of his own brain; a making of God to
be in a commotion against himself, to carry fire in the one hand and water in
the other; to fight with the right against the left, and with the left hand
against the right: sometimes the one and sometimes the other overcoming, but of
which side soever the Victory rests, still must the poor believer be cursed,
and when most under the curse (we must believe Mr. Baxter telling us a strange
wonder) he is not at all under the hatred of God. An excellent disputer to have
stood always at Marcions elbow prompting him with argument to prove this God to
have been a malignant and envious God, the author of all evil to mankind;
what less does Mr. Baxter affirm when he tells us that he curses his very
Friends, those that trust in him, those whom he hates not, yea those whom he
loves? But does he bring no Scripture to prove all that he has said? Yes one
in steed of all, and that as pertinent and proper to his purpose as a Pearl to
a Swines snout, Death has lost his sting, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. There is no
unpardoned sin in it. Yet when God has pardoned every of their sins, he will
nevertheless power upon them the Curse, when they are without, if not also
because they are without sin, ipse dixit, and I must be silent.

To the Ninth. It greeves me less when I find Mr. Baxter leaving the pure
fountain of Scripture, stirring in his own element the puddle of humane art and
wisdom, then when he meddles with the word, because he seldom touches it but
with a defiled and defiling hand to pervert, maim, or add to it and so to
profane it. So that his sin is greater in this than in the other. The place
which he quotes here 1 Cor. 15. 26. says not that (as he untruly alleges)
Death is not yet overcome, but only says The last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death; it is overcome already though not destroyed. Yet not to
strive about words, Death is overcome, and it is not overcome, but in different
respects. It is overcome

1 In relation to Christ himself and his natural body, that it cannot reach or
seize on him. Else is not Christ risen from death, and then our faith is vain.
But he is risen in the power of the Godhead, having loosed or dissolved the
pains [and Chains too] of Death, it being unpossible he should be held by it.
Acts 2. 24. For how should a power finite overpower the power of God which is
infinite? Neither will any say that Christ escaped from the bonds of death by
Treaty, but by Conquest. He ascended on high, leading captivity captive, Ephesians.
4. 8. Having spoiled principalities, and powers, he made open show of them,
triumphing over them, Col. 2. 15. By his death he has destroyed not only
death it self, but him also that had the power of death, i. e. the Devil, Heb.
2. 14.

2 In relation to the mystical body of Christ, the believers, it is so
overcome that it has in it no curse to vomit out upon them. That was carried
away in Christ's natural body, that this his mystical body might be freed from
it. He took to himself (says the Apostle) part of our flesh and blood, that by
death he might destroy him that has the power of death, i. e. the Devil, and
deliver them who through fear of death, were all their lifetime subject to
bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. What was that in death that the Saints so feared under
the Law, (before the Gospel had fully cleared to them their liberty) but the
Curse? The Law threatened them with death as with the Curse and vengeance of
God. This made them to live all their lifetime in a sad bondage for fear of
death, of the curse and vengeance in death at the last. But Christ has by his
death delivered us from the Curse that was in death, so that now we live not in
fear and bondage, in expectation of death. It is but a sweet dormitory to the
Saints, in which they put off their corruptible and dreggish, that at last they
may put on immortal and spiritual bodies, in them to meet with Christ in the
day of Judgment, and be for ever with him, 1 Cor. 15. 44. 1 These. 4. 17. In
these respects death is overcome.

But it is not so overcome but that it has its being, yea full dominion with
its curse over the wicked, and in this respect it is said, The last Enemy that
shall be destroyed is death; as will appear by reading the former verse with
this, Christ must reign till he has brought all his enemies under his feet.
The last enemy, etc. The Apostle here from the Authority of that Prophecy,
Psalm. 110. 1. concludes that Christ must sit at the right hand of God, having
and executing all power in heaven and in earth, until he has brought all his
enemies under his feet. Here if

1 We consider that death as the other enemies that are to be subdued, is
spoken of as an Enemy to Christ, we must conclude that the Apostle speaks not
at all of death, as a Curse. For death is no more a Curse to Christ glorified,
than the other enemies wicked and reprobate men that are to be brought under
his feet.

2 A reason is here given why death must be the last Enemy destroyed, viz.
Because Christ must bring all his enemies under foot. Now as long as there
shall remain upon the earth enemies to Christ, and his Gospel, succeeding one
another in their generations, so long death in its fullness of the curse and
wrath of God, is useful to seize on them, at the Lord Christ shall destroy and
bring them under its power: so that as long as there is any other Enemy
remaining, death is not to be abolished in regard of its usefulness in respect
of the other Enemies.

But when the end is come, and the enemies all destroyed, and no one more
remaining to be seized on, but that all shall be raised from this first to be
sentenced unto and hurled into the second death, hell and brimstone, (I mean
all the enemies of Christ) now death also it self shall be destroyed, there
being no further use of it. That this is the proper meaning of this Text a
blind man may see, and consequently see it to be sinfully wrested by Mr.
Baxter, forcing it seemingly to prove that the Saints are yet liable to the
Curse, because subject to death.

To his plain case of our Corruption, which he adds, I have spoken before.

To the tenth, which is the last. Every one will expect to find the sweet at
the bottom, and that the last stroke should drive the nail home to the very
head. Attend we to it therefore considerately, and we shall find it if not the
strongest, yet the most portentous of all. The whole stream of Scriptures
(says he) makes Christ to have now the sole disposing of us and of our
sufferings; Ergo because we are in Christ's arms and under his dispensation, we
must needs be liable to the Curse. For the Scripture affirms him (says he) to
have prevented the full execution of the Curse, and to manage that which lies
on us for our advantage and good; but no where does it affirm that he suddenly
delivers us. Which of Mr. Baxters admirers would not have censured it in
Bellarmin a most prodigious impudency, if not blasphemy, thus to father his
conceits upon the holy Scriptures. If Mr. Baxter had found but one least
rivulet of that whole stream of Scriptures which he mentions to have been for
his turn, would he not have directed us to it, or cited it to us? If he took
the holy Scriptures for any thing else then one of his Fathers once termed it to
Cardinal Bembus, Fabulam de Christo, he would not dare so much to slander,
wrest, and corrupt it. While his dispute is wholly taken up about the Curse to
bring believers under it, he would fear that Curse denounced against himself,
all plagues upon him that shall add any thing to it, and the taking away his
part from the book of life, whosoever shall take from it, Rev. 22. 18, 19. what
less does Mr. Baxter in pronouncing the whole stream of Scriptures, to teach
that which no drop of Scripture has a relish of? is not this adding. And when
the Scripture pronounces Christ to have delivered us from the curse of the
Law; that there is no condemnation, etc. and he comes with his gloss, he has
delivered us from the Curse, i. e. has prevented the full execution of the
Curse. There is no condemnation, i. e. none is condemned to the Curse in its
full rigor, among all the believers; is not this to take away from the word of
God, yea to enervate and emasculate it and make it of no vigor?

And further, does not his Arguing here tend to the abasing, annihilating, and
even un-Christing of Christ? What an absurdity is it to think that he who was
God, and accounted it no robbery to be equal with God, should in overflowing
love toward us, make himself of no reputation, take to him the form of a
Servant, humble himself to the death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 6.
- 8. and himself bear our sins in his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2: 24. and
all to this end, that having disabled Law and Sin from all power to Curse
without him, to purchase to himself the Monopoly of Cursing, or inflicting the
Curse upon his own friends, yea his own Body and Members, that none henceforth
should curse them but from by and under him? Who but one that is ambitious to
be his Vicar, would make of Christ such a Pope? Yea how is the glory of Christ's
grace and merits veiled, nay extinguished, by teaching that Christ is ascended
into the Heavens, and sit down at the right hand of God, to manage the Curse to
the tormenting, yet (if Mr. Baxter be heard) for the advantage of his Saints on
Earth?

The Scripture tells us of other and most glorious ends of his Resurrection
Ascension and sitting at the right hand of God, viz. to receive a Kingdom for
himself and those that believe in him, Lu. 19. 12, 15. to prepare for them
places and Mansions in it, that coming again he may receive them to himself,
that where he is there may they be also, John 14. 2, 3. that being ascended on
high, and having led our captivity captive* he may power gifts upon his Saints,
even gifts, greater than the whole world, That he might be a blessing-giver to
us, that we might be blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places
in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. to free us from the Curse and condemnation, by making
intercession for us, Romans 8. 34. But no where does the Scripture make him a
Curse-monger.

But with what impudence does he close up all that he he has to say upon this
subject in a known falsehood, telling us that the Scripture no where affirms
that he suddenly delivers us from the curse; when the Scripture contrariwise
affirms that he has delivered us from the Law, has delivered us from sin,
has delivered us from the Curse, and that we are thus delivered already; and
already is a step before suddenly. Thus abusive is he both to the Scriptures,
and to the Lord Christ.

CHAP. VII.
How manifoldly evil and hurtful such sceptick and distinctionary disputes
are, and how far Mr. Baxter and the Papists agree in the matter and form of
this dispute.

I Have been large in answering these Arguments, yet it has proceeded not
only from my natural slownes and uncapablenes of Concisenes, but partly also
from Mr. Baxters purposed Concisenes, whose common sl^ght it is here and
elsewhere, under a pretense of avoiding tediousnes, to leave the most precious
truths hidden in corners, and only to leave a paint of plausibility and
probability upon the Embryons and errors of his own brain, in stead of bringing
them openly to the trial. And this occasioned me to be the more in length to
bring forth clearly into the light the truth that he has hidden; and to take
off the outside paint from his fancies, that they might appear in their own
nature and colors. Partly also to discover the pernicious danger which lurketh
in the doctrine which he has here delivered, against which too much cannot be
spoken, to prevent the taking of inconsiderate and over credulous Christians in
his snares. I shall show my reasons why I call it pernicious doctrine, and so
leave the question.

1 It is anti-scripturall and diametrically opposite to the word, as is enough
manifested by that which has been already said in the examination thereof.

2. It is Antichristian, has sundry Popish errors, some more apertly, others
more hiddenly included in it. So that when immediately before his arguments he
professes, that it is not affectation of singularity that divides him in
judgment from the reformed Churches, we doubt not but he speaks truth herein;
For it is to follow the stream and Clowd of Popish Doctors, whose sophistry
has more force upon his judgment than ever I could perceive the Word to have.
Those Popish errors then that are more openly contained in his doctrine here
are principally about Christ's and man's satisfactions made to God for man's
sins; in which as the Papists so Mr. Baxter will have man to bear a share with
Christ, that the glory may not be wholly the Lords. And here in sundry points
Mr. Baxter speaks the very same things, though not altogether in the same
words with the Papists. I shall in these several points, lay down briefly the
doctrine of the Papists first, and then compare Mr. Baxters with it, that the
Coherence betwixt them may be clearly seen. The Papists opinions I shall truly
set forth to you, (though briefly) as they themselves express themselves in the
Council of Trent. Sess. 6. Cap. 14. 16. and Sess. 14. Cap. 8, 9. and Bellar:
in his two books de Purgatorio, and lib. 4. de Poenitentia, and by sundry other
of their own Writers.

1 They hold that although Christ has by his death and merits satisfied the
Law and Justice of God for the fault of our sins in offending Gods Justice and
violating his holy Law, so that God is no more at enmity with but reconciled to
them which truly repent and believe, has fully pardoned their sin, and
forgiven their offenses for Christ's sake: yet has neither Christ given nor God
taken full satisfaction for the punishment, but that after the fault is
pardoned, God may and will infl^ct punishment upon the offender. In this and
the rest points of satisfaction they give this general rule, that Christ has
undertaken for us only that which we could not do for our selves, and
satisfied for us so far only as it was unpossible for us to make satisfaction
for our selves. As for that which by doing or suffering was in our power to
accomplish for our selves, that he has left to be (without his preventing us)
accomplished by us. But in this Case, say they, It was unpossible for man to
undertake any work any suffering so noble and worthy as might stand in
equipoise with the offending of so infinite a Majesty, and so to satisfy Gods
Justice for the fault. This therefore Christ has done and God has accepted
from Christ in our behalf. But it was possible for man to satisfy (at least in
part) for the punishment which the justice and law of God exact for the offense
committed. This therefore is in part left to us to satisfy; and after he has
forgiven the fault, does notwithstanding inflict upon us the punishment for the
satisfying of his law and justice. This they go about to prove by the example
of Gods dealing with Moses and Aaron when they had sinned against him, he
forgave freely their fault and offense, nevertheless called them exactly to a
reckoning about the punishment; was in perfect friendship with them again, yet
would not abate them an ace of the punishment which he had threatened to them,
they must dye in the Wilderness and never enter into the land that flowed with
milk and honey. The like they instance in David about his sin in reference to
Bathsheba and Vriah; The Lord forgave the offense, The Lord has put away thy
sin, (says the Prophet) thou shall not surely dye, 2 Samuel 12, 13. Nevertheles
in reference to the punishment, David shall smoke for it. The child shall dye,
the sword shall never depart from his house, etc. so that David shall rue it to
his very dying day. Other Scriptures and reasons they bring which would be over
tedious to insert.

Compare we now Mr. Baxters doctrine with theirs. These. 7. he tells us, That
Christ Jesus being fully furnished for this work [of Mediation] by his Fathers
and his own will, first undertook and afterward discharged man's debt by
suffering what the Law did threaten, and the offender was unable to bear. And
These. 8. That the Father so fully accepted the satisfaction, that by way of
reward to Christ that gave it, he has delivered all things into his hands, and
given him all power in heaven and in earth, and made him Lord both of the dead
and living. Yet These. 9th, adds that, It was not the intent of either the
Father or the Son, that by this satisfaction the offenders should be
immediately delivered from the whole Curse of the Law, and freed from the evil
which they had brought upon themselves, but some part must be executed upon
soul and body, etc. And this he goes about by his ten Arguments which we have
examined, to prove of the believers themselves, that they are liable to the
punishment and Curse of the Law, to bear it in part even to death it self, and
that though there be no unpardoned sin for which the curse as the curse Page
71. Arg. 8,
is inflicted upon them. Let any discreet man here judge if there be the least
hairs breadth betwixt Mr Baxter and a Papist according to the Council of
Trent, i. e. the worst Papist. The rule of both about satisfaction is the same.
Christ has done and suffered for us what we could not do and suffer for our
selves say the Papists; Christ has suffered for us what the Law did threaten,
and we were unable to bear, says Mr. Baxter, implying that whatsoever we can
bear must yet be inflicted upon us. For this satisfaction, the fault is
forgiven, says Bellarmine. By means of this satisfaction there remains no
unpardoned Sin, says Mr. Baxter [viz. upon believers.] Yet say both when the
sin is forgiven the punishment, curse, and penalty of the Law must be suffered.
Here is noble mercy and forgivenes, to pardon a man his fault, and to pronounce
with Pilate I find no fault in him, and forthwith to whip and hang him for no
fault. Such divine mercy and Justice do these white sons of the Pope ascribe
to the Father of Mercies, and to his dear Son the purchaser and sluice of all
Mercies. Touching the doctrine it self I have answered Mr. Baxters Arguments.
But as to these arguments of the Papists, I pass them by, not having undertaken
to answer them here any farther than Mr. Baxter is their mouth to dispute for
them.

2 The Papists teach (according to the forementioned rule) that Christ has in
part also satisfied for the punishment of sin, as well as wholly for the fault.
And as far as Christ has born and satisfied, so far we are freed from the
punishment. But Christ has satisfied only for the infinite and eternal
punishment, leaving us to bear the finite and temporary punishments and curse
of the Law, or to satisfy for it our selves. So that by their doctrine, Christ
has not at all by his merits freed us from the substance of the Curse, penalty
and vengeance of the Law, but only from the boundles measure and endless
duration thereof. What says Mr. Baxter to this? Christ (says he) in reference
to the punishment of sin, has suffered so much of what the Law did threaten,
as we our selves were unable to bear. These. 7. leaving to us to bear the
greatest Curses of the Law, but not in their full rigor, and in their rigorous
execution thereof. p. 69. Arg. 3. and p. 71. Arg. 8. What is this rigor and
rigorous execution of the punishment and curse of the Law, but the execution of
the same in its infinite measure and endless duration, which could not be (as he
confesses) born without the offenders everlasting undooing. These. 6. And thus
he with the Papists makes the satisfaction which Christ has given to his
Fathers Justice, effectual to deliver us not from the substance of the Curse
and vengeance, but only from the extent of its measure and duration. So that
if I understand my mother language, and the equipollency of terms and words
therein, there is but the name, and a Cardinals hat that puts a difference
between a Bellarmine and a Baxter in this point, both speak not only the
Tantundem, but the Idem, the very self same thing in matter and substance, to
the diminution, yea degrading of the merits of Christ, to make way to set up
man's satisfactions parallel with if not supereminent and above Christ's. With
whom if I should enter into a Contest upon this Argument, and dared as they to
make the Scripture a mere Kickshose, without substance and authority, under the
Charm of distinctions to be formed, conformed, deformed unto and into any sense
at pleasure, I could upon more probable grounds and with more plausible reasons
argue that Christ has satisfied for, and we by his satisfaction are delivered
from the finite and temporary part of the Curse and vengeance only, but are
left to bear for ever the infinite and eternal torment thereof in hell: than
they bring for our deliverance only from the temporary and not from the
eternal. Because (according to Mr. Baxter) Christ suffered the temporary and
finite pains only for us, not the eternal, but left these (as it more
probably seems) to be suffered by our selves for our selves. But as Mr. Baxter
will not learn from Christ himself to oppose the Majesty and power of the Word
against Sophistry, so neither dare I learn to oppose his Sophistry against
Christ and his Word.

3 The Papists teach that those punishments which come upon Christians
unavoydably by the threat of the Law, for the transgression of the Law, viz.
the temporal evils that are incident to their souls and bodies in this life,
as sickness, sorrow, loss of friends, credit or estates, poverty, tribulations,
persecutions, trouble of Conscience, etc. if they be suffered willingly and
with patience, are satisfactions to God for sin; but if unpatiently and
unwillingly, they are Gods revenge upon us. So much the holy Council of Trent
does even in express words affirm and determine. What does Mr. Baxter say in
conformity or contradiction to this assertion? He tells us that all temporal
evils do necessarily invade believers, and that by the force and Curse of the
Law, that when God sanctifies the same to them, he does not thereby take away
their natural evil or their Curse, but only produces by it as by an
occasion a greater good. What reason can be given why God should not do us all
that good (viz. which the Orthodox Divines attribute to his sanctified
Chastisements) without our sufferings, which now he does by them, were there
not sin and wrath and law in them. Sure he could better us by easier means.
They are managed by Christ to our advantage and good. These are Mr. Baxters
words, Page 69, 70, 72. Arg. 2, 3, 4, 7, 10. Let us a little examine them. When
we affirm that these sufferings as they befall believers, are not from the Law
as a Curse, but sweet Chastisements of Gods love, by which he mortifieth the
flesh, increases their self-denial, Conformeth them to Christ, as well in his
sufferings as in his graces and doings, exercises and quickens all the gifts
of his grace in them, Crucifieth the world to them and them to the world; and
being in dispute with Papists, mention many other precious ends and effects of
his Chastisements: Mr. Baxter Comes in with his Tush at all this, Arg. 7.
Cannot God do us all this good (says he) without our sufferings, and better us
by an easier means? What then? [Doubtles] there is sin and wrath and law in
these sufferings. What can he mean by this, but that first there is our sin as
the merit of all these sufferings, and secondly, that God in executing them
takes satisfaction from them and upon them for his law violated and his justice
offended? Let any man that has not divorced his reason from him through
prejudice, pick out any other meaning of his words, or deny his words in this
meaning to be heterodox and Popish. And when he says that God does by these
sufferings produce a greater good [to believers than their sufferings bring
evil upon them] Arg. 4. And that they are managed, to our advantage and good,
what means he by this advantage and good? Not our purifying and bettering, etc.
as we hold, For this as we have seen, he shakes off as a singlesoled
supposition, with a kind of Apage. Nor any other good that his front has yet
taken boldness to express, for speaking thereof so often in general, he would not
have been so shie to speciallize it for our edification and comfort, if there
were any in it. It must be therefore such a good and advantage, that though he
would have us know, yet he will not speak it out plainly, least his tongue and
teeth should bewray him to be a professed Papist, before such time as he has
Phariseelike, etc. depraved others that are unwary, and made them worse than
himself, Matt. 23. 15. And what should that be, but that God takes satisfaction
to his justice by his judgments upon them, here, that they may not have, or may
have the less to satisfy for, in hell or in Purgatory? In this therefore as in
the two former points I take him expressing himself an adopted son of the
ghostly Fathers of Trent.

4. The Papists hold that there is a Purgatory, which they describe to be a
prison as hot and full of the same material fire and flames as hell it self:
into which the souls of Christians after this life, are cast to satisfy Gods
justice for all their venial sins that they have not made satisfaction for in
this life by suffering or doing; and being once cast into this prison they
cannot come forth out of the torment, until they have paid the utmost farthing
of their debt, i. e. until they have suffered so much as may counterpoise to a
very grain, the sins whereof they dye unpardoned. This they prove by many
undeniable Arguments, specially by the testimony of many good souls that have
obtained a dispensation to come thence with their bosoms so full of fire as of
flesh and bones, to tell them so. Does Mr. Baxter join with them in this
opinion also? Soft and fair, There is skill in daubing; first he will try how
this Tractate will take; if according to his mind, probably we shall have a
second part, and therein he may tell us plainly his judgment in this and many
other of his mysteries that here he leaves obscure and ambiguous. In the
interim it pleases him not to deliver his mind herein in words at length, but
in dark and uncertain figures. Yet join we together what he says here and
there in parcells, and somewhat may be made or at least conjectured of it. First
then he tells us that some part of the Curse must be executed upon believers,
i. e. upon the whole man, the soul as well as the body. These. 9. 2 That until
the day of Resurrection and of Judgment, all the effects of sin and law and
wrath will not be removed from them. page 74. Page 71: Arg. 8.
Therefore thirdly what he will not [doth not at least] say of any of their
former sufferings, he says of death, That there is no unpardoned sin in it
which shall procure further judgment, and so no hatred in it, though there be
anger. A glorious privilege no doubt! such as according to our usual proverb a
man may find at Billingsgate for a box on the ear from the worst of men that he
meets with. When a man has in revengefull fury persecuted his hated nighbour
with all the strokes and storms of wrath and mischief, and after many years
persecution, has at last slaughtered him, and trampled his dead Corpse into the
mire and dust; now at last he cease from hatred, and is but angry with his
poor relics, forgives him all the rest, when he can do no more to him, and
forgivenes can do him no good. Such tender mercies of Cruelty (as the wise man
terms them, Pro. 12. 10.) does Mr. Baxter here ascribe unto God in his gracious
dealings with believers for Christ's sake: viz. to persecute them with all the
strokes of his wrath, and all the Curses of the law all their life time,
sparing neither their body nor soul, and at last with great indignation to
destroy them and trample their bodies into the earth, dust, and rottennes, yea
and their souls whither he list, and under what torment he list, and after this
(so remarkable is his love) he will hate them no more, but be angry with them
still. When they are dead and can offend no more, and God has inflicted upon
them all his judgments that he can inflict no more, now their sins shall be so
pardoned that they shall suffer no more, no more than all which they already
suffer. Who denies this to be the very quintessence of mercy and spirits of
love when Mr. Baxter has so defined it, and held it forth to us as the most
Celestial comfort that we shall find in death? There is (says he) no
unpardoned sin in the death of believers that shall procure further judgment.
Where note 1 that he says not simply and absolutely that there is no
unpardoned sin upon the Saints now dead and buried: but no sin so unpardoned,
that it should bring further judgment than that which is already upon them.
And 2 That when he denies that their sin shall bring any further judgment
upon them, he does not deny but rather imply their sins to be yet still
unpardoned as to the holding those judgments upon them that are already
inflicted. A comfort that the Devils and reprobates in hell shall not want
after the very day of judgment in the midst of their flames; That there is none
of their sins so unpardoned as that it should bring any further judgment upon
them. But put we all together, 1 That the believer must bear the Curse, even
the whole man, in body and soul also. 2 That he shall not be delivered from
this curse in soul and body until the resurrection. 3 That although death puts
him into a freedom from further judgments, yet it does not at all deliver him
from those that at death are inflicted upon soul and body. How shall we now
make up the matter? If the whole man both soul and body must suffer and not be
wholly freed until the resurrection, this is not fulfilled in the suffering of
the body alone. If the soul also until then must suffer, then is it not
forthwith upon its separation from the body exalted to Heaven, for there, is no
suffering, no affliction. Neither does it suffer in hell, for Mr. Baxter
exempteth thence all that persevere in the Faith (according to his definition
of faith) until death. Where and whence then shall it suffer but in and from
the fire of Purgatory? And so there is no unpardoned sin upon believers after
death that can procure to them any further judgment beyond this. If Mr. Baxter
means not so, it is his fault to write with so much ambiguity, and so little
plainnes and perspicuity, as to toll us on to a strong Conjecture that he
means so, and is in this as in the rest apostatized to the Papists.

5 I might add also here that he seems to join with the Papists in holding
believers in an uncertainty of their salvation all their life long. It is
considerable that neither in his Aphorism, nor in the whole explication thereof,
nor in all his arguments by which he goes about to prove believers under the
Curse, does he once name any pardon of sin, or freedom from further judgment,
which they attain until after death, and then when they have persevered to the
end, and dyed in Christ, now he mentions and affirms it. What does p. 71.
this argue but that he would (with the Papists) have men to hope well, but to
be still uncertain without any assurance of Faith or certainty of their
perseverance, and future glory until their very last gasp? But because from
mere Negatives no affirmative can be regularly and soundly deduced; I leave
this but as probable, and conclude it not as certain.

We have found Mr. Baxters dispute here to be first against Scripture; 2
Antichristian and wholly Popish in several points. There are many allegations
more wherewith it may be justly charged, viz. that,

3 It is scandalous to the Grace and Mercy and Love of God that are the most
sweet and amiable of all his Attributes. So does he paint out terror in the
very Love and Grace of God, and Cruel^y in his tender mercies; making flames of
fury to break out from the very bowels of his Compassion, that poor souls
believing what he says will be apt to fly from God as from a Satan, and from
his Gospel dispensations as from death and hell it self. When they hear him to
be so bloody, to take delight in cursing, crushing, rending, taring, and
tormenting in soul and body, unto death and after death, his own sons and
daughters, and that under a profession of grace and love to them, what
difference can they conceive to be between such a God, and the Devil? If there
be such bitterness in his love, who will desire the least draughts thereof? If
his arms of embracing be such Lions paws, who will not shunn all union all
drawing nigh to him? so does he scandalize Gods love, etc. making it terrible,
(which is amiablenes and life it self) that none might desire him.

4 It is slanderous to the justice of God; 1 By accusing it there to inflict
the curse, wrath, and judgments, where he imputes no sin. 2 By charging it to
receive full satisfaction for our debt from Christ our surety, and afterward
when all is paid, to require satisfaction from us too. A piece of injustice so
odious to the light of nature it self, that Mr. Baxter would account him a
prodigy of Nature, a Devillized man that should so do: yet has the face to
charge the most righteous God, whose ways are all equal, yea equity it self,
therewith.

5 It is injurious to Christ and his Mediation. Charging him and it with
insufficiency. With the want (I mean) either of insufficient merit to free us
from the whole curse and wrath of God, because he could not do it, or want of
sufficient love to us that having all power given him in heaven and earth, yet
will not do it. But in both these the Scripture testifies Christ to be
all-sufficient, without the least defect either of merit, or love to us, that
in the infinitenes of his merit he has purchased all, and by the infinitenes
of his love he dispenses this liberty in the fulness of it to us, Therefore is
Mr. Baxter ungratefully injurious to our blessed Savior in denying it and
arguing against it.

6 It tends to the advancing of man's vainglory and boasting, in being at least
in part a self-saviour, that his satisfactions have wrought with the Lord
Christ's in the procurement of his Justification and salvation. This by the
sequel of this work appears to be the main thing to which Mr. Baxter drives.
For yielding himself up to be the Disciple of men, to see and judge only by
the light of man's reason, he seems to me to be so left of God destitute of his
Spirit, that he can see no farther than a mere natural man in spiritual
things; and so following the letter and scarce the letter without the Spirit of
the word, he can think of no other way to happiness but that which the very
instinct of nature suggesteth, namely a man's own willing, running, and
procurements. To this end he lays a foundation here of humane satisfaction by
sufferings, perceiving well that if man's suffering of the curse of the Law be
once granted to be effectual by way of satisfaction to purge the soul from
sin, then much more the righteousness of works done in obedience and conformity
to the Law, by the help of the Spirit, will and must be granted to be more
powerful to the same end. Therefore seeks he thus to depress the grace of God
and merits of Christ, that upon the ruins thereof he might erect a Temple
dedicated to man's righteousness.

7 It subverteth all the joy and consolation of Christians, which the Holy
Ghost requires of them in their sufferings from Christ or for Christ's sake.
How can we according to the precept of Christ, Rejeyce and be exceeding glad,
when we suffer, Matthew. 5. 12. And with Paul, Glory in tribulation, Romans 5. 3.
and Rejoice in our sufferings, Col. 1. 24. And after the rule of James, Account
it all joy when we fall into many temptations, Jam. 1. 2. If these be the curse
of the Law, the effects of Gods wrath and heavy displeasure? Can a good child
rejoice and glory in his fathers anger, and in the curses and strokes of his
fathers wrath which he has justly deserved? It is enough to add despair and
death to the sorrow of the Saints in their afflictions, to possess their
Consciences with an apprehension that all comes from their fathers wrath, and
has the curse upon it.

8 It holds poor Christians upon a rack of torment, and under the spirit of
intolerable bondage all their lifetime. For let Mr. Baxter though he were
sworn against Christ to Antichrist, deny if he can that when the Apostle, Gal.
3. 10. says; As many as are of the works of the Law are under the Curse; his
meaning to be that they are in the state and under the power of damnation, or
that the curse and damnation are not in Scripture phrase the same thing. I know
he will not deny it, l^st he should declare himself to have taken at once his
farewell of divine truth, and of natural reason also. If then to be under the
curse is to be under damnation, then by affirming believers to be under the
Curse, he affirms them to be under damnation, and consequently them that are
in Christ to be so much the children of wrath and hell as the very reprobates.

9 It inureth upon Christ a brand of evil which St James pronounces
detestable in a wicked man. What, that out of the same James 3. 9, 10, 11:
mouth should proceed blessing and cursing, says he? Yet Mr. Baxter makes the
same Christ, at the same time, to bless and to curse, to absolve and to
sentence, to save and to damn the same person.

10 Let Mr. Baxter consider whether while he labors so vehemently to fasten
the curse upon them whom God has blessed with faithful Abraham, Gal. 3. 9. He
does not pluck the curse upon himself which God has denounced, Genesis 12. 3. I
will bless him that blesses thee, and curse him that curses thee.

A word more I shall add (by way of digression) to some Ministers, who by a
faulty inadvertency, speak in this point almost the same things with Mr.
Bacter, though in the Article of Justification they wholly dissent from him. It
has filled my spirit with sadness to hear not only in the Pulpits of the
Country, but of the City of London, pronounced by the Mouths of some in great
esteem both for piety and Learning; That to say God does not punish his Saints
for their sins, is flat Antinomism: and affirmed, that the afflictions of
believers are punishments for their sin. I beseech these men to Consider whom
they here explode as Antinomians? whether besides the Apostles and Fathers of
the Primitive Church, they do not brand all the reformed Churches, and their
Champions against the Papists, with this ignominy? Whether there be any one
Article of Christian Religion, that has been more stoutly defended by these
against the Papists, than this which heat of zeal without knowledge (or
Consideration at least) has of late Called Antinomian? Let them produce any
besides the Socinian and Arminian Sophisters that have stumbled at this
doctrine as offensive. I beseech these men to read one Chamier at least,
Panstr. Tom. 3. lib. 23. the six first Chapters, where this question is not
only handled at large, but also the Arguments of the Protestants (who are also
named Cap. 1.) particularized, and all the objections of the Papists against
those Arguments Confuted: and the Papists Arguments to prove the Contrary
assertion answered. The question being thus stated, Vtrum puniantur fidelium
scelera? and utrum dura quae ijs immittit Deus, sint peccatorum paenae?

So much by way of answer to Mr. Baxters resolving of his third question. There
remain yet three questions more; viz.

Bax. 4. Whether it be not a wrong to the Redeemer, that the people whom he
has ransomed, be not immediately delivered [from the Curse]?

5. Whether it be any wrong to the redeemed themselves?

6. How long will it be till all the Curse be taken off believers, and
Redemption have attained its full effect?

The two former of these questions, are saucy, arrogant, and proud. In their
proposal, Mr. Baxter acts the part of Satan in questioning and accusing Gods
Justice. In his answer to them he takes upon himself to act the part of an
Angel, to be an Apologist to plead for the defense of Gods justice. 2 Gods
justice is not, cannot be injurious to any, so that God needs not an Apologist
to plead his cause; if he needed, his wisdom would not make choice of his
accuser to be his Advocate. 3 Mr. Baxter if he would have dealt ingenuously,
should have put the questions whether himself be not injurious; 1 To God and
his Christ; 2 To the redeemed by denying their deliverance from and affirming
their prostrate bondage under the Curse, and not to have questioned whether his
slandering of Gods justice has made God faulty. And then he should have
received an answer to his resolving of the questions. But as he puts the
questions I reject his resolving of them as unworthy of an answer. Only by the
way I say, that what he speaks in answer to his own questions is all merely
sophistical and fallacious. The three first reasons that he brings to prove
that Christ is not wronged by the not delivering of his ransomed ones, being
things in question not proved by Mr. Baxter, therefore in arguing from them he
does (as it is usual with him) beg the principle. The fourth reason is not ad
idem, but so far from the question as London from Barwick, that there is no
hope they will ever meet together. The question speaking of believers, The
reason, of Christ's dealing with the world to make them believers. And the same
is evident in what he says to the fifth question also. The sixth question he
thus resolves;

Bax. The last enemy to be overcome is death, 1 Cor. 15. 26. This enemy will be
perfectly overcome at the Resurrection. Then also shall we be perfectly acquitt
from the charge of the Law, and accusation of Satan: Therefore not till the day
of Resurrection and judgment will all the effects of sin and law and wrath be
perfectly removed.

If in the conclusion he mean the effects of sin and law and wrath shall not be
removed from the world until the resurrection; he speaks truth, but nihil ad
rem, far from the question which speaks only of believers. If he mean of
them that the Curse shall not be removed. I have answered it before, and the
Scriptures here brought to prove it, and will not here Actum agere.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether Believers are under the Law as a Covenant of works? The Negative
proved. Mr. Baxters ambiguities and mental reservations in stating the
question, and asserting the affirmative. The Law not repealed to any, but
exauthorated to believers, having inflicted its whole curse upon them in Christ.

Mr. Baxter had ended, but he had not finished his dispute about the Curse upon
believers. He did but Parthian or ram-like, go backward and decline a little,
to return with the greater force. Or as an Actor upon the stage, withdraw and
make his exit, to put on a new dress, in which to appear again forthwith to act
a second part. So does Mr. Baxter decline the dispute in one Aphorism and its
explication, (which I also shall pass by without excepting against it) and then
he returns to prosecute the same dispute afresh; yet in another dress of words,
that it might seem to be a resolving or determining of another question. That
was, whether believers remain under the Curse of the Law? This, whether they
remain under the Law as it threateneth and curses? And between these two
questions who sees not so vast a difference, as is between an arrow in the
quiver, and an arrow out of the quiver? within and without the quiver, it is
the same arrow still. Yet let us attend to him stating the question (which anon
we shall examine.) The result of it is thus.

Bax. That the Moral Law (not in its directive use but) as it is a Covenant of
works, is still in force to threaten and bring the Curse upon believers, in
case they do in any thing transgress the Law. This he undertakes to make good,
pronouncing it inconsideratenes to assert the contrary. These. 11. p. 78. and
explic. p. 79. and explic. of These. 12. p. 82.

Here before we meddle any further with Mr. Baxter, let us examine what the
Holy Ghost in Scripture speaks to this point. Ye are not under the Law, but
under Grace, says The Apostle to believers. Romans 6. 14.
I conceive there is no one Christian upon earth that has his head unbiassed
with sophistical fallacies and falsehoods, but takes the words in the same
simple and clear sense wherein the Holy Ghost delivers them, viz. That we are
no more under the Law, as a Covenant of Works, when we have once attained by
faith to be under the Covenant of Grace. But a very thunderbolt against Mr.
Baxter and his Assertion is that, Gal. 5. 3, 4. I testify to every one that is
circumcised, that he is debtor to do the whole Law. Christ is become of none
effect to you whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from
Grace. From these words must needs be deduced these Conclusions.

1 That to be under the Law, and to be under Grace, are contraries, and do
exclude either the other, so that it is impossible for the same person at the
same time to be under both together. If but circumcised, if at all under the
Law, ye have (says the Apostle) made Christ of none effect to you, ye are
fallen from grace, and consequently if at all in Christ, ye are not in the
least part under the Law, but free from the domination and Curse thereof.

2 That whosoever yields himself to be under the Law as a Covenant of Works,
in the least part, has his justification or damnation depending upon his
perfect or unperfect keeping of the whole Law, so says The Apostle, if but
circumcised, etc. ye are debtors to keep the whole Law: How debtors, viz. If
ever ye will be justified and saved to keep it perfectly, if ye fail but once,
to be damned for ever.

3 That whosoever affirms (whether he be a Bellarmine or a Baxter) believers
to be under the Law as a Covenant of Works, the same by necessary consequence
denies all actual efficacy of Christ's death, that ever any soul was or shall be
saved by his mediation, and affirms all the Saints that have been, are, or
shall be, to be damned for ever. For if at all under the Law, then not at all
under grace or in Christ; but they must stand or fall according as they do or
not do the whole Law, which none does, ergo, all must perish. The same also may
be gathered from Gal. 3. 10. but I have touched upon it before.

A noble Aphorist ye will acknowledge, declaring a greater desire to bring the
Saints under the Curse and damnation, then there is force in his Disputes to
prove them to be under it.

These Scriptures might suffice to satisfy every judgment, that believers are
not under the Law. Yet I shall mention some few more to show the copiousnes of
the word in this point, that there might be no doubting in this point, Rom 7.
1-6, the Holy Ghost does make out this truth as clear as the light. The Law
(says he) has dominion over a man [onely] during life, as the husband has
power over his wife. Let either the husband or wife dye, the law or power which
the husband had over the wife dies also. If the wife dye he has no power over
the soul or ashes of his dead wife, to exact under any penalty, obedience from
them. If the wife be survivor, she is no more bound to the dead ashes of her
husband, to fear either command or wrath thence, but is wholly at liberty. So
also stands the relation between the Law and believers. The Law in the height
of its authority had power to inflict death but once upon man; this death have
believers suffered in Christ, therefore are dead to the Law by the body of
Christ, have done their Law, and suffered all that the Law had to inflict upon
sinners, in the body, or humane nature of Christ suffering for them; so that
they are dead to the Law, so far without the lists of further punishment or
terror of the Law, as the Felon or Murderer that is condemned, hanged, dead
and buried, is free from further punishment, by the Law of the Land.

Yea the Law also is dead to them, having spent it is sting and strength, and
life also on the natural body of Christ, and is thereby disabled for ever to
reassume the same against the mystical body or any member thereof: So that
they are [fully] delivered from the Law.

All this does The Apostle speak out at the full in that place, and no less in
Gal. 3. 24, 25. The Law was our Schoolmaster unto or until Christ, etc. But
after that faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. This also he
illustrateth, Gal. 4. 1, etc. by a similitude, likening the Church before
Christ's coming to an Heir in his Minority, by his fathers will put under Tutors
and Governors, so that though he be Lord of all, yet differs nothing from a
servant, but is under his Tutors ferule and rod also, to be constrained with
fear, when love becomes ineffectuall to move him to his duty: such was the
condition of the Church while in its minority and feeblenes of spiritual
knowledge, the Sun of righteousness not being yet risen fully to enlighten them
with the understanding of their liberty and glorious prerogatives. During this
time though they were Lords of all, yet because of the weakness of their
knowledge they were kept Servantlike under hard Masters, under the Commands and
threats of the Law: but resembling the Church under the Gospel, to the same
heir in his maturity of age, now entered into the possession of his heritage,
and become rather Lord of his Tutors and Governors, then any way subject or
servile to their authority, gently and generously accepting their wholesome
Counsels, but disdaining so to subject to their authority, as to be brought
under the rod of their power any more.

So also Gal. 5. 13, 18, 23. speaking of them that had been called to the
liberty of the Gospel, believing in Christ, walking in the Spirit, and bringing
forth the fruits of the Spirit, concludes of them, that they are not under the
Law, that against such there is no Law. And 2 Cor. 3. 11. calls the Law (as a
Covenant of works) that which was done away, as he does the Gospel (as a
Covenant of Grace) that which remains. Yea that the case might be so plain,
that no Jesuiticall distinctions might pervert it, the Holy Ghost at once
concludes, both negatively that believers are not under the terrors of the
Law at all; and affirmatively that they are wholly and only under the sweet
dispensation of grace, Heb. 12. 18-24. Ye are not come to the Mount, etc.
burning with fire, nor unto blacknes, and darkness, and tempest, nor to the
words and Covenants which could not be heard and born, and to the terrible
voice which made Moses himself exceedingly to fear and quake. [These are the
things done away in reference to believers] But ye are come to Mount Sion, to
the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, etc. to all the
prerogatives and privileges of the Kingdom of Grace.

So also in the Epistle to the Galathians. There are two Covenants (says the
Holy Ghost) the one from Mount Sinai (where the Law was given) which gendereth
to Bondage, [the other from] Jerusalem which is above and is free, the mother
of us all, and concludes at last of all believers, negatively, that they are
not the children of the Bondwoman, i. e. under the Covenant of works, and
affi^matively, But of the free, i. e. under the Covenant of Grace, Gal. 4. 24,
26, 31. Hence is that bold triumphant challenge of the Apostle, Romans 8. 33, 34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies:
who is he that condemns? it is Christ that has dyed, yea rather that is
risen again, who sits at the right hand of God and makes intercession for
us.

Having laid down these two positions as truths undeniable, that Christ has
effectually satisfied, and as a perfect Mediator sits at the right hand of God,
making intercession for believers: And that God thereupon justifies them: He
now boldly challenges earth and hell: who shall charge them? who shall condemn
them? Yea his interrogations bear the force of strong negations, as if he had
said, None can effectually charge much less condemn them, yea none dares to
attempt it, no not one, not sin, nor Satan the Lords Enemies, much less the Law
which is just and conformed to the will of God.

Collect we together now but some short notions of these Scriptures, what the
Holy Ghost concludes in them and by them, that believers are not under the
Law, that it is an apostasy from Christ, from grace, to put themselves in the
least part under the Law as a Covenant of works; that they are dead to the Law,
that the Law is dead to them, that they are delivered from the Law, are no more
under it, were servants to it, but are now free from it, there is no Law
against them, that it is done away from having any domination over them, that
they are departed from the Laws terrors, and come to the Gospels celestial
previledges; are not under the Covenant of Works, but under the Covenant of
Grace, have the original of their present condition not from Sinai but from
the supernall Jerusalem, are sons not of the bondwoman but of the free, that
there is none that can condemn them, none that can justly say any thing to
their charge. Let any man now that beleiveth there is a Holy Ghost, and that
the Holy Ghost speaks in the Scriptures; judge whether i^ be possible for the
wisdom of the Holy Ghost himself, which is infinite, to give his testimony
more fully, clearly or plainly to this assertion, that believers are not under
the cursing power of the Law, or under the Law as a Covenant of works? whether
this truth has not from these testimonies of Scripture a sufficient
fortification raised about it against all Jesuits and Devils. Yet Mr. Baxter
with horn and hoof, tooth and nail assaults it, partly by secret minings, and
partly by open batteries to subvert it. I shall hold out his slights, in his
own words.

B. These. 11. Not that Christ does absolutely null or repeal the old Covenant
hereby [viz. by constituting a New Covenant These. 10.] But he superaddeth this
as the only possible way of life. The former still continues to command,
prohibit, promise and threaten: so that the sins even of the Justified, are
still breaches of that Law, and are threatened and cursed thereby. This is his
first plea, his dispute in general, against the before proved Assertion.

The Aphorism consists of mere obscurities, ambiguities, equivocations, and
mental reservations in words and phrases, wherein the Aphorist hides himself
that he may smite and not be smitten; speaking in words of a double and
doubtful sense, that he may beguile the unwary in the sense wherein he would
be understood, that he may deceive; and yet in case that by them which are wise
and wary he be called ad parts, to answer for his fallacious subtlety, he
might fly for shelter to the other sense that he might not appear to be a
deceiver.

And first the word nulling, yea the phrase absolutely nulling, is ambiguous,
equivocall, and fallacious. A thing, a law, a covenant may be said to be
nulled, i. e. made void or none, either as to its essence and being, or as to
its power and operation: yea to be absolutely nulled in some operations, though
absolutely in force in other. Null as to such ends or persons, though in its
perfect validity to other. But when Mr. Baxter says absolutely null, he would
be taken in another sense then he dares to avouch in the sense that the words
do most literally and gramatically import, viz. the whole and absolute nulling
of it not only to some, but to all operations, ends, and persons: yea not
only to its operation but to its being also. For so much that distinguishing
word (absolutely) insinuates, viz. in contra-distinction to secundum quid.
that it is nulled, not as to this or that purpose, in this or another respect,
but absolutely, simply, wholly, from having any more operation or being. And
this equivocation of his serves him to three ends.

1 To leave a secret accusation and odium among the people upon the Orthodox
Divines against whom his dispute bends, that they deny both the power and
being of the Law of God, and hold that it is become useless and abrogated, so
that the people of God must be no more acquainted with it. And this is a tacit
slander, for who among them ever taught such things?

2 To lay open to himself a wide field for a luxuriating and extravagant
disputation, to affirm or deny, confirm or confute any thing about the present
state of the Law, knowing that what is incompetent to what he asserteth in one
sense, will be enough competent in another, and he doubts not while he is thus
circling and roving, some pur-blind ones will be taken in his snare, if none
else yet at least such as are made to be taken, 2 Pet. 2. 12.

3 That if his words come to a strict examination, how little of simplicity and
truth, how much of doublenes and falsehood is couched in them, he may not want a
place of retreat: his meaning forsooth was but so and so, and there is a fault
in them that mistake him.

2 The same might I say of the word repeal which he uses. But because he
repeats it again in the Explication of this Aphorism, affirming that there are
godly and learned men that hold the repealing of the first Covenant, etc. I
shall there speak what else might be here not unfitly spoken.

3 No less ambiguous is it what he will have us to understand by the Old
Covenant, which he affirms not to be nulled, but to have the New Covenant
super-added to it: at least to what sense thereof he will stand. Whether he
means,

1 The Law of nature not sounded in the ear but written in the heart of man at
his Creation, Do and live, Sin and dye? Or

2 That Covenant expressed in the word, about a positive Command of not eating
of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil. Eat and dye, and consequently
Abstein and live? Or

3 The Covenant of the Law written in stones upon Mount Sinai? If the first,
Mr. Baxter himself sometimes declares his doubting, whether there were such a
Law, with a clear impression of its penalty, ever created and imprinted in man's
soul? And there are not wanting some among the most profound and Classical
Divines, which hold that whatsoever notions of natural righteousness and
holiness, of God, of good and evil, of truth and falsehood, there are in
natural men without the word; the same not to be engraven into them by nature,
or remainders of any Law written in man's heart at his first Creation: but of
Gods immediate infusion by a general and common operation of the Spirit in
time, distributed to some in a greater to some in a lesser measure, to some
scarce at all, as his infinite wisdom shall see it to make most for his glory.
And from these Mr. Baxter seems elsewhere not to dissent. And how then can that
be nulled and repealed, or what new super-addition can there be made to that
whith was never in being? much less can a Covenant stand firm, which was never
existent.

If the second, then contrary to his Assertion, the Old Covenant in respect of
our personal Obligation to it, and of the dependence of our life and death
upon it according to our personal obedience or disobedience to it, is nulled;
there being now no accessible Paradise, nor tree of knowledge of good and evil,
about which our obedience may be exercised, or disobedience manifested.

If the third, Mr. Baxter speaks point blank in contrariety to the Apostle,
in saying that the Covenant of Grace was added to the Law or Covenant of works.
For the Apostle gives the priority to the Promise or Covenant of Grace, and
affirms expressly that the Law or Covenant of works was many hundred years
after, added to it: Gal. 3. 17, 19. So that we know not where to meet with Mr.
Baxter to understand, much less to answer him.

4 He has a mental reservation also, when he affirms that the Covenant of
Grace was super-added as the only possible way of life. Who knows whether he
pronounces it the only possible way to life, as it has fulture and
supportance from the Law and Covenant of Works to which it is super-added, and
so Moses and Christ meeting together in the Mount do save a poor sinner, and
what the Law could not do of it self, being weak through the flesh, [that could
not fulfill it] Romans 8. 3. Now by the super-added help of Grace, it does
perform? Or as it is operative in it self and by it self, saving by its own
sovereign power without any help from the works of the Law. Why does not Mr.
Baxter speak out? Veritas non quaerit angulos. Truth loves to show its face in
the clear light, not hiding it self in the clouds. I do no wrong to M^. Baxter
in pressing upon him for his meaning herein; every man may see in the sequel
of his Tractate, that grace and faith have with him, very little power to
justify or save, but what they borrow and fetch home in a Cardinals Hat or
Monks Cowl from good works.

5 And he leaves us in the dark and doubtful, what he means by the word
hereby, when he says Christ does not null the Covenant hereby, it is a
relative word and must have its meaning from that which is antecedent in the
tenth Aphorism, viz. Christ's prescribing of a new Law, and tendering of a new
Covenant. The old Covenant is not nulled hereby says Mr. Baxter. Does he mean
by the tendering of the New Covenant? Or the offer of Grace? This makes nothing
to the end he drives at. None conceiving that the offer or tendering of Grace
to a sinner, does forth with free him from the Curse of the Law, until he
accepts the tender. Or does he mean that the effectualizing of the Covenant of
Grace to a sinner, or the taking of him effectually into the Covenant of Grace,
does not make void the Law to him as a Covenant of works? This is indeed like
himself, and agreeable to his purpose. He is not consistent with himself nor
with the most subtle and sophistical of the Papists whom he loves as dearly as
himself, if he do not so mean. Nevertheles because he is willing here to pass
under a vizzard, I will not trouble my self to unmask him. Himself will openly
enough discover himself to us, when the humor takes him. At present let him be
sullen.

6 The same might I say of that which follows. The former, i. e. The Covenant
of works or the Law, still continues to command, prohibit, promise, and
threaten. A wide dominion and large authority, but who the subjects and
servants are over whom it is exercised, he leaves (as all the rest) in an
ambiguity, is not disposed to tell us, except the next words do it. So that the
sins even of the justified, are still breaches of that Law, and etc.

7 But here also he determines to pass away in the dark, tells us only what
power the Law has against the sins, not against the persons of the justified,
that it threatens and curses their transgressions, but whether only upon the
person of Christ satisfying for them; or else in their own persons also, after
Christ has so satisfied, is a secret that at this time and in this place, we
must not know from him; though if he had not let it out before, he would have
been in pangs of travel with it until he were delivered of it.

Thus have we found M. Baxter in this Aphorism fighting against the
forementioned Conclusion and the Scriptures that confirmed it, with his sword
in the scabbard. How terrible the skirmish was they that felt either the point
or edge of his weapon can tell you. Suppose he should now unsheath it, who
could stand before his drawn sword? This he is about to do, by his

Explication.
Mr. B. I acknowledge that this assertion is disputable and difficult, and many
places of Scripture are usually produced which seem to contradict it. I know
also that it is the judgment of learned and godly men, that the Law as it is a
Covenant of works, is quite null and repealed in regard of the sins of
believers. Yea many do believe that the Covenant of works is repealed to all
the the world, and only the Covenant of grace in force.

Against both these I maintain this assertion, by the Arguments which you find
under the following Position 13. And I hope notwithstanding that I extol free
grace as much, and preach the Law as little, in a forbidden sense; as though I
held the contrary opinion.

First he acknowledges his Assertion to be disputable and difficult. We have
found it not only to be so, but to be so of his own making, by means of his
clothing it with the darkness of such and so many ambiguities, equivocations,
etc. Against it he says there is a twofold authority usually produced, the
one Divine, the othee humane. The one he despises and blows of as
contemptible, the other he falsifieth (I am confident) that he may have
somewhat to say in answer to it.

1 There is Divine authority or many Scriptures produced, which seem to
contradict his Assertion. And here take we notice in how base esteem he has
the Holy Scriptures; of those many Scriptures he vouchsafes not to answer one,
no nor to cite one: why? but that he thinks, when the Scriptures, and his own
assertions do contradict either the other, the authority of his own judgment
not only to parallel but also to over-weigh the authority of the Scriptures.
What Papist, what Enthusiast has or can have the Scriptures in less esteem
then this Aphorist shows himself here and elsewhere to have? What Scriptures are
brought against him, he disdaineth them an answer, yea a glance of his eye to
see them, or tongue to read them to us. But if he finds any Scripture whose
point with much bowing and wresting he thinks he may turn about against us that
have no more wit but to think their authority venerable and requiring our
submission thereunto: of these he makes use, to befool yet more such fools as
regard them. If I fail in my censure, the Lord forgive to me the mistake of my
judgment, and to Mr. Baxter his giving occasion, yea cause of such a mistaking.

And as the authority of Scriptures is pufft from him with less then a piff or
pish, so do we find humane authority (in all probability) falsified by him. I
know (says he) that learned and godly men are of this judgment that the Law as
a Covenant of works is quite null and repealed in regard of the sins of
believers. I do not doubt but by these learned and godly he means some
Protestant Divines, whom sometimes he will flatter, smooth, and almost spit in
their mouths, to allure them to run after him. Now if he do not falsify their
assertions, let him name but one of them that ever affirmed the Law to be so
repealed. I may possibly acknowledge him to be, in the main, learned and godly,
but I believe I shall never account him to have been considerate in laying down
such an assertion. For it directly contradicts the doctrine of our Savior,
Think not (says he) that I am come to destroy the Law, etc. I am not come to
destroy but fulfill. Verily, verily, Heaven and Earth shall pass, but not one
jot or tittle shall not pass from the Law till all be fulfilled, Mat. 5. 17,
18. Or to whom should it be repealed? not to unbeleevers; for it is consented
in both sides that they are under the Law, under the Curse. Nor to believers,
for the Law has pursued their sins unto death in the body of Christ, and by
Mr. Baxters acknowledgment has inflicted upon him for them, upon them in him,
the tantundem if not the idem which it ever threatened against sinners. And how
is the Law repealed in any of its power, that does or has executed all its
power upon all that have been transgressors? Mr. B. very well knows what
doctrine is taught in the Reformed Churches, but will needs falsify it, as he
does also the Holy Scriptures.

We affirm that the Law is still in force and shall be til the worlds end. We
preach not a repeal of any of its power or righteousness which it had from God
at any time. Neither on the other side, do we attribute to it a power or
unrighteousnes which God never gave it. We grant it a power to take full
vengeance upon every sinner for every sin committed during life. But we deny
that if any be raised to a second life after death (as was Christ) having born
the whole wrath due to the sins of the former life, that such a one comes under
the power of the Law again; the Law has never more dominion over him. But so
stands the case with believers: They have suffered in Christ, done their Law in
Christ, are dead in Christ, and in him they have satisfied the Justice of the
Law for the sins of their whole life. If now they are also risen with Christ,
and are dignified with a new life, the life of grace, so that though they live,
it is not so much they that live, as that Christ lives in them, and the life
which they live in the flesh is by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. In
this new life which they have by their union unto Christ, now triumphant, the
Law can no more reach them, then Christ himself triumphant. So the Law is
nulled to them, but never repealed, nulled because it has inflicted upon them
its whole pena^ty, and after it has so done, it has no more power over the
very reprobates, much less over the Saints. So that the Law being null or of
no force to believers, has received no diminution to its power, holding it
still firm and entire as ever; no more then the Law of the Land is weakened for
that when it has inflicted death upon the Felon or Traitor, it has no further
power to question him. As, before they had existence in Adam, their not
existing yet in him, and under the Law by being in Adam, argued no weakness in
the Law: So when they have don their Law for the sins committed while under the
Law, and that by their new union unto and existence in Christ, they cease to be
under the Law, that the Law has no power over them, argues no wound or
weakness or detriment that the Law has sustained; any more then it does,
because it is null in power to the Angels in Heaven, over whom it had never
power: or null unto Christ now in Heaven, over whom it had once power.

Mr. Baxter acknowledges that the penalty of the LAW is due to none but the
transgressors of the Law, to the unrighteous, and withal affirms These. 16. p.
96. and Explication page 98, 99. That Satisfaction for disobedience is our
Righteousness, makes a man so perfectly righteous (as to the Law and further
penalty thereof) as if he had never disobeyed. Yet we find him here fighting
not only against Heaven and Earth, but against himself also, to deny the
nullity of the Law to them that have satisfied by CHRIST, for their
disobedience to the Law; making it one and the same thing with the repealing of
the Law. This word repealing being here foisted in by himself, partly to make
way for his sophistical, and bombasticall distinctions which are no less deer
to him then his life, therefore in the Explication of the next Thesis, comes in
great ostentation, no less trappled with them, then a Cart-horse with his
painted Collar, bells and feathers, partly to give occasion of his riding in
state upon Grotius his shoulders, to show what new, subtle, and fine-spun
learning, he has drawn from so noble and Apostaticall a Doctor, no less fit to
the Argument he has in hand, than the shoo i^ for the hand, or the glove for
the foot.

But lastly and principally, that having according to his wonted and inbred
subtlety, put on a false vizzard upon the doctrine of the reformed Churches, he
might in the 13 These. and its explication, dispute victoriously against the
vizzard, having nothing to say against the doctrine in its own nature and
verity.

As for the other pretended opinion, that the Covenant of works is repealed to
all the world, and the Covenant of Grace alone in force: Those that hold it
(most probably) are some Eutopians that Mr. Baxter alone, and no other either
man or Angel besides him have had acquaintance with, or the happiness to know
their opinion. So that Mr. Baxter might have done well to have taken a second
voyage into the land of Eutopia, either to have joined with them or disputed
against them upon their own happy turf, and not to have troubled our unhappy
Coasts with this Controversy: it has the unhappines doubtless to be pestered
with so many opinionists as any Nation in the world, but among all has not
such bugbears or phrenticks, that I know, who maintein such an assertion. But
it is one of Mr. Baxters subtleties to feign such ghosts and phantasmes of men
to fight against, thereby taking the advantage secretly and unespyed (as he
hops) to erect more cursed and monstrous assertions, than all such ghosts and
phantasmes as he feigneth, could have devised. But we cannot stop him in his
Career, on he posteth, and Against both these [imaginary opinions] says he, I
maintein this Assertion, i. e. his 11th Thesis, which we have found to be a
mere fardle of equivocations, ambiguities, etc. for explication whereof we have
sought where he promised it, but have found nothing but fictions, imaginations,
and new falsehoods more to obscure it. Yet this piece of darkness he promises to
maintain under the 13 posi^ion, where we shall wait on him. But in the mean
while he has a 12th These. and an explication to intersert which we must by the
way take notice of as a most noble preparative to the sublime learning which in
the 13th he will deliver. As for that brag wherewith he shuts up all that he
has said in the titular explication of this his 11th position, [I hope that I
extol free Grace as much, and preach the Law as little in a forbidden sense,
as though I held the contrary opinion.] unto it I say but this: If his
preaching be so much better and honester than his writing, we could wish him
henceforth to apply himself wholly to the Pulpit not at all to the Press. And
notwithstanding his brags, and all his equivocations, windings, and fallacious
argumentation, we will still keep in mind the state of the question from which
he seeks to avert us, viz. that the Law is not nulld to believers, but even
when they are believers, they are still under the Law as a Covenant of works.
This he has promised to maintain, against Scriptures and Orthodox Writers,
whatsoever else he speaks and not home to this point is besides the question.
Attend we therefore what he has to make this good in the next position.

CHAP. IX.
Mr. Baxters Distinctionary preparative to the Confirmation of his Assertion
[that believers are under the Law as a Covenant of works] examined: and all
that he haeh therein manifested to be in part impertinent to the question, and
pertinent only to his vainglory: in the rest to be Popish and destructive to
all hope of salvation.

Thesis 12. BAx. Therefore we must not plead the repeal of the Law for our
Justification; but must refer it to our surety, who by the value and efficacy
of his once offering and merits does continually satisfy.

We assent here to his words in substance, but find Cause in the placing of
them, to doubt of a fallacious meaning which he has therein. 1 We do not we
will not plead the repeal of the Law for our Justification. But Mr. Baxter (as
he makes it appear by what is antecedent and following in this dispute) would
have us to conceive, that in the not repealing of the Law is included our being
under the Law as a Covenant of works. Such tame fools, in the lofty opinion
that he has of himself, does he account us. If in the following words of the
position, he meant fairly he would speak plainly. We must not plead the repeal
of the Law for Justification, etc. What then? but we must refer it to our
surety who by the value, etc. Why says he not plainly we must not plead the
laws repeal for etc. but our fullfilling of it in Christ, or the satisfaction
which he has once made for all the breaches of the Law which we have or shall
have committed? why speaks he ambiguously? we must refer it to our surety,
what? whether or when we shall be justified? or to him to plead for us
neglecting to seek for any ablenes to plead and give account of our hope for
our selves, willingly remaining uncertain of salvation all our life time? And
when he says by his once offering and merits, he does continually satisfy:
though in a good sense it be true and good, yet has he not already actually
satisfied? and are not believers by that satisfaction actually justified? we
shall find anon there was a monster contained in the womb of these equivocall
locutions. In the interim let us search whether in the place of explication
there be any thing spoken to explain his meaning.

Explication.
Bax. I shall here explain to you, in what sense and how far the Law is in
force, and how far not: and then pr^ve it in and under the next head. Here now
he brings in a quaternion of distinctions to undermine and blow up the
authority of the sacred T^inity, expressed in the forecited Scriptures that
proves believers not to be under the Law as a Covenant of works: and four
against three is odds.

B^x. You must here distinguish betwixt 1 The repealing of the Law and the
relaxing of it; 2 between a dispensation absolute and respective; 3 Between the
alteration of the Law, and the alteration of the subjects relation to it. 4
Between a discharge conditional, with a suspension of execution, and a
discharge absolute.

Parturiunt Montes. What follows upon all these polite and profound
distinctions? many notable Conclusions doubtless: Mr. Baxters nose is as right
in the middle of his face, since as before his disburthening himself of these
distinctions. But most certainly we are dull and cannot piece deeply. But Mr.
Baxter is no less acute than deep, let us see what work he can make of it.

Bax. And so I resolve the question thus.

1 The law of works is not abrogate or repealed, but dispensed with, or
relaxed. A dispensation is (as Grotius defines it) an act of a superior
whereby the obligation of a law in force is taken away, as to certain persons
and things.

2 This dispensation therefore is not total or absolute, but respective. For 1
Though it dispense with the rigorous execution, yet not with every degree of
execution. 2 Though the law be dispensed with as it contains the proper
subjects of the penalty, viz. the parties offending, and also the circumstances
of duration, etc. yet in regard of the mere punishment, abstracted from person
and circumstances, it is not dispensed with. For to Christ it was not dispensed
with. His satisfaction was by paying the full value.

3 Though by this dispensation our freedom may be as full as upon a repeal, yet
the alteration is not made in the Law, but in our estate and relation to the
Law.

4 So far is the Law dispensed with to all, as to suspend the rigorous
execution for a time, and a liberation or discharge conditional procured and
granted them. But an absolute discharge is granted to none in this life. For
even when we do perform the condition, yet still the discharge remains
conditional, till we have quite finished our performance. For it is not one
instantaneous act of believing, which shall quite discharge us, but a continued
faith. No longer are we discharged than we are believers. And where the
condition is not performed, the law is still in force, and shall be executed
upon the offender himself.

I speak nothing in all this of the directive use of the moral Law to
believers, but how far the Law is yet in force even as it is a Covenant of
works; because an utter repeal of it in this sense is so commonly, but
inconsiderately asserted. That it is no further overthrown, no not to
believers, then is here explained. I now come to prove.

Here we see the offspring of the precedent mountainous and swelling
distinctions. Exit ridiculus mus. In the three first Conclusions a mere tattle
about the repealing and abrogating, or dispensing and relaxing of the Law; and
of its dispensation in a totality and absolutenes, or in a respectivenes to
persons, circumstances and degrees of execution, etc. which is as proper to the
thing that he drives at, as swines flesh and a peacock strangled, with all his
glittering feathers, to the satisfying of a Jews hungry appetite. Surely
either Mr. Br. had forgotten, or thought we had forgotten that he had before
vented this Mystical learning of his own and Grotius his brain; or doubted
that it was not finely enough set out there, therefore that he might have the
full praise of so curious and spiderthreeded a speculation, brings it in here
again, in somewhat a new and more specious a dress. Let him rest contented, we
acknowledge it all very trim. If he believe us not, let him set it as a
philactery upon his garment. It will tend so much to the strengthening of it,
as of the cause he has in hand. For the question is not whether the Law be
repealed or but dispensed with, But whether it be in force to believers as a
Covenant of works, with which the three first positions meddle not. The word
[abrogating] some orthodox Divines (I confess) do use, but not in a sense
equipollent with the word [repeal,] meaning thereby only a nullity of the
laws domination over believers. The alteration not being in the Law (as we
acknowledge with Mr. Br.) but in our estate and relation to it. The law
reigns over all that are under it. But the Saints are not Inst. lib. 3. cap.
19. sect. 2.
under the Law, says the Apostle, But as ( Calvin says) in Christ above it.

But his fullnes and plainnes in his fourth Conclusion makes some recompense
for all his Amphibologies, all his dark and doubtful locutions in that which
went before. Here we acknowledge his ingenuity, He so speaks as that an English
man may understand him. Here he tells us what he meant before of nulling,
repealing, etc. of the Law to believers, that it is not so nulled, abrogated,
repealed, relaxed or dispensed with, but that all their life time they are
still under the Law as a Covenant of works. And why could not this be spoken,
without so great a preparative of sophistical equivocations and distinctions?
It pleased him surely to act the Alderman that decked himself with all his robes
and rich furniture, to go into his stable and cut off his horses tail. But it
shall satisfy us that after some suspension, he at last discovers to us his
meaning. Let us examine it, and first we shall find set forth in two
positions; two so soul-ravishing privileges, purchased by the Lord Christ for
the Elect Saints, that whosoever of them will rest satisfied with them, may
gird himself fast, and depart without them. 1 That they have so large a
discharge from the rigor of the Law for a while, as any of the worst
reprobates. 2 That they have no more discharge from the Laws curse than the
worst of reprobates. Must we not account him a Saint that has a fastidious
stomach or sore mouth that cannot relish these dainties. The former Conclusion
he reaches to us in these words. So far is the Law dispensed with to all, as
to suspend the rigorous execution of it for a time, and a liberation and
discharge conditional, procured and granted them. Jam sumus ergo pares. In
this the sons of God are in as good a case as the reprobates, and somewhat
before the Devils. The latter Conclusion in these words; But an absolute
discharge is granted to no man in this life. Jam sumus ergo pares. Yet have we
as large cause of exulting and joy in the Holy Ghost as the reprobates, that
(as far as we can discern) we are no nearer to hell than the children of hell,
whose inheritance is in hell forever.

To prove the latter assertion, that none are, that believers are not
absolutely discharged from the law as a Covenant of works, in this life, he
borrows matter from Pelagians, Papists, Socinians, Arminians, and the whole
rabble of professed enemies to the grace of God in Christ, manifests ( Scotus
like) ignotum per ignotius. carries us into a dungeon of darkness, to discern
Colors which we could not judge of in the light, to his mind; brings seven
other Devils, many other heresies worse than the first, at least so bad as the
first, to strengthen the first. Clavum clavo [not] extorquet, [but] torquet and
figit, beats in other wedges not to loose the first, but to fasten all. Having
gotten in the paw of the beast, beats and beetles in many of his horns after
to wedge fast all.

The Popish errors which he brings as an addition to confirm that believers are
during life, under the law, are these. 1 That they which are in Christ have not
their sins fully pardoned, neither are themselves wholly justified in this
world. 2ly, That whosoever shall be justified in the world to come, must
procure it by his own willing, running and persevering in this world. 3 That
they which are in Christ may fall away and be damned. 4 That no man while he
lives can be certain of his salvation. 5 To this he adds one worse than any
Popish or Socinian heresy as proper to himself and from himself alone, viz.
That all believers (notwithstanding Christ's satisfaction for them,
notwithstanding their persevering faith in him, yet) must be at last damned
forever. Some of these errors are in express words asserted, the rest by
necessary Consequence employed in this short dispute of Mr. B: The first he
expressly affirms. Even when we do perform the condition, yet still the
discharge remains Here he follows Arminius because in this point Arminius
overruns the Papists.
conditional (says he) till we have quite finished the performance, i. e.
till we have gasped out the last breath. So that in this life there is no
discharge, but a conditional promise that possibly we may in the world to come
be discharged. what is this discharging but Justifying and absolving us? from
what but from the sin which we have committed, and from the vengeance which
the law threateneth? such a justification he denies to be attainable in this
life. And this argument he thus urges; Whosoever is not perfectly justified,
is still under the law as a Covenant of works. But the very Saints are not in
this world so Justified ergo they are under the Law, etc. The second, that
Justification in the world to come must be procured by man's own willing, etc.
He delivers plainly enough in that he says, that we must perform, yea
continue performing the conditions until we go out of this world, and then we
may possibly obtein to be justified in the world to come. What are the
conditions by which we procure the discharge? Mr. B: tells us afterward (as we
shall find) Faith and good works. These must we observe and continue observing
to the end to procure justification after this life ended. And so it is by our
own strong and lasting endeavors, that after the world is ended our sins may
be possibly forgiven, and we saved. Here if we grant unto him, that we are Gods
hirelings thus to work in his vineyard the whole day, the whole term of our
life; and that Justification is the wages of our work to be paid in the
evening, i. e. at the end of the world, then it will follow indeed (what he
deduceth hence) that until the world be ended we are still under the Curse of
the Law. 3 That they that are in Christ may fall away and be damned if they
continue in their Apostasy, or may after their many apostacies, often renew again
their union with Christ, and so at last be justified, he speaks out fully in
telling us, It is not one instantaneous act of believing, but a continued faith
that shall quite discharge us; that no longer are we discharged than we are
believers, and when we cease to believe, the Law is still in force, and
condemns. Either he reasons from an unpossible supposition, or a possible
and usual Case incident to believers. If from an impossibility, it makes not
at all for his purpose. If it were possible for him to fall from grace, then
should believers be under the Law again. But it is not possible, etc. ergo they
shall never be reduced under the law again. But he argues as from a possible
and usual case, and then if we grant him, that the Saints may fall away, it
will follow that they are not absolutely freed from the curse of the law in
this life. But in granting this, we grant our selves to be Popish, and may
shake hands with Mr. Br. The fourth, that no man can in this life be certain of
salvation, depends on the former. For if we cannot be certain of our
perseverance, we cannot be certain of eternal happiness: and by necessary
consequence it must be concluded also that we are not discharged from the
bondage of the Law. But we cannot grant the premises from which such
inferences are drawn, unless we will grant away our selves also in despair to
perdition. And therefore we deny to Mr. B: all his argumentation here, as
having nothing of Christ, but all of Antichrist in it.

I mean not to prosecute in this place a dispute against Mr. B: about these
four pernicious errors which he holds in common with other Papists; himself
will elsewhere minister to me an occasion of speaking more fully to them, where
he does not only touch upon, but also professedly handle the most (if not all)
of them. Here I shall only (to preserve the simple from his guile) manifest
upon what fallacious grounds he pitcheth these his assertions. They are
principally these two.

1 That Faith as an infused gift of grace, and a part of our inherent
righteousness does justify, when it is not only (as the Papists say) Fides
informis, but also Formata, perfected both in its duration of time, and in all
its Concomitants the other habits, virtues, and gifts of grace, such as are
love, mercy, goodness, temperance, etc. and in the fruits and acts of all these
which are good works. For so shall we find him in the sequel of this tractate
teaching.

2 That Faith and all those its Concomitants with their fruits and effects
depend upon our freewill, to gain and retein, refuse and lose them at the
pleasure and lust of our corrupt freewill. These points being granted all those
four errors will follow as necessary deductions thence. But the orthodox
Churches hold and the Oracles of the Gospel teach otherwise. 1 That our
Justification flows from our union to Christ, that All in Adam are under the
Law, under the Curse, unblessed, unjustified, unpardoned. But that all which
are in Christ are justified, pardoned, etc. So the Apostle, Phil. 3. 8. etc.
All things are doung to me that I may winn Christ, and be found in him, not
having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through
the Faith of Christ, etc. Here was the Apostles righteousness and Justification
to winn Christ and be found in him. And this union unto Christ is made up
principally by the Spirit, by which Christ apprehends and uniteth us to
himself. No otherwise is our Justification attributed to faith than as it is
the instrument by which we apprehend Christ to our selves as we are apprehended
of Christ to himself, and bring home into our bosom^ the benefit of this our
union to him, together with the sense and joy of our Justification by him. This
I shall have occasion to illustrate and prove more fully before I part with Mr.
Baxter, and because he will call me to it in another place, here I shall say no
more of it. 2 That our Faith both in its existence and perseverance, depends
not upon the fickle sweek of our own freewill, but upon the support of Gods
power and unchangeable love, and upon the virtue of Christ's mediation and
faithfullnes of the Mediator; though our freewill be mutable, yet the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance, i. e. without Change. Romans 11. 29. He
that has begun a good work in you, will perform it till the day of Jesus
Christ, Phil. 1. 6. Though our faith be weak, yet we are preserved by the power
of God through Faith and salvation. Christ has by his sacrifice purchased to
us, not only salvation but faith also, both in its being and persevering to
apprehend him and it to our persevering Consolation; They shall never perish
says he) neither shall any man, (...) any one, man or Devil, pluck them out
of my hands, Joh. 10. 28. It is the will of my Father which sent me, that of
all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again
at the last day, Joh. 6. 39.

If now the word of God stand, and the judgment of the Churches that is
grounded upon the immutable word of the eternal God; then those bugbear
assertions, the (brats of Mr. Baxters windy distinctions) which he brings as
arguments to prove the slavish bondage of believers under the Law, will appear
vaporous and so vanish. For if our Justification proceed not from the old age
or perfection of faith and its Concomitants, but from our union to Chrst, and
no otherwise from faith than as it instrumentally closes us with Christ (which
no instantaneous Faith, that lives and dies at an instant, but a truly living
faith can do) then it will appear to be a falsehood, that None is justified in
this life. Nay all that by a living faith are united to Christ, are fully
justified in this life. And as many as are unjustified here, shall not be
either justified or saved hereafter.

Again, if our Justification spring from our union with Christ, then not at all
from our own willing, running, and persevering. And so his two first Arguments
fall into shivers.

3 If no true and justifying faith be instantaneous, and the perseverance of
faith in the believer, and of a believer in the faith, depend not upon man's
mutable will, but upon the all sufficiency of Christ's merits, and the truth and
omnipotency of the most high God: then his two latter assertions, viz. that of
Apostasy from Christ, and the other of the uncertainty of salvation, fall into
shivers also. For what more fixed and certain than what by the will of God, is
bottomed and sustained with the rock Christ, and the truth and power of the
eternal God? None then of his popish arguments here brought, do give the least
fulture to his assertion, that The very believers are under the Law as a
Covenant of Works.

The fifth Position, that all Believers (according to Mr. Baxters doctrine) must
needs be damned, arises from the Assertion which by the four mentioned
Propositions, as by so many Arguments, he goes about to prove: viz. That
until death they are under the Law as a Covenant of works. If so then must
they be needs damned:

1 Because whosoever is under that Covenant is bound to seek freedom from
vengeance, and possession of blessedness, by the conditions Gal. 5. 3.
of the same Covenant. But these conditions are unpossible to man in his
present feeblenes and corruption, viz. the purification of himself from all
sin, and perfect performance of all obedience. Who can perform all this, except
peradventure St. Francis and Mr. Baxter* so that either none or at least they
alone can be saved.

2 Because whosoever professing the Faith, is in the least part under the Law,
etc. is fallen from Christ, has no part in the Covenant Gal. 5. 4.
of Grace, as I have before proved, therefore must necessarily be damned.

3 Because whosoever lives and dies under a Covenant of works, is under the
curse and damnation, Gal. 3. 10.

That which follows in the conclusion of the Explication of this Thesis,
acquits me from all men's suspicion of doing Mr. B. any wrong in
mis-interpreting his meaning in this his dispute. Himself acknowledges it to
be his own sense. In all this (says he) i. e. in this whole dispute, I speak
nothing of the directive use of the Law, [ viz. as it is a rule and Counselor
to a Christian in all moral righteousnes] but how far the Law is yet in force
as a Covenant of works, because an utter repeal of it in this sense is so
commonly but inconsiderately asserted. [Let him name but one considerable man
that ever affirmed the Law repealed, that it may appear it is not a slander
which he casts upon the Anti-Papists.] But he proceeds, That it is no further
overthrown, no not to believers, then is here explained, I now come to prove.

And we shall come after him to see what he proves, and how far he proves.
And that it may appear to all what sincerity is in the man, two things are to
be kept diligently in mind.

1 What he is to prove.

2 What he is not to meddle with in proving, if he will show himself honest,
and not a mere Imposter.

We utterly deny any repeal or abrogating of the Law as a Covenant of works to
them that are under the Law, or have not don their Law, yea any repeal of the
Law at all, as I have made to appear. Therefore if Mr. B. go about to prove
either that the Law is not repealed, or that unbeleevers or such as have not
done their Law by satisfying for the breaches thereof, are still under the Law;
This is fallacious dealing, a proving of that which never came into Question,
for all acknowledge it without his proving. That which he is to prove is that
none, no not believers are absolutely discharged from the Law, but are under it
as a Covenant of works to the utmost moment of their life. This he promises
throughout his whole dispute to prove, let us attend how he does it in this 13
Position, under which he promises to do it.

CHAP. X.
Mr. Baxter's much promised and long expected Arguments to prove Believers to
be under the Law as a Covenant of works, discovered to be mere impertinencies,
and Sophistical Impostures: And the Question whether the Elect while yet
Unbelievers, are so under the Law, and in what respects, discussed.

Thesis 13.

B. IF this were not so, but that Christ had abrogated the first Covenant, then
it would follow.

1 That no sin but that of Adam, or final unbelief is so much as threatened
with death, or that death is explicitly (i. e. by any Law) due to it or
deserved by it. For what the Law in force does not threaten, that is not
explicitly deserved or due by the Law.

2 It would follow that Christ dyed not to prevent or remove the wrath and
curse so deserved, or due to us, for any but Adams sin, nor to pardon our sins
at all: but only to prevent our desert of wrath and curse, and consequently to
prevent our need of pardon.

3 It would follow that against eternal wrath, at the day of judgment, we
must not plead the pardon of any sin but the first; but our own non desert of
that wrath: because of the repeal of that Law before the sin was committed. All
which consequences seem to me unsufferable, which cannot be avoided if the Law
be repealed.

Unto these three Arguments he adds four more in the Explication of this
Position, which thus follow.

B. We may plead our non deserving of death, for our discharge at judgment.

5 And further, then Christ in suffering did not bear the punishment due to any
sin but Adams first, for that which was not threatened to us, was not executed
on him. This is a clear but an intolerable consequence.

6 Scripture plainly teaches that all men (even the Elect) are under the Law
till they believe, and enter into the Covenant of the Gospel. Therefore it is
said, Jo. 3. 18. He that believes not is condemned already, and the wrath of
God abides on him, ver. 36. And we are said to believe for remission of sins,
Acts 2. 38. Mark 1. 4. Luke 24. 47. Acts 10. 43. and 3. 19. which show that sin
is not before remitted; and consequently the Law not repealed but suspended and
left to the dispose of the redeemer. Else how could the redeemed be the children
of wrath? Ephesians. 2. 3. The circumcised are debtors to the whole Law, Gal. 5. 3,
4. And Christ is become of no effect to them: but they that are led by the
Spirit are not under the Law, and against such there is no Law, Gal. 5. 18, 23.
The Scripture has concluded all under sin (and so far under the Law no doubt)
that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe,
Gal. 3. 22. We are under the Law when Christ does redeem us, Gal. 4. 5. See
also Ja. 2. 9, 10. 1 Timothy 18. 1 Cor. 15. 56. Gal. 3. 19, 20, 21. Therefore our
deliverance is conditionally from the curse of the Law, viz. if we we will obey
the Gospel. And this deliverance, together with the abrogation of the
Ceremonial Law, is it which is so often mentioned as a privilege of believers,
and an effect of the blood of Christ. Which deliverance from the curse is yet
more full, when we perform the conditions of our freedom. And then we are said
to be dead to the Law, Romans 7. 4. and the obligation to punishment dead, as to
us, ver. 6. but not the Law void or dead of it self.

7 Lastly all the Scriptures and Arguments, p. 60 61. which prove that
afflictions are punishments, do prove also that the Law is not repealed. For no
man can suffer for breaking a repealed Law, nor by the threats of a repealed
Law; yet I know that this Covenant of works continues not to the same ends and
uses as before; nor is it so to be preached or used. We must neither take that
Covenant as a way to life, as if now we must get our salvation by fulfilling
its conditions, nor must we look on its Curse, as lying on us remediless.

Alas for the conscience of this man! I know (says he) that this Covenant of
works continues not etc. yet against knowledge and against conscience will he
not only teach the contrary, but with all Jesuiticall arts labor to screw it
into the judgments of men that are more Logical then Theological. How has he
suspended our expectation with promises that in and under the 13 Thesis he
would bring his Reason^ to prove

1 That the Law as a Covenant of works is not become null and void to
believers, p. 79. that they are not discharged in this life from the curse of
the Law, p. 82. But that

2 They are under the Law as a Covenant of works still, after that they are in
Christ and partakers of of his Redemption. Why had he not by and by proved it,
but that he might Bellarmine-like, first busy his Reader with Sophistical
distinctions and disputes, until he had forgotten the state of the Question,
and then prove what he would, not what he should to his forgetful Reader For
so there is not the least gry or jota in all his Arguments here that does so
much as glance upon the things that he was to prove, but a laboring to confirm
things which no one of those whom he makes his adversaries, does or did ever
Question, much less deny. So that all these his Arguments, are mere impostures,
not (as he terms them) Reasons to confirm the Doctrines which he pretends to
prove.

For first, his five first Arguments (or rather those three in his Thesis,
which in the Explication he sub-divides into five) and the seventh also in the
Explication tends only to prove that God has not, did not revoke, repeal and
extinguish the Law that it should have no more a being, or remain a Law to the
sons of men; as soon as Adam had sinned, and a promise of redemption by Christ
was made, Genesis 3. 15. who ever taught or thought so? or what is this to prove
that the Saints (after they have suffered and satisfied in and by Christ the
whole penalty of the Law, for all their transgressions of the Law) are not
delivered from it as a Covenant of works?

Secondly, the other Argument which he puts in the sixth place goes about to
prove that unbelievers are under the Law. And this is as potent a reason to
prove believers to be under the Law; as if I should thus argue, Mr. Baxter is a
Jesuit, because Bellarmine and Maldonat were Jesuite^: o^ that Mr Baxter is
not the Teacher of the Church at Kederminster, because Robin Hood and little
John are not Teachers there.

This might suffice as a full Answer to his seven Arguments and to manifest his
sin and shame in using them. But I shall add something by way of Explication to
make that which I have said plain to the weakest. Not imitating Mr. Baxter, who
under a pretense of Explication, does in most places totally darken what was
before clear and plain.

First then, I grant to Mr. Baxter, that if Christ had from the beginning of
sins entrance into the world, repealed and (in the proper and full sense of the
word) abrogated the Law, those five consequences, which he mentions in his 5
first Arguments would follow,

1 That no sin but that of Adam, and final unbelief is so much as threatened
with death, the one being forbidden by the Law while it was in force, the other
by the Gospel, that is still unquestionably in force, Nay not any thing else in
reference to the old Covenant but that of Adam should be a sin, because sin is
the transgression of the Law, and where there is no Law, there can be no
transgression.

2 That Christ by his satisfaction for us, prevented not the wrath deserved [
viz. otherwise then by Adams sin] but the desert of wrath.

3 Neither does he properly pardon any such sin, for where no Law is, there is
no sin, where no sin, there is nothing to be pardoned.

4 And then might we plead innocence, or our non deserving of death (except
before excepted) for our discharge at judgment.

5 And Christ in suffering did not bear the punishment of any other sins of
mankind besides the forementioned. Thus we grant Mr. B. five of his Arguments
without any detriment to our Cause or advantage to his. Believers are as fully
freed from the Law as if he had slept while he thus disputed. For all these his
Arguments lean upon a false supposition. If the Law be so repealed and
abrogated (as is before supposed) then and not else will these cursed
Consequences take place. But the law is not so repealed etc. therefore none of
these will follow. For we hold that Believers are therefore delivered from the
law as a Covenant of works, not because the law was almost from the very
beginning repealed or abrogated from being any longer a Covenant of works, but
because the law as a Covenant of works has executed upon them in Christ all
its penalty for all their sins, and has therefore now no more power to
question them: as has been more copiously declared before.

The same I say also to the seventh Argument as it points to the not
repealing of the law, whatsoever else is in it, has been in answer to the place
cited, sufficiently spoken to.

His sixth Argument about which he labors more then about all the rest,
though (as I said a little before) it makes nothing to his present and explicit
purpose, proving only unbelievers to be under the law; (for this is nothing to
believers) yet it makes way to an implicit or secret end which he has, and
determines to prosecute with much ardency in the following parts of this
Treatise. There are two sorts of unbelievers, the one under a temporary, the
other under a final unbelief, the elect and the reprobate. Mr. Baxter here
drives with all his force to prove both under the law, because he conceives
that if he prove the elect before they believe in Christ, are under the law,
and so granted to be, it may be proved much the more easily and plainly, that
they are so also after they become believers. For many of the strongest
Arguments which are for the one are for the other, and which are against the
one are against the other also: So that it is hard to bring reasons for the
affirming or denying of either, without giving advantage for the like affirming
or denying of both.

I purpose not here to anticipate but to suspend the dispute upon this Question
until Mr. B. shall show his face openly as a Challenger; here he does but as
it were peep behind the Curtain, in comparison of what he says afterward with
full expressions of himself. Yet that I may not be forced then to retreat
hither again to what he does here deliver, but answer every thing in its own
place; I shall at present examine those Scriptures which he here produces,
whether and how far they prove elect unbelievers to be under the law as a
Covenant of works.

And to clear up a way to the be^ter understanding of these and the like
testimonies of Scripture, I shall prefix two Positions visibly and apparently
springing from the pure fountain of Gods word.

First that all which are elected from eternity shall in their appointed times
come unto Christ and persevere in him by a living Faith. I mean not only all
but only these and none besides them* As many as were ordained to eternal
life believed, when Christ was, and Acts 13. 48
so still do or shall believe when Christ is, or shall be preached to them. If
the Gospel be hid from any (viz. so that they believe not in Christ manifested
by the Gospel to them) it is to them that perish, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 3. i. e. to
them that are not elect but reprobates. All that the Father gives me shall
come to me, and him that comes to I will in no wise cast out, [or suffer to be
lost] John 6. 37. To come to Christ is to believe truly in him, such shall
never be lost, never fall away, or make shipwreck of their Faith. But who are
they whom God gives to Christ that they may believe in him? Thine they were,
and thou gave them me, says our Savior. Mr. B. will say they were in a
peculiar manner to be Gods people, at least by election, and therefore given to
Christ that by faith in him they might be saved, Jo: 17. 6. To you it is given
to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but unto them that are without all
these things are done in Parables; that seeing they may see and not perceive,
etc. Mark 4. 11, 12. Why was it given to the one part to know the mystery life
and spirit of the Gospel, to the other only the outside and letter thereof?
They were within, these without the lines of Gods election. They went out from
us but they were not of us, for if they had been of us they would without doubt
have continued with us, but they went out that they might be made manifest that
they were not of us, 1 John: 2. 19. Not of us, he means, not of the number of
them that are called according to Gods purpose of Election, Romans 8. 28. for
then they could not have fallen away, All should have wrought for good to them.
So that hence it follows that every elect unbeliever shall come to and
continue in the Faith, and whosoever does not so is manifested not to have been
elected of God.

2 That justification or remission of sins, may be considered in a threefold
respect. 1 As it is in God, 2 As it is delivered over by God, into the hands of
Christ our Mediator. 3 As it is by Christ brought home unto and given into the
bosom and possession of any man. As it is in God, I shall pretermit to speak
much of it any where, but any thing at all, until Mr B. directly and expr^sly
calls me to it, least the man should be tormented before his time. For he hates
the very naming and thought thereof as an Act Immanent in God, cane pejus and
angui, and is ready Jew* like to rend his clothes, and fling dust in the air,
at any mention thereof, as an article that stands in enmity to his
justification by works. 2 Then as it is delivered into the hands of Christ, we
may speak of it without such terrible offense to his patience, or setting him
into so direful a commotion; conditionally that we will undertake for Christ
that he shall be ruled by Mr. B. to do what he appoints with it, that is, to
keep it in his pocket and deliver it to no man, but hold all under the Curse of
the Law until the day of judgment, we cannot adventure upon such an
undertaking, nevertheles shall hold forth the truth of God in this case. This
is, that Christ by offering himself a Sacrifice for sin, and presenting the
Sacrifice of himself unto God in the most Holy place, i. e. in heaven at his
Mercy-seat, has thereby effectually purchased everlasting redemption, and
remission of sins, and has received a full absolution and acquittance from the
father for all his elect by name. So that in Christ they are justified from all
sin, and freed from the Law as a Covenant of works even while they are
unbelievers, have this freedom (I mean) in the hand of Christ though not in
their own apprehension and possession. Though as to themselves and their own
judgments, and as to the apprehension of men, they are under the Law, under
wrath, yet in Christ they have done their Law, their iniquities past present
and to come are blotted out, their peace made, and they reconciled to God. This
is observably set forth in Aaron [and the other High Priests his successors, as
they were Types of Christ] Aaron the High Priest must bear the Names of the
Children of Israel engraven upon 2 precious stones on the two shoulders of his
Ephod, before the Lord for a memorial, Exodus 28. 10, 12. yea he must bear
their names in the breastplate of judgment upon his Heart, when he goes in
unto the Holy place, [ viz. with the blood of the sacrifice for the expiating
of si^s] for a memorial before God continually. What memorial? that they were
the men for whom the sacrifice was offered; and that their sins were purged
thereby, that God should therefore have them in remembrance to preserve them
from the Curse and judgment of the Law, for so it follows, And Aaron shall
bear the judgment of the Children of Israel upon his heart continually, ver.
29, 30. These things were but figuratively done in Aaron, but really and fully
accomplished in Christ his Antitype, who being constituted our High Priest, and
having received Command from the Father not only what but for whom to offer,
even for Israel, i. e. the elect of God, (which for a great part) were not yet
in being, h^th by his own blood entered into the Holy place, with their names
engraven upon his heart, having purchased for them an everlasting Redemption.
Not into the Holy place made with hands, but into Heaven there to appear for
them by way of Mediation and Intercession, Heb. 9. 12, 24. Romans 8. 34.
Wherefore also God has given him not only an acquittance for them from all
their sins, Heb. 10. 17. but has also given and delivered up them into his
hands, as has been before proved, and Mr. B* himself confesses, yet not as he
insinuates, to plague and Curse them, and hold them during life under the
intolerable bondage of the Law; but to deal with them in a gentle
dispensation, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, in tender mercy
to draw them unto and keep them in the Faith without all Apostasy, to the end.
All which he performs to all his elect, as is evident from most of those
Scriptures which were brought for the confirmation of the former point, and
elsewhere, Gods giving them to Christ, and into his dispensation, being their
perfect transl^tion from the Covenant of the Law, into the Covenant of Grace:
And this was done before their believing. All that the Father gives me shall
come to me, first they are given, and then they shall come. Be not afraid, but
speak and hold not thy peace, for I have much people in this City, said the
Lord Jesus to Paul of the Corinthians, yet Heathen, Acts 18. 9, 10. They were
his people before, therefore must they be gathered to him by Faith. I have
other sheep which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall
hear my voice, etc. Jo: 10. 16. he means the Gentiles that were infidels yet,
nevertheless his sheep that must afterward hear his voice, because they were
his sheep, how were these termed Christ's people, Christ's sheep, while yet in
Paganism, idolatry and unbeleef, but because they were his redeemed and
justified ones? Ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, Jo: 10. 26.
What is that, but because they were not of the number of them for whose sins he
had effectually satisfied Gods justice.

3 Justification and Remission of sins may be considered also as it is brought
into their own apprehension and Conscience, that were justified by Christ, and
in Christ before. And in this sense it is oftenest taken in Scriptures, yea
always when we are said to be justified by Faith. This is done when Christ by
the manifestation and ministry of the Gospel makes known in all ages to them
for whose sins he has satisfied, the Mystery of Grace by him, and frames
their hearts with all gladness by Faith to embrace him and it through him, unto
Justification. Then are they justified in themselves, and remission of sins
sealed up by the spirit to their own Consciences, and so have the Kingdom of
God within them, consisting of Peace, Righteousness, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
Before this Christ had life for them, now they are said to have it themselves,
Jo: 20. 31. 1 Jo: 5. 12. Until now was their winter season, so that all their
life was in Christ as the Vine or Root, now is their spring, so that the life
shows it self in them as the branches blossoming with peace and joy unto all
obedience. Before life was purchased and seizure thereof taken for them by
Christ: Now they are passed from death to life, 1 Jo: 3. 14. i. e. are put into
the actual possession of it. Before though they were Lords of all (as the
Apostle in a case little different from this speaks, Gal. 4. 1, 2.) yet
differed nothing from Servants, being (in their own apprehension) under the
threats and condemnation of the Law, and so still in slavish, fears and
terrors. But now they see their freedom and take possession of it, with
boldness to cry Abba Father, and to enter into the Holiest by the blood of
Jesus, and through the veil of his flesh, with full assurance of hope, etc.
Hebrews 10. 19, 20.

These things so premissed, we shall the better see whether the Scriptures
which Mr. Baxter here produces, do by their own force, or else by his
mis-interpretation of them seem to prove that the Elect while unbeleevers, are
under the Law as a Covenant of works. First that of Joh. 3. 18. is a threat of
the Gospel Covenant against the Contemners of it and of Christ the preacher
thereof, and not of the Law Covenant. And it is brandished against reprobats
and not against elect unbeleevers. Christ had now preached his Gospel a while
in Galilee; the elect believed, and of them says Christ they are not
condemned. The reprobates would not believe; of them he says, they are
condemned already: and the reason is rendered, not because they have broken the
moral Law, but because they have not believed in the Name of the only
begotten Son of God. This is the condemnation that [Christ the] light is come
into the world, and men preferred their own darkness before him, etc. The same
also is the meaning of the 36 ver. which he cites. Neither of these pointing
in their threat to the elect but the reprobates among unbeleevers. Neither
threatening for Contumacy against the Law but the Gospel. Therefore nothing
here proves the elect before they believe to be under the Law, as a Covenant
of works.

Again those Scriptures which he says bid us to believe for the remission of
sins, Act. 2. 38, etc. do only prove that faith in Christ does justify the
elect in the third consideration of Justification or remission of sins before
mentioned, viz. as it evidenceth and brings home into their apprehension and
Conscience that their sins are remitted. For so run the words, in that 10 of
Act. v. 47. that Whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins;
not denying that Christ had received it for them before, but affirming only
that now they should receive it from Christ. Besides, this promise is held
forth there promiscuously to all both elect and reprobate, and it is but an
offer not the gift of pardon, to distinguish betwixt them for whom Christ had
and those for whom he had not effectually satisfied and received absolution
from the Father, by the ones believing and receiving by faith from the hand of
Christ, the pardon, and the others refusal and manifesting thereby their abode
under death and the Law still. The surety had paid the penalty of the
obligation, taken up the bonds, and acquittance or discharge of the debt.
Thenceforth the Creditor had no more plea against either principal or surety.
Nevertheles the principal knew it not, therefore plays least in sight, is in
continual fear of arrests, thinks every bush has a Sergeant or Bailiff under
it; but at length the surety gives and delivers into his hand both the
acquittance, and the obligation Cancelled. Now is his first receiving of a
discharge, now he first finds himself free from his Creditors obligation, now
has he the first comfort of the benefit; but he was discharged before, though
he knew it not; so is it with the elect, etc. Therefore Mr. Baxters inference
hence is unsound.

He adds the Testimony of Paul, Ephesians. 2. 3. That the redeemed were by nature
the Children of wrath: who denies it? But this is nothing to the question. It
is not here enquired whether the redeemed drew not the seeds of sin and death
by natural propagation from their parents, as much as others: But whether by
the satisfaction which Christ made for them, according to the Covenant of
grace, they were not redeemed from that wrath before they yet believed. It is
true what Mephibosheth said of himself and his brethren, to David, We were all
as dead men before my Lord the King, etc. 2 Samuel 19. 28. because they were the
progeny of Saul that fought against David. Nevertheles by means of the Covenant
that intervened between David and Jonathan, Mephibosheth had right to all the
favor that King David could express.

As for those testimonies cited by way of Thesis and Antithesis, out of Gal. 5.
ver. 3, 4. and ver. 18, 23. they make wholly against him, nothing for him. The
3 and 4 verses, speak nothing to the question in hand, but utterly destroy that
to which in this whole dispute he drives, nothing to the question in hand. The
circumcised are bound or debtors to the whole Law, and Christ is become of none
effect to them. He was to have proved that believers, were before they believed
under the Law. This Text speaks not of the elect before they believed, but of
professed believers returning to Circumcision and the Law, to fetch thence help
unto their justification after that they seemingly at least believed in Christ:
so here is nothing that makes for him, because nothing to the present question.
But much against him in reference to the grand thing which he labors for, to
bring believers under the Law as a Covenant of works. Whosoever does so says
the Apostle in the least mite, that contents not himself with Christ alone,
takes in but so poor a piece of the Law as Circumcision to help with Christ to
Justification, the same person hereby forfeiteth all his claim to Grace and
Christ, and must gain heaven by his perfect fullfilling of the Law, or must be
damned in hell for ever. Into this state Mr. Baxter striveth to bring himself
and his disciples. I shall not wish them joy in it, because I use not to wish
impossibilities. Touching the verses which he puts in opposition to these, ver.
18, 23. But if ye be led by the Spirit ye are not under the Law, against such
there is no law. If he mean simply and sincerely what the Apostle here means
by being led by the Spirit, viz. the seeking of righteousness by Christ alone,
as the same Apostle more fully expresses himself, Gal. 3. 3. Phil. 3. 3. Then
by granting that such are not under the Law, there is no law against them; he
destroys and recanteth all that he has before spoken to prove believers
under the Law. But if by being led by the Spirit, his aim be to bring in works
to justification under the name of the fruits of the Spirit, we shall here
forbear to answer him, because it is besides the present question, leaving it
to its fit place where he openly explaineth himself.

And no less abhorrent from the question is his next proof, Gal. 3. 22. The
Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus
Christ may be given to them that believe. What is this to the purpose in hand?
we deny not the promise of, or the promised Justification and remission of
sins, by faith in Jesus Christ to be given to them that believe, into their
hands and possession when they believe, by affirming that Christ has taken
possession thereof for them before they believe, that he may let it down into
their hearts when they believe. He ascended up on high, and led captivity
captive, and gave gifts to men. Ephesians. 4. 8. The Apostle fetches his authority
from the word in Psalm. 68. 18. where it is said, He received gifts for men,
viz. to give them in his time. But the Apostle contents himself with the scope
of the word, not binding himself to the bare letter and sound thereof. So
Christ at his ascension received for us the gifts of Justification, and
remission, and all other benefits of his passion; They were then laid up for us
in his Custody, so that we had them in him before our actual existence upon
earth. But he gives them to us into our sensible possession, when we come to
be, to live and to believe.

That which he cites from Gal. 4, 5. is altogether besides the question also.
Himself acknowledges that it proves us only to be under the Law when Christ
redeemed us, or undertook to pay our ransom. Not that we were under the Law
after he had redeemed us by paying our ransom, before we yet believed. The
words are these in the 4 and 5 verses; God sent forth his Son made of a woman,
made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law. The scope of the
Apostle here, is one and the same with that to which he drives, Gal. 2. 15, 16.
We who are Jews by nature, [a holy seed, within the Covenant, and have all the
privileges of the Law] and not sinners of the Gentiles [that are without the
Covenant and the Law] knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ; even we have believed that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law, for by the
works of the law no flesh is justified. Why then do we draw the poor Gentiles
to seek any furtherance to their justification, by the observation of the Law,
by which our selves who were most privileged with it could not be justified but
by Christ only without the law? So here, Even they that had the law and were
not a little zealous for and active in the righteousness of the law, had need
of a redeemer, were justified and saved not at all by the laws righteousness,
but only by Christ's redeeming of them: What madness is it then in you O foolish
Galathians, that are not of the holy stock of Israel, but sinners of the
Gentiles to seek any help to your justification by the works of the law, which
could not justify the very Israelites that were born and brought up in it: and
not to repose your selves upon Christ alone? If Mr. Baxter will pretend any
other meaning of the Text besides, he shall therein wound and not strengthen
his Cause. For he speaks of the same persons here, to be under the law only in
the hand of a Mediator, not under the Curse of the law, but under such an
administration thereof, that even before they actually believed in Christ, the
very person of Christ, are affirmed ver. 1. to be Lords of all, all the
inheritance which is by Christ; ergo not under the wrath of God before they
embraced the Faith of Christ.

As for the other Scriptures which he annexeth yet further to prove, that the
very elect before and until they believe, are under the Law in the sense so
often manifested; let him once show how he will argue, and what he will conclude,
and upon what grounds, from them; we shall be ready to answer him. In the
interim I profess I see not any thing in them more prevalent to his purpose,
than a nights lodging in a bed of snow and ice, to cure the Cough.

Yet from all these wrested Scriptures he Concludes at last that the
deliverance which believers have by Christ from the Curse of the Law, is a
conditional deliverance, viz. if they will obey the Gospel, i. e. when they
believe, if they will believe, not only while they live, but also when they
are dead and buried. For as we say that a conditional proposition does nihil
ponere, so it is true in the sense of Mr Bax. here, that this conditional
promise does nihil promittere. The Condition as long as this world lasts
being still in performing not performed, and so nothing obtained. Yet will he
have this new nothing together with the abrogation of the ceremonial Law, (to
which we never were, none but the Israelites ever have been subject) to be the
great privilege of believers and effect of Christ's blood. When we poor souls
with our dull eyes, can see no more privilege that we have herein by Christ's
blood, than the worst of infidells and reprobates have, for they also ^ave this
conditional deliverance from the curse, and freedom from the ceremonial law.
And this deliverance (says he) is yet more full, when we perform the
conditions of our freedom; And then we are said to dead to the Law, Romans 7. 4.
and the obligation to punishment dead, as to us, ver. 6. This is indeed a full
and perfect deliverance. But what does he mean in saying when we perform etc.
either when we are performing the conditions, That were a contradiction to
himself in what he says p. 74. that we are not perfectly freed till the day of
resurrection and judgment. And so also it will be hard for another save Mr.
Br. to make sense of the words. That the deliverance of believers is yet more
full when they perform the Conditions, are performing the conditions of their
freedom; i. e. more full when they believe than when they do believe. For if we
should grant to Mr. Br, Faith to be a condition, and not rather a mean or
instrument of our justification, yet would we grant him no other condition
thereof. Or does he mean, it is full when they have performed the Conditions?
it seems then that some of the Conditions are left to be performed in the next
world, because until then he tells us we can have no such perfect freedom.

This is the free Grace of God which Mr. Br boasts himself so much to extol,
p. 79. let him that delights in it, be his disciple. That which he speaks in
the upshott for the mitigation of his harsh doctrine aforegoing; (that he
knows this Covenant of works continues not to the same ends and uses as
before, etc.) is but a trick of the Jesuits, to give sugar after the poison
which was before gone down to destroy. Neither can he make out how believers
are under the law of nature as a Covenant of works, and yet not bound to seek
life according to the tenor and condition of that Covenant.

If any marvel that Mr. Baxter should so waste his spirits in abusing both
divine and humane learning to prove the Saints to be still under the Curse,
under the law as a Covenant of works, he will cease to wonder, if he take
notice of a further aim that he has therein. He would not out of doubt have so
much insisted on it, had he not looked to a further end in it. If the believers
are still under a Covenant of works, as to the Curse, wrath, and Condemnation,
much more are they under a Covenant of works as unto life and Justification. If
the former be once granted, he accounts the game wonn as to the latter.
Therefore does he so much stir in the former, that he may with the more
facility and less contradiction, bring in afterward the latter, Justification
by works, which is his very business in Compiling this book.

CHAP. XI.
Whether as the Covenant of Works was made with all mankind in Adam their
representative, so the Covenant of Grace was made with all the elect in Christ
their Representer? What relation the Covenants made with Adam, Abraham, the
Israelites, and lastly with us under the Gospel have to that Covenant made with
Christ.

B. Thesis 14. p. 89. THe Tenor of the New Covenant is this, that Christ having
made sufficient satisfaction to the Law, whosoever will repent and believe in
him to the end, shall be justified through that satisfaction from all that the
Law did charge upon them, and be moreover advanced to far greater privileges
and glory then they fell from: But whosoever fullfilleth not these conditions,
shall have no more benefit, by the blood of Christ, than what they here
received and abused, but must answer the charge of the Law themselves; And for
their neglect of Christ, must also suffer a far greater condemnation. Or
bri^fly, whosoever believes in Christ, shall not perish but have everlasting
life; but he that believes not shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him, Mar. 16. 16. Jo. 3. 15, 16, 17, 18. 36. and 5. 24. and 6. 35,
40. 47. and 7 38. and 11. 25, 26. and 12. 46. Act. 10. 43. Romans 3. 26. and 4.
5. and 5. 1 and 10. 4, 10. 1 Jo. 5. 15. Mar. 1. 15. and 6. 12. Luke 13. 3. 5.
and 24. 47. Act. 5. 31. and 11. 18. and 20. 21. and 2. 38. and 3. 19. and 8.
22. and 26. 20. Rev. 2. 5, 16. Heb. 6. 1. 2 Pet. 3. 9.

Mr. Br having (as he thinks) laid prostrate the whole generation of Christ,
and antipapisticall believers under the Curse, under the wrath of God, sticks
as close to them, as the vulture to the carkas, or the beetle to the doung, or
the flesh-fly to the sore. For here again he concludes that the very Tenor of
the New Covenant is that notwithstanding Christ's sufficient satisfaction made
to the law, they must remain unjustified, unpardoned, under sin, under
vengeance to the end, and then possibly after many hundreds and it may be
thousands of years wherein their bodies have laid under rottennes, and their
souls under all hell torments which the law can inflict, they shall be
justified. And this (very probably) shall be about that time when Origens
reprobates and devils shall arise from hell and fly away thence all at once
and together to heaven. For whosoever is not justified and pardoned here in
this life, shall surely not attain it until that St Nevers day of Origin. But
to this it has been answered already. He seems now to bring some new thing,
and that which every believing soul gaspeth to hear made out in its fullnes
viz. What the Tenor of the New Covenant is. viz. That whosoeve will repent and
believe to the end, shall be justified after the end.

When the Serpent has got his head into the hole the body also, by little and
little follows. Erewhile it was, he that believes to the end, now it is, he
that repents to the end, and believes to the end, that shall be after all
ends and worlds justified. Yet this is but the head and neck of the Serpent.
The bulk and belly are behind, and the same full of all the qualifications and
good works that Mr. Br can devise, or all the herds of Monks and Jesuits have
devised to his hands. These all must be according to Mr. Baxters Gospel, as
effectual as faith, or Christ himself to Justification. I should but
preoccupate a dispute here to examine whether repentance be one of the many
thousand conditions of Justification which Mr. Br in the sequel of this
Treatise holds necessary to Justification. I shall therefore leave the handling
thereof to its due place. Only by the way, if by repentance Mr. Br here
means any thing heterogeneous, or specifically distinct from faith, I affirm
and shall in its place make good, that this his assertion is totally Popish,
against the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles.

As for the Scriptures which he does here roll out in a Crowd without rank or
file to prove it; partly because he neither alleges the words, nor shows how
he would argue from them, partly because his shuffling them together in
Clusters, tends only to make the labor of his answerer almost intolerable, to
show particularly how little each Scripture makes for him, and how much many of
them against him; partly because he does still reserve to himself, [whatsoever
be said in answer] an advantage to evade, by telling us that the force of that
Scripture does in another way, and not in that to which we have answered, prove
for him; but principally because he quotes the same Scriptures over and over
again in another place more proper, where it shall be more pertinent to answer
them, I shall therefore here forbear to speak to them, lest I should there be
forced to omit it, or to say over again what had been here said before: Nay
himself will not have them to be answered here, for he speaks so ambiguously,
that he will not have his meaning understood, telling us only that upon these
Conditions (forsooth) performed, we shall be justified in another world, but
does not let us know from him whether upon performance of them we may be
justified in the present world. But he passes to the explication.

Explication.
Bax. Christ's satisfaction to the Law, goes before the New Covenant though not
in regard of its payment, (which was in the fullnes of time) yet in regard of
the undertaking, acceptance and efficacy. There could be no treating on new
terms till the old obligation was satisfied and suspended.

I account them not worth the confuting, who tell us that Christ is the only
party conditioned with, and that the New Covenant as to us, has no conditions.
(so Saltmarsh etc.) The place that they allege for this assertion is that Jer.
31. 31, 32, 33. cited in Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10. Which place contains not the full
tenor of the whole New Covenant, but either it is called the New Covenant,
because it expresses the nature of the benefits of the New Covenant, as they
are offered on Gods part, without mentioning man's conditions. (that being not
pertinent to the business the Prophet had in hand) Or else it speaks only what
the Lord will do with his elect, in giving them the first Grace, and enabling
them to perform the Conditions of the New Covenant; and in that sense may be
called a New Covenant also; as I have showed before p. 7, 8. though properly it
be a prediction, and belong only to Gods will of purpose and not to his
legislative will.

But those men erroneously think that nothing is a condition, but what is to be
performed by our awn strength. But if they will believe Scripture, the places
before alleged will prove, that the New Covenant has Conditions on our part
as well as the old.

Some benefit from Christ did the condemned here receive as the delay of their
condemnation, and many mere mercies, though they turned them all into greater
judgments, but of this more when we treat of general redemption.

I shall here propound some questions to Mr. Baxter, about his own words to be
answered by some of his Chaplains or Disciples, For I am not so ambitious as to
expect his stooping in person to so low an office. 1 Whether Christ's
satisfaction to the law were undertaken and so virtually made, without an
agreement between the Father and the Son, that the Son should give, and the
Father accept such satisfaction? Mr. Br so great a Master of reason, who has
sacrificed all his religion to reason, can judge whether this could rationally
(if possibly) be done. 2 If by agreement whether this agreement was not by way
of Covenant between the Father and the Son? and so whether the whole business of
man's justification were not transacted and concluded upon, first between the
Father and the Son? 3 Whether Christ undertook to give satisfaction or the
Father to accept it for any other besides those that in time have or shall have
the full benefit thereof? I mean, besides the elect, whom the Son must
perfectly know because he was in the bosom of the Father, and was thoroughly
acquainted with all his bosom secrets? 4 Whether any one can miss of the
benefit of this satisfaction, when it is once so given and accepted for him by
name? 5 Why Mr. Br speaking of the payment of this satisfaction, does plainly
mention the time when it was made, namely, the fullnes of time: in the very
same breath speaking of the undertaking, acceptance, and efficacy thereof, does
not also name the time when that was Covenanted and Concluded upon? Did he not
see that it was needful to the Completing of this member of the sentence, in
a full equipage with the former, to name the time of this as well as of that?
Was it a bear or an evil Conscience in the way that put him to such an
Aposiopesis? that shook him into a dumbnes, when truth, honesty and plain
dealing bad him speak out? Whether he had said before all time, or shortly upon
the beginning of time, he saw he should have given a deathly wound, either to
his Cause, or to his Credit, or to both; therefore like a cunning sophister,
stops his breath, and speaks nothing. 6 And if the Covenant of grace, in all
and every of its Articles were thus agreed upon between the Father aad the Son,
either before the actual existence of any man in the world, or as Mr. Br here
Confesses, before Adam and Eve the sole persons then existent upon earth were
treated with about it, how then does he add, that he accounts him not worth the
Confuting, which tell us, that Christ was the only party conditioned with, and
that the New Covenant, as to us, has no Conditions (so Saltmarsh etc.) thus
Casting an Odium upon this opinion, as if Mr. Saltmarsh and his Disciples alone
held it, and that never any before him thought of it?

For my own part, where the Scriptures are silent, I am in great dread to be
loquent; and where the word speaks sparingly and darkly, I dare not to
conclude too peremptorily. Neither in points that are controvertible in
religion, but which way soever d^cided, do not Confer much to, or detract from
the Basis and foundation of our salvation, would I prosecute either vehement or
endless disputes. Every least truth in Divinity is precious indeed, therefore
not to be betrayed, but to be preserved more carefully than our life and blood.
Yet our life and blood ought not to be so deer to us as the Peace of the
Churches of Christ. And the disturbing of the Churches peace may sometimes more
obscure the honor of the Gospel, than the suspending of the defense of some
not very important truths, for a while, could have done. I should not therefore
quarrel against them that ascribe to the New Covenant its Condition, and make
faith alone as it instrumentally receives Christ, the only Condition of our
being justified to and in our selves. I see not so great eclipse upon the
glory of Gods Grace or Christ's merits caused by such an assertion, that we
should disturb the peace of the Churches about it, were it not that the Papists
and Arminians by this unscripturall phrase do seek totally to corrupt the
doctrine of justification.

Nevertheles Mr. Baxters contumelious words shall not affright me from
delivering my judgment what I think most probable, and most agreeing with holy
Scripture touching the point in hand. Yet laying it down not as absolute and
certain, but as that which is yet most probable to me until I shall by further
enquiry into the Scriptures, or by the help of others, that have more enquired,
see Cause to judge otherwise. As for Mr. Baxter, though in humane literature,
and in things subject to the trial of reason, I hold his judgment not
Contemptible, but equal with the most, yea the best; yet in Gospel and
spiritual things, I find him so stupefied, perverted, and wholly spoiled with
Philosophy, seeing so little of the mystery of Christ, yea so prejudiced
against the sacred things which he knows not, that I account him one of those
whom the Apostle describes 1 Timothy 1. 17. Desiring to be teachers of the Law,
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. And therefore am
so little affrighted from any doctrine of this kind by his abasing thereof,
that I am the more induced to search into it if it be not a pearl indeed,
because he has trampled it. I shall then express what I think in these
following positions.

First as God has made two great and general Covenants with mankind, each of
them comprizing other and lesser Covenants under it: So because there were not
existent personally (at the time of making these covenants) the singular
individuals of mankind to whom these Covenants belonged, therefore did he
appoint 2 public persons, each of which then existing when either Covenant was
made, to be (as it were) represe^tatives of all the singular persons, that then
did or after should exist to be under either Covenant, with whom when the
Covenants were concluded, they should be in perfect force for or against all
that were represented in their several ages, as though they had been but then
made particularly with them in their own persons. The one of these Covenants is
usually termed the Covenant of works, the other the Covenant of grace. The
public or common person Covenanted with in the one was the first Adam, in the
other the second Adam Christ Jesus. The case is clear in respect of the first
Adam, and the Covenant of works. Mr. Br himself grants every inch of it. That
whatsoever law or positive Commands were given to Adam, whatsoever promises in
cases of performance, or threats in case of breach, were added, all pertained
as full to all the future progeny of Adam, as represented in him, and enclosed
in his loins, as to Adam himself. And accordingly while Adam stood we stood in
him, when he fell we fell in him and with him, as deep under the wrath of God
as himself. I forbear to prove any of this, because it is granted on all sides.
But the question is wholly about Christ the second Adam, whether the Covenant
of grace was so made with him, as the Covenant of works with Adam? and what
that Covenant of grace was? I conceive that both there was such a Covenant
between the Father and the Son in reference to us, and that this was the tenor
thereof: viz. that the Son in time appointed should assume to himself our
nature, and in it represent the persons of the elect that were equally sinners
and condemned with others in Adam; that he should offer himself in our flesh a
sacrifice for sin; that upon his undertaking thereof the sins of all the
elect should be pardoned, and they of sinners should be made righteous, and
delivered up into his hands, no more to be accounted to Adam, but to Christ,
and to be preserved in the bosom of his grace and love to eternal glory. And
(as Mr. Br acknowledges) upon Christ's undertaking etc. The satisfaction was so
virtually and effectually made by Christ and accepted by the Father as when it
was actually accomplished. First it seems there was such a Covenant; For the
Apostle tells us, Romans 5. 14. that Adam was a figure of him that was to come,
which is Christ. And how a figure? Doubtless not only in this that as by him
the one and first man, sin and death by sin immediately came upon all men: so
by Christ, righteousness, and by it life came upon all the elect: But also in
the manner of the agreement of the Type and Antitype together. That as Adam
representing all mankind, by his unfaithfullnes in breaking the Covenant
brought sin and death upon all that he represented: so Christ representing all
the elect, by his faithfullnes in performing the Covenant etc. brought
righteousness and justification of life upon all the elect represented in him.
Yea the Holy Ghost in express words testifies to such a Covenant. In the
volume of thy book it is written of me that I should do thy will O God, says
he when he comes into the world, i. e. it is testified in the word what
Covenant has passed betwixt thee and me etc. Heb. 10. 5-10. yea and testifies
to the tenor of the Covenant, his coming with a body to be offered in
sacrifice: this will of God he came to do. And moreover he gives witness also
to the faithfullnes of Christ in offering it, Lo I come; and to the efficacy of
it upon all immediately for whom it was offered; By the which will we are
sanctified, i. e. no more taken for sinners, but Consecrated as holy to the
Lord through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, ibid. The
same is employed in that phrase which here terms the offering of Christ's body
the doing of the Fathers will. And elsewhere obedience unto death even the death
of the Cross, Phil. 2. 8. Obedience and will presuppose Command and Covenant.
And the (...), the one righteousness or one act of righteousness of Christ,
opposed to the (...), that one offense of Adam, (for so the phrase seems to me
to hold out more grammatically, than the offense of one and the righteousness of
one:) does not obscurely argue that one righteousness of Christ in fullfilling,
opposite to that one offense of Adam in once breaking the Covenant, Romans 5. 18.
And that all this was covenanted to be done and accepted for and in the behalf
of the elect, and to them and none but them to be effectuallized, is also
evident from the Scriptures. For he did the will of his Father in offering
himself as was before showed; i. e. did according as it was agreed and
covenanted between him and the Father, dyed for them only for whom he made
prayers and intercessions. But when his time was come to suffer he prayed and
interced^d not for the world, but for them only whom the Father had given him
out of the world, Joh. 17. 6, 9. Therefore for them only he undertook to
satisfy. Therefore is it that he is said to lay down his life [onely] for his
sheep, not for the goats, Joh. 10. 11. 15. For them whose names were written in
the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.
8. The rest things contained in this position are granted by Mr. Br himself,
therefore need no proof here. I have couched together many things in this, to
avoid multiplicity of positions.

2 That by force of this satisfaction so given and accepted for the sins of
the Elect, according to the Tenor of this Covenant between the Father and the
Son, all the Elect of God were Justified in Christ from the very time of
Christ's undertaking to be their Justifier. Therefore in the last alleged
Scripture their names are said to be written in the book of life of the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world. Here though the book of life which is
elsewhere mentioned to be Gods book will be taken by Mr. Br to be the book of
Election, yet this book of life of the lamb is to be understood for the book of
Justification, implying indeed the election of all that are written therein,
but primarily and in its direct sense comprehending the names of them that are
justified by the blood of the sacrificed Lamb of God. And these are said to be
written in Christ's book, that is registered in Christ, and upon Christ's account
from the foundation of the world, immediately upon Christ's undertaking to
satisfy for them. Of him ye are in Christ, says the Apostle, who of God is
made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.
30. When was he so made unto us? Mr. Br answers, not only upon the payment
but upon his undertaking to pay our debt. Therefore is he said to be Jesus
Christ yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. And that not only in
reference to them that lived in all ages of the world, but in respect of us
also, that in all ages of the world he has been, and will be what now he is
our Jesus our Christ. But this position has been before proved in the former
Chapter, in answer to Mr. Baxters 13 Thesis and its explication, where I spoke
to his sixth Argument.

3 The Ministerial way of offering and convaying the benefits of Christ's
satisfaction into the souls and apprehensions of men, now used under the
Gospel, according to the command of Christ, is or at least sounds like an
inferior Covenant, subordinate and sub-servient to this between the Father and
the Son, whereof we have spoken. Christ having now made full satisfaction to
the Father, invites all, and brings in his elect, to taste and enjoy by faith
all the perfections which he has merited and received into his hands for them.
It is confessed by Mr. B. These. 8. That God is so fully pleased with the Sons
undertaking of this business of Mediation, that he has delivered all things
into his hands, and given him all power in heaven and in earth, and made him
Lord both of the dead and living. And the Lord Jesus himself affirms, that
the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, i. e.
the dispensation and ordering of all things in heaven and in earth. And it is
the opinion of great Divines, that the Lord Christ in the old world before the
Law, and in all ages under the Law, being that person of the Trinity, which had
undertaken to assume our nature unto him, and in it to dye for the reconciling
of us to God, and entering from the beginning upon his power, to set in order
all things to this glorious end; was he that conversed with the Patriarks and
Prophets, sometimes in an assumed body like a man, sometimes invisibly, making
known the mystery of Redemption by himself to them, and prescribing under what
administrations he would have his Church governed until his coming. That it
was he who first preached to Adam salvation by the seed of the Woman, and
afterward more clearly to Abraham. That it was he also which delivered the Law
upon Mount Sinai, and added there a second Covenant, in show and sound a mere
Covenant of works, ( Do and be Blessed, Sin and be Cursed) which Covenant alone
is expressly called the Old Covenant, and is indeed now repealed, and abolished
from being any more a Covenant, saving to them that put themselves under it.
This was but a temporary Covenant, an Appendix to the Covenant before made with
Abraham; and both this and that with Abraham were but subordinate Covenants to
that before mentioned between God and Christ. Here now all that were justified
before Christ's coming in the flesh, were justified in Christ by force of the
first Covenant made between the Father and the Son. The promise to Adam, and
the Covenants made with Abraham, and with the Israelites, together with all the
Sacraments and signs annexed to all these, tended only to bring them that
were justified before in Christ to a real and sensible participation of it and
the comforts thereof, by Faith within their own consciences: So is it now under
the Gospel administration, That first Covenant is that by which our
justification is completely finished in Christ; the preaching of Faith in a
Covenant way, tends only to this, that as many as were before justified in
Christ, may by Faith have their Justification declared and evidenced to their
consciences, to fill them with joy unspeakable and full of glory, and with that
peace which passes all understanding. Not but that Christ could without any
such Sub-Covenanting have filled up his elect with all the marrow and mystery
of Justification, by immediate Revelation from himself, as he dealt with Paul
the Apostle: but that this way made most for his and his Fathers glory, both in
them that are saved and in them that perish.

4 Faith it self, (much less any other qualification, gift or act) is not a
condition of Justification in foro Dei, there Christ has pleaded our discharge
by his blood, and still makes intercession for us, but a means or instrument
by which we receive Christ Jesus, and the righteousness or justification that is
in him to our selves for consolation and salvation, in foro conscientiae, so
stood the case in respect of the forementioned under Covenant that of the Law.
When the Lord Christ had published his Law upon Mount Sinai, and given to
Israel by Moses all his Judgments and Statutes, there now passes a solemn
Covenant betwixt Christ and them, the people also every one in person assenting
gladly; to fulfill all that they might be blessed, or if in the least point
they should fail, to yield themselves cursed. This Covenant was made more
visibly and in every part more strictly after the nature and rule of Covenants,
then this under the Gospel. Yet will any say that this perfect obedience so
Covenanted, was a condition of their justification and salvation, without which
none could be justified or saved: Then were all damned, for no one either did
or could perfectly obey. Nay it was added because of transgressions, says the
Apostle, Gal. 3. 19. i. e. as a means so to operate about sin in the discovery
of it, and the damnation that is by it, so also to convince men that they might
be driven from all supposition of their own righteousness, and seek righteousness
by Christ alone, in whom alone the elect were justified before this Covenant
was made. In the same manner the holding forth of justification now under the
Gospel, in the form and likeness of a Covenant; Believe and be saved, believe
not and perish for ever: proves not Faith to be the condition of the New
Covenant, (as has been said) even the whole preaching of salvation by Christ,
and injoyning of Faith upon all to receive it, is an effect of that First great
Covenant of Grace between the Father and the Son, and a part of Christ's
Prophetical Office which he undertook in that Covenant to accomplish, in
undertaking the Mediatorship between God and Men. An effect of that first
Covenant I say. For so it was agreed that All which the Father had given to
Christ, by him to be justified and saved, should come to him, i. e. believe in
him, Jo: 6. 37. To this purpose it was Covenanted on the Sons part, to seek and
to save that which was lost, Luke 19. 10. to call unto him all to participate
by Faith of the life, light, righteousness and salvation that he had received
for them, Isa. 55. 1. Io: 7. 37. Ma. 11. 28. This was a part of his
Prophetical Office, to discover the treasures of Grace in his heart, and to
envite all to the participation thereof. And then on the Fathers part it was
Covenanted that he would draw to Christ all the Elect, all that he had given to
Christ, that while the Gospel sounded in their ears, he would divinely by his
Spirit teach and move their hearts, that they shall not but come to Christ, Jo:
6. 43, 44. And lastly it is agreed on the Sons part again, that of all that the
Father thus brings to him, he must cast out none, lose none, but raise them
all at the last day [to glorification] and the reason of all is annexed, It is
the Fathers will, i. e. that which was Covenanted between the Father and him in
Heaven, and he came down from Heaven, not to do his own will, i. e. any thing
of his private will, without the consent of his Father, but the will of him
that sent him, i. e. what was Covenanted between the Father and him, and
concurrent with the will of both, Jo: 6. 37, 38, 39. Thus all that which Mr B.
calls the Covenant of Grace, is but an effect or an Article and branch of the
Covenant made of old between God and Christ. And Faith not so properly termed a
condition of justification, as an instrument to apprehend the present comfort
of it, being before ours in Christ.

5 That this Covenant of Grace is absolute, shall be the work of the next
Chapter to evince.

CHAP. XII.
That Text of Jer: 31. 31, 32, 33, etc. opened, and Mr. Baxters elusions by
which he would evince that it proves not a free and unconditionall Covenant
answered: with some other Argumentations with Mr. Baxter about the same
Question.

I Now come to that Testimony of Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33. cited in Heb. 8. 8-10.
against which Mr. B. so much excepteth. That New Covenant there mentioned is
called the New Covenant, not in opposition to the Old Covenant made in the
beginning with Adam, but in opposition to that Covenant made two thousand and
six hundred years after at least, with Israel upon Mount Sinai. And that
Covenant upon Mount Sinai is called the Old Covenant, not in opposition to the
Cov: of Grace made [if not from eternity according to Mr. B. yet] by Mr B.
acknowledgment almost 3000 years before, and in those thousands of years often
held out afresh and renewed: but in opposition to the Covenant of Grace as it
is now held forth in a new form and administration under the Gospel. So that
the two Covenants there mentioned, are termed Old and New, not for their
differing in substance, but for their different ways of administration. The
Church of Israel then, and the Churches of Christ now, are and were under the
same Covenant of Grace in substance; but the Church then under a legal and the
Church now under an Evangelicall and spiritual administration thereof. That
was the old, this the new administration, and in respect hereof the same
Covenant then and now, are termed the Old and New Covenant. This is evident
from the Text, It shall come to pass (says the Lord) that in those days I
will make a New Covenant with [them] not such as I made with their Fathers when
I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which my
Covenant they brake, though I were an Husband to them, says the Lord. But this
is the Covenant that I will make with [them] in those days, I will put my
Laws in their minds, etc. And I will be their God, etc. And they shall not
teach every man his neighbor, etc. For I will be merciful to their
unrighteousnes, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.
Here Mr. B. must

1 Grant that the Old Covenant in this place mentioned, was the Covenant of the
Law given in the Wilderness. For this is expressly affirmed where it is said to
be made with their Fathers when the Lord took them by the hand to bring them
out of the Land of Egypt.

And 2 Notwithstanding Israel being under the Covenant, they were not either
wholly under a Covenant of works, or besides the Covenant of Grace. For the
Apostle makes these two phrases, to be Aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, and Strangers from the Covenant of Promise, to sound one and the same
thing, Ephesians. 2. 12. and tells us that the Law which was 430 years after,
could not null the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, so as
to make the Promise of no effect: but that after the addition of this Legal
Covenant, that Gospel Covenant made with Abraham, and them i^ him, of
blessedness by Christ the seed of Abraham, stood firm unto them still, Gal. 3.
17. This also will doubtless be granted.

3 That therefore the Gospel Covenant in this Scripture promised, is called a
New Covenant, not in opposition to that made with Abraham, for that is the same
with this here promised, only that was confirmed of God in Christ to come,
this in Christ already come; and yet in opposition to that legal
administration of it, and additory Covenant of the Law 430 years after annexed.

4 That this additionall Covenant was that Pedagogy of the Law under which the
Apostle affirms the Jews (though Lords of all) to be kept until the coming
of Christ, in the third and fourth chapters to the Galathians. And it consisted
partly of Ceremonial Laws and typical Ordinances pointing to Christ that was
to come, and obscurely teaching Christ and Faith in him: partly of the Moral
Commandments, the observation whereof was injoined as a condition of attaining
that blessedness before promised to Abraham in Christ, yet so as this condition,
If ye will obey, was still in the hand of a Mediator, satisfying for
disobedience, because no perfect obedience could be fulfilled. This Pedagogy or
leading of the Jewish Church by the hand while it was a child in the knowledge
of the mystery of salvation by Christ was needful, it could not well be
without the typical Ordinances, which by Lectures read upon them by their
teachers, might discover and seal up much of Christ to them. Neither could it
well be without the promises and threats of the Law, while yet the Grace of the
Lord Christ was veiled to them, that in the light joy and brightness thereof
they could not as the Saints now run the race of Gods Commandments of pure love
without some mixture of servile fear.

5 It will hence then follow that the New Covenant here promised is termed a
new Covenant, because exempted from that additament of the Law.

1 From the Ceremonial Law, which in its revealing of Christ veiled him, and
let out but a dark shadow of him and the grace that is by him, so that there
was need of a large exposition upon every figure, Circumcision, Passover,
Sacrifices, etc. Brother to teach Brother, and one Neighbor another what these
things meant, and yet at last both teachers and learners remained exceeding
dark in the mystery of Christ. But it is otherwise with us under the Gospel.
The shadows are vanished and we have the very body which is Christ, Col. 2.
17. Our eyes have seen, we have heard with our ears, and our hands have handled
the bread of life, 1 John: 1. 1. All is made out to us clearly by the Doctrine
and Spirit of Christ. The Law (by which the Prophet speaking in the tone of the
Jews, and in a phrase which under that administration they best knew,
understands the Gospel and Law of the Spirit of life) is written in our
hearts, revealed and sealed up to our Consciences. We need not say, Who shall
ascend up to Heaven, or who shall descend to the deep? etc. But the word is
nigh thee even in thy mouth and in thy heart, this is the word of Faith which
we preach, Romans 10. 6-8. So that there is not so much need of brothers teaching
brother, etc. because all is held forth not in the shadow but in the clear
light.

2 From the conditions of the moral Law, yea from all conditions which made
that former administration of the Covenant terrible, because conditions could
not be performed. The New Covenant says the Holy Ghost, shall be absolute, not
such as was made with their Fathers, that might be broken; but free and
absolute, all begun and ended by the mere grace of God, I will teach, etc. I
will be their God, and they shall be my people, I will be merciful to their
unrighteousnes, and their sins and iniquity will I remember no more. I am not
so happy as to express my self in few words, nor so either reckles, or evilly
subtle, as under a pretense of brevity to leave things in ambiguity for
self ends. This I conceive to be the meaning of this text, and in these five
Positions I have ( sub calculo melioris judicij) expressed what yet I conceive
to be the truth about the Covenant of Grace, 1 between God and Christ, 2
between Christ and man.

To this last thing handled, that the Covenant of Grace in its present
administration is free and not conditional, otherwise then I have before
granted, the Apostle gives purposely his suffrage, affirming the Covenant made
to Abraham is that which now stands in force, that the Law was but a temporary
additament to it, to remain only till the promised seed should come, he means
so to remain as to make the Covenant conditional. The Law therefore being in
this respect done away, the Covenant abides free and absolute. In thee, in thy
seed, all Nations shall be blessed, Gal. 3. 8, 16, 17, 18. This Covenant is
free, absolute, laden with no such conditions as might make the hope of
blessedness uncertain.

The evasions which Mr. B. uses to elude the authority of this Scripture, are
merely Sophistical, having no footing upon other Scriptures, and totally
crossing the purpose of the Holy Ghost in this Scripture. It contains not
(says he) the full tenor of the whole New Covenant. Where then shall we find
it, if not where the Holy Ghost undertaketh professedly to declare both what
this New Covenant is not, and what it is? This is the Covenant says the Holy
Ghost, Nay it is but a piece or morsel of it, says Mr. Br. whom shall we
believe? him that speaks from Heaven, or him that (at the best) speaks but
from the earth? But either so called (says Mr. Br.) because it expresses the
nature of the benefits of the New Covenant as they are offered on Gods part,
without mentioning man's conditions (that being not pertinent to the business
the Prophet had in hand.) A most impudent fiction, yea it was the whole or
chief thing he had in hand; was it not to show the difference between these two
under-covenants, that under the Law, and this under the Gospel? But how does it
serve to this purpose to express the nature of the benefits of the New
Covenant? Did not the Elect under the Law partake of the same benefits in
nature though not in measure, with the Elect now? Or is not this one of the
differences which he makes betwixt the Covenants, that the one was hedged about
with hard conditions, the other free? Or else, says he, it speaks only of
what God will do for his Elect, in giving them the first grace, and enabling
them to perform the New Covenant. Ridiculous; though right in the Monks tone.
For did not God give the first and second Grace too, to the Elect under the Law
as well as to the Elect under the Gospel? Where then is the difference hence,
to give a new name to the present Covenant? But lastly, says he, It is a
production and belongs to the will of purpose, not to his legislative will. Now
he hits the nail upon the head. He makes a very Ass of this distinction, and
loads him with all sorts of trash. It is to be doubted it will shortly get a
gawld back, and kick his Master in the legs. Predictions and Promises, because
they are not perteining to Gods legislative will, must henceforth give neither
fulture to our faith nor light to our judgments. The rest that he has upon
this Thesis has nothing of moment in it calling for an answer.

Thesis 15. B. p. 92. Though Christ has sufficiently satisfied the Law, yet is
it not his will, or the will of the Father, that any man should be justified or
saved thereby, who has not some ground in himself of personal and particular
claim thereto; Nor that any should be justified by the blood, only as shed or
offered, except it be also received and applied; so that no man by the mere
satisfaction made, is freed from the Law, or Curse of the first violated
Covenant, absolutely, but conditionally only.

I annex this Position because it is homogeneous with the many former, and
though Mr. Br. would seem in the Explication to distinguish the matter of it
from that which the former Aphorisms contained, yet is it not only of the same
kind but of the same substance also with it, and what has been said in answer
to that which went before might suffice as an answer to this also. Yet because
it delights him to speak the same things in a variation of words, let us see
whether the words which he here uses have more ^fficacy in them to his purpose
then the former.

We find here as we did in some of the former Theses, a fardle of ambiguities,
and phrases of a doubtful sense, which puts us into an uncapacity of answering
his meaning, because he so speaks that he will be sure we shall not be able
to prove what is his meaning.

First when he says, It is not the will of Christ, or will of the Father, he
leaves us unresolved whether he mean the will of purpose or the will of
precept, that if we answer to the one, he may evade by a pretense he meant the
other. If he will be understood of the former, when was he rapt up into the
third Heaven to search what secret purposes and decrees are hidden in the bosom
of the Father or of the Son? Or if he has it by revelation, why does he not
show how and when it was given him, and whether in an ordinary or extraordinary
manner? Or if he mean that will, how shall he take it up to be the rule of his
judgment, which in the very last words to which I answered, and so often
elsewhere, he abandoneth from being the rule of other men's judgments? If he mean
the latter, the will of precept, why holds he us suspended in the expectation
of alleging the precept, and arguing forth his Conclusions thence, that if
satisfactory we may submit to it, if otherwise we may except against it?

Secondly when he tells us of Justification denying any living soul to have it
only by Christ's satisfaction, without some ground in himself of particular
right and claim thereto, and except it be also received and applied, etc. he
leaves us doubtful whether he means Justification as completed in Christ,
or as evidenced also to our own consciences. If the former what will he then
conclude of perishing or dying infants, that they are all unjustified, and in
respect of the punishment of loss remedilesly damned, and so with his brethren
shut them up for ever in that dark prison which is termed by them Limbus
infantum? If the latter, and that he will give us leave to take his words in
Scripture-sense, we will not quarrel with them; but this in the Explication he
seems to explode.

Thirdly when he tells us of some grounds of claim in our selves to
Justification, which in the following words he seems to determinate to consist
in our receiving and applying thereof, and in the Explication, p. 93. he calls
somewhat of man intervening to give him a legal right to it, annexing that we
are said to be justified by Faith; in all this he mixeth together falsehood and
subtilty with his ambiguity: putting himself into that posture wherein the
Papists have painted and feigned Erasmus, hovering between Heaven and Hell,
sometimes mounting on high, sometimes sinking low again, but pitching neither
above, nor beneath. In such a motion we here find Mr. B. as he is in his
gradation further making out the Mystery of Romish iniquity for a Law, soaring
still higher toward the very top of it, and sinking lower from the Orb of
Christian verity? So by that something of man that must enright him to
Justification, he must mean something more then Repentance and Faith, which he
had before concluded necessary to Justification, These. 14. Else were he upon a
retreating not a marching posture. Nevertheles how subtlely does he d^wb and
paint to gull the simple, and catch them that are made to be taken, by putting
fine words upon his course purposes, telling them that we are justified by
Faith, and that there is required on our part but receiving and applying of
Christ's merits; as if he were as innocent as a Dove, and had none of the
Serpent in him; when contrariwise the sequel of his Tractate proclaims him,
by that which he calls here somewhat of man, to mean at the full with the worst
Papists, man's works to the total exclusion of Gods grace. In mean while his
words leave it doubtful here what this somewhat of man is, and whether it be
the hand or the heel that must receive and apply Christ to Justification? His
Disciples are not yet enough molded (he thinks) to receive the Dragons voice
in his own tone; they must be accustomed to bear the Calf daily until he
become an Ox that he may be born then too, and at length we shall find the
instruments which Mr. B. appoints to receive Christ, to be isntrumental only
to push him from us. However he concludes thus (because he will have it so)
That no man by the mere satisfaction made, is freed from the Law and Curse,
etc. absolutely, but conditionally only, i. e. not at all. And this he has
said over and over already, and there needs no further Answer then that which
has been before given: So that where he repeats this Assertion again in the
Explication, That Christ does not justify by the shedding of his blood
immediately, without somewhat of man intervening, etc. adding that All the
Scriptures alleged p. 79. do prove it. I grant what he says, for I find no
Scripture there alleged. But if he mean p. 89, and 90. what I said there I say
here again, he shall not miss of an answer to them when he comes to allege
them again in their proper place, and declares how he will argue from them. Yet
because the man is delighted to deliver first in general what he will after
deliver again in particulars, I shall say something also in general to his
general assertion, That Christ's satisfaction justifies not without something
of man intervening to give him right to it. Let us see what the Scripture says
for or against it.

The Apostle speaking of man's redemption and justification, and showing the
cause why some have, and some have not their part in it, affirms and proves,
that it is not of him that wills or of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy, Romans 9. 16. By the willing, is to be understood all the good
qualifications and operations of the soul; by running all the good works of a
man's life and practice, as all confess. When the Holy Ghost excludes every
somewhat of man within the man, and every somewhat of man without man, from
conferring any thing to Justification, what other somewhat remains of man to
intervene, etc? Let it be judged whether Mr. B. does not purposely fight
against Scripture?

Again, Romans 5. 6, 8, 9, 10. When we were yet without strength, (viz. to any
spiritual operation) Christ dyed for the ungodly, while we were yet sinners
Christ dyed for us, and we were justified by his blood: while enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Here the Result of the Apostles
reasoning discovers to us two things to our purpose. 1 That according to the
mind and language of the Holy Ghost Christ dying, and by his death satisfying
for any man's sins, and that man's justification, and reconciliation to God by
that satisfaction, are equipollent terms, holding forth one and the same thing.
For so the Apostle here uses justification and reconciliation as words of the
same sense and weight. And Amesius manifests Ames Med. Lib. 1. c. 27. Sect.
22.
in what respects they must needs be taken for the same thing, and makes both
the same with Christ's dying for him. So that every person for whom Christ has
by his death made satisfaction, is effectually justified and reconciled to God
(I mean) in Christ, though possibly not yet in his own apprehension. 2 That we
are thus justified and reconciled to God, while ungodly, while sinners, while
enemies, while without strength to that which is good. What somewhat of man can
there be in such, to enright them to justification, unless any will say, their
impotency, ungodlines, sin and enmity shall do it? Such contrariety is there
between Mr. Br and the Spirit or word of truth. There needs not much
deliberation to determine which to follow. But he proceeds,

Bax. p. 93. Let all the Antinomians show but one Scripture which speaks of
Justification from Eternity. And what if it be but one of all, or one that is
not an Antinomian that shows it, will Mr. Br harken and submit his judgment to
that Scripture so alleged? I say in like manner: Let all the Antichristian
Jesuits, or Mr. Br. or his Mr Grotius, show one Scripture which asserteth only
a conditional and not an absolute Justification purchased to us by Christ, I
will hear and submit, though I see not then how to be saved. As to his
Challenge I shall speak in a more proper place.

Bax. I know God has decreed to justify his people from eternity, and so he
has to sanctify them too, but both of them are done in time: Justification
being no more an immanent act in God, than sanctification: as I shall show
afterward. I shall therefore wait on him until he has the leisure and
pleasure to show it. In the mean while, why does he Conclude so hotly and
peremptorily beforehand that which he brings nothing save his own bare
affirmation to prove. He said not unwisely which said; Let not him that girdeth
on his armor boast as he that puts it off, 1 King. 20. 11.

Bax. The blood of Christ then is sufficient in suo genere, but not in omni
genere; sufficient for its own work, but not for every work. There are several
other necessaries to Justify and save, quibus positis, which being supposed,
the blood of Christ will be effectual. Qui non vult intelligi debet negligi.
He that will so speak that he may not be understood, is worthy to pass without
an Answer. If he mean that the blood of Christ is sufficient to complete our
justification before God, and that this is its own work; But that there are
other necessaries to justify us in our selves and our own apprehensions, which
being supposed the work is ended; I will abstein from all contradiction. If he
mean otherwise, and will not express himself. Honey soit Qui male pense.

Bax. p. 94. Not that it receives its efficacy from these, nor that these do
add any thing at all to its worth and value, no more than the cabbinett to the
jewel, or the applying hand to the Medicine, or the offenders acceptance to
the pardon of his Prince. Yet without this acceptance and application, this
blood will not be effectual to justify us. These words would seem to plead a
good meaning in Mr. Br to them that neither are acquainted with the glozings of
the Papists, nor with that which follows in this Treatise of Mr. Br. He might
be thought by this his smoothing to attribute our Justification wholly to
Christ's sufferings, and nothing to any thing in our selves, save to faith only,
nor to Faith, but as it is appointed of God to be isntrumental for the
accepting and receiving into our bosoms Christ's merits and the benefits
thereof. The like fine words we shall find often falling from the pen of
Pelagius, Papists, Arminians, etc. But both of him and them I may say what the
Lord once said of Israel; This people has well spoken in all that they have
said: O that there were in them such a heart etc. Deuteronomy. 5. 28, 29.

He proceeds and opposes to the Authority of our Apostle Paul, the authority
of his St Grotius, at the hearing of whose sophistical learning, all the
doctrine of Paul must fall broken and shivered to the earth, no less than the
Ark of God did before the great Dagon of the Philistims.

Bax. Cum unusquisque actui ex sua voluntate pendenti legempossit imponere etc.
as may be there read at large. p. 94. The sum of all is this. Because our
justification is an act proceeding from the mere and free will of God and of
Christ, it was therefore in their power, after payment made by Christ, and
accepted by the Father in our behalf, to covenant, and accomplish our
discharge, either forthwith or a long time after, either simply or upon
Conditions. Therefore it is Covenanted between the Father and the Son that we
shall be, after satisfaction made, not forthwith, but in process of time,
justified, and then also not purely or absolutely but conditionally. A mad
Argumentation. For A posse ad esse non valet Consequentia. It is as if I should
argue God could have supported Mr. Br and his Mr Grotius in the truth of the
Gospel. Ergo he has preserved them in the truth. What judicious man that has
considerately read their works, would not hiss at such an argument? But he
adds the authority of Austin.

Bax. As Austin. He that made us without us, will not save us without us. O
that Mr. Br had stood as Austin, pillar-like to bear up the Grace of God
entire in the whole business of our salvation, against all the sophisms of
Pelagius and his followers. We should in no wise have excepted, against
Augustines words in Mr. Baxters mouth uttering them in Augustines sense. We
make not men stocks and stones, nor deny the operation of their wills moved by
Gods Spirit in the way to happiness.

Yet the sentence it self alleged out of Austin, (I doubt) is perverted by Mr.
Baxter, as it has been by some before him. I have been told that in Austin it
is read intorrogatively; and bears the force of an affirmative, thus; He that
made thee without thee, will he not save thee without thee? which is equivolent
to this (if it were said) he will save thee without thee. For the truth of it I
have been directed to his Sermon. 11. de verb. Apostoli. where though I find it
not totidem verbis, yet the full sense and substance thereof I find. The
Father treating of those words of the Psalmist [ He made us without us, or not
we our selves] improves them by the annexion of other Scriptures against
Pelagius, demonstrating that he also saves us when we were lost without us. To
this effect his sentences are full and manifold. Perditos nos per nos, reficit
nos qui fecit nos. Again, Ipse fecit nos and non ipsi nos, ut simus populos
ejus and oves pascuae ejus. Again, Homines sumus ipse fecit nos, fidel^s sumus
and jam justi, ipse fecit nos and non ipsi nos. Again, Ipse fecit nos, and
antequam essemus omnino ipse fecit nos: and factos and lapsos ipse justos fecit
nos, and non ipsi nos. Nondum erat [homo] and factus est: offendit and salvus
factus. Again, Quis prior dedit ei and retribuetur ei? Si Dominus retribuere
vellet, nihil nisi paenam debitam retribuisset. Nihil dederunt ut eis,
retribueretur, pro nihilo salvos fecit illos. In a word, as all this is
directly against Mr. Baxter, so is there no one title in the whole Sermon for
him, but all proving not in Mr. Baxters sophistical way, but seriously and
profoundly from clear and invincible Scriptures, our salvation to be only Gods
work, not his and ours together. If nothing else should be said, that which
Austin in this one Chapter has said, is enough to bury Mr. Baxters doctrine in
the dirt for ever.

Bax. He never makes a relative change, where he does not also make a real.
True, but whether the relative, or the real change has the precedence in
order, is the question. Whether our reconciliation or justification go before
sanctification, or follow it as the fruit thereof.

Bax. Gods decree gives no man a legal title to the benefit decreed him, seeing
purpose and promise are so different. True, but altogether besides the question.

Bax. A legal title we must have before we can be justified; and there must be
somewhat in our selves to prove that title, or else all men should have equal
right. If he speak of our being justified in our selves, or having our
Justification evidenced to our selves, or our brethren, we consent with him. If
he mean otherwise (in the sense often mentioned) what he says here is that
which he has often said, but it remains yet to be proved. There is somewhat
else (as has been often showed) besides Mr. Brs somewhat in us, that
differenceth man from man, that all have not equal right. And this is somewhat
in Christ; not somewhat in us.

CHAP. XIII.
Mr. Baxters doctrine of a twofold, i. e. a legal and Evangelical Righteousness
equally necessary to salvation, or Justification, examined. The terms and
phrase which he uses discussed: and how little he says to prove either phrase
or matter to be good, manifested.

I Shall totally pretermit the 16th Aphorism and its explication, not but that
there are some passages therein deserving examination, but because that what is
delivered in such passages, is done very warily, and may admit of a good as
well as of a bad Construction; and in the following part of his book, Mr. Br
speaks it out fully and plainly, that no man can doubt of his meaning;
Therefore is more properly to be answered there, than in this place.

Neither shall I say much to the 17, and 18 Aphorisms, because they are but (as
it were) a bridge of Mr. Brs making, on which to pass over to the following
matter. Yet that he may not Complain of wrong, that he is deprived of the
honor of his artificial Method, I shall transcribe his words, and annex some
animadversions upon them.

Thesis 17. Bax. p. 102. Therefore as there are two Covenants with their
distinct conditions: So is there a twofold Righteousness, and both of them
absolutely necessary to salvation.

Thesis 18. page 103. Our Legal Righteousness or Righteousness of the first
Covenant is not personal, or consists not in any qualifications of our own
persons, or actions performed by us, (for we never fulfilled, nor personally
satisfied the Law:) but it is wholly without us in Christ. And in this sense it
is that the Apostle (and every Christian) disclaimeth his own Righteousness, or
his own works, as being no true legal Righteousness, Phil. 3. 7, 8.

Thesis 19. p. 107. The Righteousness of the New Covenant is the only Condition
of or interest in and enjoyment of the Righteousness of the old. Or thus: Those
only shall have part in Christ's satisfaction, and so in him be legally
Righteous, who believe, and obey the Gospel, and so are in themselves
Evangelically Righteous.

Thesis 20. p. 108. Our Evangelicall Righteousness is not without us in Christ,
as our legal Righteousness is; but consists in our own Actions of faith and
Gospel obedience. Or thus: Though Christ performed the conditions of the Law,
and satisfies for our nonperformance; yet it is our selves that must perform
the Conditions of the Gospel.

I close up all these positions together (as it were) in one Frontispice,
partly in regard of their near Cognation in Nature, and partly that the
profoundnes and dexterity of Mr. Br may the more clearly appear: and that it
may be here evidenced to the very senses of all, what is said Genesis 3. 1. That
the Serpent is more subtle than all the beasts of the field which God has made.

The one part of Mr. Brs Gospel we have found, in the former part of this
Tractate, the sum and substance whereof may be thus expressed; That Christ
Jesus by the will of his Father, has by the satisfaction made to justice for
the sins of the Elect, obtained that the whole Curse and managing thereof,
together with the Elect for whom he has satisfied, should be delivered up into
his hand: And he shows himself in this his power an unmercifull High Priest,
holding his redeemed ones, under the Curse, wrath, and torment in soul and
body, not giving them deliverance until the day of judgment. He did somewhat
before look unto, but now really enters upon the second part, which is like to
the former, holding forth a justification in the world to come, upon such
Conditions as will not bring any unto, but certainly exclude all, that to this
end use and perform them, from justification into condemnation. Within the
Confines of these two essential parts of his Gospel, he comprizeth all the
riches of grace by Christ, which whosoever likes it, may if he will, partake
of. Such have we already found the Nature of the first part of his Gospel. We
are now to examine whether the second part thereof be not such as I have here
mentioned; if not, I have wronged Mr. Br; if so, he wrongs Christ, and works
against him seeking the damnation of the Elect. And by the very words of these
four propositions of his, (if nothing else were to be added) he that is both
orthodox and judicious, may somewhat judge whither Mr. Br drives, finding him
to set up man's righteousness parallel with Christ's righteousness, and equally
necessary to our Justification; so making man at least a demisaviour to
himself, and so (in effect prove) an absolute destroyer of his own soul. For
whosoever brings any thing besides Christ to his justification, falls utterly
from Christ, righteousness, and salvation.

Yet while he thus acts the part of one of those evil workers mentiuned Phil.
3. 2. he shows himself an Artiz^n to deceive the wits of the time, no less than
Muncer did himself to beguile the witles Common people in Germany. He when he
was vanquished, taken, and now under the hands of the tormentor, being demanded
why he had so deluded the silly vulgar multitude to his own and their ruin;
breaking forth into a vehement laughter, answered, Sic voluerunt, They would
have it so; insinuating that because he found them little regarding the
solidity and power of the Gospel, but itching after novelties, he attempered
and even sacrified his studies to their humor, until he had subverted himself
and them. So Mr. Br taking notice of some affected wits that had rather perish
and dye for ever by Art, and that which is falsely called Science or learning,
1 Timothy 6. 20. than to live and be saved by the simplicity and plainnes of the
Gospel; composeth himself wholly to please their humor, and make himself their
darling; handles the Case so finely and artificially, that he may kill them
softly, they never feeling it until they are dead and ruined for ever.

One piece of his artifice we have here in his invention of that twofold
Righteousness of the two Covenants absolutely necessary to justification or
salvation: The one in Christ, the other in our selves: Christ's righteousness
purchasing for us a conditional justification, a possibility of righteousness
and bliss in the world to come; but the other, our righteousness when once
finished and completed, being that which does the deed and drives the nail to
the head, making both Christ's righteousness and the justification purchased by
it, to be no longer Conditionally, but actually and really ours. Provided and
always excepted that this cannot be in this life, and so the trial of Mr. Brs
doctrine by experience, can never be made until this world be wholly ended.

This is learning indeed, such as neither the dictates of men, (at least
totidem verbis, in so fine a contexture of words) nor the Oracles of God could
ever teach Mr. Br. It is his own and possibly may continue his only to the
worlds end, all men else proving themselves too wise or too foolish to join with
him in this his speculation. We thought that the righteousness according to the
Covenant under which God has placed us, had sufficed to justification; he
tells us nay, but we are under both the Covenant of works and the Covenant of
grace too, and must be righteous in the righteousness of both. The world had not
the wit until now, nor yet Christ, or any of his Prophets or Apostles had it
ever in their Consideration to term Christ our legal, and our own works and
qualifications our Gospel righteousness: Mr. Br first having received it rough
hewn from Papists and Arminians, teaches us this piece of distinctionary
learning. Neither did it enter ever into our thoughts that the righteousness of
the Old Covenant was of a more noble ^ace, or that the righteousness which is in
our selves could be more excellent than that which Christ is made to us, until
this new Doctor took the Chair to teach Mysteries, and by inverting and
misnaming Scripture Phrase has so taught.

Nevertheles it behoved Mr. Br having resolved to keep on the triple Crown upon
the Popes head, by stablishing justification upon works, (though it were to the
uncrowning of Christ,) to reject uprightnes and to seek after inventions,
Eccles. 7. 29. First he must hold believers to be under both Covenants, else
while he builds up one piece of Babylon, he should pluck down another; and give
his judgment against his holiness in one point, while he acts the Champion for
him in another: and adventure with all the loss of his Cause, if he keep not as
strong hold-fast in the Covenant of works with the one hand, as in the Covenant
of grace with the other. 2 He must call the Condition or means of applying
Christ to us or obteining interest in his satisfaction, our Righteousness, else
he will not be able to evade those Scriptures which assert our Justification by
faith. But by this feat he thinks himself in a fit posture both to answer this,
and to bring in all qualifications and works that he pleases in a partnership
with faith to justify. True (will he say) we are justified by Faith as a part
of our righteousness, and by all other good qualifications and works as other
parts of our righteousness. 3 He must call faith and works our Evangelicall
righteousness, having seen in what a stinking trance some of his dirty deer
brethren in their disputes have been left, when they would prove that good
works as works of the Law do justify: and how little better they have fared,
who would have them to justify only as works of grace, having not had enough
subtlety to prove them Gospel or Grace works. Need had he therefore to put
himself upon strong and strange inventions that himself may not stick in the
same mire after them. But enough in general, let us hear him deliver his own
mind in particulars.

B. These. 17. p. 102. As there are two Covenants with their distinct
Conditions: So is there a twofold Righteousness, and both of them absolutely
necessary to salvation. The latter member of this proposition is grounded upon
the former, the Thesis upon the Hypothesis. As true is the latter as the
former. But how true is the former, that there are two Covenants, and that they
have their distinct Conditions? First when he says there are two Covenants, he
means two Covenants in force to the very Saints in Christ, that while they
are under grace to salvation, they are also under the Law to the Curse and
Condemnation. This has been his business to Confirm in the former part of this
Treatise, and he owns it in the explication of this Thesis. But this is false
as in disapproving of his arguments before has been proved. They are no more
under the Law, who are once under grace, Romans 6. 14. 2ly, Neither have the two
Covenants their distinct Conditions, according to Mr. Br. For These. 4. he makes
the Condition of the first Covenant, Perfect Obedience or Righteousness. The
same he makes here the Condition of the New Covenant, viz. Faith and Obedience,
but both as integrant parts of our own inherent righteousness; as we have partly
seen, and shall be forced to see more fully in that which is to come after. So
that we grant him that as true, as there are two Covenants, with their distinct
Conditions in force to the same persons, so true is it that there is a twofold
Righteousness, and both absolutely necessary to salvation, (if by salvation he
means Justification) At falsum prius, ergo and posterius. When he brings proofs
to Confirm his assertions, he may meet with a larger answer. In mean while a
simple Negation stands fittest in opposition to his bare affirmation.

That which he brings in the explication to Confirm it has been answered over
and over before. Only he tells us in the upshot that He will take it as
granted: To which I answer, that there has been such a generation of men still
upon earth so fingerative, that will needs take that which was never granted
and delivered to them; such is the main bulk of Mr. Brs doctrine in this book
taken but never delivered to him from God or his Christ.

Bax. The usual confounding of these Righteousnesses (says he) does much
darken the Controversies about Justification. And Mr. Br does no less clear the
Controversy, than an Eclipse the Sunbeams.

He proceeds to explain what this twofold Righteousness is, so absolutely
necessary to salvation.

Bax. The legal Righteousness (says he) is not in us, or consists not in
any qualifications of our own persons, or actions performed by us, But it is
wholly without us in Christ, These. 18. p. 103.

The righteousness of the New Covenant is the only Condition of our interest in
and enjoyment of the Righteousness of the old, etc. These. 19. p. 107.

Our Evangelicall Righteousness is not without us in Christ, as our Legal
Righteousness is, but consists in our own actions of Faith and Gospel
Obedience etc. These. 20. p. 108.

What there is more in any of these three positions, is transcribed at large
before. To the 18 Thesis he annexeth in the explication a dispute against the
Papists, not to Confute them as adversaries to the truth, for joining man's
righteousness with Christ's righteousness unto justification, (for herein he
professes entire Communion with them) but to admonish them as his loving
brethren to defend this their Conclusion of Justification by their own
righteousness, not under the terms of their legal, but of their Evangelicall
righteousness. Because the legal righteousness is unpossible, but the
Evangelicall righteousness (according to his carving and forming of it) is easy
to be fullfilled, and almost unpossible to be violated. Not that the Papists
were wholly ignorant of this mystery until Mr. Br here teaches them. Nay many
of them had and pleaded it very artificially, before he was born. And himself
has learned it of them: But he as the most proficient of all their disciples
has more fully improved it, so that now he becomes a teacher to his very
Masters, and exhorts them to learn of him the pious feat and fraud, of making
use of this distinction yet further than ever they had the wit or grace to
devise; even to all matters and purposes that tend to the eluding of the word
of Christ, and the advantaging of the holy mother Church, in her doctrine of
Justification, that is altogether Contradictory to the doctrine of the
Scriptures upon the same Argument.

To the 19th and 20th positions he annexeth an explication of both of these and
of all that was said in the two former positions also. In it we shall find
whatsoever deserves a fuller Answer than has been yet given to all and every
of these four positions, or any thing in all or any of them contained, not
against but according to his own expressed and explicated meaning.

Bax. p. 108. Explication. The Contents of these Positions being of so near
nature, I shall explain them here together, though they seem so plain and clear
to me, that they need not much explication, and less confirmation: Yet because
some Antinomians do downright oppose them, and some that are no Antinomians
have startled at the expressions, as if they had contained some self exalting
horrid doctrine, I shall say something hereto. Though for my part I do so much
wonder that any able Divines should deny them: yet me thinks they should be
Articles of our Creed, and a part of Childrens Catechisms, and understood and
believed by every man that is a Christian: I mean the matter of them, if not
the phrase; though I think it to be agreeable to the matter also.

Egregious Confidence and a sparkish spirit! If the Triumphant Chariot were in
use again at Rome, and that Mr. Br could either not get it, or not hold it, he
would at least give occasion to the world to Epitaph upon him, -- Magnis tamen
excidit Ausis, he has bidden fair and stretched wide for it. Yet there would
be some men that would otherwise Comment upon his bravery of words. That they
are usually bad wares that will not go off without such bravery of words. That
Bragg is seldom the best Soldier. That thundering words are mostly used, when
there is wanting strength of reason to support a Cause. We shall in some
measure be able to judge when we have examined, what sound Arguments Mr. Br
brings to Confirm his assertions. By the way we are to note his subtlety, his
ingenuity, and his gallantry. 1 His subtlety in pretending that his Assertions
are mainly opposed by Antinomians; and that all that he delivers here, is out
of his pure zeal (good man) to dash those earth-born monsters that they may do
no more harm. Does Mr. Br think that none but strangers in our Israel, none but
novices in divinity, that never saluted the Gospel, but at twelve furlongs
distance, none that ever had acquaintance with this Controversy b^tween the
Papists and us, should read his book, that he thinks to blind the eyes of all
with such a mummery? Nay let him name one man in any of the reformed Churches,
that has been numbered among the Orthodox, which dissenteth not in the Chaffy
doctrine here delivered from him? Or any save the worst, or a man worse than
the worst Papists, that consents with him to make our inherent righteousness
the Condition to give us right to Christ's imputed righteousness? Must Christ
and Paul, and all Evangelicall disciples be rejected as Antinomians, because
they became not Mr. Baxters disciples, and that before he became their Teacher?
Or how could they downright oppose this doctrine, before he vented it in print?
Was he so familiar with them as to Communicate to them his Manuscripts? Or has
any other since the world began delivered the same assertions in the same
words, that in opposing them Mr. Br should take himself opposed? But he
suspends his subtlety a little to show some though but little ingenuity, which
is the second thing here Considerable in him: Confessing that there are some
that are no Antinomians who have startled at the expressions, as if they had
contained some self-exalting horrid doctrine. And did not this also startle Mr.
Br to reexamine what he had written before he Committed it to the Press?
Nothing less, but he looks over them with a fastidious admiration, that they
should be so shallow, himself being so profound, rejecting their authority,
with the like Contempt that Caesar did Syllaes, Tush he was a duus Non potuit
dictare, so he of these, Nequeunt Philosophari. And thus in the third place
passes on to his gallantry or rather his arrogance. That his doctrines here
are so plain and clear, that they need little explication, less Confirmation,
That he wonders any able Divines should deny them: shall such be termed
Divines? nay his very Catechumeni, the Children under his Catechizing, much
more every man that is a Christian should understand and believe them. That
they should be taken up for our Creed, why? because profound Mr. Br has
delivered them; if not upon this ground, let him name that man upon earth that
has delivered or believed them before himself became the author of them. But
at length he somewhat stoopeth from his bravery, and tells us that he would
have the matter of them at least thus taken into the Canon of our faith and
Creed, if not the phrase: though he think it to be agreeable to the matter
also: and therefore goes about thus to defend his phrase and make it good.

Bax. p. 109. That there may be no contention about words, you must take my
phrase of (legal and Evangelicall Righteousness) in the sense before explained:
viz. as they take their name from that Covenant which is their rule. And I know
not how any Righteousness should be called (Legal or Evangelicall) in a sense
more strict and proper, nor whence the denomination can be better taken, than
from the formal Reason of the thing: yet I know that the observance of the Law
of Ceremonies, and the seeking life by the works of the Law, are both commonly
called legal Righteousness: but in a very improper sense in comparison of
this. I know also, that Christ's legal Righteousness imputed to us, is commonly
called [Evangelicall Righteousness.] But that is from a more alien,
extrinsecall Respect; viz. because the Gospel declares and offers this
Righteousness, and because it is a way to justification which only the Gospel
reveals. I do not quarrel with any of these forms of speech, only explain
my own, which I know not how to express more properly, that I may not be
misunderstood. The righteousness of the New Covenant then being the performance
of its Conditions, and its Conditions being our obeying of the Gospel, or
believing, it must be plain, that on no other terms we do partake of the legal
Righteousness of Christ. To hold therefore that our Evangelicall or New Covenant
Righteousness is in Christ, and not in our selves, or performed by Christ, and
not by our selves, is such a monstrous piece of Antinomian Doctrine, that no
man who knows the Nature and difference of the Covenants, can possibly
entertain, and that which every Christian should abhor as unsufferable.

Here we find Mr. Br at the very top of his gallantry and animosity; most
probably his fancy had suggested to him a total rout of all terrene animals at
the sound of his precedent glorying, and polemicall argumentation; as if
therefore all this visible world were Conquered, and he were marching out of it
in triumph, as Israel out of Egypt, not a dog being left to move his tongue
against him: he now challenges the Heavens, and Calls the Holy Ghost ad
parts, to Come to a reckoning for the impropriety of language which he uses
by his penmen in the Scriptures. For when he says, I know that the observance
of the Law of Ceremonies, and the seeking of Life by the works of the Law, are
both commonly called Legal Righteousness, and that Christ's legal righteousness
imputed to us is commonly called Evangelicall Righteousness: he must needs mean
primarily that these are so Called Commonly in holy Scriptures, and but
secondarily that they are so called by Ecclesiastical Writers, as they derive
from the Scriptures a Chaste Scripture phrase wherein to express spiritual
doctrines, For so the Scripture mentions only two kinds of Righteousness
that ever Came or shall Come into Competition about our Justification, the one
a legal righteousness, or righteousness of the Law, the other the Evangelicall
righteousness, or righteousness of the Gospel. The legal Righteousness it
affirms to be a righteousness of works which we have done, i. e. of good
qualifications within us, and good operations flowing from us; the Evangelicall
righteousness to be of mere grace and mercy, Tit. 3. 5. The latter it terms
Gods Righteousness, i. e. that which God gives and imputes; the former our
own righteousness, i. e. which is wrought within our selves, and acted by our
selves, Romans 10. 3. Phil. 3. 9. That of the Law, a Righteousness of works, this
of the Gospel, a Righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6. That a Righteousness
in our selves, inherent, This a Righteousness in Christ, imputed, Ephesians. 2. 8. 2
Cor. 5. 21. Or let Mr. Br show any one Scripture that terms the Righteousness
which is in and by Christ a legal, or that which is inherent in our selves an
Evangelicall Righteousness: or that terms any gift or qualification in man, or
work and deed of man his righteousness, any piece of his righteousness unto
Justification. So that his quarrel here is against the Holy Ghost for speaking
so improperly and incongruously in Scriptures, and Calling the Righteousness
which is by Christ Evangelicall, and the righteousness which is in our selves
Legal Righteousness. But how will he Confute the Holy Ghost, and prove an
absurdity and impropriety in the language of the Holy Ghost? Forsooth, by
opposing himself, his own authority and learning, to the Holy Ghost, and his
wisdom and authority. Himself he affirms to speak logically, and by
Consequence, strictly and properly, But the Holy Ghost is no scholar, never
read Aristotle, therefore speaks rudely, rustically, like one of the Rural
Animals, not as an Artist out of the schools. Himself gives (scholar-like) a
denomination to these two Righteousnesses, from that Covenant which is their
Rule, from the Formal Reason of the thing: But the Holy Ghost for lack of
school-learning, gives names thereunto from more Alien Extrinsecall respects.
This is the sum of his reasoning. And is it not possible to request from Mr.
Br that he would take the Holy Ghost a while as a pupil into his Tuition, to
read unto him some Logical Lectures by which he may be instructed to mould a
new the Scriptures into another, a Logical, instead of that spiritual and
Celestial phrase in which we now find them? Or if the Spirit of truth and
wisdom should be the Teacher, not the Scholar of Mr. Br, then may we break out
into Mr. Brs words against Mr. Br, Monstrous Doctrine, pride, reasoning, and
that which every Christian should abhor as unsufferable.

But if Mr. Br be not in more haste than good speed, a word or two, we shall
request from him to be resolved in some few questions, (before we part,) upon
that which he has here written.

First, Whether it has not been the Common slight of all subtle heretics to
make new and unused phrases their harbingers to promote and make way for the
vending of their new opinions and monstrous doctrines? yea whether he himself
had not first laid down a purpose within himself of broaching his doctrine of
Justification by works and inherent righteousness, and then after devised this
new distinction of our legal righteousness in Christ, and Evangelicall
righteousness in our selves, both necessary to our justification? or to what
other end has he coined this novelty of words and phrase in opposition to the
language of the Gospel, but to make it subservient to the novelty of his
pernicious doctrine, Contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel?

2 Whether by this novelty of phrase he does not attribute more excellency and
efficacy (as to justification) to man's inherent, than to Christ's imputed
righteousness? For page 98. himself affi^meth, that The primary most excellent
and most proper righteousness lies in the conformity of our actions to the
precept; the secondary less excellent Righteousness, (yet fitly enough so
called) is when, though we have broke the precepts, yet we have satisfied for
our breach, either by our own sufferings or some other way. Compare we with
that which he there spoke that which here he speaks, and we shall find him
attributing that which he calls the primary most excellent and most proper
righteousness to our selves, viz. our Conformity to the precepts of the Gospel;
and that which he calls the secondary less excellent righteousness, to
Christ, in and by whom we have satisfied for the breach of the precepts of the
Law. If this be not the nullifying, surely it is the abasing of Christ. And he
that would thus veil, will be ready also to quench (as much as in him lies)
the glory of Christ's Righteousness.

3 What show of truth is there in that which he assigns, as the Cause of his
departing from the usual phrase of Scripture to a new expression of words,
Calling Christ our Legal, and our own qualifications and works our
Evangelicall Righteousness, which no man since the very foundation of the world
was laid (I think) ever so termed before him? They so take name (says he) from
the Covenant which is their Rule etc. and their Denomination from the formal
Reason of the thing. To the unveiling of this Mystery Davu^ sum non Oedipus. It
must be some of Pythagoras his mystical, and not of Aristotle's Dialectick
learning, that must so bring this about that we may find and fathom it. For
first how is the Law of Nature or Covenant of works the rule of Christ's
Mediation, or satisfaction made for us? Whether we Consider it as it was
fullfilled by Christ, or as it is apprehended by us to righteousness, is the
Law or old Covenant made with mankind a rule or direction to him or us? Did
this law at all either bind or direct the eternal Son of the eternal God to
assume our Nature, and in it to offer himself a sacrifice for our sin, and so
make satisfaction to divine Justice? Indeed as in Christ's sufferings we see him
only a patient, drawn and dragged to judgment and death for our iniqui^ies
laid on him, so was his passion the effect of the Law. But if there were no
more to be seen in his sufferings, he should not have been our righteousness
either Legal or Evangelicall. For what merit could there be in a suffering of
Constraint and Compulsion? But when in his sufferings he was a voluntary agent,
Called and Consecrated by the Father to be our Priest, Heb. 5. 5. No man taking
his life from him, but himself laying it down of himself, for us and in our
stead, Joh. 10. 18. Thus he became the purchaser of righteousness for us, and is
made of God Righteousness to us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. But all this he did not by the
rule of the Law or Covenant of works, but of the secret and sacred Covenant
made between the Father and him: Therefore having mentioned the voluntarines of
his suffering in the fore quoted Joh, 10. 18. He adds, This Commandment have
I received of my Father, implying that this his satisfactory obedience in dying
for us had its regulating not by the old Covenant of works, or any precept of
the Law given to man, but by the Covenant which had passed between the Father
and the Son in reference to man, and a special positive Commandment from the
Father agreeing with the tenor of that Covenant. As for our apprehending and
pleading the righteousness of Christ to Justification, impudency it self will
neither affirm it to be done by the rule of the Covenant of law and works; nor
deny it to be done in Conformity to the Covenant of grace and rule of the
Gospel. Or because Christ has born the penalty of the Laws breach, shall he
therefore be Called our legal righteousness, as from the formal reason of the
thing? Nay both that Christ suffered, and the Father received and accepted his
sufferings in full satisfaction for our transgressions; That the Father sent
him to satisfy the justice of his law for us; and for his satisfactions sake,
he does no more impute to us the breach of his Law; All this is the fruit of
his grace and in conformity to the Gospel and Covenant of grace; not to the Law
and Covenant of works. Therefore if we give the denomination from the formal
reason of the thing, we must call it our Evangelicall not Legal righteousness
which is in Christ.

Touching the other opposite term, that any thing inherent in man, whether the
gifts of grace, Faith, Repentance, Charity, etc. or their fruits and works,
should be called our Gospel righteousness; I see no reason for it, neither can
devise in what other sense they may be so called, but by a Catachresticall
Ironia which names a thing and means the contrary. As the Mounteins are called
Montes quia minime movent, Mounts or Movers because they do in no wise Move: or
as the Fames Auri is sometimes called sacra the inordinate desire of money is
termed holy, quia minime sacra sed prorsus, execrabilis, because it is in no
case sacred but wholly accursed. So in no other sense may this righteousness in
self be called Gosp^l righteousness (in reference to Justification) but because
it is totally opposite to the doctrine and nature of the Gospel, and because
the Gospel does wholly reject and abandon it. Mr. Br. peradventure may and will
bring other reasons, and where he does it we shall take pains to examine them.

4 Why he calls believing or Faith to be our Gospel righteousness, and whether
it be to any other end, but with the Papists upon the same grounds to bring in
good works to Justification also? If he deny this the whole sequel of his Book
will be an enditement of falsehood against him?

CHAP. XIV.
That which Mr. Baxter brings to confirm the matter of this his Doctrine,
examined and found both fallacious and empty: And what he adds to mitigate
the asperity ( viz. That we perform these conditions not by our own strength,
but by the grace of Christ) evidenced to be a mere shift borrowed from the
Papists.

Mr. Baxter after he has thus made a flourish and nothing but a flourish to
explain and defend his phrase, and make odious the phrase of Scripture; now
proceeds to confirm the matter of his doctrine. Let us see whether there be
any thing Logical or Theological, and not merely sophistical? He has
confessed before, p. 109. that some who are not Antinomians (but Orthodox
Divines) have startled at the expressions of his 19 and 20 Positions, as
containing in them some self-exalting horrid doctrine, therefore will he say
something thereto, by way of explication and confirmation. Now having said
something as bad as nothing to take off contention about words; what does he
add for the confirmation of the matter of his doctrine? He was to have proved 1
That Gospel righteousness, or the righteousness of the New Covenant consists
not in the imputation of the righteousness which is by Christ to us, but in our
own actual and personal faith and obedience. 2 That we must be righteous in
our selves first, and then after be made righteous by Christ. 3 That the
righteousness of the New Covenant is not sufficient to justify and save, but
only to give us right to the righteousness of the old Covenant, which does
actually and immediately save and justify. 4 That those gifts of grace,
virtues, and endowments, that are required to our sanctification are not the
fruits but the causes of our justification, and conditions of our interest in
Christ, and consequently that our sanctification has a priority and goes
before justification. These were the points in which he acknowledges himself
to be downright opposed by some and startled at by others. What does he now
say for the silencing of these downright opposers and startlers? Just so much
as he that would confute all that Bellarmine had written, in three words, viz.
Bellarmine thou lie. Or what brings he for the confirmation of those his
assertions wherein he is so opposed? Nothing but a fardle of sophistical
fallacies, consisting of begged principles, and homonymies of words. First he
clustereth together many Conclusions, without either premises or proofs.

The righteousness of the New Covenant then being the performance of its
conditions; this is his first Conclusion, which by the word (then) bearing the
force of (therefore) he would insinuate to lean upon some foregoing premises,
when contrariwise, there is not so much as a peble of four grains to sustein
it, not a word laid as the foundation thereof. It is the thing in question, we
deny it, he brings nothing to confirm it besides his bare affirmation, which to
us is no more then a pillar of straw to bear up a Castle.

And its conditions being our obeying the Gospel or believing. This is his
second Conclusion, taken as granted, when contrariwise his opposers utterly
deny it. And here he plays also with an homonymy of words, as if faith and
obeying the Gospel, which in the Apostles sense are, so in his sense also were,
the same thing, covering his poison until the feat be done by it. It must
needs be plain that on no other terms do we partake of the legal righteousness
of Christ. I will not say that self-confidence has made the man mad, but
rather that he thinks all the world mad and in such a sottish slumber, that
none can put a difference betwixt midday and midnight. It is plain, by what
light? by what argument? It is the thing in question, and none until Mr. Br.
ever held forth this assertion in these his expressions. Yet it must be plain,
viz. because he has said it, so plain as a New world created in Mr. Br. fist,
he that can see what is not, may see it. We deny both the righteousness which is
by Christ to be a legal righteousness, and our own qualifications to be the
terms and grounds upon which he is made to us Righteousness. And let the world
judge whether he show himself a Christian Teacher or an Antichristian Imposter,
who having promised a confirmation of his strange and before unheard of
doctrine, brings nothing but flourishes of words to charm fools, not one
argument or Scripture to satisfy the wise and conscientious. Himself sees the
grosnes and palpablenes of his delusions, and left his Reader should stay in
his meditations upon it to see it also, he hastes to annex a fourth
Conclusion, very plausible to them whom he hopes to beguile, whereupon, as on a
Cross he naileth the picture of an Antinomian to crucify him, that with this
pleasant spectacle, he may divert his Readers eyes from the nakedness and
nothingnes of what went before, to the beholding of a new object set before him.

To affirm therefore that our Evangelicall or New Covenant Righteousness is in
Christ and not in our selves, or performed by Christ and not by our selves, is
such a monstrous piece of Antinomian Doctrine that no man etc. ut supra. Which
is as much as if he had said to his Reader, if upon the bare authority of my
words (when I have no one good Argument to prove them) thou will not become a
rank Papist; I will register thee for an Antinomian, and make thee out to the
world such a Monster that all shall abhor thee as unsufferable. With this
Thunderbolt he knows he shall shake into an Ague all those that Nicodemus-like
are Disciples of Christ, but secretly for fear of the Jews. Should they be
suspected of the least tang of Antinomianism, they should never more have a
good look from the Scribes and Pharisees.

But he is not forth with an Antinomian whom Mr. B. so terms. If Pythagoras
his transmigration of souls into new bodies were Canonical, I should conclude
that the ghost of one of those ghostly Fathers of the Council of Constance had
crept into Mr. B. body. They to make John Huss odious, painted an ugly Devil
in paper, and crowned John Huss therewith when they carried him to the stake to
be burned, at the view whereof the people exulted in his death, as if they had
seen some Witch or rather young Devil burned. So deals Mr. B. here with them
which are truly Evangelical, inures upon them the black brand of Antinomianism,
so to make truth in their mouth hateful as well as the persons.

But is it decreed that they are all Antinomians that hold, and that it is a
monstrous piece of Antinomianism to hold, that our Evangelicall or New Covenant
righteousness is in Christ not in our selves, performed by Christ and not by our
selves? If so, I much question whether there will be found any one (save Mr. B.
alone) in all the Reformed Churches that are or have been, but must bear the
imputation of a monstrous Antinomian. I will not be over confident of Socinus,
Arminius, Grotius and their followers, because I take them not for members but
troublers of the Reformed Churches. For my part I know no difference about this
point between the Orthod^x and Antinomians: Both consent 1 That our
Gospel-righteousnes which works effectually to our Justification is in Christ,
not in our selves, (save by imputation.) 2 That our Gospel or New Covenan^
righteousness in reference to our sanctification, is in Christ radically, but in
us by derivation and influence, actually to sanctify us. 3 That our faith,
repentance, obedience, holiness, good works (though flowing from Christ himself
into us) are the Gospel or New Covenant Righteousness, not by which we are
justified, but by which we are sanctified. And let Mr. B. or any of his
Disciples produce that Orthodox man that ever called this doctrine
Antinomianism, or that has not shunned the contrary doctrine as Popish and
Antichristian.

Yet Mr. B. finding himself bound by promise to prove many things (as was said
before) that his fallacious dealing might not be too notorious and shameful,
he chooses one of the many (leaving the rest untouched) to speak something to
it, (as he had said) though not to prove it. And in that which he says, there
is nothing to confirm his own assertion, but a mere reviling abusing and
abasing of them that assert the contrary, under the false imputation of
Antinomianism. And here he comes upon the stage like Hercules Furens, who in a
Frenzy taking his Wife and Children to be a Lioness and her Whelps, falls
upon them fiercly with his Clubb and envenomed Arrows until he had utterly
destroyed them. So Mr. B. in somewhat a like fit, not finding real
Antinomians, but making in his fancy, imaginary Bug-bears and phantasms of
them, curses them with Bell Book and Candle for saying that Christ has
fulfilled the conditions of the New as well as of the Old Covenant, and that
our Evangelical righteousness is not in our selves but in Christ. At the
supposition of such assertions, (which none ever laid down in these terms) the
man is in a rage, beats the wind, and flings dust in the Air, cries
Blasphemy, heresy, impiety, and enumerates Absurdities upon absurdities
arising from such doctrine, all which I am not at leizure to transcribe, (it
being all superfluous and not to the purpose) but may be read at large page
111, 112, 113, of his Tractate. More proper shall it be for me here to make out
Mr. B. either willing or unwilling mistake herein, and then all his absurdities
will ^ither vanish into wind or return upon himself.

First then as we deny not Faith in the Lord Christ, to be isntrumental to
apprehend to our selves Christ for our justification, and a declarative
evidence to our own souls that we are actually justified by him; (as before
has been granted) so we affirm it to be heretical and popish doctrine which
Mr. B. does here page 111 deliver, in asserting repentance, obedience,
submission, etc. and afterward all other virtues and good works, to be
conditions of the New Covenant, viz. by which as by our Gospel righteousness we
are, and without which preceding, we cannot be justified. For all these (in Mr.
B. sense) as Austin from the tenor of the Gospel says Non precedunt
justificandum, sed sequuntur justificatum: are not the precedents but fruits of
justification.

2 We affirm Repentance, Obedience, Charity, etc. and all good works which the
Gospel requires, to be originally and materially the works and duties of the
Law. Nature and natural conscience it self suggesting to every of us both the
rest, and withal in case of offense committed against God or man, to repent of
it, to sorrow for it, and at our utmost to make satisfaction for the offense.
Yea even Faith in Christ, is in general required by the Old Law and Covenant.
We in no wise ascribe to the Gospel a creating of new points of righteousness,
or injoining of new duties which the Law did not at least in general bind us
unto, (this opinion we leave as proper and peculiar to the Socinians) But a
modification spiritualizing and appropriating the righteousness and duties
which the Law in general commanded, to the now present lapsed condition of
man, to Gods present offers of grace, and our present necessities. Yea herein
we have Mr. B. consenting to us, who, These. 30. and its Explication delivers
his judgment herein to be fully one with the stream of Orthodox Divines. So
that if we should affirm that Christ has believed, repented, sorrowed, etc.
for us and in our steed: it would not thence follow, that we pronounce Christ
to have performed the conditions of the New but only of the Old Covenant for
us.

3 Yet are we far from affirming that Christ in the most strict and proper
sense has so believed, repented, etc. for us, that we should be taken to have
believed, repented, etc. not in our selves but in him and by him. But the
reason why we neither affirm nor hold it, is not because that these are our
Gospel righteousness or New Covenant conditions of righteousness and life in the
sense before often mentioned, for we have denied and do still deny them to be
such: But 1 because it is in question whether the active righteousness of Christ
be imputable to us for justification; And 2 if it were, yet were it an
unchristing of Christ to affirm him to have been ever in such a state and
condition, that he had need of repentance or faith to the remission of sins. He
took indeed our nature not the sinfulnes of our nature; had our sin imputed to
him, or (as the Scripture phrase expressly speaks) laid on him, Isa. 53. 6. to
suffer and satisfy for it: but had no sin of his own to repent of and
mortify, then had there not been virtue in his Priesthood and sacrifice to
have expiated ours. And to say that he actually repented, sorrowed, believed,
etc. for the pardon of our sins, we confess is a harsh, unproper and
Catachresticall locution. Yet we still hold that the flawes and infirmities of
our faith and repentance as well as our other iniquities were laid upon Christ,
that he has satisfied divine justice for them by his sufferings; and that
therefore God imputes them not to us being once in Christ. Otherwise though
they are parts of Gospel righteousness to sanctification, the sin and infirmity
that is in them, in not squaring fully with the Law their rule, would bring
upon us condemnation.

These things premissed, all the absurdities which (to make the assertion
odious) Mr. B. lays upon us for affirming our New Covenant righteousness to be
in Christ in the sense mentioned and explained, and denying our faith,
repentance, obedience, etc. to be our New Covenant righteousness to
Justification; vanish into smoke. For

1 It implies not (as he says it does) blasphemy against Christ, as if he had
sin to repent of, for we utterly deny that Christ has believed or repented for
us, otherwise then by satisfying justice for our not repenting, believing, etc.
home to the rule of the Law.

2 Nor does it imply that Jews, Pagans, and every one shall be saved, because
Christ has fulfilled the conditions of both Covenants for them, so that they
are culpable in neither. For Christ has not satisfied for the breach of (much
less fulfilled) that which Mr B. called the conditions of the New Covenant, as
such conditions, etc. but as precepts of the old Covenant or Law of works. Or
should I say Christ has satisfied only for the Elect, will M. B. contradict?

3 If it should follow hence that the Elect then are righteous and justified
(viz. in Christ) before they believe; this would not sound as an absurdity to
any other besides them to whom truth is an absurdity, as has been before
showed.

4 Neither if it would follow hence that believing is needless to
justification, would it also follow, that it is needless to any other use? This
cannot fall from any other but a profane mouth and selfseeking man, that will
have nothing done out of love and obedience to God, to glorify him, but all
out of self-love for his own benefit only. But I have before proved faith to
be needful to justify us, to bring home into our own Consciences the benefit
and evidence of our Justification, even Faith acting in us, therefore Faith so
acting in us is also needful to this as well as to other uses, though Christ
has satisfied for the infirmity of it in reference to the Law.

5 It were no absurdity to confess the saved and the damned to be alike in
themselves and by nature (before Justification) but that the difference is
only in election and Christ's intention. Until then the Holy Ghost pronounces
both to be Children of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. both to be ungodly, Romans 4.
5. what then is the difference in themselves? But their believing and
Justification puts a difference in their relation first, and then in their
qualifications also, the one becoming sanctified, the other remaining unholy
still. The rest that is contained in this fifth place has been objected
before, and before answered.

6 What he says in the sixth place proceeds from the heat of passion and
height of self-confidence, not from strength of reason, or evidence of
Scriptures. Which of all the Laws and precepts of Christ had Justification for
its end, save that of Faith? Or who has confounded Law and Gospel, and
overthrown all the Laws and Precepts of Christ, by removing Faith from
operating in its office to this end? Who has contradicted the whole scope of
Scriptures by denying Christ to be made under the Law, to have fulfilled the
Law, to have born the curse of the Law, or its imposing upon all the necessity
(of duty) to perform our selves whatsoever the New Covenant requires of us to
Justification or Salvation? But that all which Mr. B. would make conditions of
Justification, must be such because he will so have it, notwithstanding all his
bombasticall noise of wo^ds, his great Cry and little wool, will not be
gr^nted him. When he brings us his large transcript of New Testament
Scriptures, I doubt upon due examination they will be found to make not for but
against him.

What he instanceth, p. 113, 114, 115. of Mr. Saltmarsh, I cannot deny it,
neither will I defend it. I remember that I did once read this passage in him,
and it was the same in substance, as Mr. B. here transcribes him. It is not a
grain or two of salt that can make his Argumentation there, enough savory:
unless he mean by Christ's repenting, believing, etc. his satisfying of Gods
justice by his expiatory sacrifice for the failings of our Faith and
Repentance, at they held not up to the Laws perfection, I dislike it no less
then Mr. B. But can we conjecture that Mr. Saltmarsh himself was not the first
that disliked it and all the rest both good and bad of what he wrote in that
Tractate? I have been told by some of his godly acquaintance, that the man had
a natural impotency of crazines in his brain. And the whirlwind of
imaginations wherewith he was carried to a hasty taking up of opinions, and no
les hasty hurling away of them again; the much of the top, and the little of
the bottom of wit, the flashes of nimblenes, and the want of solidity and depth
which he showed in his writings, his inconsistency with himself, with others,
with the Scriptures; his ex^reme mutability and roving from Tropic to Tropic
without settledness any where, do in great measure prove the report to be true.
And if so, he is to be pitied though his infirmities are not to be patronized.
However this extravagancy of his into so loos and careless expressions, does
neither justify Mr. B. Tenants, nor ought to ^rejudice the Truth from which
Mr. B. or any other has erred. Neither does Mr. B. captiousnes so null my
charity as to ente^^ain the least conjecture that ever Master Saltmarsh meant
or thought that Christ had sin to repent of, or believed to obtein the pardon
thereof.

Here now we find Master Baxter returning from his irefull pursuit of his
imaginary, not real Antinomians, and of a dead man's Ghost that could neither
see nor hear him. And when he reviews what he had written, he sees it neither
helped nor amended by his hot words spent upon the wind. He had affirmed, that
there is a twofold Righteousness necessary to our Justification; one, the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, the other a personal Righteousness,
or Righteousness of our own, inherent in our selves: And to this our own
Righteousness had attributed an equal power with the Righteousness of Christ
to our Justification, if not a power above, and superior to it. This assertion
of his he perceives to savor so much of humane arrogance, and (to use his own
words) to be a self-exalting, horrid Doctrine, of so high a nature, and so
contradictory to the whole Tenor of the Gospel, that a short affected brawl
with No-bodies, and dead men, cannot turn away the hatred which all that know
and love the Lord Jesus must needs conceive against it. He is therefore in a
straight, cure it he cannot, revoke it he will not: Therefore in stead of a
better shift, he posteth to the Monks and Jesuits, and borrows their either,
Cowl, or Cloak, to cover the deformity of it. And good reason have they to
stead him, for it is their cause in his hand, viz. Justification by our own
personal Righteousness, that has streightened him. Let us now see what he
brings from them to us, to make their assertion from his pen tolerable.

B. These. 21. 115. Not that we can perform these conditions without Grace:
(for without Christ we can do nothing) But that he enableth us to perform them
our selves; and does not himself repent, believe, love Christ, obey the Gospel
for us, as he did satisfy the Law for us.

B. Explication. This prevention of an objection I add, because some think it
is a self-ascribing, and derogating from Christ, to affirm our selves to be
but the Actors of those duties, though we profess to do it only by the
strength of Grace. But that it is Christ that repents, and believes, not we,
is language somewhat strange to those that have been used to the language of
Scripture, or Reason: Though I know there is a sort of sublime, Platonic,
Plotinian Divines sprung up of late among us, who think all things to be but
one, etc.

We find in Scripture, that as Christ has his Mystery, so has Antichrist his
Mystery also: And that this latter is a Mystery of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. and
Mystery, Babylon the great, etc. And it is somewhat mysterious and strange that
the materials of this Babel-building will not hold and close together without
Babel slime to cement it. Mr. Baxter would fain have fortified, and fastened
together the gaping chinks of this Babel with his own mortar. But it will not
hold, therefore is he forced ever and anon to make use of the proper slime
which the former Builders have left for them that come after to repair; so does
he in this place. None of his own sHifts and tricks could hide the
menstruousness, and monstrousness of his Doctrine; this Pall from Rome does it
no less perfectly then the Fig-leaf Aprons covered the nakedness and filthiness
of our first Progenitors from the eye of God. It sounded before so dreadfully,
as it was enough to make the ears of a true Christian to tingle at the hearing,
that Our own righteousness must go foot by foot with Christ's righteousness
to our Justification; but that which Mr. Baxter brings here from Rome, takes
off the ghastlyness, and makes all smooth, and himself in what he has said no
less amiable then he that had the Lambs horns, but the voice of the Dragon,
Rev. 13. 11. How should it be otherwise when all the glory is ascribed to Gods
Grace and to the Spirit, and Power of Christ? so says he. We are justified in
part by our own righteousness indeed, [yet] Not that we perform in this
Righteousness [which he terms these conditions] without Grace, (for without
Christ we can do nothing) but he enableth us to perform them, etc. And in
the Explication: This prevention of an objection I add, because some think it
a self-ascribing, and derogating from Christ, to affirm our selves to be the
Actors of these duties, though we profess to do it only by the strength of
Grace. Now when Mr. Baxter has thus said and professed, what reason can there
be given why he should not be thought as honest and innocent as the proudest
Popish Prelates, Jesuits, and Friars, that in answer to this objection which
Mr. Baxter preventeth here, have said and professed the same thing over and
over many hundred times? In stead of them all (which even to name with their
words abbreviated, would fill a volumne) I shall mention some few only. First
the Popish gloss thus speaks, Opera nostra, quatenus nostra Glosa ordinaria
in cap. 6. ad Romans ver. 23.
sunt, vim nullam Justificandi obtinent; quatenus vero non a nobis sunt, sed in
nobis a Deo facta sunt per Gratiam, Justificationem promerentur. i. e. Our
works as far as they are ours, have no power to justify: but as far as
they are not from us, but wrought of God by Grace in us, so they deserve
justification. In the same manner our English Jesuit Campian is recorded in the
dispute which he had with some of our English Divines to have sought an
evasion: Opera quidem legis (says he) quatenus sine fide and gratia Campian*
geruntur, nihil habere quod ad justitiam conferant: Caeterum opera sanctorum
Hominum cum ejusmodi non sint, sed fide and gratia referta, ideo justificari
dicuntur vere coram Deo, ex operibus suis, non tamen tanquam suis. i. e. The
works of the Law, as they are done without Faith and Grace, have nothing to
contribute to Justification; nevertheless the works of godly men are not of
that kind, but replenished with Grace and Faith; therefore are they said to be
justified by their works, yet not by works as theirs [but as wrought by the
grace of God in them.] So also Vega the Monk, Duplex est Justificatio, altera
ex gratia operandi infusa; Andr. Vega de Just. vag. 751.
altera ex debito Legis, seclusa Gratia: Excluditur ergo Justificatio illa quae
fit seclusa gratia: non Justificatio illa quae fit ex operibus gratia adjutis,
etc. i. e. There is a twofold Justification, one of the Grace to work infused
into us, the other of the debt of the Law without Grace [to enable.] That
Justification is excluded which is [sought after] without Grace, not that
Justification which is of good works helped by Grace. And Hosius, to Hosius.
elude that of the Apostle, We are not justified by works; Verum, inquit, ex
operibus iis quae legis sunt, aut quae liberi Arbitrii nostri propria existunt;
quae cum laborant imperfectione, nihil ad justificationem conferunt. i. e. It
is true (says he) of those works which are of the Law, or done in the strength
of Free Will only, which in regard they have their imperfection, cannot avail
to Justification. But as for such works as flow from our Free Will, as it is
set in operation by the over-powering of Gods Grace, He concludes otherwise.
Not to trouble our selves with what these Sophistical pratlers speak every, and
each of them severally let us take them collectively in one bunch and body, as
Mr. Pemble in his Treatise of Justification brings them in both head and tail,
great and small, thus disputing against Justification by the righteousness
which is in Christ, without any righteousness of our own intermixed. Against
this Doctrine they have two exceptions (says Mr. Pemble) Pemb. Treat. of Just
if page 37.


1. That we are not justified by any work of our own (viz.) that we our selves
do by our own strength without the help of Grace: But yet we may be justified
by some work which we do (viz.) by the aid of Grace; such is the work of Faith.

2. That we are not justified by any works of our own, i. e. by any works of
the Law; but by a work of the Gospel, such as Faith is, we may be justified.

By this time it is enough evident that Mr. Baxter fights the Popes battle with
the Popes weapons, that as he maintains the Popes cause, so he ranks and
files himself with the soldiers of the Popes Army; who then can give any
reason why he should not be thought as sure a friend either to Christ, or at
least to Antichrist, as are the Priests and Jesuits? Only if for no other, yet
for this cause Mr. Pemble deserves the brand of an Antinomian, (which in the
following part of his Tractate Mr. Baxter gives him page 173.) for disgracing
this sophistical shift which is common to other Papists with Mr. Baxter,
telling us in the forequoted place, that this distinction of works done without
Grace, and works done by Grace, was devised by one (and consequently followed
by others) that had, or have neither Wit nor Grace; being a trick to elude the
force of such Scriptures, as exclude indefinitely all works from Justification,
etc. A spightful speech, thus at once to cast dirt in the faces both of Mr.
Baxter, and all his fratres, or Friars of the holy Mother Church of Rome. No
marvel if Mr. Baxter, though he smooth him sometimes for his own ends, yet does
carry him in mind to fit him a pennyworth for it, when he thinks he has
caught an advantage against him.

Nevertheless though Mr. Baxters ingenuity and plain dealing seldom keep him
company in this dispute and controv^rfie, yet his subtilty and sophistry fail
him never. In his former positions before examined, he affirms, that besides
the imputed righteousness, we must have a personal righteousness inherent in
our selves, as absolutely necessary to salvation and justification: Here now to
make that his assertion sufferable, he minceth it in its terms, and in this
Thesis calls it a performance of conditions, and in the Explication, an Acting
of Duties, what before he had called justifying righteousness: Yea further
tells us, that some think it a self-ascribing, and derogating from Christ to
affirm our selves to be but the Actors of those Duties; though we profess our
selves to do it only by the strength of Grace. When contrariwise the question
is not about either the requisitenesse of Gospel duties, nor about the strength
by which they are to be performed; (herein if Mr. Baxter means as he
speaks, we are agreed) but about their office and end to which they are to
be performed; whether these duties are conditions of our Justification, and
that the end of our performing them ought to be, that we may be justified by
the righteousness which consists in their performance? Does he mean to tune
up a Palinodiam, to recant and eat up his former assertions, that he does here
so lenifie the roughness, and correct the extravagancy both of his words and
matter before delivered? Nothing less, but he throws sugar after his poison,
both that it may go down the more quietly what he has given already to his
unwary Readers to drink, and that they may be ready without suspicion to drink
deeper, and more deadly draughts of the same poison, which through the whole
sequel of this his Treatise he makes his business to temper for them. I shall
there answer more fully where he speaks more fully. In the mean time all may
see his dealing here to be not fair and logical, but fallacious and
sophistical.

He tells us in the conclusion of his Explication, that He will not digress from
his intended subject so far, as to enter here into a disquisition of the nature
and workings of that Grace which does enable us to perform these conditions,
but refers us to Parkers Theses de traductione peccatoris ad vitam.

What that Mr. Parker, or his work is, I know not. But that Mr. Baxter will not
here deliver his own judgment, I think he does well. For if his judgment in
the doctrine of Gods Grace working unto man's conversion, and sanctification, be
not more sound then about the operation of the same Grace to man's
Justification, his silence will be far more acceptable then his best
argumentations, to chaste ears, and spiritual minds. And little cause have we
to expect any good from him upon that subject, because that although there are
many who extol the power of man's Freewill to his conversion, even to the
clouding of the glory of Grace, that do notwithstanding hold fast the doctrine
of Justification by Christ alone, without any intermixture of our own
righteousness: Yet I know no one sort or sect of men that part our
Justification between Gods righteousness imputed, and our own inherent, but
that the same also, about the doctrine of Free Will, are wholly Popish, if not
Pelagian also.

In the bulk and body of his Explication, wherein he inveigheth against those
whom he in terms of abasement calls sublime, Platonic, and Plotinian
Divines, when as they account themselves essentially God himself; he has not
us dissenting from him.

CHAP. XV.
Whether men in Scriptures are said to be personally Righteous, because they
perform works and duties, as conditions of the new Covenant, ye a only for
this? Master Baxters reasons by which he labors to make it good, examined.

Thesis 22. BAx. page 118. In this fore-explained sense it is, that men in
Scripture are said to be personally Righteous: and in this sense it is, that
the faith and duties of beleivers are said to please God: viz. as they are
related to the Covenant of Grace, and not as they are measured by the Covenant
of Works.

Explication.
Those that will not acknowledge that the Godly are called Righteous in the
Scripture by reason of a personal Righteousness, consisting in the Rectitude
of their own dispositions and actions, as well as in regard of their imputed
Righteousness, may be convinced from these Scriptures if they will believe
them. Genesis 7. 1. and 18. 23, 24. Job 17. 9. Psalm. 1. 5, 6. and 37. 17, 21.
Eccles. 9. 1, 2. Ezekiel. 18. 20. 24. and 33. 12. 13. 18. Mat. 9. 13. [To these he
adds, as may be there read, a multitude of Scriptures more, which unless it
were to better purpose, it is not worthy the labor to transcribe.] To this he
further adds.]

That men are sometimes called Righteous in reference to the Laws and
judgments of men, I acknowledge: Also in regard of some of their particular
actions, which are for the substance good; and perhaps sometimes in a
comparative sense, as they are compared with the ungodly: as a line less
crooked, should be called straight in comparison of one more crooked. But how
improper an expression that is, you may easily perceive. The ordinary phrase of
Scripture has more truth and aptitude then so. Therefore it must needs be,
that men are called righteous, in reference to the New Covenant only. Which is
plain thus, Righteousness is but the denomination of our actions or persons as
they relate to some rule. This Rule, when it is the law of Man, and our actions
suit thereto, we are then righteous before men. When this rule is Gods Law, it
is either that of Works, or that of Grace. In relation to the former there is
none Righteous, no not one; for all have sinned and come short of the glory of
God. Only in Christ who has obeyed and satisfied, we are Righteous. But if
you consider our actions and persons in relation to the Rule of the New
Covenant, so all the regenerate are personally righteous: because they all
perform the conditions of this Covenant, and are properly pronounced righteous
thereby. Neither can it be conceived how the works of beleivers should either
please God, or be called righteousness, as they relate to that old Rule, which
does pronounce them unrighteous, hateful and accursed.

All this (in its substance at least) might be granted to a conscientious man,
that means as he speaks, hating all equivocations and mental reservations.
For it being first granted to us (what is here granted) That men are called in
Scripture, Righteous, sometimes in Regard of their imputed Righteousness,
sometimes in reference to the laws and judgments of Men, sometimes also in
regard of some of their particular actions, which are for their substance good:
and sometimes in a comparative sense, as they are compared with the ungodly:
The 3 last of these consisting in the Conformity of persons and actions with
the Laws of God, or of men, though not a perfect Conformity: upon this first
yielded to us, we could without any prejudice to truth grant back again to such
qualified men as are before mentioned, that sometimes men are called
[personally] Righteous, in reference to the New Covenant, i. e. in regard of
their inchoat sanctification, and an inherent righteousness flown out of
Christ into them, by means of their union unto Christ; for which (though not
yet Complete and perfect in them,) they are, a part praestantiore, termed
Righteous.

But to Master Baxter, whom we have as the wolf by the ears, prepared if we
hold him, to bite at our hands, if we let him go, to fall upon our throats, or
invade our face and head; if we deny him what he would have, to bite at us; if
we grant it him, to improve it against Christ our head; we grant nothing, we
can grant nothing, because in all that he speaks, he means not as he
speaks, but covers under fine words fallacies and falsities.

First then, we except against his Thesis, that it is a mere fardle of
Amphibologies and Equivocations. That he so delivers all, that he will be held
to nothing. For first, when he says In this fore-explained sense it is, his
meaning was (no doubt) to leave us doubtful, or at least to leave himself
this advantage, that we should remain uncertain where to find him. If we
should fetch the explanation from the next Theses, he might except that his
meaning was of some of the more remote Theses; if from the remote, he would fly
to the next; or if we should draw the sense from both the next and remote
Theses, he might evade thus, that he meant not any thing that was said in any
of his Theses, but something in the explication of some of them. And thus we
might pursue the wild-goose long enough, before we should find her pitching.

Secondly, When he says, Men in Scriptures are said to be personally
righteous, his purpose was to leave us in the like doubt, whether he means the
Righteousness of justification, or the Righteousness of Sanctification; and
himself the like advantage to fly from the one to the other, as may most
further his ends.

Thirdly, when he says again, And in this sense it is, he leaves us as knowing
as before, what sense he means, himself has not yet concluded what the
sense shall be, saving in general, such a sense as upon all occasions may serve
to his purposes.

Fourthly, When he says, That the faith and duties of believers are said to
please God. viz. As they are related to the Covenant of Grace, and not as they
are measured by the Covenant of works; he had a project to leave us uncertain,
whether by the word They and They twice used, he means those believers, or
those duties and works. And upon this hinge runs the question in great part
between us and the Papists, whether the works make the person, or the new
relation of the person make his works accepted.

And in the Fifth place no less ambiguity is there in the phrase, Related to
the Covenant of Grace, not to the Covenant of works. For in many respects may a
person or thing be related to either Covenant, and he tells us not in what
respect he means.

Now though from the whole scope of his worst we may assure our selves that he
would be understood in the worh, i. e. in the Popish sense, in reference to all
these things which he delivers in such words as may bear a manifold sense: yet
because the man delights to dance in the dark that he may not be yet taken, we
will neither cross his humor, nor befool our selves in dancing after him,
until he shall discover himself and his meaning in the light.

To the explication I except, that it is full of extravagancies, equivocations,
contradictions, saying and gainsaying, doing, and undoing, mental
reservations, and in all of fallacious subtilties. First he racks and rakes
together Scriptures in heaps to prove that a man's eyes are in his head, not in
his heels; I mean, to confirm that which no rational man ever denied, viz.
that sometimes men are called righteous by reason of a personal righteousness
etc. what an extravagancy is this, so strongly to fortify, where there is no
fear of an assault? But there lurketh here a twofold fallaciousnesse and
subtilty of Master Baxter. 1 a trick to delude his inconsiderate readers that
view his words running, without any stay or stopping to consider with an
opinion that he has all the Old and New Testaments on his side, in that he
can spit Scriptures so swiftly and numerously for himself. 2. a feat to screw
into the minds of unwary men a conceit, that all these Scriptures, (which he
confides they will not examine) do hold forth justification by our own
personal, or inherent righteousness. Which they do no more prove, then a crow
upon a sheeps back proves the sheep to be a crow, or a red hat forced upon
Master Baxters head proves him to be a Cardinal: Yet this must he mean and aim
at, else (to use the very same words which he before used against Master
Saltmarsh) his Argumentation is no more to the business that he has in hand,
then a harp to a harrow. For it is not the righteousness of sanctification,
but of justification that is the subject of his dispute.

2. He is liberal in his concessions, grants us first that the Scripture calls
men righteous sometimes in regard of their imputed righteousness; and when
they are so called in respect of their inherent righteousness, it is sometimes
in reference to the laws and judgments of men; Also [sometimes] in regard of
some of their particular actions which are in their substance good: (viz.
therein conformed to the law.) And sometimes in a comparative sense, as they
are compared with the wicked, etc. Yet with one flat contradiction recalls all
again, thus, Therefore it must needs be that men must be called Righteous in
reference to the New Covenant only. Who ever heard until now of such a
conclusion from such premises. If because we are sometimes in Scripture called
righteous in regard of imputed Righteousness, which (according to Master
Baxters Divinity) is our legal righteousness, and in regard of these other
ways which he mentions, none of which relates to the New Covenant, how does
it follow hence, Ergo, men are called righteous in reference to the New
Covenant only? In this, his Logic is no less mystical then his Divinity. I
can see no other ground of such an argutation in stead of an Argumentation, But
this; Master Baxer has granted, and laid the premises, Ergo, earum contrarium
verum est, i. e. Therefore the contrary to what he says must needs be true.
But paradventure he draws the conclusion not from those concessions; but only
from the words next and immediately going before, viz. The ordinary phrase of
Scripture has more truth and aptitude then so, Therefore etc. Did he not grant
that the Scriptures do call men righteous in all the former mentioned respects?
what is it then that he here says The ordinary phrase of Scripture has more
truth etc. Are some Scriptures more true then others? And therefore does he
reject that which is affirmed by the less true, and conclude that which is
affirmed by the more true Scriptures? or can he deny the Scriptures sometimes
to call men righteous in the former respects? No marvel if he does so
profanely wrest and abuse the Scriptures, when he takes them for such false
and uncircumcised things, that in his account they need also an inherent truth
and righteousness to justify them.

I should here prove, that men are called Righteous, not in reference to the
New Covenant only. But let him first bring his proofs to confirm the contra^y,
and I stand waiting to answer him. This he attempts to do in the next words:
Wherein we shall find him bringing nothing else but some vain and loose
propositions, fallaciously and sophistica^ly disposed, laying them down as
known principles, when they are the very things in question (for the most part
of them) yet Confirming them with no other authority than his own bare
affirmation and Negation, as if every paradox must be taken as sacred and
undisputable, when he has, and because he has delivered it. It is plain thus
(says he;)

B. Righteousness is but the Denomination of our actions and persons, as
related to some Rule. He had before said in the Explication of These. 16. page
96. That Righteousness is no proper real being, but a Modificatio entis, the
Modification of a being. This he means also here in calling it the Denomination
of our persons and actions as related to some Rule. But what end he has in
degrading Righteousness from the honor of a positive real being more then
other virtues, I do but yet kenn at a distance, and not fully comprehend. This
we clearly see that he takes the chair, and challenges to himself a
Magisterial power to create and destroy what his Cap thinks fit in Philosophy,
Logic, and Divinity. A famous Doctor, long versed in more sublime, and
profound studies, and by means thereof having let slip some of the poor
elementary rules of Grammar, having once by a mistake broken Priscians head,
being admonished, thereof is said in great haste to have answered, He would
make a New Grammar, that should conform to the incongruity of his words, seeing
his words were unconform to the congruity of Grammar. Such is the animosity of
Mr. Baxter, where his opinions agree not with the rules of Philosophy, or
Divinity, there he damns and annihilates the old, and with the breath of his
mouth creates a new Philosophy, and Divinity, that shall be subservient to his
opinions, and so God-like,

Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis. This he does here in defining, or
describing righteousness, denying it a positive, and real being; herein
puffing off all the Classical Philosophers, and Divines. Philosophers; for
Aristotle affirms, that all [Philosophers] call Righteousness, (...). Such
an habit by which men are apt to practice just things, and by which they act
and will just things. And to them he gives also his assent, calling it further
(...), not only a virtue, but a perfect virtue, citing and approving that
Proverbial verse,

(...) That all [or every] virtue is complexively [or comprehensively] in
Righteousness. Yea the most perfect virtue, (...); and again it is (says he)
(...), the most excellent of virtues, (...), not a part of virtue, but virtue
in the whole. So speaks he of Righteousness in the general, and as in the next
Chapters he distributes it into its specials, he makes virtue the general of
those several Righteousnesses.

In the same manner the choicest of all the learned and Orthodox Divines that I
have met with, make Righteousness thus taken in its largest sense, to sound,
and to be one and the same thing with virtue it self. Some call it bonitatem,
probitatem, and integritatem, goodness, honesty, and integrity; others,
rectitudinem virtutis, the uprightness, or rectitude of Virtue, defining its
specials by Virtue, when they assign the next and immediate genus; by habitus,
when they assign the remote genus. And are not Virtues, and either natural,
moral, or infused Habits, Positive, and Real Beings? Must all other
Philosophers and Divines vanish to nothing, when Mr. Baxter comes with his
Denominations, Modifications, or rather Noddifications?

Nevertheless though we deny to him that Righteousness is but a bare
Denomination, or dead notion; yet we grant to him that true righteousness both
of Men's Actions and persons must relate to some rule. What will follow hence?

B. This Rule, when it is the law of Man, and our actions suit thereto, we are
then Righteous before men. True, and yet latet anguis in herba, under this
truth there lurketh a fraudulent falsehood. Mr. Baxter has his restrictions to
promote, but not to prevent a falsehood. The thing that he pretends to prove,
is, That men are called Righteous [in Scripture] in reference to the New
Covenant only. There he finds the word only to make a falsehood. Here he
cannot find it, will not find it; for if it be brought in place, it will
reprove him of falsehood to all men. Is it for men's actions suiting to the Laws
of men only, that they are called in Scripture righteous before men? He would
be so understood; for if it be not only for this, if at all for their outward
and appearing conformity to the Law of God, they are called Righteous before,
or in the account of men, his conclusion is destroyed by this prop which he
brings to sustain it. And yet he dares not to say, only for this they are
called Righteous before men. For he knows whole streams of Scriptures would
be brought ^o confute so bold an assertion. But he proceeds.

B. When this Rule is Gods Law, it is either that of Works, or that of Grace:
In relation to the former there is none righteous, no not one, etc. ut supra.
This, and that which follows is all sophistical, fallacious, and catching.

First the distinction which he here makes of the Law of God, that it is
either the Law of Works, or Law of Grace, is somewhat a strange phrase to
chaste ears, that desire to hear Scripture Doctrines delivered in Scripture
terms, that oppose Grace to the Law, and are not wont to call it a Law.

Secondly, it is contrary to Mr. Baxters doctrine and Gospel: for howsoever he
in words talks of a twofold Covenant of Works and of Grace, to beguile such
as desire to be beguiled; yet really he labors to bring all under a Covenant
of Works, making man's own righteousness the condition of both, so altering the
name, but retaining the nature and power of the first Covenant still; as I have
before evinced from his disputes, and himself will in the following part of his
book discover more fully.

3. There is an ambiguity in the word Rule, he manifests not how far his
meaning therein in reference to the Law extends, whether for a direction
only what is good, and what is evil, wherewith God will be served, and what
is it that offends him, teaching us to perform the one, and to shun the
other: Or whether also for a direction how far, and in what degrees the good is
to be done, and the evil shunned, that we may be justified and saved thereby.
Though we may without much difficulty smell his meaning herein, yet because he
reserveth it for another place clearly to express himself, we also will
reserve it for the same place to make him a full answer.

4. He plays his usual game of equivocation, in telling us, that In relation
to the former there is none righteous, no not one. This is not that which is
concluded, and nothing ought to be in the conclusion, which is not also in the
premises. The conclusion (as we have seen) is that none is called righteous,
etc. The proof here is, that none is righteous. These phrases much differ. A
man may be called righteous, in reference to the rule of the Law, though he be
not absolutely righteous, in every particular thereof to Justification; and
himself acknowledges that in many respects the Scripture calls men
righteous, in reference to the Law of Works, who notwithstanding shall never be
justified by the Law of Works; as a little before in this Explication we have
seen. Concerning the Righteousness which is by the Law, I was blameless,
says the Apostle, Phil. 3. 6. And, I have lived in all good Conscience unto
this day, Act. 23. 1. Lo even while Paul was yet a Saul, a hater, a persecuter
of the Gospel Righteousness, yet he is termed, and called Righteous,
blamelesly Righteous, conscientiously righteous, in relation to the Law of
Works. Or when Judah says of Tamar, She is, or Saul of David, Thou art more
righteous then I; and Solomon of Joab, Two men more righteous then himself,
Genesis 38. 26. 1 Samuel 24. 17. 1 Kings 2. 32. Were these here called Righteous in
reference to the righteousness of the Gospel, and not of the Law? Or when the
Lord by his Prophet calls them righteous which turned from their
righteousness, and perished in, and for their wickedness, Ezekiel. 3. 20, 21.
and 18. 20, 24, 26. and 33. 12, 13, 18. was it an Evangelical, or a legal
Righteousness, that gave them the denomination of Righteous persons? When
Isaiah calls all his, all the peoples Righteousness, menstruous or filthy
Ragge^, and Paul his Righteousness, Dung Isa. 64. 6. Phi. 3. 9. yet both such
as gave them the denomination of Righteous men, Mr. Baxter himself will not
say, that these were the righteousness of the New Covenant: I could heap, and
hoard up Scriptures to the same purpose which call men righteous in reference
to the Law of Works: But in what respects men are called so in Scripture; for
an unperfect righteousness is not the thing in question. Not that they were
justified by it, is certain; but in whatsoever other respects, it destroys
Mr. Baxters conclusion, that men are called Righteous in relation to the
Covenant of Grace only; and shows the inconsequence of his Argumentation, that
because none is perfectly righteous, viz. to Justification in relation to the
Law of Works, Ergo, in no other respect is he called Righteous according to the
Covenant of Works.

What he adds, Only in Christ, who has obeyed, and satisfied, we are
Righteous. This we embrace as our Gospel Righteousness, and Mr. Baxter alone
without company, or suffrage of Prophet, or Apostle, Ancient, or Modern
Writers, affirms to be our legal Righteousness. But hitherto we find it an
affirmation without confirmation. It follows.

Bax. But if you consider our actions and persons in relation to the Rule of
the New Covenant, so all the Regenerate are personally righteous, because they
all perform the conditions of this Covenant, and are properly pronounced
Righteous thereby. Neither can it be conceived how the works of Believers
should either please God, or be called Righteousness, as they relate to that
old Rule, which does pronounce them unrighteous, hateful, and accursed. He
proceeds still in his sophistry without any the least particle of Scripture, or
any thing else, save the wind of wit and words to prove what he would have us
to believe. It behooves him that will fasten and screw into the judgments of
men new, and strange Doctrines, that never sounded before (at least in the same
phrase of words) in their ears, to bring irrefragable Arguments to confirm it.
But such paradoxes and prodigies both of doctrines and words, does Mr. Baxter
here hold forth, as were never before heard of, but in uttering them he is a
Barbarian to us, and we Barbarians to him, in not understanding them, yet
brings nothing else but his own word to promote them. The mysteries of his
sophistry are so deep, that our wooden wits cannot sink to the bottom to
comprehend and understand it.

First, what means he by the Rule of the New Covenant? Does he put the New
Covenant here in the Passive, or in the Active, and Possessive sense? i. e.
Does he mean by the Rule of the New Covenant a rule extrinsecall, and without
the New Covenant, to which the New Covenant must be conformed, that it may be
regular; or a rule in the New Covenant, and by it made out to us, whereunto we
must be conformed? If in this latter sense, then whether without, or else with
reference to some end? if to some end, whether then to Sanctification or
Justification? I cannot so much as conjecture that he puts the phrase in the
first sense, that he tells us here of a Rule to which the New Covenant must be
conformed, because it is altogether alien from the scope of his dispute; and
besides how we should be related to a rule with which the New Covenant must
suit, I cannot see; for such a Rule I should conceive to be immanent in God,
and so hid from us, that we cannot perceive how to regulate our selves by it.
This then he cannot mean.

2. Neither do I conceive that his meaning is, that we are to be conformed to
the Rule which is contained in, and manifested by the New Covenant, without
respect to any end to which the rule directs; that we ought to be thus and
thus qualified, and thus to act only, because the Gospel so bids, without
reference to the end of such qualifications and actings: For neither is this
any thing to the purpose of his dispute. Neither in this sense can such
qualifications and actings be in any show of reason called, what Mr. Baxter
here calls them, Conditions of the New Covenant: For they are Conditions (if
at all Conditions) in reference to some ends, without which the end cannot be
obtained. Or what ends does the New Covenant immediately point at, more then
either our Justification or Sanctification?

3. If he mean the Rule of the New Covenant for Sanctification. 1. Then I shall
demand of him, whether the Law of Works be not the rule of the matter and
substance of those qualifications and actions which conduce to Sanctification,
even under the New Covenant; and whether the Rule of the New Covenant or Gospel
do extend any further then to the Modification of those Qualifications and
Actions, directing to the Mediator from whom to derive those Qualifications and
Actions, and by, and through whom to present our selves and them unto God? 2.
And then, whether in reference to Sanctification, men may not be called
Righteous, as having their righteousness relating to the rule of the Old, as
well as the New Covenant? I cannot be so uncharitable to think that Mr. Baxter;
having positively affirmed that believers are in part under the Curse of the
Law, will deny them to be also in part under the rule and direction of the Law;
if he should, he must brand upon himself the due infamy of Antinomianism,
which he unduly and falsely charge upon others. 3. And yet this will in no
wise advantage his cause: For we grant him, that in reference to the inherent
righteousness of Sanctification, men are called Righteous in the Scriptures by a
personal righteousness. But what is this to that righteousness in our selves
equally necessary to the righteousness which is in Christ, to Justification,
which he had in the former Theses asserted, and here goes about to prove or
illustrate?

4. If he mean the rule of the New Covenant to Justification, (which seems to
me unquestionable, though he will not fully express himself) then

1. I demand of him, how our actions relate to this rule? Is it, that
themselves, i. e. our very actions may be justified by it? This he condemns,
These. 25, and its Explication. Or that they may Justify us, as conditions of
our Justification? This most probably is his meaning, which when he confesses,
he confesses himself worse then Popish; for the Papists ascribe Justification
not to actions indefinitely, but to some good works only. When he speaks more
broadly then they, let him show himself without a vizard under the name and
notion of a Papist, and he will not want answerers or answers.

But upon this supposition let us see what he infers; So all the regenerate
are personally righteous, because they all perform the conditions of this
Covenant, and are properly pronounced righteous thereby. Let us now collect
together what in probability is the whole sum of his dispute. Leaving what he
has said to deny that men are called Righteous in respect of Justification, by
the rule of the Law, because we do not, cannot perform the conditions of the
Law (unto which I have already answered) here he endeavors to prove, that they
are called Righteous only in reference to the rule of the Gospel; and if we
draw his reasoning into a syllogism, it runs thus.

All that perform the conditions which the Gospel, or New Covenant prescribe
unto Justification, are personally righteous thereby, and properly so called.

But all the Regenerate perform the conditions which the Gospel, or New
Covenant prescribe unto Justification.

Ergo, All the Regenerate are personally righteous, and properly so called
thereby.

If Mr. Baxter says not this, either he says nothing, or I understand nothing
of what he says. But if this be his meaning, then as to his Proposition or
Major,

1. I except against the ambiguity of the terms, they want explication. What
he means by conditions, I know not; for if we grant one, yet shall we grant
but one Gospel condition of Justification, viz. Faith in Christ Jesus. When
therefore he puts the plural number for the singular, until he shall certify
us what he means, we must leave him uncerta in what we will answer. Again,
it is doubtful what he means by personally Righteous: if he mean thereby the
same thing with that which our Divines call inherently Righteous, and put in
opposition to imputed righteousness, we deny the proposition as false and
Popish. But if he means by personal righteousness the Justification of our
persons by the blood of Christ apprehended by Faith, we gainsay not his
proposition, but pronounce it to be utterly besides his purpose, which is to
prove a twofold righteousness, one in our selves, the other in Christ necessary
to salvation. Yet that this is not, but the former is his meaning, he makes
evident by the word [ thereby] i. e. by such performance. And if righteous by
his own works and performance, he needs not to step further to Christ for
another righteousness, to make him more then righteous, exorbitantly righteous,
righteous in a way of supererogation. He that has justified himself, needs no
other Justifier. Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance.

As to the Assumption, or miner Proposition, I except that it labors of the
same ambiguity in the word [ conditions] with the major, so that until he
tell us how many thousand, and what conditions he means, I must be dumb
instead of answering.

To both Propositions, I except that there lies a fallacy in the word [
perform.] No living person can perform any thing so as to be justified, and be
termed absolutely righteous by such performing. Yet every Regenerate man does
perform that upon which he may rest confident that Christ is made of God
Righteousness to him, and so have his Justification evidenced to his own
conscience. But if Mr. Baxter will change his terms, and call (after the tone
of Scriptures, and Orthodox Writers) Christ our New Covenant or New Gospel
righteousness, and our performings or works, our legal righteousness, then lo
how near I shall close with him. I shall say with him, that all which perform,
are righteous; but in what sense? Righteous in a proportion answering the
proportion of their performings; if they perform perfectly, then perfectly
righteous; if unperfectly, and sinfully, then sinfully, and unperfec^ly
righteous. Whatsoever else Mr. Baxter would hence elicite, in doing it he
prostitutes all his integrity to sophistry and fallacies. The rest has been
said, and answered before, in, and upon the former clauses of this Explication.

Yet as if he had spoken all this out of Peter's chair, which is as free from
errors as an Irish cabin from Lice, so he holds forth his golden foot
triumphantly to tread on their necks, as being all laid prostrate before him,
whosoever have since the beginning of the world, said any thing contrary to
this doctrine which he has brought to light now at the end of the world. Thus
disdainfully exulting over them,

Bax. page 121. Two sorts among us therefore discover intolerable ignorance in
this point. 1. Those that commonly use and understand the words [ Righteous,
and Righteousness] as they relate to the old Rule; as if the godly were called
righteous (besides their imputed righteousness) only because their
sanctification, and good works have some unperfect agreement to the Law of
works; as if it were a straight line which is in one place straight, and in
another crooked; much less that which is in every place crooked in some
degree. I have been sorry to hear many learned Teachers speak thus. In these
words we find first gross contradiction, whom he accuses in one breath of
intolerable ignorance, in the next breath he applaudes to be learned Teachers.
If intollerably ignorant, how learned Teachers? If learned Teachers, how
intollerably ignorant? Does he not contradict himself? unless he will thus
solve it. That in comparison with others they are learned Teachers, but as
compared with himself, they are intollerably ignorant. This indeed is employed
in the next words, compassing the learned Teachers, I have been sorry to hear
many learned Teachers speak. Others that were taken for learned saw no
infirmity in them, But I have been sorry to take notice of their nakedness, and
babishness in learning. So does the light of Moon and Stars vanish before the
Sun. Let us next take notice whom he calls intollerably ignorant, and for
what.

1. Those that commonly use, and understand the words, etc. ut supra. The
Crab-fish cannot, will not cease to go fideling, and crooked, though his damme
entreat him to take straight steps. Can Mr. Baxter in a case of this nature
deal simply, and sincerely? Shall we conclude (because he says it) that many
intollerably ignorant learned Teachers have said, and maintained, that the
Godly are [in Scriptures] called Righteous (besides their imputed
righteousness) Only because their Sanctification and good works have some
imperfect agreement to the Law of works, Credat Judaeus Apelles, or Quaerat
peregrinum: I am too much acquainted with his fallacies and falsifications to
believe it. It were a m^er contradiction, for how that should be called
Sanctification which has only some imperfect agreement with the Law of Works,
I see not; I never met with that man that has professed himself to have seen.
We do not place Sanctification in some outside conformity of the utter man,
and his visible works only to the Letter of the Law, but in the actual
infusion of the Holiness and Righteousness of the Law into man's heart,
working a real change of the whole man from the image of Satan, unto the image
of God. Whom the Lord Jesus has justified, and by his blood reconciled to God,
so changing their relations: Them also he sanctifies by his Spirit, and
reformes to the image of God by the alteration of their qualities, which though
it be but inchoate and unperfect at the first, yet is it more and more
consummate and perfited until the day of the Lord Christ. So that here is not
only the Law without, to rule and direct, but the holiness and righteousness
of the Law, and Christ by his Spirit as the root thereof, wrought by Gospel
grace in the heart, and diffused through the whole life; and the same conformed
not only to the Law, but the Gospel also, as before has been mentioned. In
respect of this sanctification, though yet but unperfect, we indeed affirm
the godly to be sometimes called Righteous, yet not righteous to
Justification, but in regard of the life of Righteousness new begotten and
inherent in them.

But it is observable how subtlely he slanders the Orthodox Teachers, with a
fault which is his, not theirs, how he would condemn them for men, attributing
too much to the Law and Works, because they call those virtues, and good works
which the Law commands, a righteousness with which the godly do serve the
Lord, in, and through Christ Jesus. When himself affirms the same to be the
very Righteousness by which they are justified. For if he be demanded whether
the personal Righteousness which he contendeth to be necessary and effectual
to Justification, ought not to have at least some unperfect agreement to the
Law of God, he answers affirmatively, and fights strongly for it in the sequel
of this Treatise. Let him be demanded whether any other supposed Righteousness
that the Law command not, can be our personal righteousness to justify us?
This he^ denies. What then is the difference betwixt him and them This only,
that they will not say with him, that his righteousness (so unperfect as he
here terms it, and which in the las^ words of the former Section he pronounced
unrighteous, hateful, and accursed) is the personal righteousness by which
men are justified before God. If you ask how such works should justify, being
so unrighteous and accursed? yes, says he, as God has appointed them to be
the conditions of the New Covenant, the performance whereof justifies and
makes us personally righteous before God. Here now is a heavenly Gospel. Such
conditions and such a justification, if the one be accursed much more the
other. And where is Gods Righteousness, if he will not justify but upon
accursed conditions?

Those that will not, have not consented to this doctrine of his, he calls
intolerably ignorant. Let him now name any one either Divine, or understanding
Christian in any of the Churches that have shook off Popery, and not sucked it
back again, consenting with him in this doctrine; else it is not his humility
that is discovered, in calling all the godly and learned that are, or have been
in any of the Churches of Christ, intolerably ignorant. Satis pro imperio;
enough Magisterially out of doubt.

What he talks of the straight, crooked line, has its dependence only upon
the fallacious definition which he before gave of Righteousness, making it a
mear empty notion, not a virtue or gif of Gods grace; which definition falling,
this comparison falls with it. For if we grant unto Righteousness a real being,
Master Baxter himself will not deny but, as one spark of fire under a vast
heap of ashes is as true and real fire as if no ashes were there; so one spark
of righteousness, (I mean living Righteousness) under a whole body of
infirmities, is as true and truly Righteousness as if no infirmities were
there; And if God vouchsafe to call a man righteous in reference to that poor
pittance of Righteousness, rather than unrighteous for the whole mass of his
corruptions: what art thou O man that reply against God? is thine eye evil
because he is good?

B. Most they say to maintain it, is in this simple objection. If we are called
holy because of an unperfect holiness, then why not Righteous, because of an
imperfect righteousness?

Answ. Holiness signifies no more but a dedication to God, either by
separation only, or by qualifying the subject, first with an aptitude to its
Divine employment, and then separating, or devoting it: as in our
sanctification. Now a person imperfectly so qualified, is yet truly and really
so qualified. And therefore may truly be called Holy so far. But
Righteousness signifying a conformity to the rule, and a conformity with a
quatenus, an imperfect rectitude, being not a true conformity or rectitude at
all, (because the denomination is of the whole action or person, and not of a
certain part, or respect) therefore imperfect Righteousness is not
Righteousness, but unrighteousness: It is a contradiction in adjecto.

Object. But, is our personal Righteousness perfect, as it is measured by the
New rule?

Answ. Yes: as I shall open to you by and by.

I could here heap up a multitude of orthodox writers that do call our personal
Righteousness by the title of (evangelicall) as signifying from what rule it
does receive its name.

The words of the Poet are here verified by Master Baxter, mali bonos malos
esse volunt, ut sint sui similes. He is angry with the simplicity of the godly
and orthodox that they are single and sincere in their disputes, and would have
them double and crafty like himself. In this sense I acknowledge the Argument
which he says they bring, and is most they say to maintain their assertion, is
a simple objection. They have more to say for the maintenance thereof then all
his sophistry can subvert. And this argument though simple, yet is not silly or
weak, but strong and sound against all his batteries. It is drawn a pari. If
there be a parity between righteousness and holiness to give a denomination
of holy and righteous persons, then the argument is firm, and men may be as
properly termed Righteous in reference to a righteousness not yet perfected,
as holy in reference to a holiness not perfected: at verum prius, ergo and
Postorius. The former is true, therefore the latter also. Master Baxter denies
the assumption, and goes about to show a disparity in this case between
righteousness and holiness: making holiness to be either only a separation
of a thing or person to holy use, without an infusion of a new qualification to
fit him for holy employment, or at least the qualification of such a person
first always, and then a separating of him afterward, as if usually the
consecration or separation by the blood, did not go before the new qualifying
of him by the Spirit of Christ, (this indeed is not so squaring with the Popish
Canon, as his way.) But to let pass this, and touch only upon that wherein he
opposes righteousness to holiness. Holiness he grants to be a
qualification, and consequently to have a real Being. This here he denies, as
before, of righteousness. A merely fallacious evasion; for righteousness has
no less a real being than holiness (as has been before showed.) And the
Scripture gives its Testimony, making Righteousness and true Holiness, as it
were the two essentials of the New Man, which is created after God, i. e. in
answer and conformity to that essential Righteousness and Holiness that are
in God himself. Ephesians. 4. 24. And what else does Saint Peter mean in affirming
the Saints to be Partakers of the Divine Nature, but by the infusion or
creating of Righteousness as well as Holiness in them, by which they are
reformed to the nature of God, which is Holiness and Righteousness. 2 Pet. 1.
4. And no more is it a true Holiness, than this a true Righteousness which are
not both in some measure conformed to the Law of God. And because they are both
alike real beings, or qualifications: Therefore what Master Baxter says of
Holiness may be no less truly said of Righteousness also. That a person
imperfectly so qualified, is yet truly and really so qualified, and therefore
may truly be called Righteous so far. What he does Philosophari to the
contrary of Righteousness, is against both Philosophy and Divinity, as has
been before manifested.

When he has once opened the perfection of this Righteousness according to the
new rule: we shall there and then examine it as in its due time and place.

Let him name but one of the heap and multitude of those Orthodox writers, that
call our Personal Righteousness [Evangelicall] in his sense, else let him give
us leave to conclude, that he makes no conscience of heaping together
falsities in multitudes to Eclipse the truth. But who are in his account
Orthodox writers, though he does not expressly tell us, yet he has made it
easy for us to judge.

So far of the former sort of intolerably ignorant, viz. the learned
teachers. He proceeds to the latter.

Bax. page 123. The second sort that show their gross ignorance, of the nature
of righteousness, are the Antinomians (and some other simple ones whom they
have misled) who if they do but hear a man talk of a righteousness in
himself; or in any thing he can do, or making his own duty either his
righteousness, or conducible thereto; they startle at such Doctrine, and even
gnash the teeth, as if we preached flat Popery, yea as if we cried down Christ,
and set up our selves: The ignorant wretches not understanding the difference
between the two sorts of Righteousness: That of the Old Covenant, which is all
out of us in Christ, and that of the New Covenant, which is all out of Christ
in our selves (though wrought by the power of the Spirit of Christ.) In this,
and that which follows, there is nothing but dirt and wind, all unworthy of
the labor to transcribe it, much less deserving an answer to be given it. I
should therefore have past it by with disdainful silence, were it not for the
respect which I have to the weakest sort of Readers, which ordinarily are more
affrighted with high and bragging words, then wrought upon by sound reasons
from the Word of God: For preventing of delusion to such, I shall therefore say
somewhat, and there will not be need that I should say much.

First then I undertake to maintain, that although there be no man upon earth
that has in words pretended more hatred against Antinomians, then Mr. Baxter,
to make them hateful to such as are foolishly apt to hate without a cause; yet
is there no other man upon earth that has in reality and substance so much
honored and magnified them as Mr. Baxter. He makes them, even them alone to be
the sound Christians, the advancers and maintainers of the pure Gospel of
Christ against all the falsities and portentous lies of Antichrist, railing
against them as the only hinderers of the total ruin of Christ's Kingdom, and
the advancing of the Kingdom of Antichrist in the room thereof as Paramount.
These he affirms here to be he men supereminently zealous for Christ, who if
they do but hear a man talk of a righteousness in himself, or any thing that
he can do ( viz. as ordained, or powerful to justify; for so is his meaning,
or else he says nothing) or makes his own duty either his (Justifying)
Righteousness, or conducible thereto; they startle, etc. as if we preached,
etc. ut supra.

O noble spirits! these are the men indeed (as far as we can judge) baptized
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. Let me not live one moment longer then the
Grace of Christ supports me in such Antinomianism. Such have been all the holy
Orthodox Reformers, Martyrs, Teachers, and Saints, in all the Churches from
Luther unto this very day, such were the Apostles. Let them be accursed that
preach another Gospel; I would they were cut off that pervert this Gospel,
says the Apostle. These all are at once Anathematized by Mr. Baxter for
Heretics, for daring to be bold in speaking for Christ, when himself is
impudent to speak for Antichrist. But tush, all these were but the Angels of
the Churches, this man is mounted higher, to take the Chair among the
Seraphims, or Seraphicall Doctors: Therefore pittieth the childishness of this
lower order, that they have not more sublime apprehensions. The ignorant
wretches (says he) not understanding the difference between the two sorts of
Righteousness, that of the Old Covenant, which is all out of us in Christ, and
that of the New Covenant, which is all out of Christ in our selves. Oh
intolerable ignorance of all the worthies that have lived in all ages ever
since God had a Church upon earth, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
Pastors, and Teachers, that none of all these could see that which never was,
never shall be! Yea the most holy Father, Christ's Vicar, with all his Cattle,
Cardinals, Bishops, Schoolmen, Monks, and Jesuits, could but kenn it a distance
unperfectly, until Mr. Baxter (Cui meliore Luto finxit praecordia Titan)
having lighted his Torch from him that fell as Lightning from heaven, brings it
here as clear and visible as the man in the Moon to our view. What Lyncean
eyes has he! one of Platoes scholars no doubt, that had higher speculations
then others, and could see Ideaes, which this man has discerned more clearly
then all his elder brethren that have studied, and even spent themselves in the
contemplatioa of them. But let us leave the man, Narcissus like, in his amorous
doting on his beauty and righteousness, while we present our selves before the
Lord, who is present only in Christ, reconciling the world to himself.

The objection about Ahab and Nineveh, and the answer thereto given, wherewith
the Explication of this Thesis is closed up, I pass by as altogether
impertinent to this question of Justification by our own personal righteousness;
except either the Objector or the Answerer, i. e. Mr. Ri. or Mr. Baxter will
say, that either Ahab or those Ninevites, were ever truly justified.

CHAP. XVI.
Whether Faith in its proper sense, or [in Mr. Baxters sense] the (...)
credere, i. e. Believing as it is an act, or work of man, and comprehends in
it all duties, be it self, our righteousness? or be imputed to us for
Righteousness to Justification? or both? Mr. Baxters Reasons brought to prove
the affirmative of all these, examined.

Thesis 23. page 125. BAx. In this sense also it is so far from being an
Error to affirm that (Faith it self is our righteousness) that it is a truth
necessary for every Christian to know, i. e. Faith is our Evangelical
Righteousness (in the sense before explained) as Christ is our legal
Righteousness.

Explication:
This assertion, so odious to those that understand not its grounds, is yet so
clear from what is said before, that I need no more to prove it. For first I
have cleared before, that there must be a personal righteousness besides that
imputed, in all that are justified. And that secondly, the fulfilling of the
conditions of each Covenant, is our Righteoesnesse in reference to that
Covenant. But Faith is the fulfilling of the conditions of the New Covenant;
therefore it is righteousness in relation to that Covenant. I do not here take
Faith for any our single act, but as I shall afterward explain it.

Mr. Baxter verifieth the Proverb, Noscitur ex comite, qui non cognoscitur ex
se. The affections of the man may be discerned by his company, with whom he is
(as it were) in a confederacy. The Holy Ghost pronounces of the Jews once
degenerated into the manners, and false-worships of the Canaanits, that they
were [no more children of Abraham, but that] their birth was of the land of
Canaan, their father was an Amorite, their mother a Hittite, when once they had
taken the pattern of their Religion from the Amorites and Hittites, and
diverted from the Word of God, and steps of their own Progenitors, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and the following Patriarcks, and Prophets, Ezekiel. 16. 3. What
should we account less of Mr. Baxter, whom we find deriving his Religion
from the Papists, and their associates the Arminians, in contempt of
Scriptures, and the godly Divines of the Reformed Churches?

His former assertions, That believers are still under the curse of the Law
after they are in Christ: That their Justification is but conditional both
before, and after their believing: That none is (in any sense) justified before
he believes: That Justification is a continued act, during only so long as we
continue fulfilling, broken off when we break, and repaired when we return to
the fulfilling again of the supposed conditions thereof. That it is not
completed before the end of our life (or as Mr. Baxter, out-stripping most of
his Masters, will have it) not before the day of Judgment. (These all) he
cannot deny to be Doctrines held in common by the Jesuits and Arminians; and I
could (were there need) allege the very words of Bellarmine, and other
Jesuits, and of Arminius, Corvinus, Episcopius, Grevinchovius, the Apology of
the Remonstrants, and in most of these even Socinus himself, whose not only
matter but also their very words Mr. Baxter has transcribed into our language,
in the delivery of those Tenants.

Here again he does in this Thesis lay down a conclusion (before more then
hinted at) wherein Bellarmine, Socinus, and Arminius fully agree; that, Faith
is our righteousness, even Faith it self our Evangelicall righteousness (viz.
to Justification) that it is so far from being an error to affirm it, that it
is a truth necessary for every Christian to know. He acknowledges it in the
Explication to be an assertion odious to some. Rational men would therefore
expect great strength of Arguments to prove it. And what brings he? Nothing
but his own Authority, which to us is of equal, and but of equal authority with
theirs from whom he has taken it up. It is clear (says he) from what is said
before. No less clear I acknowledge, then the face of a man in a mud-wall for
a Looking-glass. 1. I have cleared before (says he) besides that imputed,
that there must be also a personal Righteousness in all that are justified.
This is not denied, that there must be such a personal Righteousness, but
that where it is, it is there proper and effectual to Justification, is no
better cleared then has been said. How the second thing was before cleared by
him, I refer to that which has been said of both sides about it. If the
casting of dust and dirt into the eyes, may be properly called clearing of
them; in this, and in no other sense, do I acknowledge the thing to be
cleared by what Mr. Baxter has before said.

Where he lays down this caution, ( I do not here take Faith for any one
single act, but as I shall afterward explain it) he might have spared the
labor to tell us so: For we see what himself sees, that so to take it, would
be a ruinating blow to the most of the foregoing and following doctrines about
Justification, contained in this his book.

But he goes forward thus.

B. Quaest. In what sense is then Faith said to be imputed to us for
Righteousness, if it be our Righteousness it self?

Answ. Plainly thus. Man is become unrighteous by breaking the Law of
Righteousness that was given him. Christ fully satisfies for this
transgression, and buyeth the prisoners into his own hands; and makes with
them a New Covenant: That whosoever will accept of him, and believe in him who
has thus satisfied, it shall be as effectual for their Justification, as if
they had fulfilled the Law of Works themselves.

A Tenant forfeiteth his* Lease to his Landlord by not paying his Rent: he
runs deep in debt to him, and is disabled to pay him any more Rent for the
future. Whereupon he is put out of his house, and cast into prison till he pay
the debt. His Landlords son pays it for him, takes him out of prison, and
puts him in his house again as his Tenant, having purch^sed house and all to
himself: He makes him a new Lease in this Tenor, that paying but a Pepper-corn
yearly to him, he shall be acquit both from his debt, and from all other Rent
for the future, which by his old Lease was to be paid. Yet does he not cancel
the old Lease, but keeps it in his hands, to put it in suit against the
Tenant, if he should be so foolish as to deny the payment of the pepper-corn.
In this case the payment of the grain of pepper is imputed to the tenant, as if
he had paid the rent of the old Lease. Yet this imputation does not extol the
pepper corn, nor vilify the benefit of his benefactor, whoredeemed him. Nor
can it be said that the purchase did only serve to advance the value and
efficacy of that grain of pepper. But thus, a personal Rent must be paid for
the testification of his homage. He was never redemeed to be independent, and
his own Landlord and Master. The old Rent he cannot pay. His new Landlords
clemency is such, that he has resolved this grain shall serve the turn.

Do I need to apply this to the present case? or cannot every man apply it?
Even so is our Evangelicall Righteousness or Faith imputed to us for as real
Righteousness, as perfect obedience. Two things are considerable in the debt of
Righteousness. The value, and the personal performance, and interest. The
value of Christ's satisfaction is imputed to us in stead of the value of a
perfect obedience of our own performing; and the value of our Faith is not so
imputed. But because there must be some personal performance of homage,
therefore the personal performance of Faith shall be imputed to us for a
sufficient personal payment; as if we had paid the full rent; because Christ,
whom we believe in, has paid it; and he will take this for satisfactory
homage. So it is in point of personal performance, and not of value that Faith
is imputed.

I should have left this passage, as merely windy, to the wind, finding nothing
in it that has the least force to disturb, or shake any wel-grounded
Christian. Only because not all that are true Christians, are also so well
grounded and rooted in Christ, and built upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets as could be desired; but not a few children in understanding
whirled to and fro with every wind of doctrine; for prevention of their
sliding I shall say something, (and there is not much need of speaking much) to
it. Mr: Baxter shows himself to be a notable proficient, yea a perfitist in the
art of Imposture. As he has his feats and shifts of sophistry still in
readiness to beguile them that pretend to learning; so he has, and here makes
use of his good words and fair speeches, smoothness of language, and a show
without substance of reason, which the Holy Ghost affirms to be the common
slight of false teachers, to deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 17, 18.

His scope here seems to be twofold. 1. To hold himself in favor with the
Arminians his younger brothers, and kindly to draw them with him up to a full
closure with the Papists, the worst of Papists, to speak not only the same
thing, but also the same words with him, and them in the point of
Justification. 2. To delude and charm with golden words of painted vanity, in
stead of sound verity, the weak and unwary Christians among us, into a
confederacy with him in his opinions. 1. In reference to the former part of his
aim and purpose, it is evident, that though the Arminians are led by the same
spirit with the Papists, and as much as we can understand by their writings,
have even sacrificed themselves to drive on the Papists interests; yet they
speak not altogether so broad and home as Master Baxter does in the Popish
dialect in this point of justification. The times of Master Baxters and
Arminius his declaring themselves for the Popish synagogue, were not one and
the same. Here Master Baxter has the advantage of Arminius, and improves it
diligently. Arminius was to broach his doctrine in Commonwealth; where he knew
he should have all the Magistracy, Ministry and people also, on a sudden,
rising up with co-united strength to oppose him; yea all the Magistrates and
Ministers of the reformed Churches round about, bringing their co-united help
to extinguish his wildfire. Needful was it therefore for him in policy to
speak warily, and non repent fieri turpissimum: not at once to discover
himself at the worst.

The times do better serve Master Baxters purposes, Providence has cast him
upon a people of itching ears, at a time when the promoting and admitting of
Monstrosities in opinions is the fashion mainly in request in religion, the
most, like the Athenians, harkening after nothing else but news and novelties
in doctrine, and having set up Altars in their hearts to the unknown Gods, are
ready to burn incense and offer sacrifice to every phantasm of falsehood, which
under the name of a new light or truth, shall be discovered to them. It behoved
him therefore, for the full attaining of his designs, to make use of the
opportunity, to strike home, and to the purpose, while the iron is hot, and
having his mouth once open, to vomit out all the poison in his belly in one
flood, while there are so many mouths and bellies open to receive it. Hence it
is, that Arminius and his followers, though they had as good stomachs as Mr.
Baxter, yet did not open their mouths as wide as he in Babel language. Though
they spoke the tantundem, yet they spared to utter the idem, with the Papists
to obscure the Grace of God in our Justification. They termed not (as the
Papists do) Faith the very, or part of the very righteousness which justifies
of it self, but that which is imputed to us for, or in stead of perfect
righteousness, to Justification, asserting not that it justifies by its own
inherent virtue, or righteousness, but to be graciously accepted for
righteousness at Gods tribunal. Christ (say they) has merited for us, that
our Faith should be accepted, and esteemed of God, for, and in place of the
perfect righteousness of the Law, to justify us in his sight. In substance
they speak the same thing with, but in words they are somewhat more favorable,
and modest then the Jesuits. But Mr. Br. does not thus speak through his teeth
lisping, to mince the matter, but having the advantage of a good wind and tide,
(as has been said) hoyseth sails, and is at once carried into the very
Lateran of Rome, through the streams of Tibris; and speaks out in the Romish
tone, asserting Faith to be the personal righteousness by which we are
justified, and makes the righteousness of Faith a collateral with the
righteousness of Christ to our justification. Yet doubting his good friends the
Arminians will be angry for his posting before them, and finding them in
reverence to their Father Arminius, yet sticking to, and loath to depart from
his words, that Faith is but imputed for righteousness, he calls back
(notwithstanding all his haste) to them, inviting them to follow him; for he is
still of the same mind with them, and endeavors to show them, that Faith it
self may be our righteousness, and yet be imputed to us for righteousness
also. Which also he does so graphically paint out to them, that they may (if
they will not be too wayward) easily perceive, that they may own the Pope for
their Father, and be nevertheless the genuine sons of Arminius still. What
effect his fine words will take upon the Armians, I know not, I care not. Only
this was requisite to be made out to be one end that he had in this passage of
his, that we might the better know the man what he is: One that hangs so close
to Rome, as the bur to the garment; yet holds sweet correspondence with the
Arminians too, to draw them to so full a discovery of themselves, as himself
has made of himself.

2. In reference to the weak, and unwary Christians among our selves, his aim
is to fasten both the Popish and Arminian doctrines before mentioned upon them;
and that not by strong arguments of Scripture, whereof he is wholly destitute
in this point, but by fine paints and flourishes of words, and delightful
fimilies, pretending much sweetness and innocence in those doctrines, having
learned of his forefathers that images are Laymens best books, viz. to carry
them into idolatry and error, and pictures are of more force to work upon the
ignorant, then sound doctrine. To prevent therefore what evil is intended to
them, I shall give these few premunitions.

First, that the question it self proposed by him, is merely captious; If Faith
be our Righteousness it self, how is it said to be imputed to us for
Righteousness? as if Faith either as an act or duty, or habit of Evangelical
righteousness, were imputed to us for, and in stead of the perfect fulfilling
of the righteousness of the Law to Justification. This he takes as granted,
whereas it is one chief thing in question. All the reformed Churches, with
their Teachers and Pastors have unanimously denied both that faith is our
justifying righteousness; and that it is imputed to us for righteousness,
otherwise then as it is instrumental to apprehend Christ to be our
righteousness, or the satisfaction which Christ has made for us, to be imputed
to us for, and instead of that righteousness which consists in fulfilling the
Law.

2. As to the plain and positive answer which he makes to the question: Though
we grant what he says of our unrighteousness, Christ's satisfaction, and
purchase of the prisoners; yet in that which he adds of the covenant that
he makes with the prisone^s so bought, there is nothing but guilful,
ambiguity. viz. that Whosoever will accept, and belie^e in him, who has thus
satisfied, it shall be as effectual for their justification, as if they had
fulfilled the Law of Works themselves. To the simple and upright man, that is
not acquain^^d with Mr. Baxters subtilties, this will seem as sound a Doctrine
as if an Angel from heaven had delivered it. But how wide is his meaning from
that which his words seem to import?

1 By faith he meanth not what he calls it, An accepting of and believing in
Christ, as it is such an accepting and believing, but as it is a qualification
or act, Comprehending in it all qualifications and good works besides, as
afterward he makes his meaning evident. 2 When he calls it an accepting of and
believing in him who has thus satisfied, he means not a believing and
accepting of him only under this notion as he has satisfied, that this shall
suffice to Justification. Nay our accepting him for our law giver and
performing of all things that he Commands, and Consequently all our
obedience, he will have to bear an equal part to Justification. 3 When he
says, whosoever thus accepts and believes, does he mean that this Faith or
believing is the alone Condition of the full justification of which he
speaks, or upon which alone Christ Covenanteth to justify? Nay he attributes
no less to repentance, Charity, mercy, holiness, every gift of the Spirit, every
work of the law to which we are moved by the Spirit, and Called by the Gospel;
about their efficacy to Justification than to Faith it self. Why does he put
off the Monks C^wle and put on Paul's Cloak, only to deceive the simple for
whom Christ has dyed? 4 When he says, It shall be as effectual etc. putting
It next to the word satisfied, and next to the Clause Him that has satisfied,
there is the same ambiguity and falsehood with that which I noted in the second
place, and whether he means it faith, or it satisfaction, shall do the work?
5 Where he says, It shall be as effectual to Justification as if they had
fulfilled the law of works themselves. Here he utterly destroys the
righteousness and satisfaction of Christ, as any way imputed to Justification,
when elsewhere he makes it equally necessary with the righteousness of Faith to
Justification. And thus he seems to leave the Papists (which he would not do
for a world I think) which hold that we are justified both by Christ's
righteousness and our own righteousness also: and to join only with the
Socinians, which hold that we are justified only by faith imputed to us for
righteousness, and not by the righteousness and satisfaction of Christ at all.
For if this believing be by the virtue of Christ's Covenant as effectual to
Justification as our fulfilling of the law of works could have been, then is
there no need of any act or suffering or satisfaction of Christ to be imputed
to us. For whosoever shall fulfill the law shall have no need of a Mediator to
justify him. Therefore neither he that so believes etc. But how hard is it
for a man that oppugneth truth and propugneth error by mere fallacies against
the light of his Conscience, to keep himself free from Contradictions; here he
Contradicts what he had before said of Christ our righteousness; and in the
application of the following similitude we shall find him in substance
contradicting what he here says. Touching all those things which a little
before I have affirmed his meaning to be so and so; let none demand how I know
what is in another man's heart: himself in the following part of this Tractate
fully discovers it, as we shall find by reading and examining it. Neither will
any question it but they that have not read him, or in reading have not
understood him. Thus much to his plain answer before he discends to his
similitude which he uses as sugar to lap and roll it up in, that it may go
down pleasantly. In this answer we find nothing but words, his own words, not
the least pittance of Gods word to authorize it; he says all, and with the
same facility we deny all. Proceed we after him now to his similitude.

3 As to his similitude, first I except that Similitudines or rather Similia
illustrant, non probant. Similitudes are of good use to illustrate and make
Clear to the understanding that which is before proved to be a truth; but of no
use to prove that which is unproved and the thing still in question. That which
Mr. Br has before Concluded in his answer, was that Faith is both the
righteousness it self by which we are justified, and 2 that it is also imputed
to us for and in stead of Justifying righteousness: viz. the very Gospel
Righteousness, imputed for and in stead of the legal righteousness. He has said
it without any addittament of Scripture or reason to prove it; so that his
similitude here is brought to illustrate only a phantasm of his own brain, not
any doctrine of Gods word.

2 I except against the similitude it self as being in its matter and form
altogether incongruous to illustrate the doctrine of justification by Faith,
which the Gospel holds forth to us; because it has (besides other) these
following incongruities to it.

1 Though (as in the positive answer before we did, so here) we grant what he
says of the Tenants forfeiture, unablenes to pay, expulsion from the
inheritance, casting into prison; his Landlords son paying the debt for him,
delivering him out of prison, putting him into his house again as his Tenant,
having purchased the house and all to himself; (provided always that all this be
done by the will of the Father the first Landlord, which Mr. Br does not deny,)
And though we pardon to Mr. Br (upon Condition that he do so no more) that he
speaks here more orthodoxly than he purposed, viz. the prisoners debt to be
satisfied, the prisoner to be delivered, and restored to his house, to the
inheritance again by the mere grace and purchase of the Son, before God; which
implies no less than a full justification with and by God, before ever the
prisoner believed, or had a new Lease, a new Covenant of grace and faith made
with him; a doctrine which before Mr. Br anathematizeth to hell it self: and
will do so again; though he thereby Curse himself for that which
inconsiderately here fell from him: These things granted and winked at: we
utterly explode all the rest in the Similitude not only as uncoherent with,
but as contrary to the doctrine of Grace, yea utterly destructive to the nature
and working of grace in our Justification; and that in these particulars, as I
promised above to specify. 1 That it makes our Justification mercenary, and
held by yearly rent: for though it be but a pepper-corn that is paid, yet that
is rent and payment, (as shall be manifested before we pass from this
similitude) which is contrary to the Covenant of grace, and doctrine of the
Gospel which affirms, that We are justified freely by his Grace through the
Redemption which is in Jesus Christ, Romans 3. 24. And wholly agreeing with the
doctrine of the Gospel is that of Austin; Non enim gratia Dei Gratia erit ullo
modo, nisi gratuita sit omni modo. The Grace of God shall not be grace in any
respect, except it be free in every respect. But how is it free which is a debt
acquired and held by rent and payment? 2 That it makes our Justification
Conditional, if Articles of Covenant be performed then the Tenant abides in
the inheritance, the man is justified, if through foolishnes or forgetfulness
unperformed, then is the Tenant outted, the man unjustified. And to be thus
conditionally Justified is no Justification. When contrariwise the Gospel holds
forth a real and absolute Justification, Son, Daughter, Be of good cheer, thy
sins he forgiven, Mat. 9. 2. Luke 7. 48. He that is washed needs not, save
to wash his feet, but is clean every whit, Joh. 13. 10. Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God, and glory in tribulation, Romans 5. 1. 3. Is it
not a real and absolute, but a conditional forgivenes, washing, Justifying
here spoken of? then must the effects in these places added and attributed to
such forgivenes washing and Justifying, be not real but conditional also. A
conditional not real cheer and comfort, a conditional not real cleanness, a
conditional not real peace with God, and glorying in tribulation. But these
effects are out of question real, Therefore Justification the Cause of these
effects real also. 3 It delineats an unperfect Justification. The Old Lease is
not cancelled, but kept firm to be put in suit against the Tenant after the New
Lease is made. The Old Covenant of works is kept in force against the believer
after he is entered into the New Covenant of grace to be put in suit against him
upon occasion to his total damnation. When the Gospel pronounces the
justification of a believer perfect, the Old Covenant in respect of any power
over him to be dead, Romans 7. 6. The hand writing against him and contrary to
him, blotted out, taken out of the way, and nailed to the Cross of Christ, Col.
2. 14. So that he is no longer under the Law of works to be pleaded or putt in
suit against him, Rom 6. 14. Nor is there now any more Condemnation to be
inflicted on him, Romans 8. 1. 4 It points out a mutable justification. While the
Tenant pays the rent he shall be acquit both from his debt and all other rent
for the future, but if he miss of payment then, both the old d^bt and rent
falls on him as a mountain again, crushing him until the pepper-corn intercede
and remove the mountain, and then acquitt again until the pepper-corn be lost
in carriage, or being round and full of volubility, run besides the Landlords
hand, then on comes the mountain of debt upon the Tenant again, etc. Thus man's
justification is made fast or loose, according to the stedfastnes or
mutableness of man's will, and the grace of God in justifying, of so little
fixedness that a pepper-corn can weigh it and sway it up and down at pleasure.
When contrariwise the Scripture every where pronounces the grace of God, and
Covenant of grace, everlasting, unchangeable; and makes the Justification of
man to rest not upon his own mutable and mad will, but upon the stable and
stablishing grace of God. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
their sins and iniquities will I remember no more, Heb. 8. 12. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good, but I will putt my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from
me, Jer. 32. 40. with a large heap of testimonies more to the same purpose,
which would be here impertinent to transcribe.

Thus is the similitude as here framed in all these respects, proper indeed to
illustrate the bugbear figment of Justification in Mr. Brs brain: but
altogether incoherent with the Justification which the Gospel holds forth to
us. Yet he adds, In this case the payment of the grain of pepper is imputed
to the Tenant as if he had paid the Rent of the old Lease. When contrariwise
the reformed Churches affirm from most full and pregnant Testimonies of
Scripture, that to rest any thing at all upon the imputation of such pepper
payments for righteousness, does utterly frustrate the offers of grace and
benefits of Christ's death unto us; as has been often before manifested.

That which follows does not take off the Odium and falsehood of this his
doctrine, but rather augments it, declaring that he has learned of the Papists
not only their falsifications of the Gospel, nullifying of the grace and
righteousness of God, and extolling the crest of man's pride; but also their
fallacious shirts to d^fend his dealing herein. Yet this imputation (says he)
does not extol the pepper-corn, nor vilify the benefit of his benefactor, who
redeemed him; Nor can it be said that the purchase did only serve to advance
the value and efficacy of that grain of pepper. The very language of the
Papists and the Arminians, for ^o they when they have mounted the righteousness
of man's faith and works to be a part or the whole of the righteousness
effectual to Justification; they come after with a plausible varnish of words,
professing that they do not herein abase Gods grace, nor heave above its own
proportion man's righteteousness. For (say they) we do not attribute any thing
to man's righteousness, either as it is man's righteousness, or to the price and
value of it, as if by its own worth and merit it does Justify; but partly
(says Antoninus) ex ordinatione Divina, as God has ordained it to that end;
and partly as it is the effect of Grace, and wrought in us by the Spirit, so
that the value and efficacy thereof is to be taken not from the righteousness
inherent in us, or performed by us, but from Gods ordination of it to the end
to which himself will make it effectual, and from the virtue of grace, and the
spirit of grace in whose strength it is performed. So also Antoni. par. 4. tit.
9. c. 7. ante sect and sect. 1, 2, 3. Osor. de Jus: li. 6. nu. 151 ex Hos.
Confut. l ih. 5. page 451, 452. Andrad. Orths. explic. li. 6. page 181. Pemb.
of justif. p. 34, and 35. sect. 2. cap. 2.
the rest of the Scholasticks, Monks and Jesuits, affirm that they do not by
this doctrine Contribute any thing to man's righteousness, or diminish the glory
of Gods grace and Christ's merits; Nay they are the sole advancers of Grace and
of Christ; for that they attribute due power to them, to make man's
righteousness that is base and nothing in it self, to be effectual or
meritorious to Justification. That these Heretics the Lutherans are the Cursed
enemies unto Christ and grace, in denying our Righteousness available to
justify and save us, so streightening the virtue and power of Grace and of
Christ, as being unable to infuse virtue and efficacy into our righteousness to
justify and save us, but more fully of this in a more proper place. The same
paint does Arminius use to make tolerable if not plausible his imputation of
the Act of Faith to Justification, as his very words are alleged by Mr.
Pemble. No marvel then if Mr. Br has proficiently learned at the feet of such
Gamaleels. But what force or show of substance is there in his and their so
peevish shifts and evasions? It is as he that brake up a neighbors house,
killed the Master and enriched himself with the Treasure thereof, with this
mental reservation, that the Act should be without any guilt of Murder before
God, or of felony before men. And what either God or man could then lay any
thing to his Charge. So Mr. Br with those whom he follows, robs God of the
glory of his grace, and Christ of the honor of his merits, to enrich the
righteousness of their own Faith and works therewith: but with this proviso
first laid in their fancies, and after subscribed to with their hands, that God
and his Christ must not take their grace and righteousness herein wronged, nor
man's righteousness extolled, nor the actors therein offenders: and when they
have laid all things so sure, what has God or man to say against them?

Yet is there one inconvenience, and the same a shrewd one, that Gods way of
reckoning in the point of Justification was fixed before this of Mr. Br and his
Masters, and without any Consultation with them about it, by means whereof it
runs right Contrary to theirs. And it is much to be feared because he is God,
he will not now Change. He has in this point set so in direct opposition man's
righteousness and Gods righteousness, grace and works, that both Cannot, shall
not Consist together, but either exclude and frustrate the other. It must be
only Gods righteousness or only man's righteousness (according to his rule) by
which we must be justified; he prohibits all medleyes, will have no mixture of
heaven and of earth, of the Spirit and of the flesh, the ox and the ass must
not be yoked together in this business: he that brings any of his own
righteousness, frustrates to himself the Grace and righteousness of God: He
that trusts to grace, and putts on by Faith the righteousness of God, must
derelinquish his own righteousness to be found in Gods alone unto
Justification, Romans 9. 30, 31, 32. Romans 10. 3, 4. Phil. 3. 9. If by Grace, then
it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of
works, then it is no more grace, otherwise work is no more work, Romans 11. 6.
And other such like Scriptures which in the more proper place I shall produce.
What will Mr. Br answer at Gods tribunal for raising his pepper-corn as a mount
from which to batter the impregnable grace and righteousness of God? If this
does not, what can extol his pepper-corn?

To conclude what I have to say to the foresaid words of Mr. Br, let him not
take pepper in the nose (as the Country phrase is) if I take a grain or two of
his own loose powder to blow up his pepper-corn, that it may not be abusive to
the feeble and simple Christians. If these will but consider well these two
things; first, what he means by his pepper-corn? secondly, how far he will
abase, or extol it, they should easily see his subtlety, and keep their foot
from being taken in this his snare laid for them. Both these are to be gathered
from himself. Touching the former he means by the pepper-corn, the whole
righteousness of man, the entire righteousness which the Law requires in the
full substance, though not in the full degree which the Law requires it, all
personal virtues and duties which the moral Law enjoined upon men. This is
clear enough by what he has said before, hinted by that which he annexeth in
the application of this Similitude when he says, Even so is our Evangelicall
Righteousness or Faith, insinuating that by Faith he means all that Can be
brought under the notion of Evangelicall righteousness in his sense, which is
all that the Law Commands and the Gospel approves as righteousness: and in
the following part of his Treatise when he Comes to the Anatomizing of his
Faith here spoken of, he does in express words affirm and seek to confirm it.
Here is a pepper-corn able like Moses his rod-serpent, to eat up all the
pepper-corns of the East Indies. Possibly the royal Sovereign was built to
fetch it from the East Indies to us, it being too great a fraught for any other
Shipp in England. And it must not be divided, for a piece will do no good in
this business, but the whole is required. Does not the weakest Christian here
see discovered the Cunning of the man that would have them to swallow such a
pepper-corn, such a Camel into themselves? What room would be left then for
Christ? which of the Pharisees of old or of the Papists in latter ages, have
more extolled man's righteousness, or more fully ascribed salvation to works?
only though they used terms equipollent to Cover their falsehood, yet they did
not hit upon the pepper-corn, to delude poor souls with an opinion that if
there were any difference between their doctrine and the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, yet was it as small as the weight and worth of a pepper-corn, so
that they might be followed without danger.

Touching the latter, how far he will extol the pepper-corn of our own works
and righteousness to Justification and salvation, he does not here (though
afterward he does) in express words signify. But that he means to extol them,
he does enough plainly give us to understand: When he says that the purchase
did not Only serve to advance the value and efficacy of that grain of pepper,
his meaning must be (at least) that Christ dyed and by his death has purchased
to the pepper-corn of man's righteousness, a value and efficacy in part, though
not Only to Justify us, so that our righteousness must go Cheek by Cheek with
the righteousness of Christ to Justification. Now as if Usury as it Consists
in taking increase, be unlawful, a penny of a hundred pounds taken by way of
increase, is no less in substance Usury and unlawful, than the taking of Tenn
pounds of the hundred: so if the adding of our righteousness to the
righteousness of Christ for our justification, be an unlawful exalting of our
own, and depressing of Christ's righteousness, then to bring our own
righteousness with the righteousness of Christ in the least part to justify,
is as truly an unlawful depression of Christ's righteousness and advancing of
our own, as if we brought it in the highest degree wholly and alone to justify
us: and so by his account Christ dyed to make man, though not the Only, yet in
part a savior of himself. And herein to follow his doctrine is the ready way
to be a self-destroyer. Christ is become of none effect to you whosoever of you
are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace, said the Apostle to a people,
that did extol but in part and not Only their own righteousness to
justification. Though it be not Only poison which a man eats, yet it there
be poison in it, it brings death after i^. If we magnify one grain of our own
pepper to that height that we make it a part of that righteousness by which to
stand at Gods tribunal this one grain will sink us down to hell, so hot a
poison is Mr. Brs pepper-corn.

I shall join that which follows in the similitude, viz.

Bax. But thus: A personal Rent must be paid for the testification of his
homage: He was never Redeemed to be Independent, and his own Landlord and
Master; The old Rent he cannot pay, his new Landlords clemency is such, that
he has resolved, this grain shall serve the turn. With that which is
homogeneous to it in the application.

Bax. Two things are considerable in this debt of righteousness: The value and
the personal performance or interest. The value of Christ's satisfaction is
imputed to us, in stead of the value of a perfect Obedience of our own
performing; and the volue of our Faith is not so imputed: But because there
must be some personal performance of homage, therefore the personal
performance of Faith shall be imputed to us for a sufficient personal payment,
as if we had paid the full Rent, because Christ whom we believe in, has paid
it, and he will take this for satisfactory homage; so it is in point of
personal performance, and not of value, that faith is imputed. It is not
denied but a personal testification of homage is required. We were not
Redeemed to be independent, or our own Landlords and Masters, to serve our
selves and walk after our own thoughts. No; Ye are not your own, for ye are
bought with a price, (says the Apostle) Therefore glorify God in your body
and in your Spirit which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6. 20. And again, He has given
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. We must live and dye to him
that dyed for us in testification of our homage. But the thing in question is
not whether this homage is to be done, but whether when it is performed, it be
a Cause or an effect of our redemption and justification; Whether we are to
perform all duty that we may be redeemed and justified, or because we are
redeemed and justified. Whether the relation of the persons go before the
relative duties, or the relative duties before the relation of the persons.
Reason tells us that filial obedience does always presuppose the relation of a
Son, and where there is no Child there can be expected no Childlike obedience.
First free and then free service. And to this tenor runs the vote and voice of
the Gospel. We are delivered out of the hands of our enemies, that we may serve
him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life, Luke 1. 74, 75. Not that we shall be delivered out of etc. because we
have so served him all the days of our life. That we are married to Christ,
that we should bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7. 4. Not that we are married
to Christ, because we have brought forth fruit unto God. That he dyed for all,
that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
that dyed for them, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Not that we must live to Christ, that we may
live by Christ and obtein life by his death. If any man be in Christ he is a
new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Not that he must be a new creature to the end that
he may be in Christ. Mr. Br shakes the whole frame of the Gospel into a
topsie-turnie, and might as rationally make our glorification the Condition of
our sanctification, as sanctification the Condition of our Justification and
Adoption.

As for the distinction which he puts in the application, between the value and
the performance of Faith, i. e. (in his sense) of sanctification, making the
value of Christ's satisfaction to be imputed in stead of the value of a perfect
obedience, and the personal performance of Faith to be imputed only in stead
of the personal performance of the Law, and so our inchoat sanctification (for
that he means by the performing of faith) is imputed to us in place of
performing all perfect righteousness, unto justification; some pretty witty men
may be taken with it as a pretty witty fancy; But whosoever Loves the Lord
Jesus up to a due jealousy for his honor, Cannot but have his heart full of
trembling, to see the sacred word and mysteries of Christ, to be made the
play-game of an audacious and frothy wit, and eluded yea vilified and enervate,
with such absurd and windy distinctions that have no footing in the word of
God. Himself using this distinction with a purpose not to teach but to Cheat
the simple. For page 141. he does in express words affirm the worthiness or
value (which he does here ascribe to Christ's satisfaction) to lie in our
performance or works. Either he must be destitute of all natural and moral
operations of Conscience, or an Anti-Hannibal, that has sworn unreconcileable
wars, not for God against Rome, but for Rome against Christ, that in so holy a
business can so frequently and fearlesly act the wanton. I shall conclude
therefore in the words which Mr. Pemble has against the brethren of Mr. Br in
this point. These things the Scriptures teach not; They teach that Christ is
our righteousness, Pembl. of Justif. ca. 2. page 41.
and that we are justified by his blood and obedience. But that he has merited
by his obedience, that we should be justified by our own Righteousness and
Obedience, is a perverse assertion of men that love to run about the bush, and
leaving the straight to run into crooked and froward ways. Like to theirs is
Mr. Brs dispute here, and no less than they deserving the same censure. The
Holy Ghost Calls upon us for a Faith to Justification, that Consists in
taking and receiving, Mr. Brs distinctions for a Faith that Consists in
doing and performing: The Holy Ghost in the dispensation of Gospel Grace
says; Take Freely, Rev. 22. 17. Mr. Brs distinction presses upon us to give
all or we shall receive nothing: The one says, Without money and without
price, Isa. 55. 1. The other makes all our hopes to depend upon our payments
and rents. How apparent is it that the spirit of bondage that speaks in Mr.
Br is a Spirit of a contrary nature to the Spirit of Liberty that speaks in
the Gospel? He should not abuse the Scripture that shall say to Mr. Br what
Peter said to Simon the Magician, Act. 8. 20. Thy money, thy pepper-corn perish
with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be purchased with
money, with pepper-cornes. But in stead of saying so against him, I shall pray
for him.

CHAP. XVII.
That Popish Luciferian doctrine of the Perfection and Merits of man's inherent
Righteousness to Justification, here taught by Mr. Br. examined. To which is
added something in answer to what he brings, about the Justification, first
of the person and then of his works, and of the possibility of performing this
perfect meritorious Righteousness.

Bax.

Thesis 24. p. 129. THis personal Gospel Righteousness is, in its kind a
perfect Righteousness; and so far we may admit the doctrine of personal
perfection.

Thesis 26. p. 137. Neither can our performance of the conditions of the
Gospel, in the most proper and strict sense, be said to merit the reward:
seeing there is nothing in the value of it, or any benefit that God receives
by it, which may so entitle it meritorious. Neither is there any proportion
between it and the Reward. But in a larger sense as promise is an obligation
and the thing promised is called Debt, so the performers of the Condition are
called worthy; and their performance merit, though properly it is all of Grace,
and not of Debt, Romans 4. 4, 10. and 5. 15, 16, 17. Hos. 14. 4. Mat. 10. 8. Romans
3. 24. and 8. 32. 1 Cor. 2. 12. Rev. 21. 6. and 22. 18. Romans 11. 6. Gal. 5. 4.
Ephesians. 2. 5, 7, 8. Genesis 32. 10. Matthew. 10. 11, 12, 13, 37. and 22. 8. Luke 20.
35. and 21. 36. 2 These. 1. 5. 11. Rev. 3. 4. etc.

I join these two together because of their affinity either to other, and annex
them to the former, viz. the 23 Thesis, because of their dependence on it,
standing or falling with it; there being no new thing in substance, but in
degrees only, here asserted. In the 23 These. he had asserted a personal
Righteousness of our own, necessary and effectual to Justification: Here least
he should seem a younger Brother to any of the Jesuits, he mounts himself
Check-mate with the worst of them in his gradations, affirming that
Righteousness of our own to Justification, These. 24. to be a perfect
Righteousness, and These. 26. a Meritorious Righteousness. Has any of the most
zealous Children of Babylon raised his scaffolds higher, to exalt the pinacles
thereof to a more stupendous height?

There shall not be need of speaking much by way of answer to him in these
positions and their explications: For he does here build Chimaera's upon
Chimaera's, and nothings upon nothing. We deny, and so do all the true Churches
of Christ, any such personal Righteousness of man, as righteousness necessary
or required to Justification, affirming that every imagination of such
righteousness as effectual or ordained to justify, is a monster begotten of
the pride of men's hearts, which in the midst of all their gaudy knowledge,
never experimentally knew Christ, or the operation of that justification which
is by Christ alone, upon their Consciences. Neither has Mr. Br brought any one
reason worth a rush to prove such a Righteousness. So these two positions are
answered in the last before it. There being no such righteousness: the blind
man may see that No righteousness cannot be either a perfect or meritorious
Righteousness; The subject Righteousness being evaporated, the accidents
thereof [perfect and Meritorious] are turned to vapors with it. The Adjects
stand not, where the subject is dissolved. It can be but an imaginary dress
that is put on upon a merely imaginary body. Yet I shall look after Mr. Br in
his imaginations, if peradventure there fall from him any thing here and there
deserving an animadversion.

In the Explication of the 24 Thesis he spends two whole pages, viz. 130, 131,
in spitting of wit, and playing with his imaginary perfection of personal
Righteousness unto Justification, as with a shuttle-cock, here I hit you, there
I missed you, there you were mine, here I came short of you; and when he has
taken his fill of this game, in the last line of page 131. and so forward in
the next page, confesses that all this is nothing to his meaning or purpose,
[and yet is it full to it.] Nothing to his purpose or meaning, in reference to
the explication much less to the proving of a personal righteousness required
to Justification, or a perfection of such a righteousness: yet full to his
purpose to delight and allure to him such as have nimble wits but dull
Consciences, how should these but run after him finding more wit and art, in
these two pages of his, than ever they met with in all the doctrine of the dull
Apostles and Prophets, though they should add to them their Master also.

Well, Haec non successit, alia aggrediamur via. That which he has said is not
home to his meaning: But that which he says next shall come home to it. And
what says he? Nihil quod non dictum est prius Only that which he had said
before once and again. Holiness is a quality, Righteousness is not so, but the
Modification of our Acts as to the Rule, viz. to the Rule of the New Covenant
in point of Justification. Here is nothing but what was said before, and has
been answered before in our Examination of the Explication of the former
Thesis. But he adds which is not varyed secundum magis and minus, alleging
Schibl. Metaph. li. 2. ca. 9. Tit. 7. Art. 2. His word Which, I conceive he
will have to relate, not to the Rule which was the next Antecedent, for this
serves nothing to his purpose: but to the more remote Antecedent, which he
calls the Modification of our Acts, or cur righteousness to Justification, that
it is not varied secundum Magis and Minus. Indeed Schibler there concludes out
of Aristotle that Relations which have their foundation in substance or
quantity, non recipient Magis and Minus, have no remission or intension, but an
equality, fullnes or perfection in their relation (if I may speak a little
unproperly to please Mr. Br.) But that Righteousness has its foundation in
substance he seems to deny, or that it has its foundation in quantity, he
says but does not prove. We say it has its foundation in quality, and such
relations Schibler there acknowledges to admit Magis and Minus. Again Schibler
adds in the second place, that Relata ex part sui, hoc est, secundum esse
relationis ipsius, non recipient magis and minus. But this hinders not why in
some yea sundry other respects, they should not admit it. And thus Schibler
does him no good. Yet if Schibler were for him, I should except that the Holy
Ghost is not (specially in Gospel matters) a Peripatetick, was never a disciple
of Aristotle, his wisdom is a Metaphysics more transcendent above Aristotle's
Metaphysics, than Aristotle's Metaphysics are above his Physics. Therefore
the Holy Ghost takes the liberty in Scriptures, to affirm a Magis and Minus in
Righteousness, to pronounce one more, and another less righteous in reference to
the Rule, as has been before showed. Br. Therefore our Divines usually say,
that our Justification is perfect, though our sanctification be not: and then I
am sure our Righteousness must be perfect. A mere flam and vanity of words! Our
Divines (says he) does he own them? are they not such as he would rather
tollere than extollere? Our Divines and yet not Popish Divines? our Divines
usually say that our Justification is perfect. But will Mr. Br say so? Nay he
says pointblank in opposition to it. Yet even hence would he force in his
Conclusion, and then I am sure our Righteousness must be perfect. A mere sophism
and fallacy: we grant that the righteousness by which we are perfectly
justified, must needs be a perfect righteousness. But we deny that righteousness
to be any otherwise ours than by imputation, viz. Christ's satisfaction. As for
the Righteousness of our sanctification which Mr. Br makes the condition of our
justifying, we utterly deny either to be perfect in this life, or to have any
finger in the business of Justification.

When he finds all his other shifts too weak to hide the nakedness of his
Conclusion, at length he flies to his sophistical distinctions according to
his usual manner, to obscure and darken what he cannot confirm and clear up in
the light to be of God. B: A twofold perfection is here employed (says he) 1 a
Metaphysicall perfection of Being, 2 A perfection of sufficiency in order to
its end. These two he jumbles and tumbles together, sometimes into a Confusion,
and then out of the Chaos that he has made goes about to separate them again
into some distinct order, so far that if there be any that can see things which
are not as if they were, may discern either from other so perfectly at a
distance that he shall never attain the one or the other as a perfection of
Righteousness to his justification. The former he makes to be the Material
entity of a non ens, (as he had before defined Righteousness) the Material
Being of that which is not a being. And this, says he, is the sincerity of our
faith, i. e. of our Sanctification (for so he means:) this is the first
perfection of our own righteousness to justification. Let us suppose now that
there is such a Metaphysicall perfection in the sincerity of our righteousness
and the matter thereof, what does this make to his purpose, that there is a
perfection in our personal righteousness to justify us? I shall demand these
questions of him. 1 Whether a Metaphysicall perfection of Being, in the matter
of our Righteousness be the perfection of righteousness which is required to
justification? Is there not a Metaphysicall being yea perfection of being in
the matter of all the Acts of righteousness which the very heathen and
reprobates perform? 2 Whether Sincerity be perfection of righteousness, any
further than it is more or less sincere, perfect sincerity being a perfect
perfection, unperfect sincerity an unperfect perfection, perfect it may be in
its Metaphysicall being, that is unperfect in its degrees: But must there not
be also a moral perfection in a righteousness personal that shall be perfect
to justify. 3 Whether there be not sin and imperfection in the best sincerity
of the Saints during this life, a mixture of unbeleef with their faith, of
flesh with Spirit, of doublenes with their simplicity? 4 Whether this mixture
be not evil and a sin in reference to the New, as well as to the Old Covenant?
Why else does the Lord Christ so often reprove and upbraid his disciples with the
feeblenes of their Faith? O ye of little Faith, etc. because of your unbeleef.
Where is your Faith? and such like? 5 Grant unto a man the greatest sincerity
of Faith and holiness attainable by the most spirituallized Christians in this
life, has God ordained it to be a perfect righteousness, or is it a perfect
righteousness either in it self, or to Justification? if so why does the Apostle
when he could profess not only his personal obedience as a Christian, but
also his righteousness and integrity as a Minister, to be so far in sincerity,
and as in the fight of God, and in Christ, that he knew nothing by himself,
wherein he could accuse himself as failing in sincerity; nevertheles add, Yet am
I not hereby justified, but he that judges me is the Lord, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and
2. 17. 1 Cor. 4. 4? This Mr. Br sees and that his reader may not see the
weakness of his Metaphysicall material Righteousness, he therefore Confounds it
with the Formality of it. Else should he give every reader to retort upon him
his own words page 121. that he pronounces that a perfect Righteousness which
is unrighteous, hateful and accursed, being a righteousness which in its matter
is enjoined by the old Covenant, and has for its rule in the matter thereof
the Law of the old Covenant still.

No less vain also is that which he discourses of the Formality of this
personal righteousness, that it is a perfect righteousness in respect of its
perfect sufficiency in order to its end, which is to be a condition of our
Justification, etc. This end (says he) it shall attain. The tenor of the New
Covenant is not, Believe in the highest degree and you shall be justified, but
believe sincerely and you shall be justified. So that our righteousness. 1.
formally considered in relation to the conditions of the New Covenant, is
either perfect or none.

To this I answer that God has ordained no righteousness of ours as our
Righteousness, to be a Condition of the New Covenant. 2. If he had so done, yet
it follows not thence that the same Righteousness performed, is a perfect
righteousness, though it be sufficient and effectual to the end to which God
ordained it to be performed. God required the use and sound of Trumpets and
voices to destroy and lay level with the earth, the strong walls and Towers of
Jericho; and the washing in Jordan to Clean^e Naaman of his Leprosy; and the
washing in Siloam to Cure the Man that was born blind of his blindness. These
were ordained as several Conditions in order to those several ends; and being
performed became sufficient and effectual to the attainment thereof. Shall we
say then, that the performance of these Conditions was their perfect
righteousness which performed them? So neither if God had appointed Faith which
according to Mr. Br is sanctification, as a Condition of our Justification, is
the performance thereof our perfect righteousness. 3 This sufficiency of that
which Mr. Br calls perfect righteousness in order to its end, is no more in
and from it self, than the beforementioned noyces and washings were in
themselves, to the attainment of their ends: But the sufficiency thereof is
wholly from the righteousness faithfulness and all sufficiency of God to
fulfill the promises of his grace. So that what he says of believing in the
highest degree, and believing in sincerity, is besides the matter in question;
Both together if they could be performed according to the tenor of the new
Covenant, not being of sufficiency to make up a perfect righteousness. Therefore
we conclude in Mr. Brs words, That our Righteousness formally considered in
relation to the condition of the new Covenant, is so far from being a perfect
Righteousness, that it is none at all.

I have nothing else to say against that wherewith he concludes his explication
of the Thesis, enumerating the many respects in which this imaginary
righteousness of man is imperfect, and consequently sinful; But this that it
displayes the sin and impudency of the man, that he will call that a perfect
righteousness, which himself confesses to be so deficient, rotten, and
unrighteous.

Thesis 26. page 137. In the 26 Thesis he adds to the perfection of Man's
righteousness, merit or meritoriousnes also. In my exception against him upon
this point, I shall take notice, 1 of his position or asserting of this
doctrine, 2 of his lenifying and mitigating the roughnes thereof, that it may
go down the more gently and pleasantly. In both which it shall suffice to show
that he speaks the same things with the Papists his Masters, and that in
their Tone also; though I do not ex professo, undertake a full Confutation of
the doctrine it self, leaving the reader to fetch it from those many Orthodox
Divines that have copiously and unanswerably done it against professed Papists.
In this I shall seemingly cross yet really follow Mr. Brs method, putting first
what was the first and primary purpose of his heart to hold out unto the world,
viz. that our Righteousness is meritorious; (though in a pretty subtlety he puts
it last both in the Thesis and in its explication,) and last that which he puts
first, viz. his limitation and mitigation of so arrogant a doctrine, which he
does so trimly and ^eatily, that if his reader be a fool it is possible he may
think Mr. Br to deny, and not to assert here the doctrine of merits; though
there were never any of the worst Papists that has asserted it higher than Mr.
Br here does. His assertion of merits then, runs in these words in the Aphorism
it self.

B: In a large sense, as promise is an obligation, and the thing promised is
called debt, so the performers of the Conditions of the New Covenant are called
Worthy, and their performance Merit, though properly it is all of Grace and not
of Debt, Romans 4. 4, 10. And all those Scriptures which he annexeth and I have
before in adding this to the 24th Thesis transcribed. 1 His assertion of Merit
in man's righteousness is here laid down in a Connexive proposition, The
performers of the conditions of the new Covenant are called Worthy, and their
performance Merit. If both members of the proposition be not true, if either
fail, the proposition is false. But where does he mean these are so called? in
the Scriptures which he here annexeth all men will (it is questionles his meaning
is that all shall) conceive. (For to say that they are so called by Popish
Writers were to make his doctrine suspected, not accepted.) But neither in
these nor any other Scriptures are they so Called; therefore his proposition is
false. The 13 first Scriptures alleged, affirm the contrary: deny all worth,
all merit, in our persons and righteousness, pronounce the reward, to be of
grace not of debt, a gift, not a payment, given freely, without desert: and all
this so fully that it appears the Holy Ghost had an aim not only to stop the
mouths of the mercenary Jews then, but also of the Popish Justiciares now,
whom he foresaw as enemies to the doctrine of Grace. And the last six
Scriptures here alleged prove only that the Scriptures call the Saints
worthy, but neither in these nor in any other Scripture can he find that their
performances are called merit, or their Justification here or glorification
hereafter debt.

2 By the way we may take notice of his fallacious sophistry to deceive the
simple, in making the whole worth of the performers to consist in their
performances, because the performers of such an act are called worthy,
therefore there must be merit and worth in the performance. Which is grounded
upon as good reason as if I should say, The Murderer of Vriah, and the abjurer
of Christ were counted worthy of justification and glory. Therefore was there
an unproper worth (at least) in the ones murder and the others abjuration to
Justice and save them. None of these nor any other Scriptures do affi^me (in
express words) the performers of the conditions of the new Covenant Worthy,
much less, as they are performers; and least of all that the performance has
worth or merit in it.

3 Besides there is a great difference between Gods Dignari and man's Dignu^
esse: between Gods accounting or reckoning man worthy, and man's being worthy in
his own deserts; so that those Scriptures, Lu. 20. 35. Lu. 21. 36. 2 These. 1.
5, 11. that speak of Gods accounting men worthy, do not import or imply any
worth in a man's own qualifications and performances: but a worth which God has
put upon him by imputation, viz. Christ in them, the blood of Christ sprinkled
upon their Conscience, Christ's merits imputed to them, they being found in
Christ the righteous, and not in Adam the unrighteous. As the Israelites were
accounted worthy of deliverance from destruction which fell upon the Egyptians
in the day of Gods passing over Egypt; but how worthy? surely not in respect of
their own righteousness, but in respect of the worth of the Paschal Lambs blood
sprinkled upon their door-posts. In this sense is also that of Rev. 3. 4. to be
taken. And hereunto runs the whole tenor of the Gospel, making not our own
righteousness and works, but Christ in us the hope of Glory, i. e. all the
ground and worth upon which we may Cherish within our selves a lively hope of
glory, Col. 1. 27.

4 The word worthy in Scriptures often signifies, Meet, beseeming and answerable
to: as Ma. 3. 8. Bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance, and Ephesians. 4. 1. Walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called. and Col. 1. 10. Walk worthy of
the Lord. The meaning is that we should bring forth fruits beseeming the
repentance which we profess, and walk agreeable unto, and in ways becoming our
holy vocation, and answerable to the Grace of God in the Lord Jesus Christ: not
to make our selves worthy of the gift of repentance, of so high a vocation, and
of so glorious a Christ to be conferred upon us. And in the same sense are
those other scriptures, Ma. 10. 11, 12, 13, 37 and 22. 8. alleged here by Mr.
Br, to be taken. Where those that are termed worthy or unworthy of Christ and
his Gospel, are meant to be such as carry themselves in a way becoming or not
becoming Christ and his Gospel preached to them. Without any hinting at an
imaginary worth or Merit in their performances that might make them deservers
of Christ, and the grace of the Gospel: as is easy to be made out, from the
very Texts here alleged, if there were need thereof.

Thus it appears to be false, either that in a larger sense, promise is an
obligation, and the thing promised is called Debt: or that the performers of
the co^ditio^s are called worthy, and their performance merit, in the
scriptures. And consequently neither the fallacies nor the falsities of Mr Br
do any thing avail him here to the setting up of Man's and the frustrating of
Christ's Merits, which is the scope of his levelling.

The explication in reference to this part of the Thesis has nothing that may
be called an addition to it. Only there page 141. as here in describing the
third kind of meriting, he tells us, that The obligation to reward is Gods
ordinate Justice, and the truth of his promise; and the worthiness lies in the
performance of the Conditions on our part. He doubted (it seems) that we would
have taken him (notwithstanding that which he had said equipollent with this in
the Thesis) to have had some seed of Christian modesty and humility remaining
in him, that he had not totally forsworn all self-denial, unless he should
express, and therefore has expressed himself at the full here, to be full of
self-arrogance.

But in this does he declare his intolerable contempt of the word, that having
himself quoted (at the least) 13 testimonies of scripture, all with one harmony
affirming, that Gods Gospel dispensations are free, of mere grace and mercy,
without any reference to our works and righ^eousness, that Gods grace and man's
works or worth cannot stand together, but that they destroy either the other in
reference to Justification and salvation: That man's merit in any respect
without difference is a subversion and denial of Gods grace in all respects;
(For all this he shall find that will but peruse the 13 first scriptures which Mr
B. quoteth in this Thesis) yet he does elude all with this frothy distinction in
the beginning of the same Thesis: True, Our Performances cannot be said to
Merit in the most strict and proper sense, etc. but in a larger sense they may.
What is this but to oppose the sacred verity of the most high God, with the
froth of man's wit? what Scripture shall henceforth stand in its venerable
Majesty and authority, if the boldness of a corrupt worm shall thus puff it to
nothing? Of all other men I conceive Mr Br has most need to make grace alone
and free Mercy his refuge: For of all that I have met with accounted Members of
any of the reformed Churches, I never found any whose very meritorious services
(as he terms them) such as this work of his is, have more provocation in them.
But thus far of his assertion which we have found full of the Leaven, or
rather to be the Leaven it self of the Scribes and Pharisees both of the former
and latter ages. Let us see now how he lenifieth and sweeteneth it, that his
sacrilege in robbing God of the honor of his grace appear not.

B: We ascribe not Merit (says he in the Thesis) to our works, as Merit is
taken in its most proper and strict sense, seeing there is nothing in the value
of it, or any benefit that God receives by it, which may so entitle it
Meritorius: Neither is there any proportion betwixt it and the reward, but in a
larger sense, as promise is an obligation and the thing promised is debt, etc.
Yet in the explication, p. 138, he grants to man a capacity of Meriting somewhat
at the hands of God in this sense also, lest he should seem to acknowledge that
there are some of the worst reprobates yea devils, that have not at all
merited from God; But of these he Concludes p. 139. that it is a poor kind of
Meriting which they can boast of yet without some Merit, and that of good from
the Justice of God he will not leave them destitute. But in the Conclusion of
the explication page 141. he adds somewhat more to take off the harshnes of his
self-ascribing doctrine of Merit: thus;

B: This kind of Meriting is no diminution to the greatness or freenes of the
Gift or Reward: because it was a free and gracious Act of God, to make our
performance capable of that title; and to engage himself in the foresaid
promise to us; and not for any gain that he expects by us, or that our
performance can bring him. Lo ye now, the strength of this man's wit, that can
blow heaven and earth into a confusion with one breath, and with the next
breath set both into their due place and order again. Nothing inferior is the
slight of his wit to the slight and dex^erity of that head-mans hand that is
reported so nimbly to execute his office that having cut off the head, he left
it standing without any wagging upon the shoulders still. So this man hewes off
the honor of Gods grace yet leaves it in all its glory without diminution
still. Yet let us reckon with the man a little. Can he name any one of the
worst Papists or Jesuits that does attribute Merit to man's works in a higher
degree than, or does not when he has extolled man's Merits, salve the grace of
God as finely as himself? Are not his words and theirs about Gods Grace and
man's merits the same? Does he add any thing here of his own that he has not
learned of them? We cannot merit (says Mr Br) in the most strict and proper
sense: Why? Alas, says he, There is nothing in the value of our works, or any
benefit that God receives by them, that may entitle them Meritorious; Neither
is there any proportion between them and the Reward. Do not Bellarmine and his
brethren speak altogether so fully and more fully, seemingly to vindicate the
grace of God from all ecclipsing by their doctrine of Merit? Merit as strictly
and properly taken (say they) must be, 1 Ex proprijs, 2 ex indebitis, 3 Ad
aequalitatem. 1 It must be of something of our own which we have not received;
2 of that which we were not indebted or bound to perform; 3 It must come up to
a full proportion of equality in value with the reward which it meriteth. And
thus (say they) no man can merit with God. For neither has he any thing of his
own to offer unto God which he has not received from God, nor any strength to
act meritoriously but what he has received from above, and is inspired by
grace into him; So that Antoninus that Postill Schoolman, Concludes that in
this Case that Fathers conclusion is authentic, which said it before him,
though not punctually in the same words Quum enim Deus coronat Merita nostra,
remunerat A^on par. 4. Tit. 9. ca. 7 ante sec:
Munera sua, quia scilicet ipse dedit virtutem operandi gratis. When God Crowns
our Merits, he rewards his own gifts, because himself has freely given us the
strength so to work. Nor 2 Can he do any thing but is his due obedience he owes
it as homage to his Creator. And 3 as to proportion and equality, even
Bellarmine that affirms quandam infinitatem, a certain infinitenes in man's
works, not as they proceed from man, but as the Holy Ghost which is infinite,
is the author of them, yet concludes, Nemopotest paria reddere Deo. Our works
can never mount up to an equality with Gods bounty. In this proper sense
therefore all the worst hornets of the Romish hive do explode Merits with as
much detestation as Mr. Br.

In like manner what he tells us in the beginning of the explication of Merits
in strict Justice which he does in part abandon; is but a distinction which he
has learned from the Jesuits which distinguish betwixt Merits in strict
Justice, and Merits in gracious acceptance, rejecting the former, and
attributing unto man a power only to perform that which God will graciously
accept for Merit. Yea when Calvine will express what use the whole rabble of
Popish Schoolmen make of this evasion, not troubling himself to allege their
particular words, he contracts the sum of all that they all say into these
words of his own: Aiunt, Non tanti esse intrinseca dignitate bona opera, ut
Call. Inst. li 3. ca. 14. sect. 14.
ad justitia^ comparanda^ sufficiant, sed hoc acceptantis esse Graciae quod
tantum vale^t. They acknowledge that man's good works are not worth a rush in
their own intrinsecall worth to Merit or obtein Righteousness [before God,] but
that it is of Gods Grace accepting that they are of such value.

And what he says at the end of the explication, [that this kind of Meriting
is no diminutio^ to the greatness or freenes of the gift or reward, Because it
was a free and gracious Act of God that made our works capable of this title,
and to engage himself by promise to us, etc.] as it is in substance one and the
same thing which he had said before, to make his doctrine appear sufferable, so
is it that which he has sucked from the breasts of the Holy Mother Church of
Rome also. It is the plea of all the Popish Sophisters says Calvin, Qui belle
se absurda omnia evasisse putarunt, Inst. li. 3. ca. 17. sect. 3.
non intrinseca sua bonitate valere opera ad salutem promerenda, sed ex pacti
ratione, quia Dominus liberalitate sua tanti aestimavit, i. e. who thought that
they had bravely discharged themselves of all the absurdities [which follow
this doctrine] by saying that our works do not avail to merit salvation by
their own intrinsic goodness, but by reason of Gods Covenant or promise,
because he of his free bounty has put such a value upon them. And still
affirming that the Merit of works does not at all Clowd Gods grace, Quia a
Gratia acc^ptante habent suum Ibid. ca. 17. sect. 15.
valorem, i. e. because it is the gracious acceptance of God that entitles them
to this honor.

I shall instance no further in particulars: only in general I affirm there
is not to be found any of the most Trentified and deepest branded Papists, that
has in this point spoken more derogatorily to the grace of God, or more
superlatively to the exalting of man's menstruous righteousness; but contrariwise
diverse especially of the more ancient Schoolmen that have spoken more modestly
and moderately of both, than Mr Br. So high in the conceit of his own worth and
perfection, have the praises of his righteousness and virtues decanted by some
throughout the Country, coming (as it is probable) to his ears, enthroned him.
Or if it be not either the proud opinion of his own virtues and righteousness,
or an ambition to be esteemed matchles and unanswerable in any Paradox that he
undertakes to maintain, or a vow that he has made to return and bring what
Proselytes he can with him to Babylon; which has; let him show what it is that
has induced him, thus to pervert and disturb the Churches of Christ with these
Antichristian doctrines, by raising them to life again after they have so long
laid almost dead and buried therein.

But whether there be not as concinnous an agreement and uniformity, in Mr Brs
doctrines of the perfection and Merit of man's righteousness; and yet while his
righteousness is thus perfect and Meritorious with God, he remains
notwithstanding under the Curse of the Law and wrath of God until the day of
Judgment, (as before he has asserted) whether these things do not so trimly
agree together, as a Crown on the head, and a halter about the neck, I leave to
every rational man to Judge.

That which he has in the middle part of his explication about Merits of man
which the Wisdom (not the Justice) of God is bound to reward; as also sundry
passages that he has about Merits in the strict Justice of God; I leave as
mere fopperies unworthy of reading, much more of answering. Only this I affirm
that he does here equallize the merits of man's with the merits of Christ's
righteousness, for neither has Christ merited from Gods natural but his
ordinate Justice, not in the strict, but in the large sense.

His 25 Thesis lying betwixt these 2 that I have coupled together, I pass by
without any particular examination of the particulars in it, or in the
Explication of it, because it has not any thing in it controverted between us
and Papists, though what he says there, be said with an intention to ^app up
himself in an Antipopish dress that he may be the less suspected when he comes
to sour us with the leaven of the Papists. He saw these 2 Theses which I have
examined together, viz. Perfection and Merits of works, if they should come
together one in the neck of another, without any Calm betwixt them, would make
so terrible a sound as would be enough to waken and startle all that were but
sleeping and not dead, for fear the Pope or the Devil had been come to assault
them; Therefore to keep all quiet he interposeth this Thesis and its
explication, in which he pulls the ears of our Divines for saying that God does
justify first our persons and then our duties and actions. page 134. and
deinceps in the explication, telling us it is a doctrine of dangerous
consequence many ways, and except we will take it in his, that is, in the
Popish sense, it smells rankly of Popery, and setts up Justification by works,
from the very thought whereof he starts and startles away as affrighted.
Notable dissimulation, not of a learner but of one learned in the Trade,

Clodius accusat Maechos, Catilina Cethegum. He that affirms our Righteousness
equal with the righteousness of Christ to justification, that entitles it a
perfect righteousness, a meritorious righteousness, is the first man in all the
world that fears of the advancing of Justification by works, by them whom he
hates for oppugning it. If there were that which he calls danger in this
phrase or doctrine, of setting up such a justification, would not himself be
the first man to kiss it, to eat it up, to promote it? What is it that makes
him to disrelish the phrase so extremely? is it not that it inverts his order
in Justification, that he would have the works to justify the man, when
contrariwise this doctrine makes the justification of the person to be the
ground of the acceptance of his obedience? Is it not the very depth of Satan,
from which he is moved to guise and disguise himself, to act Satan's part with
all guile and subtlety to betray the Saints of Christ and the truth of Christ
to damning Popery, and yet here and there to transform himself into an Angel of
Light, a Minister of Righteousness, to blind the eyes of the simple that they
may not espy him until they be taken in his snare and lost for ever.

As for the doctrine or phrase it self, he knows our Divines mean this only
when they say, God does justify first our persons and then our duties and
actions, viz. That God having first justified their persons from all the guilt
that was upon them, does thenceforth also justify them in ref^rence to all the
duties which through Christ the Mediator they shall perform unto God, not imputing
to them the imperfections thereof, so that they may rest Confident of Gods
accepting both the performers and the performance in and through Christ the
beloved. In this respect and not as Conditions of the New Covenant (as Mr. Br
dreameth) does the Gospel teach our works to be accepted of God.

There is yet one link of the Popish Chain wanting, without which it will be
unperfect and unusefull. If it were granted that there is, 1 a personal
righteousness of Gods own appointment necessary to justification. 2 That this
righteousness consists in ou^ own Faith and sanctification, or good works. 3
That it is a perfect, and 4 a Meritorious Righteousness: yet all this cannot be
effect^all either to save or deceive us, unless it be a righteousness also
possible for us to perform. Tha^ he may not be wanting therefore to the Popish
Cause in any one branch of Popish doctrine, he adds this also.

Thesis 27 in these words, page 141. Bax: As it was possible for Adam to have
fullfilled the Law of Works, by that power which he received by Nature; so is
it possible for us to perform the Conditions of the New Covenant by the power
which we receive from the Grace of Christ.

To which he adds in the Explication, page 142 etc.

Bax: This possibility is to be understood not in Relation to the strength of
the Agent. But in the Relative sense, the Conditions of the New Covenant are
possible to them that have the assistance of Grace.

So that strength which was in Adam to fulfill, was a power which he received
by Nature; But the strength by which we perform, is the power which we receive
from the grace of Christ If any should have asked him what that grace of Christ
is? the man was very Coy, he could, but he would not tell, whether it were a
Pauline or a P^lagian Grace; a grace equally extended both to the Elect and the
Reprobats, or a grace peculiar to the Elect; a grace that comes no further than
the ear, or a grace operating upon the heart also; etc. He had other fish to
fry and had not the leizure to stay and c^ack these nutts now He bids us to
turn over many volumes, and specially Parkers Theses, to search if possibly we
can find what Mr. Brs judgment would be many years after in this point. But it
is easy to perceive the man's meaning by his gaping in many passages of this
book. We should have had all this in rank and file in his much promised
Tractate of Universal Redemption, by which as by a second famous achievement
he meant to endear himself to his holy Father, but that unluckily there is one
of his own spirit step into his Holinesses Parlour to present him with this
gift, and so anticipated this favor which Mr. Br would have had entire to
himself; so that now the expected advantage being lost, and he not using to
open his Commodities to sale a day before the Fair, we might possibly for a
couple of Capons obtein to know his meaning herein In the mean while, it must
needs be his intent in reserving to himself what he meant by grace, to pu^ upon
us a kind of impossibility to say readily, yea or nay to his asserted
p^ssibility of performing the Conditions of the New Covenant by a power which
he leaves us uncertain of knowing what it is.

As for the two fold opposition which he puts in his Thesis, 1. between the
conditions of the Old Covenant and New, 2. Between the power which Adam had by
nature, and the power which we have by the Grace of Christ; there is nothing
but a windy sound of words therein, to deceive his reader into an opinion that
he has some honest and sound meaning in what is here posited or said. For
neither does he make any real difference between the conditions of these two
Covenants: but makes our own Righteousness, consisting in faith and works, to
be the substance of the conditions of both Covenants, only he puts a supposed
difference in the measure of them: One, an imaginary perfection of sincerity in
doing them, answering to what the New Covenant requires; the other, an
absolute and gradual perfection in doing them without the least particle
omitted or committed, besides or against the rigorous exaction of the Old
Covenant. And this is a difference made up of a man's dreaming fancy without any
least footing that it has in, or sustentation by the Word of God; which
utterly shakes off all man's righteousness, works, and qualifications in either,
and both senses, from having any thing to do in the business of justification
under the New Covenant, as has been in part already, and shall be in its due
place (if God will) more fully demonstrated afterward.

Nor does he mean 2 things, by Adams power by nature, and our power by Grace.
Nature there, and grace here, to him are one and the same. For was not the
power which Adam had to stand, a power received by Grace? what a malignant eye
has he, so extremely to envy the rays of Gods Grace, when they luster, and
by their brightness discover the dimnesse and invalidity of man's nature? He
will own no longer Peter Lombard himself to be the Magister, if he affirm (as
he does affirm) that the power which Adam had to fulfill the conditions of the
Old Covenant, was (not by grace, but) by nature; or what means he by the grace
of Christ now? does he under this word point out any other power than every man
has or may have, that is no more Christified, or Spirituallized now, than Adam
was then? yea than he was immediately after his fall? This book of his in many
parcels of it does (not obscurely) insinuate thus much of him; and if we judge
amiss, it is his fault in writing so ambiguously and refusing to explain his
own meaning that ministers cause and evidence enough so to judge.

But as to the thing it self here posited by Master Baxter: we utterly deny
that God has ever given, or any where promised to give unto the best of men in
the state of sinful infi^mity, such a measure of Grace, as might put him into
a possibility by the power which he has received, to perform either a
righteousness effectual and sufficient to justification, or a righteousness
perfect and Meritorious; or a righteousness which as righteousness, and by a
worthiness in it self, can give him right and title to the righteousness of
Christ to justify him. And these are the things which Mr. Baxter here either
with the grace, or without, and against the grace of God contendeth for; but
neither has, nor ever will have the grace of God, from the Word of God, to
prove and demonstrate; though he bangle and bungle never so much with his loose
shifts of Sophistry, to give out an appearance to them that are more delighted
with appearance then with substance, as if he had done it.

CHAP. XVIII.
Arg. An examination of Mr. Baxters Doctrine about the nature and use of the
Moral Law, upon what grounds, and in what sense and degrees the righteousness
thereof is required under the Gospel, what relation it has to the Covenants,
and each of them. His Paradox of sincere, not perfect obedience required under
the New Covenant; and his extravagancies about all the rest of these
particulars discovered.

THe three following Theses, viz. the 28, 29, and the 30th, I purposely
pretermit without examination, not that there is nothing in them which
deserves exception against it, but because whatsoever therein calls for
examination by the touchstone of the Word, is either not controverted between
us and the Papists about the point of Justification, or else has been said,
and answered before; or thirdly will offer it self again more properly to be
answered in the following part of this Tractate, where we shall find Mr. Baxter
speaking it out more fully then he has done here in these Theses, and their
explications.

To the 31 Thesis, page 154. as it is considered in, and by it self, I have
nothing to object: but to the Explication thereof, page 155. and deinceps, I
have somewhat to say, yet not altogether by way of exception against it, but
partly also for the substration of some grounds to answer him in things which
in the following part of this Treatise he has to deliver; accordingly as he
lays down here for delivering them. His words therefore I first transcribe,
beginning at page 155.

B. That the Moral Law is yet in force, I will not stand to prove, because so
many have written of it already. See Mr. Anthony Burgesses Lectures. But to
what ends, and in what sense the Gospel continues that Law, and commands
perfect obedience thereto, is a question not very easy.

1. Whether Christ did first repeal that Law, and then reestablish it to some
other ends? So some think.

2. Or whether he has at all made the Moral Law the preceptive part of the
New Covenant? and so whether the New Covenant does at all command us perfect
obedience? or only sincere?

3. Whether the Moral Law be continued only as the precepts of the Old
Covenant, and so used by the New Covenant merely for a directive Rule?

To the first I answer:

1. That it is not repealed at all I have proved already; even concerning the
Covenant of Works it self; and others enough have proved at large of the Moral
Law.

2* Yet that Christ uses it for other ends, and for the advancement of his
Kingdom, I grant.

What is here meant by the Moral Law must be first understood, before there
can be any well-grounded consenting, or dissenting in judgments about the
force in which it yet stands. Both the word Law, and the word Moral, have
their ambiguity, and are used in diverse senses.

1. The word Law is taken sometimes only for a rule, or guide, or directive,
to give us light to discern between truth and falsehood, good and evil, lawful
and unlawful; to which also may be added, a power therein to command duty, and
to prohibit, what is contrary to duty. Sometimes it is taken in a larger sense
also, comprehending all these things in it, and withal a promise of reward to
the performers, and commination of penalty to its transgressors. Here I
conceive Mr. Baxter takes the word Law in the former sense only, because page
156. in answer to the first question, he distinguishes, and puts a difference
between the Covenant of Works, and the Moral Law, so plainly, as if he did,
totidem verbis, tell us that he understands by the Moral Law, the rule and
precepts of Holiness, and Righteousness, as considered apart from the
pactionary Adjunct of life and death going with it.

2. The word Moral also has its diverse senses; sometimes Divines take it in a
larger sense, for all whatsoever pertaines to manners; and then by the Moral
Law they understand all the Commandments, or Rules which God gives for the
regulating of our manners, in reference to the qualifications of the mind, and
the outward operations also: Whether those Commandments be either of
natural, or of positive right, written in man's heart at his creation, or had
their first positu^e in time from the word, and lips of God. Sometimes in a
stricter sense, for that which does eminently above other things concern the
life and manners. And then by the Moral Law they understand sometimes the
Decalogue, or Law of the ten Commandments: Sometimes the Law of Nature, or
natural Righteousness imprinted in man's heart at his first creation.

Here taking it for granted, that Mr. Baxter means by the Moral Law, the
doctrine of the Law considered as a rule of Righteousness, not as a Covenant of
Works:

If 1. he mean by the Moral Law all Commandments both of natural and
positive right; I deny the Moral Law so taken to be in the whole, and in every
part now in force.

If 2. he mean by it the Decalogue, or Law of the ten Commandments, as it
was given upon Mount Sinai in time, so himself knows it to be the judgment
of many Divines, that it bound the Nation of Israel alone, was not at all given
to the Gentiles, does not at all bind us that are not of the Na^ion of Israel;
othe^wise then it clears up to us the Law of Nature written in our hearts,
which does bind us; or as the duties thereof are required of us in the New
Testament, by the Lord Christ, whom we acknowledge to be our King. See
Zanchius, Tom. 4. lib. 1. cap. 11. These. 1. Where he fully handles, and
confirms this assertion; adding moreover, Sic etiam insignes Theologi omnes
sentiunt. i. e. All Divines of note a^e of this judgment. Withal, that there
are some things contained in some of the ten Commandments, not pertaining to
the jus naturae, save in their genus, and that somewhat remote, I know Mr.
Baxter will not deny; and if I thought any else would question it, it were
easy to be demonstrated. But if he mean by the Moral Law, the Law of Nature,
as aforesaid, as it is written in the heart; yea as it is further illustrated*
either by the book of the Creatures, or by the Decalogue, as it is epitomized
in Tables of stone, and explained and amplified in both Testaments; so I grant
the Moral Law to be still in force; viz. as a directive of Moral obedience
still.

What Mr. Baxter adds, [ viz. to what ends, and in what sense the Gospel
continues that law, and commands perfect obedience thereto, is a question
not very easie] is to me a strange speech, in many respects. For 1. I cannot
see how the question can be difficult to him that will not Nodum in scirpo
quaerere, make the plain ways of God rugged, by filling them up with briars
and thorns. To the same most honorable ends, and in the same sense is it
continued, for, and in which it was first given; I mean to the same ends in
general, though not in every far remote particular. First to make his glory
elucent in this Microcosm, this choice piece of his Workmanship: Man is the
glory of God, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 7. How? but as he bears the image
of God, not only in rule and dominion, but also in wisdom, holiness, and
righteousness, to manage that authority, and rule wherewith the grace of God
has invested him. And this glory of God upon man is by so much the more
conspicuous, by how much the more perfectly he resembles God in wisdom,
righteousness, and holiness.

Besides it was both given and continued, to direct and enable man in some
measure to render to God his Pepper-corn (as Mr. Baxter terms it) in
testification of his homage, and thankfulness, both for the favors received,
and for the favors promised: without the guidance of the Moral Law written
without us, yea within us also, we should, though our affections were never so
sweetly sanctified, for lack of sound illumination, present God with wild
grapes in stead of grapes, with an abomination instead of due obedience and
devotion. And are not these ends as requisite in the state of man's Renovation,
as they were in the state of his innocence?

Yea further, unpossible was it, that Christ should not continue the Moral
Law, no less unpossible then it is for God to be unrighteous, or not God: He
came to fulfill all righteousness, not to destroy any one branch of natural
and essential righteousness. The Moral Law is the image of God, in which we
may read the nature of God: The rule and platform is in God himself
originally, this is but an extract from it, and abstract of it. Christ came to
restore it, not to quench it, to set it up in man to perfection, not to deface
it by any diminution: For so should he have abased the glory of his Father,
shining in his living image.

And lastly, not to have commanded perfect, but a maimed obedience thereto, had
been against the rule of righteousness, which bids us to render to every one
his due, his whole due; To God the things that pertain to God; yea the whole
that pertains to him. All is but a Pepper-corn to a whole kingdom of Grace
held, and of glory expected from him; and should not Christ require the payment
of a Pepper-corn whole and entire, without diminishing, or dividing it?

But the truth is, that the question is difficult to be answered, without
crushing Mr. Baxters Gospel Justification by Works, not in reference to Christ's
Gospel Justification by free Grace; with it the Commandment of perfect
obedience to the Moral Law sweetly cohereth. The command of perfect obedience
to the Moral Law, as a condition of Justification, leaves all men hopeless of
Justification, sure to condemnation for ever. Because none can perform the
condition in this life. But when we are justified freely by the blood of
Christ; and then by way of answering the grace of our Justifier with our real
thankfulness, we are bidden to render our obedience more and more perfectly,
not slacking our endeavors, until we come to full perfection: Though we
attain it not in this present life, yet our not attainment does but increase
our self-abasement, and make us feel that Christ is our all, and we are
nothing; but does in no wise destroy our Justification, or lessen the joy of
the Holy Ghost, and peace of conscience, which are bottomed only, and wholly
upon Christ, and not upon our selves at all.

Now let us see how he will make the question difficult to us, as it must be to
him.

First, says he, it is a question, Whether Christ did first repeal that Law,
and then re-establish it to other ends? So some think.

A mere windy question of such as delight to play with God in contempt, as the
Froggs with Jupiters Log. Where are those some thinkers? No less rationally
might they feign that the Lord Jesus plucked down his Father Joseph's house, and
re-edified it to this other end, that men might go in and out no more at the
doors, but at the windows.

Mr. Baxter washes his hands clean from having a finger in this pie. Nay,
says he, I have proved already, that it is not repealed at all, even
concerning the Covenant of Works it self. i. e. That Christ is so far from
taking from us the perfect rule of righteousness, that he (however he be
called a Savior) yet has left all men, without saving any, to be damned for
their unrighteousness. But what he has proved before, I suppose, we have
disapproved, and that sufficiently, before.

Yet, says he, that Christ uses it (i. e. the Moral Law, without the
separable adjunct of the Covenant of Works thereunto annexed) to other ends I
grant. He grants that which none demands of him. But what title he has to make
such a grant, he shows not. And I think it will cost him so much labor as will
make him sweat under the saddle, before he be able to show to what other
substantial, and not merely circumstantiall ends it now serves, besides those
to which it served at the first creation thereof in man's innocence, at least
after his principles, that holds the works thereof now under the Gospel to
tend to Justification.

But from this he passes to a second question which he makes hence to arise.

B. Quest. 2. Or whether he has at all made the Moral Law to be the
preceptive part of the New Covenant, and so whether the New Covenant does at
all command us perfect obedience? or only sincere?

To this he answers.

B. 1. That the Moral Law, as it is the preceptive part of the Covenant of
Works, is but delivered over into the hands of Christ, and so continued in the
sense before expressed, seems plain to me.

2. That the Moral Law does therefore so continue, to command even beleivers,
and that the perfect obeying of it is therefore their duty, and their not
obeying, their sin, deserving the death threatened in that Covenant.

3. That Jesus Christ has further m^de use of the same moral Law, for a
direction to his subjects, whereby they may know his will. That whereas our
sincere subjection, and obedience to Christ is part of the condition of the New
Covenant; that we may know what his will is, which we must endeavor to obey,
and what rule our actions must be sincerely fitted to and guided by; he has
therefore left us this moral Law as part of this direction, having added a more
particular enumeration of some duties in his Gospel: That as when the Old
Covenant said, thou shall perfectly obey: the moral Law did partly tell them
wherein they should obey: So when the New Covenant says, thou shall obey
sincerely, the moral Law does perfectly tell us wherein, or what we must
endeavor to do.

Before he pretended a purpose to speak of the Moral Law in it self, and as
considered without the Covenants; but finding quickly that his Babel will not
tower up out of simples, he is forced either to let all fall, or else himself
must return to his compoundings and confoundings again, now mixing the moral
law with the old, and by and by with the New Covenant, as a part sometimes of
the one, and sometimes of the other; as if it were a Noun Adjective which
cannot stand by it self. When contrariwise the moral Law is the rule of
righteousness, complete in it self, the very image of Gods Nature, and Will,
to which every reasonable creature is bound to conform, that it may be like to
God himself, and so illustrate either to other the splendour of Gods glory
invisible in himself, but shining forth in their persons and performances. But
the Covenants are separable Adjuncts of the moral law, when annexed to the
moral law, being free and voluntary Acts and Statutes of God, which he might
pro imperio, by the Sovereign authority which he has over his creatures,
either have, or not have added to the moral law, at his pleasure: The Old
Covenant making out to men the way of Salvation in strict, yet equal and
incorrupt Justice: The New Covenant, his way of saving sinners, and justifying
the ungodly, by free grace, when in justice they were lost and unrecoverable.
The one of these is by the perfect fulfilling of the moral law; the other
without reference to the moral law at all, freely by the redemption which is by
Jesus Christ.

Here now, if both Covenants were silenced, and annihilated, yet the moral law
would abide firm still, it would as well without Covenant as by Covenant, speak
out man's duty and obligation, both unjustified and justified, in his state
either of integrity or infirmity, to be wise, holy and righteous, as God made
him, and to act perfectly according to the perfect principles of acting first
created in him; even without life and heaven before him to allure him, or death
and hell behind him to enforce him. And so the moral law is no part of either
Covenant essentially, that it cannot be separated from it without its
nullifying. Nay it was in God from all eternity, and shall be in him still,
when all Covenants conditional shall have their expiration.

Yet let us follow Master Baxter, to see what business he will make in the
dark, having thus obscured the clear light of this doctrine by his mixtures and
confoundings. He gives many answers to this 2 question.

1. That the moral law, as it is the preceptive part of the Covenant of works,
is but delivered over into the hands of Christ, and so continued in the sense
before expressed, seems plain to me. How clear are this man's eyes? I can see no
plainness in the answer, or any part thereof. It is all intricate, and almost
incomprehensible to our dull understanding.

For 1. I see not how the moral Law is the preceptive part of the Covenant of
works. It contains in it I confess the precepts of all good, just and holy
operations, as it is the rule of all these. But how it is the preceptive part
of the Covenant, being a distinct thing from it, the Covenant being added to
it, and not it to the Covenant, I see not.

2. How it is delivered over into the hands of Christ, and in what sense, is
hard for me to apprehend. Is it taken out of God in whom it was originally and
essentially, and so put into Christ's hands, that it is no more to be found in
God? or is that unperfect remainder of it which abode still in the Synteresis,
or mind and conscience of lapsed man, taken thence and put into the hands of
Christ, that it is no more to be found in man, but that after Satan had felled
down the stemm and branches thereof, Christ at last has forced thence the very
root thereof also, that there may be no more sprouting even of an unperfect
righteousness in any man, saving by some light and mover from without him? Or
is it so put into Christ's hand to dispose of its being and office, that if he
say the word, that which was shall be no more natural or moral righteousness,
much less the perfect rule thereof; or that which was man's duty, and his
conformity with the nature of God, if Christ will, shall be so no more? All
these are such absurdities as cannot possibly drop from Master Baxters learned
pen. Or is it delivered into the hands of Christ to be the dispenser and
disposer of it in relation to i^s end, whether the natural righteousness which
it prescribes shall be effectual, and of necessary use to man's justification?
This indeed were an intolerable absurdity for one of us, that have our stations
here below under Christ, to be regulated by his doctrine, to utter: But for
M^ster Baxter that has soared upward in his Aenigmatical and Metaphysical
learning unto the sphere of Saturn, high above the Sun of righteousness and
his light, it is no absurdity to deliver it. It is but the language of Rome,
that the righteousness of the moral law must under the Gospel still justify
us, as when we were perfect in Adam, though then in him we could, but now we
cannot perform it. And why so? not because Christ has declared by his word
that he will so have it, but because the holy Mother Church, that has the
power to make the word of Christ to dance into all forms and senses after her
interpretations, has so decreed. If this be Mr. Baxters meaning, and that it
appears to him to be a plain truth, why does he not make it plain to us that we
may see it with him, but only says it, as a cathedral doctor without adding
illustration or confirmation to it?

3. What he means by that which he next says, viz. and [it is] so continued
in the sense before expressed, is not plain to me, where this sense is
expressed, whethe^ in the former part of this answer, and then it must be
continued by Christ, to be the preceptive part of the Covenant of works still:
or in the question, and so it is continued by Christ to be the preceptive part
of the New Covenant; or in some one or more passages of the foregoing part of
this his treatise, and so we shall be still uncertain of the sense, because we
c^nnot tell, and he does not tell us where it is expressed. And for us to seek
after a man in his sense, who wilfully hides himself and his sense in the
dark that we may not find them, were but a senseless piece o^ w^rke,
especially when we know it will nothing better our senses in case we should
be so luckie as to find his. I should ghess that he means the sense
expressed in the former part of this answer, and so it will be examined in that
which he adds in his second Answer, viz.

2. That the moral Law does therefore so continue etc. as before. What else
should he mean in saying it does continue, but that as he had said in the
former clause of the first answer, viz. to be the preceptive part of the
Covenant of works? or why does he say, it does therefore so continue, but that
his therefore bids us to fetch the cause from the same answer, because Christ,
into whose hands it is delivered, has so continued it. And if so, to what
purpose is all this reasoning? Tends it to affirm that it was possible for
Christ considered either as God, or as our mediator, to rescind and destroy the
eternal and immutable Law of natural and eternal righteousness? or that it
would have fallen to the ground with its own weight, if it had not been
delivered into Christ's hand to sustain it? Or that it would not be in it self
the rule of Righteousness for ever, except Christ had assumed our nature, in
it to give it a second birth and stablishment? Or that the Moral Law had lost
its power and righteousness when we had lost ours, and so it needed no less
then we, a reparation? Nay whether man had sinn^d, or not sinned, been
redeemed, or not redeemed, the Moral Law was, and is still the same. What the
Psalmist says of God, Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the
earth and world were formed, from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God;
Psalm. 90. 2: So may I say of the moral Law, wheresoever it is, and as far as
it is truly held forth and fully too, whether by Christ or by Moses, by the Old
or by the New Testament, by the creature, by the conscience, by the
Philosophers Ethics, or by any other way or means whatsoever; before the
mountains and world were formed, from everlasting, to everlasting it has been
and is the perfect rule of Moral righteousness still. Neither shall it cease so
to be when world and mountains are dissolved: but then we shall see perfectly in
the face of God himself what we now see in his either more or less perfect
images, and be perfectly configured thereunto. In the mean time evenbeleivers
have this as one of their great privileges, to be free from sin, and servant,
of Righteousness: To. 6. 18. and so the Law of Righteousness continues to
command both believers and unbeleevers, and the perfect obeying thereof is the
duty of both, and the not obeying their sin, deserving the death threatened
in the Old Covenant: But so that believers having fully done their Law in
Christ, and being freed from the Old Covenant, though still in a sweet
conjunction with the Moral Law, Romans 7. 22. have no more their hated
irregularities imputed to them, but fully forgiven for Christ's sake. Thus the
Word of God, and Doctrine of Christ run smoothly, and clearly, why does Mr.
Baxter not find, but make whirlpooles, and stoppages therein, to offend, and
drown poor souls, that cannot yet swim in the deep? Good ends have straight
ways leading to them. Mr. Baxters crooked windings, argue him not to have a
straight and upright meaning. His unusefull therefore, and therefore, put out
of joint that which God has so compacted, as that it ought not to be
dis-joynted. And if we would know what he aims at in his circumlocutions to
circumvent the simple in these his two first answers, let us but follow him to
the next, and we shall in part find it.

B. 3. That Jesus Christ has further made use of the same moral Law, for a
direction to his subjects, etc. ut supra. What he says in this his third
answer to the second question, of the usefulness of the moral Law for
direction to Beleivers, is granted. And this is one great prerogative which
Beleivers have, that the moral Law, which in relation to unbeleivers has the
curse of the Old Covenant, as a scourge and sword annexed to it to take
vengeance of them for their transgressions, is to them that are in Christ a
peaceable, sweet and unarmed counselor. But in the opening hereof Master
Baxter shows himself to be himself, in foisting in two of his unauthentick
paradoxes or falsities (call them which ye will) and the same so finely with
slight of hand interwoven in his discourse, that his craft might not be easily
espied; but being espied, every one that knows Master Baxter, may know them
to be from his Artifice so inserted. viz. 1. That obedience to Christ, in the
performance of all the duties which the moral Law prescribes, is part of the
condition of the New Covenant. 2. That the Gospel, or New Covenant does not
require of men perfect, but sincere obedience only. Both of these his subtilty
lays down not as positions here first asse^ted, and consequently here to be
proved: But as assertions before proved and granted, upon which he is now ready
to build his other geere and t^ash which he has in readiness to j^yne to these
as a superstructure. Whereas our sincere subjection, and obedience to Christ
(says he) is part of the condition of the New Covenant: And where again, When
the New Covenant says, Thou shall obey sincerely, putting there this voice of
the New Covenant in opposition to the voice of the Old Covenant, which (as he
tells us) says, Thou shall obey perfectly. Here is a pretty slight to broach
errors, a creeping into men to persuade them in despite of their teeth that he
and they are of one mind: That he proved, and they granted it yesternight when
they were all fast a sleep, and none of them spoke or heard any thing. Which
shall we think this man to have more studied, Machiavil, or M^ldonate? If
Bellarmine were alive, he would even shake off his red Cap with laughter, to
see a son of his so much more witty, and crafty then his Father.

But to the matter it self.

First concerning obedience to the Moral Law, that it is part of the condition
of the New Covenant.

1. I demand where it was before proved, yea where in direct words asserted,
that it is here taken up as a point granted? He gave cause enough indeed to
be suspected of it throughout the foregoing part of this Tractate, but not
evidence enough to be impleaded for it. This is Magisterially to command Faith,
as one that speaks by the authority of an infallible spirit, and not
Ministerially to teach, as one that subjecteth himself and his Doctrine to the
trial of Gods Word.

2. I demand whether he means not by the condition of the New Covenant, the
condition upon which, and for which God will justify the performer? Yea that
condition which he had before termed a righteousness perfect, and meritorious
in its own worthyness to Justification? If this be not his meaning, then Master
Baxter eats up again to day what he spit out yesterday. But this can in no wise
befall the animosity of his spirit. If it be his meaning, then does he
pronounce even our legal righteousness, which consists in the fulfilling of the
Moral duties of the Moral Law, as well as our Evangelicall righteousness (as
he terms the personal righteousness which is conformed to the rule of the
Gospel) to be meritorious to Justification. And not any one of the Popes
themselves have spoken higher language then this, to deifie man in his own
righteousness.

3. I would be informed, if the performance of the duties of the Moral Law, in
obedience to Christ does justify, why the same performance in obedience to
God, does not justify also? Is not obedience due as well to the Father, as to
the Son? or is not Justification as much from the Father as from the Son? The
same honor is due to both, and the same work of grace effected by both.
Neither can I see any more worth in Moral Righteousness Morally performed
(for I find not Mr. Baxter as yet speaking further of it) in obedience to the
Son, then in the same done to the Father by way of obedience to him. But of
this point we shall have a more proper place and occasion to speak more fully
afterward.

2. Concerning the second, that the Gospel does require but sincere, not
perfect obedience, I might also enquire,

1. Why Mr. Baxter does here take it up pro concesso, for granted? He had
indeed put it in the question to which he is answering, but had said nothing
for the solution of it, except peradventure by the art of Ventriloquie, he
spoke something under the Table, that he might not be heard, when he said in
his first answer to it, That the Moral Law is continued by Christ in the sense
before expressed, meaning by those words, the expressions used in the said
question, that under the New Covenant the Moral Law commands not perfect
obedience, but only sincere, or at least the Gospel having the Moral Law for
its preceptive part does so. If I knew that to be his meaning, I have somewhat
to say to it. In mean while, be it, or be it not his meaning, is every thing
that Mr. Baxter has once imagined in his brain, or spoken under a bushel, by
and by to be taken up for a granted principle in Religion, upon which he may
make a superstructure of what he pleases?

2. Why does he not allege those Testimonies of the New Testament which assert
only a sincere, and not a perfect obedience? Why does he suffer us poor
souls to continue in darkness for lack of his light communicated to us? Is it
in the outside, or the inside of his Testament that this mystical doctrine is
contained? I acknowledge the promises of Gods free grace are made ^ut in the
riches thereof to them that are in Christ, that God for Christ's sake will
accept their sincere volitions, and performances, according to the ability
which they have, and not reject them for want of the ability which they have
not. That not only the infirmities of their obedience, but their very sins,
and disobedience is blotted out, and shall be no more imputed to them, etc. But
this in no wise denies perfect obedience to be their duty still. Yea much more
their duty under the Gospel, then under the Law, because there is a greater
obligation of greater, and more benefits upon them under the Gospel then under
the Law, binding them to yield back perfect love and obedience to their
Benefactor.

3. What shall we think of those Texts in the New Testament, which require of
us to be perfect, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Jam. 1. 4. Yea perfect as God is perfect, Mat.
5. 48. reproving weakness and infirmity, and commanding a going on to
perfection, Heb. 6. 1. as compared with the precedent Chapter in the latter
part thereof? Yea if perfection were not the duty of a Christian, and
unperfectness and infirmity his sin; why does the Apostle so much groan and
grieve under the remainder of his natural infirmities, and press on to
perfection? Romans 7. 14, to the 24. Phi. 3. 12-14. Or is such unperfectness a
sin only in reference to the rule of the Law, and not the rule of the
Gospel; for that the Law does, but the Gospel does not call for perfection?
This is both contrary to the Scriptures alleged, and does withal make the
Gospel to allow imperfections. And (to use Mr. Baxters own expressions, which
calls the Gospel a Law) what the Law forbids not, we take the same to be
approved by that Law. If any should say that the Gospel does not require
perfect, but sincere obedience, ad aliquid, in relation to this, or that
particular end; it might in some case be a truth. But Mr. Baxter lays it down
positively in it self, that the Gospel requires not perfection. And this can in
no wise be defended.

4. Is not this Doctrine a sluice to let into the hearts of men a whole flood of
carnal security, idleness, improficiency, contempt, or neglect of all the means
of growth in grace, each man settling himself upon his lees, with this Apology,
that they are already squared to the mind and rule of the Gospel, are sincere,
have the truth and true being of Faith, knowledge, and ob^dience: This is all
which the Gospel requires, they are even with the rule, why should they
stretch themselves further to be beyond it? This is a brand which Mr. Baxter
inureth upon our, or rather Christ's doctrine of Justification by Faith alone.
Is not himself guilty?

5. I would be informed what he means by sincere obedience. It is very
requisite that he which vends new Doctrines in new terms, should be exquisite
in expressing, and explaining his terms and words. Sincerus, say the
Etymologists, est quasi dicas sine cera, as honey pure without the mixture of
any wax in it. That which is most pure and simple, without any mixtures, or
taintures. And Sincerity is usually put in opposition, 1 to hypocrisy, or 2.
to corruption, or sinful pollution. As sincerity of obedience is put in
opposition to that obedience which is done in hypocrisy, or with sinister, and
self ends; so ou^ Savior denies the sincerity of the Scribes and Pharisees,
and charge them frequently in the Gospel with hypocrisy, for their strict
walkings, devotions, almsdeeds, etc. that they might be justified by such
personal righteousness of their own. This he calls hypocrisy, and denies to
be sincere obedience, because it aimed not simply to the glory of God, but to
their own ends, their own justification. But this I take to be Mr. Baxters main
end of obedience, to do it that we may be justified by it. And then according
to the doctrine of the Lord Christ, it is not sincere, but hypocritical
obedience. Or if we take hypocrisy to consist in professing, and practicing
holiness and obedience outwardly, but to baser, and worldly ends, lurking
secretly in the heart, viz. profit, honor, applause, and praise of men, etc.
which is there of the aliens from the Covenant of Grace, that cannot plead a
sincerity this way. I have lived in all good conscience before God unto this
day, says Paul of himself, in reference to the time wherein he was yet a Saul,
insinuating the Moral sincerity of his heart in opposition to hypocrisy and
base ends in his obedience while he was yet out of Christ, that even then he
served, and obeyed of good conscience, and according to the measure of the
light of Gods Word shining, as far as it shined in his conscience, Act. 23.
1. Yea he did in sincerity according to the dictate of his conscience,
whatsoever he did against Christ: I thought verily, says he, that I ought to
do many things against the Name of Jesus, etc. which things also I did, Act.
26. 9, 10. It is that whereof the Apostle gives his testimony to the greatest
bulk of his kindred and Nation that rejected Christ. They have a zeal of God,
says he, etc. Romans 10. 2. of God, therefore sincere in opposition to base ends
in all the services which they performed; and a zeal; this imports an high
degree of their obedience, and sincerity of obeying. Who is there of the
carnal, and ignorant multitude, but can profess the like sincerity in their
public worship, and private performances, without proposing to themselves any
base and sinister ends therein? And does the Gospel prescribe only such a
sincere obedience, which is attained without any Gospel, or Gospellizing of the
heart? Or if we take sincerity in opposition to all mixture of the flesh and
corruption, in our obedience; in this case the sincerity must be either perfect
or unperfect: If perfect, then the Gospel requires the most perfect obedience,
contrary to the assertion of Mr. Baxter. For what can be more perfect then that
which is pure, and free from all contamination of the flesh, wholly spiritual?
But where is the man to be found that can practically perform the duty? That
Apostle which had labored more abundantly then they all, professed himself not
to have compassed it, but that in the purest and liveliest operations of the
Spirit in him unto good, there was a counter-working of the flesh in him,
hindering the good which he willed, and turning it into the evil which he
hated, etc. Romans 7. 21-23. And the same he professes also to be the case of
all other the Saints of God, Gal. 5. 17. So that a perfect sincerity he cannot
mean, both because he denies that the Gospel injoyneth perfect obedience, and
perfection of sincerity in this kind is the highest pitch of the perfection
that is in the most perfect obedience: And withal because he tells us in the
next answer, page 158. He knows not to what end Christ should command us that
obdience, which he does never enable any man in this life to perform. And this
he has laid down for a maxim, That whatsoever Christ has commanded, or
testified, if Mr. Baxter cannot find out, and fathom a good reason for it, and
of it, meddle with it who lists, he will have nothing to do with it. Or if
he mean an unperfect sincerity, that, according to Mr. Baxter, is none at all.
For if the righteousness of our persons and actions be, much more the
sincerity of our righteousness and obedience must be, not a being, but a
modification of a being, which does not admit of magis and minus, but must be
perfect, or none at all. Yea what an absurdity is it to affirm, that he, whose
office it is to perfect his Elect, Heb. 10. 14. that does not only begin, but
finish his good work in them, has commanded that which is unperfect? He may
be truly said to wink at our unperfectness, to forgive our imperfections; but
to say he commands that which is unperfect, is to deny the perfection of his
commands, and so to lay imperfection to his charge, as well as to our own.
Besides he may according to his custom, if he be put to tell us what sincerity
he means, fall to distinguish it, into a Physical, or Metaphysicall sincerity,
into a Moral, and an Evangelical sincerity, so that although we find many of
his Meashes, yet shall we never find his Fourm: So full of doubles, and false
leaps are they that deal not sincerely in handling the doctrine of Christ,
swaying and waving it hither and thither, to make it not subservient to the
advancing of Christ's kingdom, but of their own inventions. Let Mr. Baxter
labor rather practically, and feelingly to know the power of Christian, and
spiritual sincerity within his heart, then to make use of the Word to make
intricate the plain doctrine of Scriptures, and henceforth we shall find that
which we have hitherto unsuccessefully sought after, sincere dealing in his
disputes. It is not all this while denied, that the Gospel requires sincere
obedience, but affirmed, that it calls for both sincere, and perfect obedience.

I much doubt I should slander Mr. Baxter, if I should say that he means by
sincere obedience, sincerely Evangelical obedience. For he will not be known
to know what that is. It is besides the Orb of Philosophers, Scholasticks, and
Sophisters, in which he moves. But if beyond our belief he mean so, then I
shall consent, and speak with him, When the New Covenant says, Thou shall obey
sincerely, i. e. purely, according to the Gospel rule, which teaches us to
fetch all our guidance, in every work of obedience to make it Evangelical, from
the Word of Christ; all our strength to do it from the Spirit of Christ, all
our acceptance from our union to Christ, presenting all, and our selves withal
to God, through the mediation of Christ, doing all not to attain Justification
by all done, but to glorify God with the fruits of our thankfulness, for the
prizelesse gift of Justification conferred upon us in, and through Christ. When
the New Covenant (I say) has taught us to obey in a sincerely Evangelicall
manner; here now the Moral Law steps in, and tells us (as Mr. Baxter says)
wherein, and what we must endeavor to do. i. e. What be those duties of Moral
holiness, and righteousness, which being in this Gospel way performed, do
receive a higher title then Moral, and become Evangelical, Christian, and
spiritual obeying. If Mr. Baxter mean, or will mean thus, we will go hand in
hand wi^h him, or (what shall be more proper) give him his due precedence, and
follow him.

The next answer (put in numb. 4.) whether it be also an answer to this second
Question, or intended as an answer to the third Question (which else passes
without answer) or else to both questions; runs in these words.

B. But that the Moral Law, without respect to either Covenant, should command
us perfect obedience; or that Christ as the Mediator of the New Covenant should
command us, not only sincere, but also perfect obedience to the Moral Law,
and so has made it a proper part of his Gospel, not only as a directory, and
instruction, but also as a command: I am not yet convinced, (though I will not
contend with any that think otherwise.) My reason is, because I know not to
what end Christ should command us that obedience, which he never does enable
any man in this life to perform. If it were to convince us of our disability
and sin: That is the work of the Law; and the continuing of it upon the old
terms, as is before explained, is sufficient to that.

But I judge this question to be of greater difficulty than moment.

The multiplication of nice and unnecessary questions has been one special
means to bring a darkness upon the doctrine of the Word in those parts thereof,
that in themselves are clear and full of light. It suffices me to know, what
has been a little before proved, that the Moral Law, both with respect, and as
considered in it self, without respect to either Covenant, has been ever, is,
and shall be ever the perfect rule and directory of Moral obedience; And that
Christ, as the Mediator of the New Covenant, has not dissolved, or made void
any part of the Moral Law, or of the Righteousness and duty which the Moral
Law requires, in reference to either the sincerity or perfection in performing
the same; but contrariwise has avouched the contrary, and denounced, that
whosoever shall break one of the least of these commandments, and teach men
so; i. e. as I conceive, shall take liberty by the abuse, and misunderstanding
of the New Covenant to neglect, or be remiss in any part or degree of that
righteousness which the Law requires, and teach others the same remissness
also, The same shall be least in the kingdom of heaven. i. e. A useless and
unprofitable Teacher in the Gospel Church. This suffices me to know, and this
the Scripture plainly affirms and fully confirms. Mat. 5. 17. 19.

But whether the Moral Law to them that are under the New Covenant, and truly
in Christ, be only a rule and directory, or else a commander also? Or whether
Christ has made the Moral Law a proper part of his Gospel, these are things
Heterogeneous from the former, and first devised by those distinctionary
Sophisters that to strengthen their doctrine of merits and works of
superogation, have distinguished between the precepts and counsels of Christ.
Sure I am, that the Gospel in its strict and proper sense, consists not at all
in bringing precepts, but life, grace, righteousness, peace, joy, holiness,
liberty, and salvation from heaven, and whatsoever else tends to the perfect
and never ending welbeing of poor souls, together with an alsufficient light
and direction how to attain all these, and manage them being attained, to the
advancing of the glory of the grace of the giver. This is properly the sum of
the Gospel, and the precepts intermixed with the doctrine hereof, no otherwise
proper to the Gospel, than as they are furtherances to the attainment of them,
and lights and helps to direct us how to stand fixed in the enjoyment of them,
and walk holily, honorably and worthily in the strength and comfort of them.
Yet it cannot be denied but that still the Law Moral is a perfect rule of all
perfect Moral righteousness; and that Christ has expunged no part of it, but
commands all, yea writes the righteousness of all in the hearts of believers,
that they might will all, and delight to do all, not only after the Moral,
but after the Evangelical rule, through Christ, for whose sake their unperfect
services are accepted with God as though they were full and complete. This has
been cleared before in our examination of Master Baxters second Answer to the
seeond Question, and express Scriptures alleged for confirmation thereof.
Neither can we think that the many infinite benefits freely conferred in the
way of the Gospel upon us, do exempt us from, but are obligations upon us unto
the fulfilling of all righteousness: or that it is our bondage, but our liberty
to be free from sin, and the servants of righteousness. The nature of the
commands being now altered under the Covenant of Grace, from what they were
under the Covenant of works. Then they proceeded from mere sovereignty and
power, now from tender Grace and Love. Then had they a sting in the tail, the
curse and hell to inflict, in case there were not full performance. This sting
and curse is now carried away in the body of Christ, no threat of it to them
that are in Christ, but the thing commanded for the completing of our
perfection, which consists in our conformity with the will and nature of God,
with this damage annexed, that the less perfectly we perform, the father off
we are yet from our desired perfection. There the Lord commanded his servants,
here the father his dear Children. There man was commanded to work in his own
strength, here the treasury of Christ is opened, and the power of his Spirit
offered, and we commanded to receive our fill, and in the strength of what we
receive, to mount higher and higher until we come to full perfection.

The reason that Master Baxter brings, why he cannot be yet convinced that
Christ commands perfect obedience to the Moral Law, were from another
reasonless, but from Master Baxter it is but a discovery of himself to be
himself, i. e. an admirer (I had almost said adorer) of his own wisdom.
Because (says he) I know not to what end Christ should command us that
obedience which he never does enable any man in this life to perform. What
more lofty arrogance? he must be admitted into Christ's privy Council, and
have communicated to him what ends Christ has in giving his commands, else
will he cast be hind him his precepts as void and vain. He should have left to
Socinus and his followers thus to have argued, who make humane reason the rule
and bound of their Religion. Had he said, he is not yet convinced, because he
yet meets not with any punctual testimony of Scripture that expressly affirms
it, this would have at the worst but employed some inadvertency in his reading
the Scriptures. But not to deny that the Scripture says it, and yet not to be
convinced, because he sees not to what ends Christ should do what the
Scripture says he has done; this is no less than the advancing the authority
of his reason above the authority of Gods Word: and an attributing of power to
his own blindness, of silencing and frustrating the authority and truth of the
Scriptures.

But who is more blind than he that will not see? Or what hinders Master
Baxter from seeing what ends Christ had in commanding that perfection which we
cannot attain in this life fully to perform? Is it not because he terminateth
and boundeth Christ's ends in all that he did, suffered or commanded, to man, as
both the circumference and center of all, and had no aim to his own glory, and
the glory of his father that sent him, therein? How many honorable ends of
Christ in this case may there be gathered from the Scriptures.

1. That God might be herein glorified. Herein is my father gloryfied, that ye
bear much fruit. Jo. 15. 8. The more fruit we bear, and the more perfect, the
more is God glorified in us. Therefore is the perfection of our fruit-bearing
commanded, that God may be still more and more glorified by our greater and
greater fruitfulness; every one being forced to magnify the wonderful
operation of Gods grace in Christ, that has enabled that which was erewhile a
dead stock, to bring forth against nature so much and so good fruit. Even as an
^xpert penman, or Master in writing, to get honor by the proficiency of his
Scholars, does not bring down, and lessen the perfection of his letters which
he writes for their copy, to their feebleness and unablenesse in writing, (so
should they continue unskilful and unable still) but sets before them a
perfect copy, commanding and teaching them to follow it, and by degrees even
to match it; and by this means the more perfectly they write, the more honor
comes to the Master.

2. To hold us in a constant intercourse and communion with himself by faith.
Were we perfect, or had we attained all that is required of us, we should be
wholly apt to settle our selves upon our own bottoms, and work either not at
all, or else in our strength. But when we see our selves deficient in what we
ought to be, and nothing in our selves, or any where else, out of Christ to
supply us, that without, or out of him we can do nothing, this keeps us in a
diligent and constant union with him, to abide in him as the branches in the
vine, to suck from him sap and life more abundantly for the producing of more
abundant growth and fruitfulness in us: and thus the communion beeween Christ
and ^s is more and more pe^fected, and he more and more honored, when we fetch
all our virtue and strength from him.

3. To keep us in continual selfe-denyal, and to dash to nothing Master Baxters
idol of Justification by our own inherent righteousness; which when we find
to come still short of the pe^fection enjoined, and sinful in its
defectivenesse, we shall be forced to withold our confidence from it, and
with the Apostle to shake it off (in reference to Justification) as dung and
loss, that we may win Christ, and be found in him etc. So making Christ our
All, and our selves nothing to our own happiness, Phi. 3. 8. 9.

4. To awaken us out of our carnal slumberings, and contentation in our poor
beginings and slight pittances of knowledge and righteousness already
attained, and to stir us on with a holy agility toward perfection, in our
motions. It was this that wrought thus with the Apostle Paul. Knowing
perfection to be commanded, and seeing himself yet in a station so short of
it, it makes him to cry out, I have not yet attained, I am not yet perfect,
[therefore] forgetting those things that are behind, that are already done and
attained, and reaching forth to the things that are before, not yet attained, I
press toward the mark, [of perfection.] Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14.

For these and many other ends (that might be added) does Christ command
perfection, though not fully attainable in this life.

Master Baxter expresses himself to be able to find but one, and that but a
seeming end or reason in this case, and that he blows off as insufficient. If
it were (says he) to convince us of our disability and sin, that is the
work of the Law; and the continuing of it upon the old terms, as is before
explained, is sufficient to that. Sundry failings are there in this passage of
his, making it insufficient to the end for which he uses it.

1. That it makes the Law, because it convinces of sin, to be the only
means ordained of God to convince us of sin. When contrariwise the Lord
Christ tells us, that the Spirit of Grace shall, under the Gospel also,
convince men of sin, Joh. 16. 8. and that with a more effectual conviction
than ever the Law, as the Law, could work. It shall so convince men of sin,
that it shall convince them of righteousness also, of damning sin in
themselves, and of saving righteousness laid up for them in Christ. This the
Law could not do; Therefore is as a Covenant of works (for so Master Baxter
here takes the Law,) neither the only, nor the chief means ordained of God to
convince of sin.

2. That it makes the Law, upon it old terms, to be ordained of God, in a
special and proper manner to convince of sin. This indeed was the office of
the Law, as given to Israel upon mount Sinai, upon other and new terms: But
upon its old and first terms as it was given to Adam, this could not be the
next and proper end of the Moral Law. For Adam received it while he was yet
innocent and without sin, and in that state of his, the Law could not
convince him, was not appointed to convince him of sin, having not all sinned.

3. That it makes the Law upon its old terms, i. e. (according to Master
Baxter) as a Covenant of works, sufficient by it self to conviction, without
any need of Gospel convictions to be used. When contrariwise all the
convictions of the Law so considered can work but desperation and death in the
convinced. They are the convictions of the Gospel, and Spirit of Grace working
by the Gospel, that are effectual to conversion and life.

For conclusion he says,

B. But I judge the question to be of more difficulty than moment. And I
answer, that the difficulty of the question is not from the Word of God, but
from him and his fellows, which fill with knots hard to be loosed, the leading
thread which Christ has given us all displayed. As for the Moment of the
question, let him crack at his pleasure among fools; yet the wise must needs
see and acknowledge it such, as if he lose it, he loses one of his chief
pillars (though it be but a paper pillar) to bear up man's personal
righteousness to justification. For if it be proved that Christ requires
perfect obedience under the Gospel, down falls all the perfection,
meritoriousnesse and efficacy of man's righteteousnesse to Justification. And so
he must begin all again, and fit himself with better pillars next, if any
where from Rome or Jury they are to be had, this proving rotten and unusefull.
That obedience which in relation to both Covenants, to Law and Gospel too, is
sinfully unperfect, cannot be of any power to Justify.

CHAP. XIX.
Arg. Whether Christ has satisfied for sins against the Old Covenant, and
not for sins against the New also.

These. 32, 33, 34, 35. UNto this I may ad the quodlibetarie and quidlibetarie
doctrines of Mr Baxter, his Niceties, quiddities, and nimble nothings, whereof
he disputes profoundly in the four next Theses, viz. the 32 etc. and in his
Appendix, in answer to the third question, page 12. of the appendix, and thence
to page 27. in which many notable and rare speculations are unfolded. viz.

1. Whether the rope wherewith Judas hanged himself, were made of hair or hemp?

2. Whether it were Simon, alias called Peter, or Peter, alias called Simon,
that denied Christ; and whether it were Pontius, or else Pilate that condemned
him.

3. Whether it were Christ's Cross, or else the Cross of Christ that Simon of
Cyrene was compelled to bear? Item whether he carried it on his right or his
left shoulder? and which end of the Cross was before, and whether the contrary
end were behind in carriage?

4. Whether when Joab was put to death for killing two men, Abner and Amasa,
for which of these two murders he suffered, for the former or the latter, or
for neither?

The same or like to these are the disputes of Master Baxter, in these Theses
and their explications, and in the forementioned part of the Appendix. viz. 1.
Whether, when himself has laid it down for a position no less firm and
unrepealable than the Laws of the Medes and Persians which alter not, that
there is no sin prohibited in the Gospel, which is not a breach of some
precept of the Decalogue, and a sin against the Old Covenant, etc. Yet
nevertheless there be any sins against the New Covenant which are not also
against the Old Item whether there be any sins, considerable in any of their
respects against the Gospel only, and not against the Moral Law? and then
consequently, whether Christ has satisfied by his death for such sins as
himself affirms never have been, never shall be, or can be committed. These.
30. page 148. that is, for imaginary sins which never were sins, nor shall be?
These. 32.

2. When he has asserted, and peremptorily concluded, These. 32. That Christ
was not to satisfy for any sin committed against the New Covenant, which was
not, is not also a sin against the Old: Yet whether it be not very needful to
be questioned in the 33. These. Whether Christ has done, what he was not to
do? whether he has satisfied for sins that violated the New Covenant, as well
as for those that violate the Old Covenant? And consequently if he should have
so done, whether this were to have been reckoned as a work of supererogation
above, and beyond his duty, to have merited superexcedently for us; or an act
of sin against his duty, putting him into an incapacity to merit at all for us?
yea whereas Mr. Baxter concludes absolutely as an undeniable truth, These. 32.
Therefore Christ dyed not for any sin against the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace,
whether that be not a sufficient argument to prove in These. 33. that Christ
has not by his passive obedience satisfied for the sins that violate the
Covenant of Grace? who can evade the force of such an argument, Christ has not
satisfied, ergo he has not satisfied; specially when it has been before
proved in words at length, that there is no sin against the New Covenant, but
is a sin against the Old also; and it is satisfied for, as to the Old Covenant,
what reason is there then that it should be satisfied, as to the New Covenant
too? When the Creditor is paid his full debt in the hall, and has yielded up
the bond, will he expect to have the same debt paid to him in the parlor also?

3. Whether, when both Law and Gospel, Old, and New Covenant, command the same
thing; that Christ then satisfyeth for the breach of that duty, as to the Law,
but not as to the Gospel? The Gospel then damneth men for that fault that in
reference to the Law is satisfied for? and consequently many poor wretches are
damned by the Gospel, and New Covenant, which by the Law, and Old Covenant
should be saved? Or if it be not so, whether then it be not the Law that
damneth even final unbelief it self, taking advantage from the violating of
the grace of the New Covenant, to aggravate their condemnation, that under the
means of Grace have lived, and dyed contemners thereof?

4. Whether all other sins which the Gospel precepts do prohibit, be against
Christ and his Gospel, as the object of those sins, only the breaking of the
conditions of the Gospel, be not a sin against Christ and his Gospel, as the
object of that sin? for so Mr. Baxter page 159. distinguishes between those
sins that have Christ, and the Gospel for their object, and those breaches of
the conditions of the New Covenant, as if these had not Christ and his Gospel
for their object. What then is the object of these sins? or have they no
object? or how many thousand conditions of the New Covenant are there, the
breach whereof is by no sacrifice to be purged? He tells us indeed, These. 32.
page 159. that the Gospel threatens death to no other sin, but final unbelief
and rebellion. But this final unbelief, and final rebellion has its belly so
full of other small sins threatened in the womb of their Mother, [ Rebellion] as
ever a man found of the berries in the belly of a breeding Lobster. And in his
Appendix, page 23. he makes final unbelief the genus, to which he attributes
but three species, of which the first, viz. Ordinary final unbelief, is not to
be considered as species specialissima, but subalterna, which being looked
upon as a genus, has so many species, or as a species has so many individuals
under it (according to Mr. Baxters doctrine) as the best Arithmetician in the
world, saving himself, will not dare to yield up, upon his casting, the true
sum of them to satisfy Mr. Baxters censure therein; as it will appear when
Mr. Baxter comes to unlace, and rip abroad his Justifying Faith in its largest
sense. These. 70.

To these I might add many more quaintisies of the same nature, breathing out
themselves from the veins of this his dispute. But all the rest, as those
already mentioned, are but tarrying irons to take up the time of men that are
Male feriati, rather love to play with the buttons, then to close with the
body, and drink in the spirit of true Christianity. And what other end can Mr.
Baxter have in these his chippings and mincings, but to show the delicacy of
his wit? Whom has he in the substance of what he speaks, his adversary? We
grant and teach with him.

1. That there is no sin prohibited by the Gospel, or New Covenant, which is
not a sin against the Law, and Old Covenant also.

2. That final unbelief, and rebellion, are sins (if not unpardonable) as if
they exceeded the bounds of Gods grace, and Christ's merits to pardon them, yet)
which have no futurition of pardon, shall never be pardoned in this life, or in
that which is to come: For so has the Lord declared his purpose in reference
to these sins.

3. That both the Law and the Gospel concur in damning such persons; the Law
as a Covenant of Works properly, for their refusal to submit (even till death
it self) to the will and authority of God, requiring Faith in Christ for their
redemption from vengeance. The Gospel improperly, by withholding its shelter
from the Laws sentence against them, because they would never be persuaded to
come under the shelter of it: yea more in strengthening the hand of the Law to
give them the sorer punishment, for the contempt of Gods grace, as well as of
his Authority and Justice. And thus not only the mountains of their sins
against the Law, but also Christ the Rock shall fall upon them to their greater
shivering, for that they dared to dash themselves against him, and would not be
induced to be built against all the strokes of vengeance upon him.

This is the sum of all that which Mr. Baxter here in substance says. To
what purpose then are his elaborate distinctions of the differing respects and
aspects, senses and non-senses, in which Christ has either satisfied, or not
satisfied for man's sins, unless it be Balaam-like, to lay a stumbling block in
the way of the simpler people of Gods Israel, to occasion their fall? to puzzle
their judgments and consciences? and to make the way of grace, which is in it
self as discovered by the Lord Christ, easy and plain, to be unto them by his
evil working therein, intricate, perplexed, and full of snares? To all sober
men it suffices to know,

1. That there is no one of their sins, in whatsoever consideration it be
taken, but has death and hell in the tail of it.

2. That there cannot be any other way of exemption from the death and hell
which every such sin of theirs meriteth, by any other means but by the
redemption which is by, and in the Lord Jesus.

3. That the blood of Christ has in it a perfect efficacy to cleanse from all
sin whatsoever, no one excepted, if it be applied to cleanse; Not the very sin
against the Holy Ghost, which it has not power totally to purge out from the
conscience, if it were truly applied. But therefore is that sin never pardoned,
and purged from the soul, because the Spirit of God never does, nor will apply
the blood of Christ to the soul that is guilty of it; nor generates Faith in
such a soul to run unto, and wash in the Fountain of Christ's blood, that it may
be clean. Let there be any one sin named of all the sins whereof our corrupt
nature is pregnant, that is so much a sin against the Gospel, but that the
purging, or not purging away of it, the absolving of the conscience from it, or
retaining of it upon the conscience, does not wholly depend upon the
application, or not application of the blood of Christ to the soul, and I shall
acknowledge that I have seen but the Letter, and was never yet acquainted with
the Spirit, and drift of the Scriptures.

Or suppose we should take a delight to contend about that which is a mere lana
caprina, whether it be hair or wool that grows upon the Goats shoulders, how
feeble might we manifest the reasons to be which Mr. Baxter beingeth to prove,
that the sins against the New Covenant are not satisfied for, by the sacrifice
of Christ's death.

As 1. When the Apostle affirms Christ to have suffered death for the
redemption of the transgressions under the first Testament, Heb. 9. 15. Does it
follow thence that he has not redeemed from the transgressions against the New
Covenant also? If I say that Christ forgave to Peter, or Paul, or Mary Magdalen
all their sins committed before conversion, do I thereby as much as imply that
he retains still, and revengeth upon them all the sins they committed after
they were converted? Or should one of Mr. Baxters acquaintance say, that
whatsoever Mr. Baxter preached, and wrote, until four or five years since, was
good, and Orthodox, does it follow that all that he has since preached, and
written, is heretical, and erroneous? Nay the purpose of the Apostle here is to
convince the Hebrews that sought in part for righteousness by the Law, or Old
Testament, that it could not make its observers perfect: For Christ dyed to
redeem the transgressions of them that were under the first Covenant, which he
needed not to have done, if all the Sacrifices under the Law could have purged
them. And thus the Moral Law is not here at all opposed to the Gospel, that
the Gospel, or New Covenant do purge the sins only that were committed
under, and against the Moral Law, because all the righteousness of the Moral
Law could not purge them; but the sacrifice of Christ, the Mediator of the New
Covenant, is here opposed to the Leviticall sacrifices under the Legal
Covenant. What these could not, the sacrifice of Christ has expiated.

2. Where he tells us, that Christ could not satisfy for sins committed
against the New Covenant, because the New Covenant threatens no death to such
sins, therefore no need if Christ's mediating death here for us: For where no
death is threatened, there is none explicitly due, says he. But will he say
none is either explicitly, or implicitly due? Or when Mr. Baxter tells us page
15. that in the Old Covenant the promise of life is not expressed, but plainly
employed in the threatening of death: Will it not follow by the same reasons,
that when Mr. Baxter in the after part of this his Tractate alleges such
multitudes of Scriptures, that promise life to the performance of such and such
acts of Gospel righteousness, that there is employed the threat of death
against the nonperformance of the same? Or if it should have been printed (as
it is most probable, because he so speaks elsewhere in reference to the
covenants) that where death is not explicitly threatened, there it is not due,
and Christ has not suffered it in our behalf. What shall we think then of all
the fathers from Adam to Moses? where was this death explicitly threatened to
any actual sin, until the Law was given by Moses? The Scripture mentions it
not, and Mr. Baxter has told us (though I doubt somewhat rashly, and
Magisterially) that to Adam himself in his perfection the form of the Covenant
was not known (as written in his heart) but by superadded revelation, page 14.
Yea what shall we say of all the Nations of the world ( Israel alone excepted)
that even until Christ, had no revealed Covenant with God, much less death
threatened explicitly by such a Covenant? Will Mr. Baxter deny death to have
been due to them for their sins, because not explicitly threatened? Does not
the Apostle, Romans 1. 32. and alibi, affirm the contrary? Thus if it were; but
it is not proved, that the New Testament does not so threaten death.

3. When he tells us that Christ is said to have been made under the Law, and to
have born the curse of the Law, and to have freed us from it, but no where is
this affirmed of him, in respect of the Gospel, page 161. This is an Argument
of the same nature, with that before, from Heb. 9. 15. The Apostle to dash the
crest of their self-confidence, in seeking to be in part justified (as Mr.
Baxter also does) by their own personal righteousness done in conformity to
the Law, tells them that even the Israel of God, that were privileged above all
other people with a Law of Righteousness, were under the curse of the Law, and
could not be saved but by a Redeemer; much less they that had not the help of
such a Law. It bears the same sense with that of Gal. 2. 15, 16. We that are
Jews by nature, and not sinne^s of the Gentiles, Knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we
have believed in Jesus Christ that we may be justified, etc. What a monstrous
delusion were it then for us to teach the sinners of the Gentiles to seek after
Justification by their personal righteousness, according to the Law. And though
it be no where, totidem verbis, said, or affirmed of him in respect of the
Gospel, yet is it said in the words equivalent, Heb 9. 15. That he is the
Mediator of the New Testament: whence Pareus on the place concludes, That if
he has satisfied for the sins against the Old, much more for the sins
against the New Testament, seeing he is the Mediator of this, not of that. And
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. Ergo from
sins also against the Gospel. I cannot say from sins which are only against
the Gospel, for there are none such. Or if Mr. Baxter will take the words so
strictly as he seems to take them, that Christ has redeemed only from sins
against the Law, he must exclude himself, with all the Churches and Saints of
the Gentiles that are, or have been, from the redemption which is by Christ;
for so then must that passage in Gal. 4. 4, 5. be read; Christ was made under
the Law to redeem them [onely] that were under the Law. i. e. Only the Jews,
for they only were under the Law of Moses, and of this Law Mr. Baxter must
needs confess the Apostle here to speak. So that this argument of his, if it
please not a Jew, it will please no body.

4. The last Argument which he brings in the same 161 page to hit the white,
and cleave the pin, and resolve the question so unanswerably, that no tongue
which cannot speak may ever more utter, or mutter against it, is as straight
with his purpose, as a rams horn with a line. 4. But the question is out of
doubt, (says he) because that every man that performs not the
Gospel-conditions, does bear the punishment himself in eternal fire, and
therefore Christ did not bear it. True, for Christ did bear the punishment of
none of his sins, neither of his lying, swearing, lust, murder, drunkenness,
and other sins against the Law, but he shall bear all himself: shall we
therefore conclude that Christ dyed not to make satisfaction for those sins
in reference to them that have part in his death? This were to pronounce Christ
to have satisfied for no sin at all, either against Law or Gospel, and so no
flesh shall be saved, but ll suffer in eternal fire.

5. What is in this Argument, as also in the two next, and immediately put
before this, in the same 161 page of his Saint-conditions which he worshipeth
as his Mediators to bring him into communion with Christ, no less then he does
Christ himself to bring him into communion with God, I have partly spoken to
before, and shall have large, and frequent occasions to speak more fully and
largely upon other parts of this Tractate of Mr. Baxter; here he does but name
conditions in general, and what he says is not worthy of any particular
Animadversions in relation to it.

He confesses himself page 160. To have been long of another judgment in this
point, while he considered not the tenor of the Covenants distinctly: That is,
as long as he derived his guidance therein from the Scripture it self, and from
the truly Evangelical, and Orthodox Commentators thereon. But since he has
met with Apocryphal Doctors, the Jesuits, and other nimble brains among the
Papists, and with Grotius, and Vossius, and others of that hair, which h^^e
divided their consciences between the Papists and Socinians, little prizing the
Word, where some quaint wit and invention of man ha^h not descanted upon it to
make it shine in the paint and varnish of humane speculations and art: Now
having found a C^ckows egg in a Finches nest, the man is so taken with the
pretty conveyance, that he does as it were nest himself by it, and accounts
all other contemplations base in comparison of this, defies Eagles, Swans,
Turtles, yea the whole generation of other birds; cares not what becomes of
them all, so that this one may come to maturity, and prosper, because his fancy
has made it his own (as it were) though (as it is much to be feared) to the
perverting, if not total loss of himself and others; He having ascribed
perfection and merit to it already, as fully as any of the most professed
Papists. See how he flaunts and glories in this imaginary piece of
Huperephaneous learning (in the 20, 21, 22. pages of his Appendix) as if he had
not received it from men, but Mahomet-like from a celestial Dove, or by the
Angel Gabri^l from heaven, insulting not over the Antinomians, but over their
adversaries also, (as he terms them) i. e. all the Orthodox Divines of all the
Reformed Churches, scarce abstaining from cursing their ignorance in this
fantastical mystery so revealed to him; when contrariwise himself has
received the substance of it (if indeed there were a new substance in it) from
the Papists, and himself has but licked it Bear-like, into a form of words
best pleasing his own imagination. The vanity of it will in its due place be
discovered.

CHAP. XX.
Arg. Besides other lesser things first, the chief thing about which this
Chapter is occupant, is to discover the judgment of Protestant VVriters about
Justification, as an eternal, and immanent Act in God, and how far it is
grounded upon Scripture.

These. 36. page 166. B. The pardoning of sin is a gracious Act of God,
discharging the offender by the Gospel promise, or grant, from the obligation
to punishment, upon consideration of the satisfaction made by Christ, accepted
by the sinner, and pleaded with God.

I mean not here to fall upon a dispute with Mr. Baxter, whether (according to
Mr. Baxter himself) the pardoning of sin through Christ, and Justification
through Christ be not one, and the same thing: And whether he himself does not
page 208. acknowledge so much? Indeed page 186, he says, that Pardon of sin,
and justification in law, are not punctually, and precisely all one. Yet
adds, that the difference is very small, lying chiefly in this, that the
terminus a quo of Remission is the obligation to punishment, but the terminus
of Justification (or the evil) that it forma^ly, and directly frees us from,
is the Laws accusation and condemnation. Here (says he) though the difference
be very narrow, yet a plain difference there is. How plain? Can the blind man
see it? Yea as well as he that has both his eyes; for it is respective rather
then real. But how does the difference lie in the different termini a quibus,
Remission of sins, and Justification free us? because Mr. Baxter (a more
curious cummin-cutter in Logical disputes then he that Aristotle in his Ethics
speaks of, was in dividing of secular goods) has thus cloven the hair into two
even rafters, and so has himself laid the difference, giving the one rafter
for remission of sins, and the other to Justification, and bidden each to rest
satisfied with his own, and neither to entrench upon the others part. I confess
my self to have been so gross witted, until Mr. Baxter does here teach us so
finely to distinguish, that I was apt to have argued in this case somewhat like
to Mr. Baxter, page 208. when it seems his spectacles were off, and his
considering cap not on, and so could not see, and conclude punctually where to
bea^ the wedges into the hair to cleave it exactly. As there he cannot close
with Mr. Burgess, That Justification, besides the pardon of sin, does connote a
State that the subject is put into, viz. a state of favor, being reconciled
with God. Because remission it self does connote the state of favor. For if
the loss of Gods favor be a part of the punishment, and all the punishment be
remitted, then the favor which was lost, must needs be thereby restored. So
neither should I have easily closed with another, putting Mr. Baxters plain
difference, page 186, between Remission, and Justification, in their said
terminis, that the one delivers from obligation to punishment, the other from
the Laws accusation, and condemnation. Because freedom from obligation to
punishment does connote freedom from the Laws accusation, and condemnation;
and freedom from the Laws accusation, and condemnation connotes freedom from
obligation to punishment; and so does Remission of sins, and Justification,
i. e. Justification in Roman, and Justification in Secretary hand, have the
same terminus a quo, viz. The Laws accusation, and condemnation, and obligation
to punishment; and consequently that they are one and the same thing. But let
Mr. Baxter pass in this particle without further interruption. It is not for
that he sees a difference, but that he thinks it will somewhat advantage him
in attaining the ends to which he drives, to make an imaginary difference
between pardoning of sin, and Justification in terminis. Therefore does he*
so acutely distinguish. And I shall leave him to solace himself in his
distinction, without saying any more to it.

2. Neither do I account it worthy of any deep examination, what in the
Explication of the first words of the Definition, that it is [ an Act of God]
he does page 168. trifle about the difference which he makes between Christ's
Acceptance, Pardon, and Kingdom, and Gods Acceptance, Pardon, and Kingdom. We
grant unto him, that as of the two Temples that Marcellus built at Rome, one
dedicated to Virtue, the other to Honor; that to Honor had no door to it, but
out of the Temple of Virtue: So neither is there any other entrance into the
Kingdom of Glory, but thorough the Kingdom of Grace. But to put a difference
between Christ's, and Gods Acceptance, Pardon, and Kingdom, as if the one were
upon Earth, the other not until we are translated hence into Heaven, and so we
must be in Heaven first, and be forgiven afterward; or as if Christ's
acceptance, etc. were not Gods, or the Fathers Acceptance, Pardon, and Kingdom,
is a merely imaginary dream of one that lists to dream waking; pat indeed to
Mr. Baxters purpose of setting up his twofold, or rather manifold
Justifications; but wholly thwarting and crossing the Scriptures, which
affirm, Not that Christ as Mediator reconciled the world to himself, but that
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them. 2. Cor. 5. 19. And that where Christ forgiveth, there God
[not will hereafter forgive, but already] has forgiven all our trespasses for
Christ's sake, Ephesians. 4. 32. Col. 2. 13. And more often call the Kingdom of Grace
here, the Kingdom of God, then the Kingdom of Christ. And that the great
Absolution at last in the day of Judgment shall be given by Christ, and not by
the Father in person, and the same not in Heaven, but before the Ascension of
the Saints into Heaven, as is evident by all the Scriptures of the New
Testament, which describe the Judgment day. Neither does the Scripture tell us
of any ultimate perfecting pardon, beyond, or after this, if ever it so term
this.

3. And of as little moment is that which he has page 169. in the Explication
of his Definition of Pardon, calling i^ [ a gracious Act] where he blesses,
and kisseth the image [ Tantundem] set up by Grotius, and polished by himself,
denying it to be a pardon, if it be not in some sort gratuitous, or free, and
asserting, that if Christ has paid for us the idem, or the proper debt, then
there is no place left for pardon, and we have nothing forgiven us: For the
Creditor (says he) cannot refuse the proper debt, nor deny an acquittance upon
the receipt thereof, etc. A mere vanity of words, without either ground, or
substance. It does not always hold firm in trifling debts of money. Suppose I
have a son, that having received his portion of my estate from me, will
forthwith come and pay it me for the debt of some bankrupt debtor, that I have
cast into prison; if indeed it be so agreed upon between my self, and my said
Son; and that to this end I gave him such a portion of my estate, that he
should so do with it, then it were not equity in me to refuse the payment so
offered. But yet Master Baxter will not deny that this agreement, or covenant
between me, and my son, and my receiving of my own monyes in satisfaction for
that Bankrupts debt, though it be the same, to the utmost farthing which he
owed, is an act of grace, or favor in me to the said Debtor. But in case
^here were no such covenant between me, and my said son, but that I gave him
the said portion of my goods for other ends, and uses, and not to pay the Debts
of Bankrupts: I suppose then it is in my choice, either to receive, or refuse
the full debt so offered me, because he which offerrs it, was not bound upon
the Bond, as Surety, or as Excecutor, or Administrator to the Debtor, nor is
assigned by the Debtor to make payment in his stead. What is there in this case
binding me to receive the debt from such an hand, or to give an acquittance to
him that should pay it? Much less will the case hold in point of Life and
Death. Suppose some Priest, Jesuit, or other Traitor were by the Law condemned
to dye for Treason committed: The day of Execution is at hand, Master Baxter
interposes, and offers to dye for him: Is it not in the power of the chief
Magistrates to refuse the accepting of the death of the Innocent for the
Nocent? Or if they do accept the change, is it not an Act of free grace to
pardon the offender, accepting another sufferings for him? Much more is it a
gracious act in God to pardon us upon Christ's suffering in our stead, because
he sent his Son, and gave him a body wherein to suffer for us, Heb. 10. 5.
And gives us acquittance, having cast him into prison in our behalf, until he
had paid the utmost farthing of our debts.

4. What he says against the ignorant Antinomians in the end of page 169, and
in page 170, he has said before, and it has been before examined, and his
pepper-corne being crushed, has been found too hot in smell and operation, for
a humble, and selfe-denying Christian to meddle with in the point of
Justification. Therefore I conclude with him, nor further to trouble the Reader
with those senseless conceits which have only a plausible show of words, but
no footing in Scriptures, or authority from Scriptures to establish them.

The rest of the Doctrine which he delivers in this page 170, and adds
page 171, and 172, I do in part grant him; and what I grant him not, we shall
find again so involved in his dispute, whether Justification be an immanent,
or transient Act of God, page 173, and seq. that it shall be more proper there
then here to take it into examination.

In his 173 page, Master Baxter enters upon a dispute of great moment, whether
Remission and Justification be immanent, or transient Acts of God? Before page
93 of this Tractate, in a brave challenge of the Antinomians to produce one
Scripture, testifying Justification to be from eternity, he promised to show,
or prove that Justification is not an immanent Act in God. Here he addresseth
himself to the accomplishment of what he there promised, and in doing it he
pretendedly draws the sword against the Antinomians, as the sole assertors of
the opinion which he here with much gallantry seeks to confute.

Two things then I conceive here to call for examination.

First, how sound the reasons are which he brings to deny Pardon, and
Justification to be immanent, and to prove them to be merely transient acts of
God.

2. What kind of Vermin these Antinomians are, against whom Mr. Baxter has
already discharged so many Gun-shots before in this Treatise, and finds them
nevertheless yet alive, and in a capacity to bear so many more shots from him,
in this, and the following parts of this book.

Before my entrance upon either of these, for an introduction to the former,
that the state of the question may the better appear, I shall endeavor with as
much fidelity, and simplicity as (in brief) I may, to lay down the judgments
of our Protestant Divines, whom he slanders here, and every where (almost) with
Antinomianism, about this question, before mentioned, which Mr. Baxter here so
much opposes, I mean such of these as hold (not that all have taught it) to be
in some respect immanent in God.

1. Then, in their disputes against Bellarmine, Arminius, Socinus, and their
followers, about remission of sins, and justification they tell us, that
justification is taken sometimes actively, for a judicial act of Gods grace;
sometimes passively, or terminatively; as it has its termination upon
believers. In the former sense, it is an act internal and immanent in God, not
transient upon an extraneous subject; or in plain words, it is secret, abiding,
and hidden in God himself, not declared or passing into the knowledge and
conscience of man. That it is of the same nature with the acts of election and
reprobation, having its complete being, as these, before the persons so
elected, justified and reprobated, begin to have being, life or faith in them,
or to do good or evil. But in its passive sense, as it is terminated upon,
and made out to the conscience of a man, so it is a transient act of God,
pronouncing and declaring home to the conscience of a man now living, convinced
of his sins, and trembling at the sense and burden thereof, yet resting
upon, and cleaving to Christ by faith; that his sins are forgiven for Christ's
sake; and by this act and sentence of God in his conscience the poor sinner
becomes sensible and apprehensive of his full discharge and absolution at Gods
tribunal, through Christ's satisfaction made to justice for him.

2. That justification, as taken in the former sense, is an Act of Gods supreme
Lordship or dominion, or else of his good pleasure (to use the Apostles terms)
by which he freely and without necessity, in relation to his justice, wills
the salvation of one, and wills not the salvation of another, loves or
hates, imputes not, or does impute sin, according to his own free will. But
justification in the latter sense, is an act of Gods righteousness or
faithfulness, by which he faithfully and righteously accomplisheth his
promises of grace, in just ^ying and absolving them which believe, by the
sentence of pardon pronounced to their conscience, according to the Gospel
promise made to believers. No word of promise went before justification in the
former sense, to make it an act of justice to fulfill that promise; neither
could it be an act of his natural justice, that by the necessity of his nature
he should so justify and love any; for then should none be either loved or
saved freely of God, when contrariwise it was in his own free choice, to love
or to hate, to save or condemn all, or mutatis vicibus, to have loved Esau, and
hated Jacob, to have willed the condemnation of the saved, and the salvation of
the reprobated. But the word of promise preceded justification in the latter
sense, which it is righteousness in God to fulfill; therefore is it an act as
well of his justice or righteousness, as of his free grace.

3. That Justification in the former sense is antecedaneous, or foregoing to
all covenants whatsoever. 1. In order of nature (though not in time) it goes
before that covenant between the father and the son, mentioned before in the
examination of the explication of Mr. Baxters fourteenth Thesis; and
consequently before Christ's undertaking to make, or the fathers Covenant to
accept what he should offer, in satisfaction for the sins of the elect. For
in order of nature the willing of the end, always goes before the willing of
the means conducing to the end; so that Gods willing man's righteousness and
immunity from sin, and loving him to salvation, must needs go before his
willing of Christ's satisfying of his justice, which was but a mean appointed of
God to the constituting of man righteous before him, that he might be pure from
sin, discharged from condemnation, and partaker of salvation, which was the
end. Not that there was any precedence, or following after, of these acts of
God, in time: for they are both coeternal, and before all times. Whom God has
loved, and forgiven their sins, them has he so loved and forgiven, in and
through Christ from all eternity, and through and for the merit of his
satisfaction. Much more does this immanent act of justification go before, not
only in nature, but in time also, the other temporary Covenants, both the
Covenant of works made with Adam, and the Covenant of Grace, made after by
Gospel promise, by Christ, or God in Christ, to us and with us. For these had
all their being in time. But justification in its other acceptance is
subsequent unto, and follows after, and is an effect of not only the Covenant
of Grace, but of faith it self, which the Covenant of Grace calls for, as a
mean to attain it. None else but a beleiver, nor he, until he actually
believes, is thus actually justified, or has pardon of sins and absolution
from wrath declared and pronounced of God in his conscience. And thus to be
justified in Christ, or in God, is one thing and to be justified in our selves
by God through Christ is another. The former is an antecedent, the latter an
effect or consequent of the Covenant of Grace.

4. That neither the mediation and satisfaction of Christ, nor (much less) our
faith in Christ, nor any of the most noble gifts of grace received from Christ,
either in their habit or operation do move God to justify us, so as to put
into him a will to pardon our sins, and accept us as righteous, or to change
his affection from nilling to will our forgiveness and happiness, and from
hating to love and accept us; because he is God, and therefore immutable; and
there cannot be any cause of Gods will rendered, any more than of God himself.
For the Will of God, is God himself, and these immanent acts of God, are God
himself acting. So that the substration of all that Christ has suffered, and
by his sufferings satisfied for us, and of all that we do, or can do to put
our selves into union with Christ, and a conformity with the Will of God, are
in no wise the causes or conditions, or antecedents of Gods first loving,
owning, and pronouncing u^ righteous and pure from sin imputed; but the
effects thereof. For he so loves and justifies all, that in a Covenant way
have been, or shall be justified in their own conscience, before ever they
believe, or live. But that the intervening of Christ's satisfaction for our
sins, and our recumbency upon, and embracing of Christ so satisfying by
faith, that we may be justified, do ad nothing to God which was not, nor alter
any thing which was in his will before; but do only lay and make a way by Gods
ordination, how he from all eternity loving and justifying us in himself
freely, may in a course most convenient to magnify both his truth and
righteousness, and withal his grace and mercy, at length actually declare us
just in, and to our own consciences, and for ever acquit us from sin and
wrath, to the admiration of Men and Angels. And so the former justification is
a pure, simple, free, and irrespective act of God, having no causality out of
himself moving him to it: but the latter is a foederal, Gospel or Covenant
justification, respecting his own Covenant before made, Christ's satisfaction
already given and pleaded in heaven by Christ, and man's faith in the mediator
and promiser, pleading the promise, and the blood of the mediator sealing it:
upon all which he does, he cannot but actually pronounce and declare to the
conscience of the beleiver his perfect absolution from sin and vengeance. This
latter is indeed the justifying whereof the Scriptures primarily speak, as often
as they speak of justification by faith, but so as the former is also in such
Scriptures employed. Neither is the Scripture silent in reference to the former,
as considered without the latter, or apart from it.

5. That although all that are or shall be justified by faith in time, i. e.
each on^ in the time when he so believes, were justified also in Christ, and
secretly in God before they believed, or yet lived even from eternity: Yet is
there no man justified by virtue of the New Covenant and promise of the Gospel,
proclaiming right to the Lord Christ, to forgiveness of sins, freedom from
condemnation, heirship to Gods Kingdom, and all other benefits of Christ's
Passion; until he does actually believe and embrace Christ, through him to have
all those precious promises made good and effectual to himself. Though in
Christ he were Lord of all before, yet differed he nothing in himself from a
servant, from a child of wrath, his life and righteousness were hid with
Christ in God; He could claim nothing from God by any evidential title, but
wrath and condemnation; though he had right in Christ, yet had he no right unto
Christ; though in Christ all was his, because Christ had united, purchased, and
received all into his hands for him, yet had he no right to Christ by which to
claim a partnership and interest in the kingdom and privilege of grace, was
without all true peace of conscience, all joy and consolation in the promises
of grace, under fears and terrors in expectation of wrath and damnation, could
be sensible of nothing but anger, hatred and displeasure against him for sin,
knew not himself to be one of the children of promise, Gal. 4. 28. to be
entitled to Christ, in whom alone the promises of God are yea and Amen: 2 Cor.
1. 20. Therefore as if there had been no Christ, no Mediator and reconciler, no
Covenant of Grace, yea no Grace, or acts of Grace eternal or temporary in God
through Christ, so he remained under a Spirit either of delusion or of bondage
still. But now when the father has drawn him to Christ, and Christ has
received him, when Christ has apprehended him to himself by his Spirit, and
he by faith has apprehended Christ to himself for redemption, reconciliation,
remission, righteousness, and whatsoever else is laid up in Christ for him;
and so has union and communion with Christ, has Christ in him, and is
himself in Christ: Now his justification, which was sure before in God and in
Christ, is also made sure to his conscience. He is now justified in his own
conscience after the tenor, and by the virtue of the Gospel and Covenant and
promises of Grace; finds and knows himself through Christ absolved at Gods
tribunal, has all the evidences for it that possibly he can desire, the Word
and the Oath of God, that by two immutable things, in which it is impossible
for God to ly, he may have a strong consolation, Heb. 6. 18. The Word
evidenceth, and his faith evidenceth, the Covenant is now sealed mutually and
reciprocally between God and him, by believing he has put to his seal that God
is true, and God seals to his conscience by certifying it by his Spirit, that
his wrath is pacified, that all accusations are silenced, there is no
condemnation to him being now in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. Himself may now rest
satisfied, banishing henceforth all fears and doubts, and glorying in the Lord
that the fear of death is past, it is enough my soul is now alive, Christ is
made sin for me, that I might become the Righteousness of God in him: 2 Cor.
5. 21. Now Lord let thou thy servant depart in peace, for my eyes have seen
thy Salvation: and in the interim while he is here enjoying a heaven upon
earth, a kingdom of Righteousness, joy and peace in the Holy Ghost, until he
was incorporated by faith into Christ, Christ might indeed plead for him, but
he had no evidence, no show of title, not an article, under Gods hand, or from
his lips, to plead at Gods bar for life or pardon.

6. That nevertheless when a man truly believes, then may he apprehend
justification and remission of sins not only as now first declared and
evidenced to his own soul: But also as past and complete before the foundation
of the world was laid. Because from eternity Christ satisfied, in that he
undertook to satisfy, for the sins of the Elect; and God from eternity
rested in this satisfaction undertaken by Christ, and so laid aside all
displeasure which (without this Covenant between him and his only Son) he
might have taken up as well against them that should afterward believe, as
against them which dye in unbeleef. For their justification in time does a
posteriore argue their justification before all times: and where faith finds
the least rivulet of the great stream sent forth it can, it ought, by it to
ascend up to the very fountain to be filled and satisfied with the
deliciousness thereof. Thus shall we find the Apostle almost in all his
Epistles, from the sense of their present enjoyments in Christ, to carry upward
the Saints to whom he writes, unto the very bosom of Gods eternal grace,
counsel and good pleasure where all was laid up and treasured for them from
all eternity, that thence it might in due time be shed forth upon them. Faith
runs not away rashly and hastily with the gift, but delights to enter and
pierce through the vail, to contemplate and embrace the as well eternal, as
infinite love of the giver.

7. That although no man receives the sensible comfort of his justification
before he actually believes, yet every elect vessel has (besides, and
without his knowledge) the true benefit thereof (as to freedom from vengeance)
throughout the whole time of his infidelity: was in Christ beloved, accepted
and owned of God as righteous, in that his sin was not imputed, as fully
before as after he believed, the price of his redemption was paid, all his
sins borne and punished upon the shoulders, yea the soul and body of Christ,
so that himself was no less exempted from the revenging wrath of God, and
from all obligation to make any part of satisfaction in his own person for his
sins, as he that was already in Christ by faith: So that whatsoever
afflictions befell him in the time of his unbelief, were not the infliction of
the curse, as the curse for sin, but sanctified chastisements of a loving
father, flowing from his grace and favor, not from his indignation and hatred
against his person (though against his sins) tending all to his good, not to
his ruin. Else if he should have born the least stroke of Gods revenging
justice, and in the least pittance have made but one least piece of
satisfaction by his sufferings for his offenses; then either Christ has made
satisfaction for him but in part; and is not his whole Savior and redeemer,
for that himself has satisfied divine justice in part: or otherwise the
father has taken satisfaction twice for the same sins, once from the Lord
Christ, and after that from the offender also. But this were to slander either
the perfection of Christ's mediation, or the incorruptnesse of Gods justice,
both which are unsufferable.

8. That the justification which is by faith consists not only in a bare
apprehension of our justification and pardon from God, (for this is only man's
act, and no express act of God) but first in Gods actual declaration,
evidencing and certisfying the conscience of man drawn to the bar of
judgment (set up as it were in the conscience) that God has taken
satisfaction to his offended justice from the Lord Christ for all the offenders
sins, and has for ever quit-claimed and discharged him from all sin and
wrath, and admitted him into favor and family to be under the dispensations of
his grace for ever. And then indeed God having by this act absolved the
conscience, there follows also the sense of our remission and justification:
So that besides this sense and apprehension, there are two things in our
justification by faith over and above that which was in our eternal
justification in Christ: viz. 1. A total diffidence and denial of our own
righteousness, and a trusting and adhering wholly and only to Christ for
pardon and justification. 2. Gods act upon our consciences, declaring and
assuring us that our debt is paid by Christ, and we discharged upon the
satisfaction which our surety has made, so that the obligation is cancelled,
and we depart with a full and general acquittance in our consciences. Neither
of these were there in the former justification, i. e. in the justification in
the former sense before mentioned, and so that there is more than the bare
knowledge of our justification, in our being justified in the latter sense is
evident.

Whatsoever else is contained in the doctrine of the Protestant divines about
this question, we shall have occasion to add in examining what Master Baxter
says here, and afterward to oppugn it.

But the chief thing is yet behind, (may some say) viz. the proof of these
positions by sound Arguments, or by evidencing Scriptures: and the main thing
to be proved, is, that there is such a justification as is an immanent and
eternal act in God. It is Master Baxters loud challenge. page 93. Let all the
Antinomians show but one Scripture that speaks of justification from
eternity. I will be so charitable as to conceive, he expects not that we should
produce Scriptures that say in those very words, but that which is the
Tantundem) that say it in sense and substance; else if he reject the matter,
and stick to words, I shall challenge him to produce one sentence of all the
sermons which Christ preached, and in the whole doctrine that he personally
delivered, which speaks at all of justification by faith. But in words
equipollent to Master Baxters, the Scripture delivers this doctrine which he
opposes, viz. justification from eternity.

First, What less is to be gathered from 2 Timothy 1. 9. God has saved us, and
called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to
his purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ, before the World began.
What can be said more fully to Master Baxters challenge? He will not deny that
the word saving, does include in it justifying, for so should he both
contradict himself, and lose elsewhere more than he can gain here, by denying
it. It will then run thus, that we are justified and called of God with a holy
calling, not according to our works, [these words destroy the end of Master
Baxters opposing the eternity of our justification] if our own qualifycation
and works may not come in collaterally with Christ to constitute us justified,
he little regards whether the act be immanent or transient) but according to
his purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ, before the world began,
and that is from eternity. See, the grace of justification and salvation was
given us in Christ from eternity.

Object. Master Baxter may probably object, that the grace was indeed given us
in Christ from eternity, that is, God had decreed from eternity to justify us
in Christ, when we should come to believe in him, to justify or save us in
time, as to call us in time. For the grace here mentioned given us in Christ
before times, is as much affirmed to be the grace of our vocation or calling,
as of our saving and justifying. But our calling must, therefore our
justification also must be in time. And thus by the grace given, must be
understood Gods gracious purpose, and decree to give us salvation and
justification. So Mr. Baxter, I know God has decreed to justify his people
from eternity. But it is done in time, page 93.

Sol. 1. That Covenant justifying, or the declaring of us in our own
Consciences to be accepted as just in Christ, is not denied to be an act
accomplished in us in time. Nor yet that God decreed from Eternity to declare
us in our consciences Righteous, when we should believe. But the granting of
all this nothing advantageth Master Baxters cause: For neither does this Act of
God in time terminate upon our conscience, nor his eternal decree so to
justify us (believing) in our selves, deny that we were justified in God, and
in Christ from Eternity.

2. It appears not that the Apostle here speaks of our calling to the
participation of Christ, and of justification and sanctification by him in
time, but rather of that calling mentioned Romans 4. 17. That God calls those
things that be not, as though they were. As he called Abraham the father of
many Nations, when he was yet either childlesse, or at least was in reference
to the strength of nature, without having, without hope to have that child from
whom those nations should issue and accrue to him as their father. So God is
said to have called us with a holy calling, i. e. to have called and reputed us
in Christ his pardoned, accepted and adopted children, even before we had any
actual being in our selves. Dedit qui erat, accepit qui non erat. Quis antem
hoc facere potuit, nisi qui vocat ea quae non sunt tanquam ea quae sunt. Aug.
de verb. Apost. Sect.

3. If by Calling it be pertinaciously maintained that we must understand that
which is done by the Ministry of the Gospel; yet all this helps not Master
Baxter at all, in regard of the exclusive clause following, not according to
our work^, where our salvation and justification as well as our vocation, are
denied to have any dependence upon our own works and qualifications, as
conditions thereof: And the whole end of Master Baxters dispute against
justification as an immanent Act in God, is, because if that be granted, there
will be no place for footing our works and qualifications as necessarily
precedent conditions of justification. And these fall to ground, as well as if
we were justified without them, though in time, as if we were justified from
Eternity.

4. But how, and whether we can truly, and properly be said to have received
Grace in Christ before all worlds, whereby we are saved, and justified, and yet
not to be saved, and justified in Christ before the world was, will come to be
examined in drawing forth the sense of other Scriptures which I shall annex. In
the interim this remains unquestioned, that although the Apostle speak here of
Justification in our selves in time, yet he affirms it to be according to the
Grace given us in Christ before the world; so it was in Christ for us before,
though not in our selves till we believe.

Again when the Scripture speaking of the Sons of Isaac, says of them,
while yet unborn, and consequently having neither done good nor evil, Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated, Mal. 1. 2, 3. Romans 9. 11, 13. And elsewhere
pronounces of men, that when they lay in their blood, in their nakedness then
he made it the time of love, said to them live, spread his skirt over them,
and covered them, entered into Covenant with them, and made them his, Ezekiel. 16.
6, 8. God of his great love wherewith he has loved us, even when we were dead
in sins and trespasses, has quickened us, etc. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. God commends
his love to us that when we were yet sinners, when enemies, we were justified
by Christ's blood, and reconciled to God by his death. Romans 5 8, 9, 10. Here it
is evident to all men that the love of God justifying and reconciling us to
himself, goes before our Faith and Works, was then in its power and
operation, when we were yet sinners, in all our pollution, enemies, dead in
sin, therefore without any spiritual motion, or operation to our own
cleansing, or happiness. I demand now when this love of God so justifying us
began? Not when we believed, and first obeyed the Gospel, for it went before,
it was then acted toward us when we were enemies, dead, etc. Or when we
began to be sinners? Then it seems our sin begat this love in God, and then
let the Atheists Aphorism stand as an impregnable Principle, let our sin
abound, that the grace and love of God may abound. Or was there ever an hatred
of us, as a contrary affection in God, before, which is now expelled that love
might succeed in its place? And has God now changed his hating of us to
condemn us, into a love to justify and save us? This were to accuse God of
mutableness and change. For God is Love, 1 John 4. 8. and the Love of God is
God himself loving, and to affirm where we find the Love of God at present,
that there was a time when this Love was not in God, and a time when God
began to love, is no other but to affirm, that there was a time when God yet
was not, and a time when he began to be God, the will of God being God
himself; And the volitions, or willings of God, being God himself willing: And
the acts of Gods Love and Hatred being acts of Gods Will; yea of God himself,
and no more subject to change (because immanent in God) then God himself. So
that these Scriptures which affirm Gods love to us when sinners, do affirm
also consequentially his love to us before we were either in being, or just, or
sinners, even from eternity.

Thirdly, when the Lord says to his people, I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, Jerem. 13. 3. Does he not mean a love which is from
everlasting to everlasting? Or is there a Love of God to everlasting which was
not from everlasting? Or was it not the Love of accepting, and approbation of
them unto Righteousness and Salvation, whereof he there speaks? And when
the Apostle John tells us, that the glory of Gods love does herein shine forth,
Not that we loved him, but that he loved us, 1 John 4. 10. making not our love,
or any fruits thereof, the foundation of Gods love to us, but the love of God
to us to go before and prevent our love; is not this a doctrine universally
true of all the Saints that are or have been, that Gods love to them prevented,
and was antecedaneous to their love toward him? if so, then consequently before
man's being, as well as before his loving; and if before man's being, then from
eternity was this grace given us, that we were loved of God in Christ, to
justification and salvation. It is that which the Lord Christ speaks, (and
that not obscurely) in his prayer before his passion, where having interceded
and craved sundry blessings for his Elect, he adds this reason why he craved
those blessings in their behalf, viz. That the world may know that thou have
sent me, and that thou have loved them as thou have loved me. Jo. 17. 23. How
is that? in the next verse he explaineth himself thus, Thou have loved me
before the foundation of the world: what does follow hence, but that as Christ,
so they that are Christ's, were loved of God unto life, before the foundation of
the world? why will not Master Baxter acknowledge what Christ has prayed that
all the world may know?

Object. 1. Or will it be objected, that God loving the Elect in Christ before
the foundation of the world, is to be understood only in this sense, that
before the foundation of the world, God decreed in himself to love them in
Christ afterward in time? Then must we so conclude of Christ also, that God
loved Christ before, that is, decreed before the foundation of the world to
love Christ in after time, not that he loved him from eternity, for as he
loved Christ, so he loved them in Christ: But he actually loved Christ as the
head of the Church before the foundation of the World, therefore also he loved
the Elect in Christ as the body and members of Christ before the foundation of
the world. Yea to decree from eternity, to love them afterward in time, and
until the time came, to hate them, or not to love them in Christ, was to
decree mutablenesse and change in his own will, i. e. in himself, which is
wholly repugnant to his nature that cannot change, by receiving augmentation
unto, or diminution of the acts of his Will, which were in him from eternity.

Object. 2. But perhaps Master Baxter may object with his friends of the
Netherlands, the Arminians, whose ghosts have much infested us within this
Nation these many years, that this love of God from Eternity, that which he
shed abroad upon the Elect when they were yet sinners, enemies, and dead in
sin, is to be understood only of Gods universal and common love, his love to
all the creatures which he has made, or at the uttermost his (...), his love
unto mankind which he extends to all alike; Making the rain to descend, and
his Sun to shine upon the just and unjust, and fills the hearts of all with
food and gladness.

Sol. But how then was Jaakob loved and Esau hated, when Esau partaked more of
this common love than Jaakob? or was it a Common love by which God does
justify and reconcile sinners to himself? then all shall be reconciled,
justified and saved. Or when the Apostle terms it (...) the much, or great
love of God, out of which when he quickened us, yet dead in sins and
trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 4. was this the common love extended to all the Sonns and
Daughters of Adam without difference? Then also (for God loved us as he loved
Christ) the love of God to Christ was a common love, in nothing supereminent to
the love wherewith he loved Cain and Judas.

Lastly, when God says, I have not beheld iniquity in Jaakob, nor seen
perverseness in Israel, Number. 23. 21. it will (I doubt not) be granted that the
meaning was, that God did not see it to impute it, as to the curse which Baalam
was hired to denounce from God against Israel. If God did not actually see
iniquity and perverseness in Israel, then never did he see it in any people; So
degenerate had Israel been into the idolatries of the Egyptians, so full of
infidelity and murmuring in the Wilderness, until the very day that God thus
spoke; that unless we will make him Plinies God, that does not descend in his
providence lower than the starrie and Celestial Spheres, to intermixe himself
with earthly things, for fear of attracting to himself pollution thence; We
must acknowledge that he saw iniquity in that people. But he saw it not to
impute it, although he saw it clearly to reprove it, and to purge it out of
them. Also in those Scriptures, where God imputes to men righteousness without
works, pr^nouncing them blessed, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered, and to whom God imputes no sin, but imputes Righteousness, Romans
4. 6, 7, 8. 11. 2 Cor. 5. 19. To what time shall we reduce this imputation to
find it in its Original, if not to Eternity? When began God to account or
reckon us righteous in Christ, or not to impute sin to us, if he did not
actually do it in himself before time from eternity? When else was the
generation of the Elect reckoned righteous in Christ first, and had their
iniquity no more imputed; but when Christ's satisfaction became effectual for
them? But this Master Baxter before, page 23, 24. acknowledges, and
maintains to be when Christ undertook to satisfy in their behalf: How
should it be otherwise? when Christ came to be voluntarily bound for them,
then were they dismissed free. When he became sin for them, they became the
righteousness of God in Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 21. At once their sins were
imputed to Christ in point of satisfaction to be made for them; and they
discharged for ever, ( viz. in the Court where these things were transacted
between the Father and the Son) from making satisfaction in their own
persons, and reckoned perfectly righteous for ever, in respect of vengeance,
and condemnation for sin. But Christ's undertaking to satisfy for them, and
consequently the whole transaction, and covenant between the Father and him
about our Redemption, and Justification, and the said imputation of the sins of
the Elect to Christ, were all from eternity, before the foundation of the
world, else how could they be loved in Christ before the foundation of the
world? Therefore also their being accounted Righteous in Christ, the not
imputation of sin unto them, their absolution, and discharge from
condemnation (and this Master Baxter will acknowledge to be Justification) were
perfited in God, and in Christ before the foundation of the World. Yea however
some godly Commentators speak beneath the mind of the Apostle, yet his words
are plain, and full, Tit. 1. 2. 1 Timothy 1. 9. That God has promised eternal
life, and given us Grace in Christ before the world began. How promised? unto
Christ our head, and to us in him, by that eternal Covenant between the Father
and the Son? And how given us in him, but as John says, He has given us
eternal life, and this life is in his Son; viz. laid up in him for us from
eternity, to be received in time into our selves, as we receive Christ,
according to what follows, He that has the Son has life, and he that has
not the Son has not life, 1 Ioh. 5. 11, 12. And the grace or life that in that
2 Timothy 1. 9. is said to be given us in Christ before times, is yer. 10.
affirmed to be brought to light by Christ in these last times; As the former
seems the Immanent, so this the Transient Act of Justification. Else let Mr.
Baxter produce any other season of such a parley and covenant between God and
Christ since the world began. He finds this project not to thrive in the
hands of his friends the Arminians, therefore as ashamed of it, he lays it
aside, not touching it (as far as I can remember) in any part of this his
Tractate.

As for that giddy and unbottomed devise of Grotius, which Master Baxter lays
down first in his own words, These. 15. page 92. and then in Grotius his words,
page 94, 95. it hathin its due place received so much in answer, as I think fit
to be given to so bold and peremptory an assertion as has nothing but a dream
for its father, and neither Scripture nor show of reason annexed to confirm it.

If it be objected, that the Apostle in the afore^ quoted Chapter affirms faith
to be imputed for righteousness, and that it was so reckoned to Abraham when
he was yet in uncircumcision: and thence concluded that therefore we are
justified in time even when we believe, we grant the argument in respect of
foederall justification, or Gods transient act, concerning declaring a man
justified to his own conscience.

This alone the Apostle there asserteth, and this is acknowledged by our
Divines (as has been said before) not to be until we actually believe. But
this is nothing to the confuting, no nor to the weakening of our Justification,
completed in God, and in Christ before the foundation of the world. This I
take to be the sum of the Doctrine which Mr. Baxter asperseth with
Antinomianism; which I believe no other Papist, or Arminian had done before
him. As well, and properly might he have termed it Mahometanism; for as
agreeable is it with the principles of this, as of that. How consenting it is
with the Scripture I leave to the unprejudiced Reader to judge. The very flower
of all our Protestant Writers have asserted it in such numbers, as would fill
up a page to name them. Neither know I any one Writer which (having not
occasion to manifest himself to be of the same judgment) has ever expressed
himself to dissent from it: Till Doctor Downham excepted against Master Pemble
for delivering it, and that upon a strange ground, that declared great
inadvertency in the reading of the Doct. viz. That he believes no man had so
written before Mr. Pemble. Within these ten years indeed, some others of great
place and name (among our selves) have disrellished it. But (as far as I can
by enquiry find) have not communicated their reasons to their Brethren, why
they did it, therefore ought not to be angry with them, if by an implicit
Faith they take not in the same disrellish also. For my own part I must crave
the liberty to see light for my guidance into the contrary assertion, before I
lay down this as darkness, unto which I at least think my self to have been led
by the light of the Word. Yet with these Proviso's (to prevent mistakes) I
adhere to his opinion.

1. That this Immanent Act in God does not deny his Transient Act of Justifying
man when he believes, any more then this latter does that former.

2. That the Transient Act of Justification consists not only in Gods
evidencing and manifesting to the believer that he was really justified in God
from eternity; but also in Gods Actual, and Judicial pronouncing of the
sentence of Absolution to the soul drawn to Gods Tribunal, and gasping for
pardon thorough Christ. By means whereof the poor sinner is constituted, as
well as declared actually, and personally righteous, and that before God his
Justifier.

3. That as often as the Gospel speaks of Justification by Faith, it is in
reference to this Transient Act of God, not that Immanent.

4. That as I conceive the Covenant between God and Christ to be (if I may so
term it) a fruit, in order to that immanent act in God; so I think also that
the Covenant of Promise, the Covenant under the Law, the Covenant under the
Gospel, and the very Covenant of Works to be subservients to this Covenant made
with Christ as a public person, representing us, to work all coordinately to
the advancing of the glory of Gods Grace to his Elect, in justifying them in
himself from Eternity. Yet so, that if I find a candid Teacher in any, or all
these to inform me better, I hope I shall not be wanting to show my docility.

I should have wholly forborne to touch upon this point (so famous a Divine
having lately taken upon him the Province) but this was written before, and it
will not hinder his further prosecution thereof, to which I hear he will be
provoked.

As to Mr. Baxter, let him pretend what he will of his zeal against this
Doctrine, because it is a Pillar of Antinomianism, yet his conscience tells him
that his rage against it is under this consideration, as it is a sl^dge to beat
in pieces the conditional Justification, Election, Redemption, and Grace;
together with the pride of man's Free Will, Works, and Righteousness,
uncertainty of Perseverance, etc. Which are the Articles of Faith common to Mr.
Baxter with the Papists and Arminians. If Justification, as an immanent act in
God from Eternity, hold, all these must fall, and Master Baxter and his fellows
be crushed with the ruins thereof. The work of the next Chapter therefore
shall be, to examine the force of his reasons, and arts, whereby he seeks to
refute, and subvert it.

CHAP. XXI.
Arg. Mr. Baxters Reasons and Dispute examined, by which he endeavors to
refute Justification as an Immanent Act in God, and from Eternity.

B. A great question it is, whether Remission and Justification be Immanent, or
Transient Acts of God: The mistake of this one point was that that led those
two most excellent, famous Divines, Doctor Twiss, and Mr. Pemble to that
error, and pillar of Antinomianism, viz. Justification from Eternity. For
says Doctor Twiss often (All acts immanent in God are from Eternity: But
Justification and Remission of sins are Immanent acts. Therefore, etc.

By [Immanent in God] they must needs mean Negatively, not Positively: For Acts
have not the respect of an Adjunct to its Subject, but of an Effect to its
Cause.

Now whether all such Immanent Acts are any more Eternal then Transient Acts,
is much questioned: As for God to know that the world does now exist, that such
a man is now just, or sanctified, etc. Gods fore knowledge is not a knowing
that such a thing is which is not, but that such a thing will be which is not.
Yet does this make no change in God, no more then the Sun is changed by the
variety of creatures which it does enlighten and warm, or the glass by the
variety of faces which it represents, or the eye by the variety of colors
which it beholds. (For whatsoever some say, I do not think that every
variation of the object makes a real change in the eye, or that the beholding
of ten distinct colors at one view does make ten distinct acts of the sight,
or alterations of it; much less do the objects of Gods knowledge make such
alterations.) But grant that all Gods Immanent Acts are Eternal (which I think
is quite beyond our understanding to know) yet most Divines will deny the
minor, and* tell you that Remission, and Justification are Transient Acts;
which is true, but a truth which I never had the happiness to see well cleared
by any. For to prove it a Transient Act, they tell us no more, but that it does
transire in subjectum extraneum, by making a Moral change on our relatio,
though not a real upon our persons, as Sanctification does. But this is only
to affirm, and not to p^ove, and that in general only, not telling us what
Act it is that makes this change. Relations are not capable of being the
patients, or subjects of any Act, seeing they be but mere Entia Rationis, and
no real beings. Neither are they the immediate product, or effect of any Act,
but in order of Nature are consequentiall to the direct effects. The proper
effect of the Act, is to lay the foundation from whence the Relation does
arise* And the same Act which lays the foundation does cause the Relation,
without the intervention of any other. Suppose but the subjectum, fundam entu^
and terminus; and the Relation will unavoydably follow by a mere resultancy.
The direct effect therefore of Gods actual Justification must be a real
effect, though not upon the sinner, yet upon something else for him. And thence
will his passive Justification follow. Now what Transient Act this is, And what
its immediate real effect, who has unfolded, I dare not be too confident in so
dark a point. But it seems to me, that this justifying transient Act is the
enacting, or promulgation of the New Covenant, wherein Justification is
conferred upon every believer. Here passing, and enacting this grant, is a
transient Act.

2. So may the continuance of it (as I think.)

3. This Law, or grant, has a Moral improper action, whereby it may be said to
pardon, or justify, which properly is but virtuall justifying.

4. By this grant God does,

1. Give us the righteousness of Christ to be ours when we believe.

2. And disableth the Law to oblige us to punishment, or to condemn us.

3. Which real foundation being thus laid, our relations of [Iustified and
pardoned in title of Law] do necessarily result.

A matchless and egregious dispute, able to tum all the immanent Acts of God
into Transient, yea, if spelled backward, to turn all his Transient Acts into
immanent; of force enough to extort from Gods bosom all that wa^ in him from
eternity, that it shall abide in him, or with him no longer.

Here is Doctrine fitted to purpose for his ignorant babes* and tender lambs of
Kederminster, for whose sake and use, this work (if we will believe the
Author) was chiefly published: No less proper for them, than the Scripture in
the Latin tongue by his holy mother appointed, for the illumination of them
that cannot read the English, or their Country language. What a supereminent
measure of the Spirit has this man received above Christ himself, above Paul,
the most learned of all Christ's Apostles? Christ was anointed with the Spirit
to preach the Gospel to the poor. Luke 4. 18. Isa. 61. 1. And had received from
the Lord God the tongue of the learned, to speak a word in season to the weary.
Isa. 50. 4. This man's Spirit carries him aloft in the Air, to clowd the Gospel
from the poor, and to darken with his vaporous Sophistry the things which God
has hidden from the wise and prudent, but revealed to babes: and uses the
tongue of the learned to amaze and entangle, not to refresh the weary. Paul
descended from all excellency of speech and of wisdom, to the capacity, or
rather incapacity of the weak Christians in the Ministry of the Gospel, 1 Cor.
2. 1, 2. and fed the babes with milk 1 Cor, 3. 1, 2. And even, then when he
spoke wisdom to the perfect, because perfect; it was not the wisdom of the
World, or of the Princes [for learning] of the World, but the Mysterious and
hidden wisdom of God; and this he spoke also not in the words which man's
wisdom teaches* [which the subtle S^phist^rs made u^^ of] but which the
Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spirirituall things with spiritual. 1. Cor 2. 6,
7. 13. This man, casting away the words which the Holy Ghost teaches, and
uses in the holy Scriptures, sends his poor lambs to feed, and seek
spiritual pasture in the thorny Copses of his Master Aristotle, and his Saint
Suarez, Saint Vasques, Saint Fonseca's Metaphysics, and Metaphysical
Jesuitical Divinity, or in Seraphical Scotus his Quodlibetary learning; all
which understood just so much of the Spirit and mystery of the Gospel, in this
greatest point of Gospel Doctrine [Justification] as the unlearned people of
Kederminster do of this and the like pieces of this tractate of Mr. Baxter.

As for the matter it self, he that understands it not, shall be as much
endoctrined by it, as he that understands it. For my own part, I profess I see
nothing in it of any more force to refute the opinion which he here opposes
[Eternal Justification, or Justification as an immanent Act in God] than there
is in a Peacocks Feather to dash out all the teeth of a Lion. For should we
grant to him all that he here says (the thing in question only excepted) That
immanent in God must be understood, not Positively but Negatively, for that
Acts have not the respect of an Adjunct to its subject, but of an effect to its
Cause; that Gods justifying a man when he believes, argues no change in God,
any more than is found in the Sun, glass, or eye, by the variety of
creatures, faces, colors, set before them; as he mentions: what of all this?
What will he conclude at length against that which he says Doctor Twisse
makes the Major of his Argument, [ vizt. That all immanent Acts in God are
from Eternity.] will he deny it? Nay, but distrusting the weakness of his
reasoning, he does rather grant it. But grant (says he) that all Gods immanent
Acts are eternal, (which yet I think is quite beyond our understanding to know)
This is the result of all his Argumentation, as to the Major; It is true,
notwithstanding any thing I have said, or can say against it, only I think it
is beyond our understanding to judge whither it be universally true or no.

As to the Minor of Doctor Twisse his Argument, ( vizt. That Remission and
Justification are Immanent Acts) he disputes with as little dexterity as to the
Major. Most Divines (says he) will deny the Minor, and tell you that they are
but transient Acts. Be it so. But what have those most Divines to say for the
disappr^ving of the Minor? It Is true (says Mr. Baxter) what they say, but I
could never have the happiness to see, or hear it well cleared by any. For to
prove it transient they tell us no more, but that it does transire in Subjectum
Extraneum, By making a moral change on our Relation, etc. But this (says he)
is to affirm and not to prove. What then does Mr Baxter himself to supply what
is in his most famous Divines deficient? This only: he tells us a tale of a
Tubb, about relations how they are made up, and thence he brings in his
Conjectures to make clear how this change of our relation is made up, that our
Pactional Justification, or Justification according to the New Covenant is a
Transient Act of God; which I was never so happy, or unhappy in my slender
reading, to find any one that denies. And all this being granted, yet may it
stand as a firm foundation, that Remission and Justification are immanent Acts
in God, as has been before, and shall be, (if there be need) more fully
afterward showed.

He that reads Mr. Baxters dispute, must acknowledge that I do him no wrong
in this Epitomizing of it. And let every rational man judge whether the heat
of the man in promising so confidently before page 93. and in charging all his
impetus, or impotent impetuousness here, as against the Pillars of
Antinomianism, be answered with strength of reason to beat down what he would
have down, Gods Eternal acceptance and approbation of his beloved ones in
Christ Jesus. Thus feeble are the most Nervous arms in fighting against God,
and so vain in their imaginations (as the Apostle says) do they become, who
whet their wits upon the threshold of humane literature to dispute against God.

But after this general view of his dispute, it shall not be impertinent to
take notice of the particulars also therein enclosed.

And 1. Why does he call Doctor Twisse and Master Pemble, Most excellent famous
Divines?? Does he so style them for the excellency of their Philosophic
Scholastic learning? He should then more properly have termed them Most
excellent famous Philosophers, or Scholars: Except he will also make Aristotle
(because he in his (...) makes the Treating of God, one part of that Doctrine
which is to be handled in that Science which is commonly called Metaphysics)
to be a Theologer or Divine also* Or for their abundant knowledge in the
Doctrine of Christian Religion, together with their great ability and
faithfulness to teach and maintain it against the Adversaries thereof? Much
more proper had it been then, for him to have followed the Genius and policy of
the chief Priests (as in other things he does) that would not say any thing to
the Praise of John, that his Baptism or Droctrine were Divine and from Heaven,
fearing, lest the Lord Jesus should then urge upon them; Why then did ye not
believe him? Mat. 21. 25. For so Master Baxter here opens his bosom to the
dint of the like reproof. Were they excellent? Why does not he close with them
in their excellency. No one of the Papists or Arminians, against whose Sophisms
and impostures, these two Champions so excellently and famously propugned the
truth of Christ; has more deviated from their doctrine, i. e. the Doctrine of
Christ which they defended, than Master Baxter: how is not then himself in
famous in reference to that for which he pronounces them famous? Or in
granting them at the highest, the name of Theologers, does he not inure upon
himself the brand of a Theologaster? But peradventure he thus insignizeth them
in respect of the opinion that others have of them, though in his own account,
or in comparison with himself, he knows not whither to term them Cranes or
Pigmies. Or it is a piece of that subtlety which elsewhere he uses frequently,
to abuse the ignorant with a conceit, that all which he delivers is orthodox,
because of his pretending himself to be an admirer of such, in whom verity and
Godliness with profoundness in learning are met together. Or lastly, Ambition of
popular glory and praise, might invite him so to magnify them; The greater the
Champions are with whom he Combateth; The more glorious he may conceive his
victory to be, if he return out of the field Conqueror; And he might expect
that the lesser and lower rank will be as mute as fishes, when they see the
Classical Doctors of highest esteem once battered by his disputations. Two
Kings could not stand before him, how shall we stand? 2. Kin. 10. 4. so etc.
However it be, all that know them, and him, will conclude certainly that he
does in no wise so speak of them, because he can say of them in the words of
John, whom I love in the truth. 3. Jo. 1.

But note ye, out of the same mouth, in the same breath come Blessing and
Cursing. The Kiss and the stab of Joab go together. Majestically rather than
Magisterially he mounts them to the top of the Stage, to hurl them down thence
in the same Mom^nt headless. Master Pemble long since while he was yet a young
man, sl^pt in Christ. But Doctor Twisse not until of late in a venerable old
age was laid in the grave, and Master Baxter a Punie to him, throws his curses
after him, that he was erroneous, heretical, yea, one that set up the Pillar
of that which he calls and detesteth as the worst of Heresies, [Antinomianism]
Dared he but to have whispered so while Doctor Twisse was yet living? It is
come to pass what I conceived, and intimated to diverse of my friends at the
first coming abroad of Doctor Twisse his works, that during his life we should
find none that would write against him, but after his death, there would be
many censurers, though never an answerer of him. Our eyes have seen since his
death brought forth into the light those Tractates, which while he lived, dared
not come forth out of the womb of darkness: And those mouths now open after
his death, to snarl at him, which for fear of him were as fast shut while he
lived, as the Egyptian dogs at the presence of an Israelite. Exo. 11. 7. yet
may some take it to argue an ignoble Spirit in Master Baxter, so to tread on
the neck of a dead Lion, having not so much as looked through the Grate upon him
while yet living; and to seek honor by the Conquest of them,

Quorum Flaminia tegitur cinis atque Latina. But there is but little harm,
where there is but barking only without biting. And how little impression upon
Doctor Twisse his either Doctrine or reputation, Master Baxters sugillation
has made, we have in part, and in general seen already, and may yet take
notice more particularly.

2. Then when in opposition to Doctor Twisse his Major proposition, [ vizt. All
Acts immanent in God are Eternal] he tells us that [Immanent in God] must needs
be taken Negatively, not Positively;

. To speak more scripturally, than Metaphysically.

I answer, I see no ground of such a necessity: but that it may be understood
as well positively, as, yea rather positively than Negatively. What is immanent
in God, but abiding or residing in God, or (to use the Scripture terms) hidden
in God? Ephesians. 3. 9. Col. 3. 3. Yet so that when it is revealed, it abides
notwithstanding, and has its immanency in God still. Approbation, Acceptance,
accounting us just, and loving us in Christ, are Acts of Gods Knowledge and
will; and both before and after, we have the revelation thereof to our souls;
they are immanent and abiding in God from everlasting to everlasting. Are there
not imm^nent Acts in the soul of man? much more in the mind and will of God.
What man knows the things of a man, but the Spirit of man which is in him?
Even so none knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 11. By the things of God, and the things of a man, I doubt
not but it will be granted, that we must understand the apprehensions,
volitions, purposes, and affections (if I may so speak) of God and of men. And
are not these things in God, as well as the things of God? So they are as
properly termed Acts immanent in God in a positive sense, as actually abiding
in God, as in a Negative, in opposition to their Transiency and termination
upon a subject without God: The latter is not only, or so much denied, as the
former affirmed. And thus our justification is positively and depositively
immanent in God from eternity. Posited in the bosom of God the Father, as in
the Cabbinet of his counsels: and deposited in the hand of God the Son, as in
the hand of a faithful Mediator and surety for us upon his undertaking to make
satisfaction, which God the Father accepted as present satisfaction made for
our sins.

3. The reason which he annexeth, to prove that Acts are not positively
immanent in God, is insufficient and reasonlesse. For Acts (says he) have not
the respect of an Adjunct to its subject, but of an effect to its Cause. As if
Acts and effects could not also abide and remain in their cause. Master Baxter
(no doubt) has read Bellarmine, Arminius, and Corvinus, in their disputes
against the Doctrine of the reformed Churches: suppose now an act of
approbation has passed within him so far, as that their Faith is become his
Faith also, but secretly and not fully yet manifested to the World: Is not this
approbation an Act of Master Baxter? if so, is it not also an immanent Act
abiding in himself within his own mind, as well positively the r^siding, as
negatively not transient upon those Writers to produce any new relation or
passion in them? Himself, and his Master Grotius concur, That the effects of
efficient voluntary causes do not always immediately follow them; That God has
decreed from eternity the transient Justification of the Elect in their own
consciences, yet the execution thereof follows not until they believe. These.
15. and its Explication, and here again page 177. I demand now where this
decree, this act lies hid until the execution thereof? It must be either no
where, and consequently null, and annihilated, or else abide still, and be
Immanent in God, and so what was in God from eternity, is immanent in him from
eternity, and continued until the full execution thereof; That very pactional
Justification, which is by Faith, being nothing but the execution of the decree
of God from eternity. For besides our eternal Justification in Christ before
mentioned, we acknowledge also an eternal decree in God to declare and
evidence his Elect justified in their own consciences. i. e. in time to send
forth his Spirit into them, and by his Spirit to work Faith in them, and so to
draw them unto Christ, and by the evidence of Faith, and evidence of the Spirit
to declare themselves to themselves to be justified, and pardoned for ever.

As for that of the respect of the Adjunct to its Subject, we leave to Master
Baxter, and his friends the Arminians. They indeed make Pardon and
Justification to bear the nature of Adjuncts, yea separable Adjuncts, and
Accidents of God, which may adesse, vel abesse sine destructione subjecti, that
God may hate one day even to damn, and love the next day to save, and the third
day convert this love into hatred again, and so consequently change more
frequently then the Moon, and yet be G^d still. Such shall we find Mr. Baxters
doctrine, sucked out by kissing from the lips of the Arminians: But I forbear to
speak further of it here, reserving it for its proper place.

4. As to the instances which he gives, to make questionable whether Imanent
Acts are eternal; viz. For God to know that the world does now exist, that
such a man is sanctified, or just, etc. Gods foreknowledge is not a knowing
that such a thing is, which is not, but that such a thing will be, which is
not. I answer that foreknowledge does still imply, and connote knowledge,
though knowledge does not so imply foreknowledge. He that perfectly in every
respect foreknew an Eclipse, in every point of its time, measure, etc. knew it
also perfectly, and could as fully, and perfectly contemplate, and speak of it
in its fruition as presence, future, and present, it was, and is one to him.
Much more in God, who has created time for the measure of his creatures, not
his own being and motion. Past, present, and future are much to us, whose
existence, duration, and motions, are spanned, and spinned out by moments. But
to God who is eternal, dwells in eternity, is eternity, not circumscribed with
place or time, there is nothing former, or latter, no succession, of present to
past, of future to present, but all at once, and at one view apparent to his
eye, or knowledge: So that albeit he speaks often in Scriptures to our capacity
of succession of times, as if he together with us did act within the bounds
thereof (else if he should speak still in reference to things of old, and
things hereafter [to us] as the eternal I AM, not I was, or I will be, our
weakness would be beneath the comprehension of what he says) Yet these
circumstances of time do add nothing to, take nothing from, nor properly
square with him that is above time, without the precincts of time, comprehends
time, and temporary things within himself, and is not comprehended, or touched
by them. The now existence of the world, the now sanctification of such a man,
are n^w, and new in the knowledge of the Creature, not the Creator. Or let Mr.
Baxter deny the world in that form, state, extent, fullness, etc. in which it
does now exist; or the now either sanctified, or just man, or the measure and
nature of his Justification, to have been from all eternity, as apparent to
Gods knowledge, as it is in this now, or present time of us his creatures.

5. The comparisons or similitudes which he brings of the Sun, the glass,
the eye, though they may have some appearance of freeing God from change in
taking new notions into his knowledge in time (which notwithstanding is but an
appearance) yet is there nothing in them from which to argue to the acts in
general which are immanent in God. These do but set forth the respect of
natural causes, and their natural effects, either to other, therefore are in a
capacity to illustrate only those acts that flow naturally, and therewithal
necessarily from God: Not those that proceed from the liberty and freedom of
his will, (which Master Baxter call Moral Acts, and Moral Causes) For of
these there can be no Cause assigned but the free will of God. And if they
serve not Master Baxters turn in this respect, they become utterly unusefull to
him in the point of Justification. Yet to this end does he drive, that God does
justify and unjustifie, pardon, and unpardon, change his will from love to
hatred, and from hatred to love, to will the salvation of the same man at one
time, and his damnation at another, without any change of his will, or in
himself: The absurdity and impossibility whereof we shall afterward show, when
Master Baxter in his following Theses gives me cause to do it. So much of what
he says by way of answer to the Major, or more properly what he says to leave
it unanswered. For after all he concludes, But grant that all Gods immanent
Acts are Eternal. And this is as much as if he had said; All that has been
said is of no force to refell it, Therefore I grant it.

As for his answer to the Minor [ That Remission and Justification are immanent
Acts in God] though he speak much, yet is it nothing to the pupose.

First he tells us that most Divines will deny it, and tell you that they are
transient Acts; which is true. An irrefragable Argument, most will say it, Ergo
it is true. True, because most Will say it, though hitherto possible they have
never said it. And how knows he they Will say it? ^eradventure he puts so much
confidence in his following dispute, that he accounts all will be captivated by
it into his opinion. O^ if he mean the most Divines have said it, he
questionless means partly the Jesuiticall Divines, (for so Bellarmine indeed,
with others of the same School asserts:) or else more primarily the Arminian
Divines, speaking in this point what they have learned of Socinus, who is as
great with them as was Simon Magus with the Samaritans. Yet even these also,
though they some^imes deny, yet do they also sometimes (when it may make for
their advantage) affirm Justification to be an immanent Act in God.

2. Who is there that sees not his sophistry in shifting from him this
proposition in stead of answering it? Doctor Twisse^ his proposition is,
Justification is an immanent Act in God. To subvert this, Master Baxter
bestirrs himself to prove a seemingly, but not really contradictory
proposition, viz. That Justification is a Transient Act of God. A fallacy which
in the Schools is called Ignoratio Elenchi. And the reasoning of Master Baxter
here, is as proper and powerful, as if Master Baxter should affirm that Apollo
was above a hundred years old; and I to overthrow his conclusion, should
assert, and prove, that Apollo had never a beard. There is no contradiction
between these two assertions; A man may be old, and yet be without a beard: So
to affirm that Justification is a transient, does not contradict, that
Justification is immanent in God. For both are true, and may concur without
dashing either in the other. The Eternal Justification deposited in Christ,
upon the Covenant made between the Father and the Son is immanent in God. But
that Justification, which according to the tenor of the New Covenant made with
man, is declared and evidenced by God unto the Conscience of man, is a
transient Act of God: So that the affirming and confirming of the latter, does
not contradict the former, but is a mere sophism, an (...), a flinching to
another question; which I take to be in substance the same with the before
named fallacy.

And so Master Baxter does but Oleum and Operam perdere, toil much and catch
nothing in disputing so profoundly and Metaphysically, pa. 175. about the
Doctrine of Relation, and pa. 176. to make out, according to that Doctrine, a
possible, probable, Transient Justification, which is a conclusion that is
granted him without dispute. And yet the grant of it does not at all weaken the
Minor proposition of Doctor Twisse, That Remission and Justification (in the
sense often mentioned) are Acts immanent in God. The Subjectum, Fundamentum,
Terminus, together with the Ratio Fundandi, are no more wanting in Gods
Eternal justifying us in Christ, than in his Temporaneous justifying us
declaratively and evidentially to our own Consciences, and might be no less
confidently upon as good grounds of Reason particularized; if we delighted (as
Master Baxter does) to bring Gods Acts under the rule and measure of the terms
of humane Art and learning. Which notwithstanding, if we either would not or
could not do, our Faith should in no wise stumble, but having the infallible
word of God for its foundation (which we have before seen, notwithstanding all
that Master Baxter has said against it, to be for us,) it ought on it to rest,
contemning all the pillarage of humane reason and wisdom, to lean thereon for
sustentation.

In like manner the whole sum of Master Baxters dispute, pa. 177, 178, 179,
180. spent in raising and overthrowing an objection so raised, about a thing
never questioned, is altogether impertinent to the question in hand. None
denies the conclusion, or objects against it in that manner, or any thing at
all to the substance of it: So that Master Baxter does here but make knots to
loose them, and fight against the Air, which never accepted of a Combat with
him. Neither is there any other, or new thing in this piece of his dispute,
that has not had before a sufficient examination and Answer.

At length, pa. 180, and 181. he does in a manner unsay all that he has said,
and confess that his whole dispute, is little to the purpose, and therefore
does more than half grant the question to them whom he has made his
adversaries; For these are his words.

B. The second kind of Gods acts, which may be called Justifying, is indeed
immanent; viz^. his knowing the sinner to be pardoned and just; His willing and
approving hereof as true and good: These are Acts in Heaven, yea, in God
himself: but the former sort are on earth also. I would not have those Acts of
God separated which he does conjoin. And he ever does these last with the
former. But I verily think that it is especially the former transient legal
Acts, which the Scripture usually means, when it speaks of pardoning and
(constitutive) justifying, and not these immanent Acts: though these must be
looked on as concurrent with the former. Yet most Divines that I meet with,
seem to look at pardon and justification as being done in Heaven only, and
consisting only in these latter immanent Acts. And yet they deny justification
to be an immanent Act too But how they will ever manifest that the Celestial
Acts of God, ( vize. his willing the sinners pardon, and so forgiving him in
his own breast; or his accepting him as just) are transient Acts, I am yet
unable to understand. And if they be immanent acts, most will grant that they
are from Eternity. And then fai^ fall the Antinomians, etc. I know not of two
things considerable in these words of Master Baxter, which is more
considerable, either the power and victory of truth against his will convincing
his Conscience, or his hateful and desperate detestation of the truth, when
his Conscience is convinced thereof. The conviction of his Conscience, that it
is the truth which he has here oppugned, is sufficiently manifested in this,
that he confesses

1. That Gods knowing the sinner to be pardoned and justified, his willing and
approving hereof to be true and good (and a little after) his willing of the
sinners pardon, forgiving him in his own breast, and accepting him as just, to
be Celestial Acts, Acts in heaven, yea in God himself, indeed immanent.

2. That he sees not how they can ever be manifested to be transient Acts.

3. And if immanent Acts, most will grant (and himself has nothing to
contradict) that they are from Eternity. His wilful hatred of this truth so
confessed, is plainly enough hinted in these words. Then fair fall the
Antinomians, i. e. then in despite of the Devil, yea malice it self, the
Assertors of this truth abide unquenched, yea untouched. This torments his
spirit, and makes him to gnash with the teeth in fury, like him that cried; O
Galilaean, thou have the Victory.

He will not have those acts of God to be separated which he does conjoyn. And
who ever separated, or was so madd as to divide Gods Knowledge and Will from
his either immanent or transient Acts? that has ever said that God in imputing
our sins (in reference to punishment) to Christ Jesus, in forgiving,
absolving, and accepting the sinner, has done either he knows not what, or
that which he would not, wills not? But to conjoyn what the Lord has divided
in point of time, his constitutive justifying us in his own breast through Christ
before time, with his declarative justifying us in our own consciences in time,
were to confound heaven and earth, eternity and time, together in one. The
question is not, whether when God has by a transient act justified a sinner,
he knows and wills his justification? But whether God did not both
knowingly and willingly so justify and pardon him through Christ, within his
own breast from eternity? or whether Gods accepting him in Christ, and knowing
him to be so accepted, be begotten in the will and mind of God now in the end
of time, and so God is not the same God in his Knowledge and Will, which he was
from eternity?

He verily thinks that the transient Acts of God are meant in those Scriptures
which speak of justification by faith, (for so I conceive he would be
understood.) And I verily think that he is not enough sound in his head-peece,
whosoever thinks the contrary. For it were a mad contradictive proposition to
say, whosoever does, or shall believe, shall be justified in himself before he
had a self, or being. But this is no nearer to the matter in question, than the
North is to the South pole.

As for that bar of God in heaven, that he concludes with, where his
Angelical and Seraphical Doctors that better know the way thence than thither,
saw at their last coming thence, God fitting and transacting these things
before his Angels, we are bidden to wait until he shall have the leisure after
he has spoken once more with Lucians Icaro-Menippus, and enquired of him the
certainty thereof, and then we shall hear the dream interpreted.

This is the sum of his noble dispute against justification, as an act
immanent in God from Eternity. And now I appeal to the reader, comparing
together his bigg and swelling promises with his curt and insubstantial
performance; after his challenge of all the Antinomians, his promise to show
that there is no such thing, his charging the doctrine with the scandalous
terms of error, and pillar of Antinomianism, and his undertaking to prove it
such; upon due examination to judge,

Quid tanto dignum tulit hic [Promissor] hiatu? CHAP. XXII.
Arg. What the real Antinomians have been, and are, and that Master Baxter
casts this reproachful name upon all the Churches of Christ, charging the
innocent with the fault whereof himself is guilty.

THE second thing which I promised to take into examination, in his explication
of this Thesis, is his vellication of the Antinomians, which here and elsewhere
throughout this Book he defieth with unquenchable hatred, charging and
discharging so hotly against them, as ever Jupiter did against the Giants that
made a battery against the Heavens. And what are they, that Goliath like, he
should come harnessed from the head to the foot, brandishing his weavers beam
against them? he tells us, They are Ignorant [animals] pa. 169. Fitter to learn
the grounds of Religion in a Catechism, than to manage those disputes wherewith
they trouble the world. pa. 115. If so, who can abstain from laughter, to see
so great a Nimrod as Mr. Baxter, hunting, with no less weapon then Hercules
his Club, a nest of wrens to death? and with the great Monarch of the World
Domitian, to set himself in battle array against the gnats and flies that dared
to peep into his chamber.

But his aim is to show his Craft more than his power, as I before in part have
manifested in the preface to this examination, and there promised more fully
afterward to evidence: The performance whereof, I have reserved for this place.

That we may the better discern Master Baxters either singleness or
doubleness in this Case, it shall be somewhat expedient to enquire after,
first the original, secondly the growth of the Antinomians properly so taken
and denominated in the several reformed Churches, until our late divisions
within this land have made such a medly and confusion of all, or at least many
errors together, that we know not punctually what error is predominant in most
of the wilfully erroneous: that having seen them both in their birth, and
their full height also; we may compare Master Baxters Antinomians with the
Antinomians indeed, and so judge how far he goes about to confute the innocent,
and how far to defame and deceive the innocent.

The first rise of them was in Germany, Anno. Dom. 1538. as Sleidan in the 12
Book of his Commentaries tells us. Their principal ringleader was Ioannes
Islebius, Agricola. I have not met with any of their Books, neither know I
whether there be any of them extant, from which we may certainly gather their
opinions. We are forced therefore to take them at the second hand from the
foresaid Author, who in the forequoted place thus speaks of them. Hoc Anno
secta prodijt eoru^ qui dicuntur Antinomi. Hi poenitentiam ex Decalogo non esse
docendam dicunt, and illos impugnant qui docent non esse praedicandum
Evangelium, nisi primum quassatis animis, at que fractis per pradicationem
legis. Ipsi vero statuunt quaecunque tandem sit hominis vita, and quamtumvis
impura, justificari tamen eum, si modo promissionibus Evangelij credat. i. e.
This year sprung forth the sect of them which are called Antinomians. [Their
Tenants he reduces to three general heads, telling us that first] They say,
that Repentance is not to be taught out of the Decalogue: [2] They impugn them
that teach, the Gospel ought not to be preached to men, until their hearts be
first shaken and broken by the preaching of the Law. [3] They assert that
whatsoever the life of a man be, and how impure soever, yet is he justified if
he only believes the promises of the Gospel.

He adds further, that Luther wrote against this Islebius, who thereupon
submitted, and in a sort recanted; and so it seems the Sect ceased, and their
assertions for a while slept.

Such were they at their first rise. In these after times, they discovered
themselves in more plain terms than Sleidan here discovered them. About twenty
years since, I had acquaintance, and upon that acquaintance, much reasoning,
and many disputes with some of them in Summer set shire, who much honored and
professed themselves to have received their light from that Master W^otton,
whom Master Baxter does seem much to applaud in some parts of this Treatise.
Their opinions that partly were, and partly weretaken by the most t^ be points
of Antinomianism were these, (as in discourse with them I found them to
maintain)

1. That the Law is totally abrogated now under the Gospel, and that not only
as a Covenant of Works, but also from being any more the rule of
righteousness. That we have but one Master, Christ, that since his coming
into the world, he is our Teacher sent from heaven: the Prophet raised up like
to Moses, that we should hear him alone. That since the time he began to speak,
Moses has been silent, and we are bound now to attend to the voice of God, as
in these latter times he speaks to us by his Son only.

2. That the whole Old Testament is (as it were) uncanonized, though it were
the Word of God, the Rule and Canon of Faith, and practice, to them that lived
under it; yet to us that are under the Gospel it remains not in its former
power. Because the Last Will and Testament only stands in force, and when a
latter Testament is made, the former is thereby to all uses and purposes made
void. We may read the Old Testament as other Apocryphal, and Ecclesiastical
Writings, but must no more subject our judgments or consciences to it, then to
these: For Moses and the Prophets prophesied (only) until John the Baptist,
were in force until he began to preach the Gospel, and ever since the Kingdom
of heaven has suffered violence, the doctrine of the Gospel has succeeded in
its place.

3. That we have no Sabbath under the Gospel, but all holiness in days, and
difference between days and days is taken away; so that to sanctify any one
day to the Lord above another, is mere Will Worship, and Superstition. Upon this
ground they actually made use of shooting, bowling, and other lawful
recreations upon the Lords day, pronouncing it to be a use of the Liberty which
Christ had purchased for them.

4. They disrelished altogether that phrase of Justification by Faith, as
attributing somewhat to man; and would that all should rather say that we are
Justified by Grace, or by Christ or by being found in Christ, or by our union
unto Christ, that the praise of our Justification might be reserved whole and
entire to the Grace of God in Christ alone.

5. That we are justified by the Passive, not the Active obedience of Christ.

6. That God sees no sin in the justified, he knows indeed when they sin,
and that they have sinned, but the does not see it because themselves and it
are covered under the righteousness, and cross of Christ, so that the Father
does not, will not see it. As if the eternal God had any other eyes besides the
eyes of his knowledge to see; or that Gods seeing, and his knowing were at
least disparats, and not the same thing.

7. That God punishes not sin in his people, for he sees not sin in his
people, and what he sees not, that he cannot punish. He has punished it upon
Christ, therefore are they free from punishment.

8. That whatsoever is not in precise words forbidden in the New Testament,
that is lawful for a Christian to do, how strictly soever it be prohibited in
the Law, and Old Testament. So that I have taken notice that when in disputes,
such and such things have been denied to be expressly forbidden in the New
Testament, and that they could not find any clear testimonies of the New
Testament literally forbidding them; though before they made it a case of
conscience to abstain, yet thenceforth, notwithstanding all that is said in the
Old Testament against it, they have taken full liberty to commit it.

These things were formerly (as far as I have taken notice) either all, or
the chief things, branded with the name of Antinomianism. And they that held
them were called by the most Antinomists, or Antinomians, because either in
all, or most of these assertions, they either did, or seemed to oppose, and set
themselves against the Law, or Old Testament.

In these last seven or eight years indeed, wherein all the Ghosts of all the
Heretics of former Ages have been let loose from hell in full swarms, to
infest this Nation more then ever the Locusts did the Land of Egypt; and men in
wantonizing against Christ and his Truth, have thought it too little to be
Satan's budget-bearers in some, except they had their packs filled with all
varieties of his hell-bred errors, so that the Legion of Devils now might be
found sometimes in one man, which heretofore was distributed into a legion of
men: By means whereof, many Heresies molded together have gone under one
denomination; partly through ignorance, and partly out of malice, both all the
dreams of mad E^thusi^sts, and blasphemies against the Word sometimes, and
sometimes the very sacred truths of the Gospel of Christ have been exposed to
the hatred of the multitude under the title of Antinomianism: Men full of all
subtlety and mischief thus painting Christ in the midst of many Devils, that
he might be taken for one of them, and the truth of his Gospel be abandoned
under the name of Heresy.

But as to the forementioned tenants in former times charged with
Antinomianism, I shall say something.

First those three mentioned by Sleidan, as he expresses them, it is very
ambiguous whether they were truths or errors. Because the words by which he
describes them, are ambiguous: and may be taken either in a good, or evil
sense.

1. That they taught that Repentance is not to be taught out of the Decalogue:
It is doubtful what his meaning is; 1. Whether they denied it to be taught
simply, or secundum quid, either that it ought not to be thence taught at all,
or not to be taught thence, as ordained and effectual to justification, and
salvation? 2. It is doubtful also what he means by the Decalogue, whether he
means the Ten Commandments considered strictly in their own words, as mere Law
(for so I see not how repentance can be taught properly out of the Decalogue,
because it commands perfect obedience, that there may be no need of
repentance) or as the Doctrine of the said Decalogue is amplified, and
expounded in other Scriptures: where we shall find indeed Repentance required
in case of transgression, with a promise of temporal deliverances and
blessings annexed; and so the teaching of Repentance out of the Law be here
opposed to the teaching of it out of the Gospel, and consequentially the Legal
be here opposed to the Evangelical Repentance? 3. Or whether his meaning be,
that they would not have repentance at all taught, because they took it to be a
merely Legal, not an Evangelical duty, therefore pertaining to the
administration of the Law, not of the Gospel? I conceive the Historian being a
man singular for his moderation in all that he writes, though he speaks of
their opinion in the easiest words he may, yet means that they held it in the
worst sense, (And such have been the Antinomians in these latter times)
otherwise in a good sense, that his words will bear, this first tenet deserves
not the name of Antinomianism, or error.

To the second, if his meaning be, that they impugned those that preached the
Law to shake the hearts of men into self-denial, and to break down the proud
confidence of safety, and righteousness in themselves, thereby to make way for
the doctrine of Christ into them: There is something indeed worthy of blame
laid to their charge. But if we take his words strictly as they lie, viz. that
they opposed them which teach that the Gospel is not to be preached until the
Law has so convinced, and shaken the conscience, etc. I profess my self to be
an Antinomian also, if this be Antinomianism. For what warrant has any
Minister so to teach? The commission which we receive from Christ is, to preach
the Gospel to every creature in all the world. Mar. 16. 15. without any
restriction whether they be shaken, or unshaken: And if we continue Law-shakers
still among some people, until we see them thereby shaken into a Palsy of
selfe-despairing, I know no ground we have to promise to our selves a time of
preaching Gospel so long as we live. And what answer can be given in such a
case to Christ for following our own carnal wisdom, and not his commission?
Neither was it one of Luthers praises ( pace tanti viri dixerim) from the
experience of Gods working upon himself, which was first the laying of him
prostrate by the Law under great horrors, and then reviving him with the
precious comforts of the Gospel; to prescribe unto God the same method, or to
conclude the same to be the method of God in his operations upon all in
converting them. The rending whirlwind does not always go before the quickening
beams of the Sun of Righteousness.

To the third, if he mean that they taught that Justification by Faith in the
Gospel promises might be sound and effectual, though no sanctification, but
all allowed impurity of life should follow; the assertion and doctrine implies
a contradiction; for there can be no living Faith in the promises, that is not
fruitful in good works: And herein they declared themselves no less
Anti-Gospellers, then Antinomians. But if he mean that without all such
extreme horrors of the Law, a man may be truly justified by Faith in Christ,
notwithstanding all his former loose and impure life, and so the Publicans and
Harlots enter into the Kingdom of God before the self-righteous Pharisees;
this is not Antinomistick, except Paul's doctrine also be such, Romans 4. 5.

2. As for those opinions charged in these latter times with Antinomianism by
many, the 1, 2, and last cannot be excused. Only (to give the Assertors their
due) whatsoever of doctrinal truths to be believed, or of Moral duties to be
practiced, are expressed both in the Old and New Testament, they were
conscientious to submit themselves thereunto, yet not for the authority of the
Law, or Old Testament, but of the New only.

The third can be justly charged with Antinomianism no farther, then as either
the Maintainers of it were in other points Antinomists, or in respect of the
foundation, which they laid to maintain it, which was the abrogation of the Law
and old Testament. The Law of the Sabbath being one part thereof, which must
stand or sink with the rest. But as they denied the lawfulness of all
discrimination or difference of days, by way of Moral, or Ecclesiastical, or
Apostolical order, for the more orderly, and profitable celebration of public
Assemblies, and the ordinances of Christ in public Communion, calling it
Will Worship, and Superstition: This error they drew from the Petrobusians, and
Anabaptists, not from the Antinomians that had been before them. As to other
questions about the authority of the Sabbath first, and now of the Lords day,
what relation they have either to other, whether the observation of them be of
Natural, or Positive right: If of Moral and Natural right, by what express
authority it is altered from the last, to the first day of the week? If of
Positive right, whether it began from the Creation, or from the Law given upon
Mount Sinai? Whether the fourth Commandment has any thing in it Typical, now
vanished in Christ? Or whether wholly Moral, and binding for ever? how far it
did, or did not bind precisely to a day, and not this day of 7? Whether it were
of Moral Righteousness, or else only of Moral order? Whether the holiness of the
7th be now wholly translated upon the first day of the week? By what authority
the observation of the seventh day ceased, and of the first day of the week was
instituted to succeed? Whether by virtue of Christ's Resurrection, or by some
express command of Christ? and where that command is to be found? Or else by
Apostolical appointment? And then whether in respect of order, or of the
aforegoing authority of Gods Commandment about the Sabbath? or else by the
appointment and consent of the Churches in, or after the Apostles times? These,
and many other the like questions Mr. Baxter knows to have been in agitation
between both the greater and the lesser Divines and Members of the Reformed
Churches, and adhuc sub judice Lis est. Only some within the Church of
England, ever since a Tractate came forth upon this subject from one Dr. Bownd,
Anno Christi 1595. seem to fix the observation of the Lords day upon more
strict grounds, and to bind it to more precise terms then the other Reformed
Churches beyond the seas admit, or many of the solid Divines have approved. But
of this there is no proper occasion here given to dispute. This assertion
therefore, any further then has been specified, I doubt not but Mr. Baxter
himself will discharge of Antinomianism.

The 5. and 7. Mr. Baxter himself will not have to be ranked among Antinomian
errors, confessing the former to be the judgment of many learned, and godly
Divines, of singular esteem in the Church of God, page 53. and Ap. page 12. The
latter he pronounces to be the Common Judgment, viz. of Churches, and
Divines; therefore of ignorance accused of Antinomianism, page 68 of his
Aphorisms.

The fourth gives us cause to accuse them of some audaciousnes, in teaching the
Holy Ghost to speak, and pertinaciousness in binding themselves to phrases and
words, even to the declining of the language of the Holy Ghost in Scriptures.
To be justified by Faith, and to be justified by Christ, or our being found in
Christ, being ever both in Canonical, and Ecclesiastical Writings taken as
Equipollent terms, until in these few last years Mr. Bax. and some of his
fellows irradiated from Rome, and by the doctrine of Socinus, and Arminius,
have broached another, a new, and unheard of interpretation of the phrases. For
whether we say we are justified by Faith, we were formerly understood to
affirm our Justification by Christ, to whom our Faith has united us; or by
Christ, it was understood by Christ apprehended by faith. Neither manner of
Locution therefore was to be rejected, as opposing the other.

The sixth I take to be a fancy (if they understand Gods seeing and knowing in
general, without restriction) troubling the brains of men with a strife about
words without substance. God sees no sin unpardoned upon his people, we
acknowledge. In reference to Judgment and Vengeance, he has seen them all
upon Christ, and punished them upon Christ, so that he no more sees sin in
believers, to take vengeance of them for it. But it were our loss and misery,
if God should not at all, and simply see sin in us; How then should he purge
it from us, and us from it? He is the Husbandman of his Vineyard, sees, and
cuts out every canker from his Vines, sees, and pareth off every unprofitable
sprigg from the branches, by means whereof fruitfullnesse follows, where
else* there must ensue barrenness and rottenness. Some Divines therefore thus
distinguish, that Gods seeing of sin may be considered as either in Articulo
providentiae, (so he sees all sins of all men alike to dispose of them to his
glory,) or in Articulo Iustificationis, (so he sees the sins only of the
unjustified; Ier. 18. 23. Forget not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin
from thy sight: but the sins of the justified are forgotten, and blotted out
of his remembrance and sight (as the constant phrase of Scripture affirms) no
more to be imputed. If they mean only in this latter sense, they err not.

By that which has been said, we may easily perceive (without any further and
new summing up the particulars) what the assertions are which may be truly and
properly charged with Antinomism, and gave first the Term of Antinomism to the
Assertors.

Now let us see also what the Tenants of Master Baxters Antinomists are, and
what opinions he curses to Hell, unde the name of Antinomianism. Their
Heresies according to Master Baxter are these which follow.

1. That Justification is, or there is a Justification from Eternity. page 93.

2. That it is an immanent act in God. pa. 173.

3. That our Evangelicall righteousness by which we are justified, is without
us in Christ. pa. 109. or performed by Christ, and not by our selves. pa. 111.

4. That Justification is a free act of God, without any condition on our part.
pa. 169, 170.

5. That God sees not sin in his justified ones, pa. 207.

6. That we must not work or perform duties for life and salvation, but from
life and salvation: or that we must not make the attaining of justification, or
salvation, an end of our endeavors, but obey in thankfulness only, because
we are saved and justified. pa. 324, 325. 330.

7. That they acknowledge no condition of life, but bare belief in the
narrowest sense, that is, either belief of pardon, and justification, and
Reconciliation, or affiance in Christ, for it: so also they acknowledge no
proper damning sin, but unbelief, in that strict sense, as is opposite to this
faith, i. e. the not believing in Christ as our Savior. Append* pa. 20, 21.

8. To these he adds many more, (or rather mostly the same in other Terms)
out of the Marrow of Modern Divinity, (I mean the book so entitled) which in
due place we may as far as shall be thought needful, examine. Appen. pa. 100.
to pa. 106.

Lastly, he seems to accuse them of all the prodigious Doctrines which Colyer,
Spriggs, Hobson, and the rest of that Anabaptistical, Enthusiasticall, and
phanatick strain of men, have (if indeed they be of them that have at any time)
said and unsaid; whether such as they have derived from Nicolas Stock, David
George, Thomas Muncer, John of Leyden, Cniperdolins, etc. and others of the
same stamp in these latter times: or such as either of them has by a kind of
Necromancy raised up from the ashes of Manes, Samosatenus, Arrius, and other
cursed Heretics of ancient times. All these he would willingly inure upon the
Antinomians, i. e. upon them that will not say the same things with him, who
speaks the same things with the Jesuits in the point of Justification. This he
does subtlely, and underhand, to beguile his unwary reader. Append. pa. 99.

Of all these only the fifth has been (as far as ever I could find) by any
considerate and judicious person, nicknamed with Antinonism, until Master
Baxter and some other of his fellows in these late years have taken upon them
a Sovereignty, as Lords and judges from Peter's Chair, which they have Canonized
again, to baptize with new names, all the Doctrines of the Gospel that cross
the pride of their selfe-ighteousnesse.

And even the sift it self in Scripture sense (as I have before showed) is a
Soul-comforting truth, which we must no more suffer to be wrested from us, than
our Christ and all our happiness by him, vizt. that God sees not sin in his
justified ones, to impute i^, to hate and condemn them for it. He sees not
the guilt of any sin upon them, having laid it and the condemnation to which it
obliged, upon Christ Jesus. But that God does not simply see sin in them,
either Original or Actual, to act about it in a way of grace and truth,
according to his promises in Christ; This I take to be a foppery, the fruit of
men's wilfulness, and pertinacity, to have their own words and phrases stand
as impregnable as Christ's truth lapt up in them. Let it be called Antinomism,
or Antigospellism, or what else Master Baxter will style it, I shall not herein
withstand him; To me the truth and spirit of the Doctrines contained in the
word, suffices, the letter I shall no further propugn or oppugn, than as
through it the spirit and truth is levelled at.

To the first and second I have before spoken, and let any man upon earth be
produced, that ever charged them with Antinomianism, saving Master Baxter
himself, or one of his Disciples: And if they be Antinomian Tenants, then is
Master Baxter one of those Antinomians, being forced after his long and
impotent cavil against, as last to grant both; as we have before seen.

To the third, I have also before answered. Neither has Master Baxter named,
nor can he (I am confident) name one man, but either a Papist, or at best an
Arminian, that before him has either called Faith and Gospel obedience the
Evangelicall Righteousness by which we are justified: Or that has denied our
gospel righteousness by which we are justified to be without us, in Christ.
So that he pronounces here all the orthodox of all Churches, yea, all
professed Christians, saving Papists, Arminians, and (perhaps) Socinians to be
Antinomians: So much of Antichristian pride and impudence possesses him.

To the fourth and seventh I answer,

1. That they are contradictory either to other. For how can both be true, that
they affirm Justification to be a free Act of God without any condition on our
part, and yet teach also Faith or affiance in Christ to be a [necessary]
condition of our Justification? who shall take upon him to defend him that
arraigneth and proves himself to be a slanderer?

2. Yet may it without contradiction be both affirmed, that Justification as an
act immanent and Eternal in God, is absolute and without condition, but as it
is transient and Terminate upon the conscience of a believer, not to be without
condition.

3. Because the Scripture never names Faith, much less works, the condition
of Justification in time; to question whether Faith itself may not more
properly be termed by some other denomin^tion in reference to justification,
than a Condition, is no piece of Antinomism, but a point of Christian prudence
to consider and examine: specially at such a time when Master Baxter and other
of the Popes Factors, under the word condition bestirre themselves to re-erect
Justification by works.

4. That Justification by that which Master Baxter abasingly calls bare
belief, or affiance in Christ the Savior, i. e. by Faith without works, is no
Antinomian Doctrine, but the Doctrine which Christ and Paul, and the rest of
the Apostles, have preached and sealed with their blood; that which all the
reformed Churches have unanim^usly maintained, and do maintain unto this day:
and that which Antichrist with his vassalls, and others apostatized from the
reformed Churches to them do pursue with fire and fury unto ruin. With whom
though Mr. Bax. come up in the rear, driving Jehu like furiously in his
Chariot, to destroy it, yet shall it stand impregnable, as the prime Article
of their Creed, who either are, or shall be justified and saved.

To the sixth, I shall reserve my answer until I come to examine the
forequoted places of Master Baxter, together with his impetuous and fiery
dispute against it, Append. pa. 76. and thence forward unto pa. 98. where we
shall find him combating against this opinion, with as much gallantry, and
possibly with no less success than the Dragon fought against Michael.

In the interim, I doubt not thence (after the question rightly stated) to
maintain the position, as our Divines most eminent in the reformed Churches
have taught it, to be the sacred and sound Doctrine of the Gospel, as free
from Antinomism, as the contrary assertion of Master Baxter is full of Popery.

The examination of the things* contained in the eighth and ninth, I shall
leave to their proper place, particularly to be examined, because they have a
multitude of particulars congested in them, requiring particular answers.

From all that has been said upon this point, we may take up two
observations, in reference to Master Baxters dealing therein.

1. That there is no truth and sincerity in his pretense of fighting against
the Antinomians (truly so called) throughout this his Tractate, (For he medleth
not at all with their erroneous Tenants:) But contrariwise, that he uses mere
fraud, to inure the odious Term of Antinomism upon the choice and most precious
Doctrines of the Gospel, delivered by Christ and his Apostles, and taught and
defended by the most able and most faithful Ministers of Christ in all ages,
to make both the pure Gospel, and the defenders thereof, to stink in the
nostrills of unread and unwary men: subtlely concealing the names of those
worthies which have taught and maintained these truths, lest their light and
glory should bring his Doctrines, contrary to theirs, into suspicion first,
then to examination, and lastly to an abomination among men. How much more
candor do we find in his fellows the Arminians, or Remonstrants? These in all
their Tenants wherein they dissent from the Protestant Churches, do not load
the contrary opinion with the imputation of Antinomism; but throughout their
Apology, ever and anon ingeniously confess of that which they hold, Contra
quod fere hactenus creditum est, in these, and in words equipollent,
acknowledging still their opinions to be wholly against the judgment of the
best Churches and Divines before them. Master Baxter it seems has more of the
serpent in him than they had, therefore follows the steps of our English
Arminians, rather than those in Holland before them. For as these blasted the
sacred truths which they opposed with the name of Puritanism, so does this man
with the name of Antinomianism, to make them odious. A trick which the old
Pharisees had learned of their Father, Jo. 8. 44. and propagated to their sonns
the Papists, to besmear the Doctrines of Christ with the infamous titles of
Schism, Nazarism, Heresy. Who then will lay it as a fault to their Children in
our times, if they do also Patrizare.

Secondly, that he has the like fraudulent design in mingling with the truths
of the Gospel, which he brandeth with Antinomism, the dreams of Colyer,
Spriggs, Hobson, and other Ranters, (if indeed these be such, for I have not
read them) giving the same brand to these as to the former; by this feat
endeavoring to instill into the minds of them that will be deceived,

1. That all the heretical and blasphemous Doctrines which these men teach,
are Antinomian.

2. That the truths which the one side teach against Antichrist, and the
Blasphemies which the other side vent against Christ, are of one Nature, and
the former to be no less abhorred than the latter. Now if the Pamphlets of
these men be so abominable as Master Baxter affirms, and others also that
are both able to judge, and faithful to give their judgment, have told me;
(for I acknowledge my self never to have been so ill at leisure to spend two
hours in reading what any, or all of them have written) he deals unjustly to
yoke them together with those tenants which he falsely accuses of Antinomism,
yea, with those that are rightly fathered upon Antinomians indeed. For granting
that they hold some Tenants of the Antinomians, yet this neither argues that
all their heresies and blasphemies are so many pieces of Antinomism; Nor yet
that the Antinomians speaking the same things with these in the points proper
to their sect, do also close with them in their abominable Doctrines that are
totally alien from the Antinomists Tenants. Else because Master Baxter joineth
with the Jesuits in the Doctrine of Justification by works, we might conclude
that in all points he is a Jesuit, holds not only lies, equivocations, and
mental reservations; but also murders, Massacres, Seditions, Powder treasons,
and all other practices devised in hell it self, to be Meritorious works, if
done to the advancing of Romes interest. And because he holds the very Act of
believing to justify, with the Socinians, therefore he is in all other the
most blasphemous of their assertions against Christ and his blood, a Socinian
also: or on the other side, that the Jesuits and Socinians are in all things,
because in some things of the same judgment with Master Baxter. Were it the
truth of Christ which Master Baxter goes about to propagate, he would
doubtless seek the propagation of it in Christ's Spirit, and Christ's way. When
we see such serpentine windings and crookedness in his disputes, who can but
judge that it is the work of the Old Serpent about which he is employed?
Neither the truth of Christ, nor Christ which is the truth, have any such
impotency in them, as to need any deceits and shifts for their support. When
Mr. Baxter, yea when all the Jesuits have raised all their mists of Sophistry,
Sycophancy contumely, etc. as thick as the smoke from the bottomless pit, to
dim the beams of Gods grace shining forth in the Sun of Righteousness; not
one Raie thereof shall be thereby diminished, it shall hide the [pure light of
the] Gospel only from them that perish, whose eyes the God of this World has
blinded. 2. Cor. 4. 3, 4. No one Soul shall be thereby beguiled, save those
only that were made to be taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2. 12.

A large Catalogue more of the Antinomian Tenants are set forth by Master
Anthony Burgess, affixed to his Lectures against them: Which he says he has
gathered from Luthers works against them. I will not question his
faithfulness in collecting them, whether Islebius and his Disciples directly
maintained such Doctrines; or whether Luther in prosecuting them, enumerates
these as absurdities that would follow upon their Doctrine? whether they are
imaginary, or real opinions of any sect of men, the most of them are
detestable. But I find not that either Master Burgess, or Mr. Bax, can name any
one creature under the Sun, that has declared by words or writing, that he
held them. If they can, we shall join with them, as dissenters from, and
excepters against every such person. That these Antinomians of the former age
were filthy dreamers, loose livers, such as turned the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ into lasciviousness, is very probable, if not certain, from that which
Calvin and others have written against Antinomians and Libertines. And from
such we have no less abhorrence then Mr. Baxter.

But while Mr. Baxter declaimeth against the innocent, he proclaims himself
a rank Antinomian, in teaching, and maintaining that the perfect obedience and
righteousness of the Law are not required, and consequentially not due under
the Gospel. Islebius himself never spoke so derogatorily to the righteousness
of the Law.

CHAP. XXIII.
Arg. Mr. Baxters distinction of Justification in Title of Law, and in Sentence
of Judgment examined, together with other distinctions equipollent to this.
Whether besides the present there be also a future Justification? and whether
it be begun and perfected together at once.

I should wholly have passed over the 37, 38, 39, and 40 Theses, with their
Explications, as merely shady imaginations, void of all reality and substance,
without stopping to give them one word of answer: (For why should we talk of
Pictures that have no life in them?) were it not that it is Master Baxters
drift to carry us through these ways of his own chalking, wholly from Christ,
under a pretext of leading us to Christ the Justifier. To frustrate therefore
his deceit I shall speak somewhat to these passages of his Tractate also.

These. 37. page 183. B. Justification is either in title, and the sense of Law,
or in sentence of judgment: The first may be called Constitutive; the second
Declarative; the first Virtual, the second Actual.

Lawyers have laid it down for a Maxim, Non est distinguendum ubi Lex non
distinguit. i. e. We are not to distinguish of any point in the Law, where the
Law it self has not made a distinction. If the Laws of men are not, much less
are the Laws, and Word of God to be violated with men's bold distinctions: For
this is no less then to bring Gods sacred Oracles into a subjection to man's
vain fancies. Let Mr. Baxter show any Scripture that gives footing for the
distinguishing of Justification into that which is in title of Law, and that
which is in sentence of judgment, into constitutive and declarative, or
virtuall, and actual Justification. These are the inventions of wanton wits in
these latter times, whose endeavor it has been to tear in pieces, and thereby
wholly nullify Gods Justification, and to put many Justifications of their own
in stead thereof. We deny not a constitutive and declarative Justification in
some sense, but in Mr. Baxters sense we deny it. It is granted that the
Satisfaction which the Son by promise gave, and the Father accepted for the
sins of the Elect, according to the Covenant between the Father and the Son,
before more then once mentioned, did constitute the Elect justified in Christ
before they were born; who notwithstanding were not declared just to their own
consciences before they actually believed; nor to others until they manifested
their Faith by their Works. But Mr. Baxter explodes this constitutive, and
declarative Justification, as an unsufferable abomination, and will not have
his virtuality, and actuality to these applied. And let him allege any one
Scripture that calls the sentence of life (unto those that shall be saved by
grace) that is to be pronounced in the last day, Justification: Or if he
cannot, but that the justification of the New Covenant, wherever it be
mentioned in the Word, be that which is in this present life, who sees not that
his distinguishing here tends to the subverting of Scriptures, and of the both
virtual, and actual Justification which the Scriptures speak of?

B. The Scripture speaks of it many times as a future thing, and not yet done.
Romans 3. 30. Mat. 12. 37. Romans 2. 13. Explic. page 185. This is all that he
brings, or can bring for Justification in the day of Judgment; and this all
is nothing. It follows not because these Scriptures speak of Justification as
of a thing to come, saying, they shall be, not they are justified; that this
Future tense does point out the day of Judgment. If I should say, Mr. Baxter
shall dye, I should not be accused for speaking an untruth; but if any will
needs confine that [ shall] to the day of Judgment, that Mr. Baxter shall then
dye, who would not laugh at the absurdity of the consequence? That of Mat. 12.
37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned; and that of Romans 2. 13. Not the hearers, but the doers of the Law
shall be justified; speak of Justification after the tenor and covenant of the
Law, not of Grace; therefore pertain nothing to the present purpose. He shall
but Dare verba, damnably deceive with words, that teaches men to seek for
Justification by the righteousness of the Law consisting in deeds and words.
Whosoever indeed shall neither in word or deed be found a transgressor of the
Law actually or originally, shall be justified by his words and deeds. But this
man must be sought for out of a happier generation then those of the race of
Adam; else (if we except Christ alone) we must return our Non est inventus.
That of Romans 3. 30. speaks indeed in the Future tense, but may be as properly
rendered, by the word [ will] as [ shall] (though the difference be not very
considerable) thus, It is one God which will [or shall] justify the
circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through Faith. The Apostle here
means no otherwise, speaking here in the Future, then what he had said before
in the Present Tense of Justification. And it is as if he had said, God has
decreed and declared his method of justifying both Jews and Gentiles to be one
and the same. As long as there remain, or succeed any upon earth of either part
to be justified, the purpose of God abides firm to justify as well the one as
the other by faith, and no one of either sort by Works; neither circumcision,
nor uncircumcision shall avail, or hinder any thing, but Christ, faith in
Christ shall be all unto all in this business, as long as the world endures.
And what is there then in this Text to p^ove Mr. Baxters declarative
Justification in the day of Judgment? Not that we deny the adjudging of life
in the day of Judgment to all that in this life were justified; but the
Scriptures terming this last sentence by the name of Justification, whatsoever
is said of Justification by Faith or Grace, is still to be understood in this
life. And the whole reason that Mr. Baxter has here to coin a Justification in
the day of judgment, is to lay a foundation of Popish Justification by Works;
as by the sequel of this his Treatise will more fully appear. Else would we
not contend with him about mere words, did they not tend to a destructive end;
and that we are taught by him elsewhere, That no advantage is to be given to the
Papists in the point of Justification. To say that the last sentence of
judgment shall declare to Men and Angels that the Elect were justified in this
life by faith in him, is according to the voice of the Word. But to say that
they shall be then fully Justified, as if their Justification had not been
before completed, is to out-throw the Bar two foot beyond the Papists for the
maintenance of their self-justifying, and to speak more for them then they had
wit, or gracelesnesse to speak for themselves.

Hence it is that in the beginning of his Explication, page 183. he forbears to
mention other distinctions which are common in others, and may be found in Mr.
Bradshaw, Mr. John Goodwin, and Alstedius, because (says he) they are not so
necessary and pertinent to my purposed scope, which is to destroy Justification
by Grace, and erect in place thereof Justification by Works. It is a
superlative praise that he gives these men (how well deserved by some of them I
know not) that they are traveling another way from him, their faces are toward
Jerusalem, and he cannot obtain a word of direction from them, but must trust
to his own Compass to guide him to Rome.

What he has more in the Explication, is but the interpretation of his own
dream: And I have not superstition enough to keep me awaked, and attentive to
dreams, and their interpretation.

Neither is there any thing else in his 38 Thesis, and its Explication, but a
further forming of the same Chimaera* and notional Nothing, created out of his
brain in the former Position, and its Explication. Or if there be any thing
besides, it has been examined in the precedent Chapter.

With no less silence might I also pass by the 39 Thesis, and its
Explication, as being of the same nature with the former; saving that there are
two things that we may glance our consideration upon, before we pass further,
lest that we should seem to look aside from any thing that has an appearance
of weight and strength in it to confirm his doctrine, of a Justification, or
pardon of sin in sentence of Judgment, contradistinct from that which he
makes to consist in Title of Law. To make evident, that besides the
Justification here, there shall be another Justification in the day of
Judgment, he adds these two things unto what he had before said.

1. An explication of the form of future Justification, and Pardon.

2. Another Text of Scripture, besides the former, to evince it. The former he
has in these words of that his Thesis, That it shall be an acquitting of the
sinner at Gods public Bar.

B. From the accusation and condemnation of the Law pleaded against him by
Satan. For page 189. in the Explic. the accusation of his guilt will be managed
against him by Satan hereafter, from which accusation he shall be then
acquitted. Who is there now that can doubt of a Justification after this life,
when he has heard so graphicall a description of it? But how came Satan and
Mr. Baxter to be of so great acquaintance, that either shall know the others
purpose about the Judgment to come? I had thought the Devil had made known
only to his friends, not to his adversaries, what he means to do to morrow,
much less what he means to do in the day of Judgment. I should have
conjectured that he is more taken up with the horror of torments that he shall
suffer, then with the thought of further actings in that terrible day. Neither
did I until now find that Satan should be an accuser of others, having not
what to say for the defense of himself, being accused by others, as the author
of their sin and misery in the day of Judgment. Neither can I find yet that
the Scripture teaches any such thing, that Mr. Baxter should be able to say,
he has received from the Lord what he does here discover to us. It must be
from some Apocrypha's, or out of the left side of the Romish Legend that he
has borrowed this doctrine, where I shall leave him to dig out more traditions
to maintain his bold assertions, that have no pillarage from Scripture to
sustain them.

The latter, vizt. the Text of Scripture which he alleges to the same end we
have in the beginning of the Explication thus.

B. There is also a twofold pardon, as well as a twofold Justification, one in
Law, the other in sentence of Judgment. So Act. 3. 19. Repent, that your sins
may be blotted out when the time of Refreshing comes, etc. Lo here a
Justification, or pardon of sin, in, or after our glorification begun. But Mr.
Baxter knows that Erasmus, and the old translation otherwise render this Text,
making the latter clause thereof Ecliptic, or unperfect, which is thus to be
supplied, Repent etc. that your sins being blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come forth from the presence of God, [What then? we must
supply] Ye may have your part in the eternal refreshing and joy: This rendering
of the Text even the most solid Expositors that follow the other reprove not,
but speak honorably of it; much more those that take it up. And if we so
understand the Text, it has no show of affirming a forgiveness of sin, but
glorification only after the judgment day. Yea I have found none, until
Beza's new Translation of the Testament, that otherwise understood the text, or
since this translation that has reprehended the former as faulty, but all both
before and since making that the sense of it. Yea the word (...), which our
Translation renders [ when] both Beza and all the Orthodox Expositors render fo
(...), after; thus reading the Text; [not when, but] after the times of
refreshing shall come. And this Mr. Baxter will not deny to be the proper
meaning of the phrase. And will he notwithstanding say that the times of
refreshing, that is, of everlasting joy, come first, and then the forgiveness
of sin follows? Mr. Baxter is not ignorant that the word [(...)] in the
original may be as properly rendered [ have, or are come] as [ shall come] And
so many learned Translators and Expositors of this Text have understood it,
viz. of Christ's first coming in the flesh. And then without any supplement the
Text is full in it self, and runs thus; Repent, etc. that your sins may be
blotted out, seeing that the times of refreshing are come forth from the
presence of God. Let Mr. Baxter cite any one either Scripture, or Greek Writer,
in which [(...)] signifies [ when] otherwise I cannot see the least ground
upon which he can blame this, or uphold that Translation which he takes up.

3. The translation which a learned and godly friend gives, rendering the
[(...)] [that] (...), i. e. to this end that, bears great force with me, as
best agreeing with the constant use of the Scripture. And so the Text is thus
to be read, Repent, etc. that your sins may be blotted out (and that the times
of refreshing may come, etc. (upon you.) In this sense is (...) taken, Mat. 6.
5. Lu. 2. 35. Act. 15. 17. Romans 34.

In which soever of all these senses the words be taken, this Scripture favors
not at all Mr. Bax. neither has his second justification or pardon in the day
of judgment any patronage from it.

Yea the vanity of this distinction of pardon and justification, into that which
is in Title of Law, an^ that which is in sentence of judgment, this
declarative, that constitutive, is evident to as many as understand evidences.
For the whole tenor of scriptures which speaks of the last judgment, tends
to manifest it to be a pronouncing of eternal glory to the Saints, because
they were justified and before pardoned, perfectly righteous, in that sin was
not imputed to them in this life, not a pronouncing of pardon to them that they
may be thereby received into glory. Let there be any Scripture produced to
evince the contrary. Or why will Master Baxter have the sentence of the judge
and Savior in the last day called a declarative justification and pardon? To
whom shall this his sentence declare it? to God? He knows who are his, and
whom he has justified and pardoned in himself, and through Christ before the
World was made, therefore needs no such declaration. To themselves? They had in
this life the word of the Gospel declaring, the truth of Faith evidencing, and
the spirit of grace witnessing it to them; and whether at the very instant they
shall be affirmed to have come in spirit from the flames of Purgatory, or from
under the Altar in Heaven to reassume their bodies (for Master Baxter keeps
himself reserved in this treatise what he thinks thereof) yet their separation
from the reprobates has enough declared them to be justified; so that they
need no^ any further declaration to be made therein to themselves.

Or lastly to the World? This might be somewhat useful to the World, and to
themselves while they were in the World: but is now utterly useless, when they
shall no more return to the World. Neither is there need of a voice to declare
it to the World, where their instantaneous rapture up to Christ in the air; to
sit with Christ in judging the World, shall fully enough demonstrate it. And no
more does this Scripture uphold this Justification, as in other terms he
proposed it, calling it Actual, as distinct from that which he terms virtuall.
All these are but windy notions, to fill up the dictionary of his distinctions
which have no footing in the word. And when all these are fardled together,
they will quickly be consumed with the fire of Gods jealousy, and little steed
Master Baxter to dispute out his justification by works in the day of judgment.

No less vaporous is that which he has, These. 40. and in its Explication,
where he distinguishes most learnedly between a bar, and the bar, between a
Wooden and an Iron Bar, between a Bar, and a Bar of judgment, a primary and
secondary bar, a direct and a Consequential Bar, and all with such sagacity and
profoundnesse, as passes all the wisdom of the Holy Ghost in the scriptures
to make out unto us. pa. 190, 191, 192, 193.

B. These. 40. When Scripture speaks of Justification by Faith, it is to be
understood primarily and directly of justification in Law title, and at the bar
of Gods public judgment, and but secondarily and consequentially of
Justification at the bar of Gods secret judgment, or at the bar of Conscience,
or [at the bar] of the World. And in the explication he disputes about

B. The Forum Dei, and the Forum Conscientiae, the Bar of God, and the Bar of
Conscience; the Bar of God, and the Bar of the World; the Bar of Gods secret
judgment, and the Bar of his public judgment; the Bar in heaven before the
Angels, contradistinct, I suppose, to the Bar in hell before the Devils. At
last he gallantly gathers together all these dispersed bars, justifying and
unjustifying, pardoning and condemning us, in some sense at all the bars, and
in several senses at several bars, according as his wit and Sophistry does
give him utterance.

And to what purpose is all this, but to tickle witty, wanton, and
sophistically fantastical brains, flattering them off from the simplicity,
plainness, and soundness of the Gopsell into a disputative, fangled, and
wordy formality of religion, having the spirit and power of Conscience, and the
word that should regulate it, enervate and evapored in to mere froth and
bubbles, by this questionary, distinctionary, and colorative show of learning.
In the mean while, all these bars are by the subtlety of this Artificer made
use of, to bar out the poor and simple for whom Christ has dyed, from the due
comfort of their justification, obscuring to them the Doctrine of grace,
sending them from Bar to Bar for pardon and peace, and leaving them unsettled,
and hovering to their very dying day, yea, till they come to the bar of Christ
at the judgment day, where if they be followers of this man's Doctrine, they
shall appear no less uncertainly and tremblingly before the great judge than
the reprobate men and Devils. For until then all the former bars (according
to Master Baxter) minister no absolute pardon or acquittance to any soul, so
free from the Curse, but that we are left under the curse; acquit
conditionally, that is, leave us fast bound to hell as it found us; loose the
finger to day, that it may bind us up hand and foot to morrow. Such and so
pretiou^ Gospel does this learned Scribe draw out of his Treasury among his
Keder minsterians, as by that we have already seen, has been in part
manifested; and by that which follows in this Treatise will more fully appear.

When contrary to all this Sophistical winding, circling and labyrinthicall
Mazes, the Scripture speaking of Justification and condemnation after the tenor
of the Covenants, makes only two Bars of judgment, the Bar of justice
according to the Law, and the Bar of grace or Mercy-seat, according to the
Tenor of the Gospel or New Covenant: affirming all that are judged at the one
condemned, and all at the other justified. That as soon as we are convicted of
death, and vengeance only due to us at the former, we are carried out in the
Spirit of Christ through the consecrated way of his purifying blood, to seek
remission of sins at the latter, the Throne of grace; the all gracious
Father, from the bar of grace pronounces to our consciences peace, and pardon,
and joy which shall never be taken from us. This is the sole and allsufficient
Justification which the Scripture speaks of, speaking properly of
justification. The subject has heaped up Treasons against his Prince; For this
cause the Law apprehends and arraigns him. The Princes Son pittieth and
mediateth, and by Mediation obtaines a pardon from the Prince, and brings it
under hand and seal, puts it into his hand for life, while standing at the
Princes Law bar, he was by Law condemned, yea condemned himself. The pardon
thus freely given, he cannot but gratefully embrace. He questions not, none can
question that finds him guilty in Law, from what bar the pardon came. He was
a dead man in Law. It must therefore needs be from free Grace, mere Mercy that
the pardon came. The receiver acknowledges it, pleads only the grace of the
pardoner, not any righteousness of his facts, or innocence in the things
whereof he is accused, or dese^ts of former service, or purposes of future
loyalty, for his life. Such is the justification which the Gospel holds forth.
The multiplication of Bars which Master Baxter makes, at which ^his New
Covenant justification is transacted; is a confection of fancied Bears, Bulls,
and Bubbles, to distract poor Souls from the plain way, and sound Comfort of
Justification.

B. Thesis 41. pa. 194.

That saying of our Divines, [that justification is perfected at first, and
admits of no degrees] must be understood thus, That each of those Acts which we
call justification, are in their own kind perfect at once, and that our
Righteousness is perfect, and admits of no degrees. But yet as the former Acts
called, Justification, do not fully and in all respects, procure our freedom so
they may be said to be imperfect, and but degrees to our full and perfect
Justification at the last judgment.

Here Master Baxter advances himself not so much as Doctor and Moderator, as
Popelike to command and impose a sense, yea his sense, upon that which the
Divines in general of all the Churches have said, That saying [ that
Justification is perfected at first, and admits not of degrees] must be
understood thus: etc. very Magisterially at the best; for what if not all of
them, yea none of them meant so, would be so understood? This nothing hinders,
though they will not, yet they must be thus understood. What necessity or
authority lies upon them and their writings, that they (will they, nill they)
must be understood, or upon us, that although we know them to mean otherwise,
yet we must so understand them? No other power or reason from Heaven or Earth
is here specified, besides Master Baxters placitum, his pleasure, he so
defines, so determines. How fair does he bid for Peter's Chair, and Golden
Pantofle?

Jupiter in caelis, Caesar regit omnia terris. What authority the Pope
challenges over all the Canonical Scriptures, and the penmen thereof, the
same does Master Baxter over the Ecclesiastical writings, and the Authors
thereof. It is but one step higher to the Triple Crown. But ipse dixit, and we
must be silent, else Master Baxter will be angry, and crown us with the fools
Cappe, and put upon us the Ignoramus and Dulman.

Wel^, how must they then be understood? viz. that each of those Acts (says
he) which We call Justification, are in their own kind perfect at once, and
that our Righteousness is perfect, and admits not of degrees.

H^re I crave leave of the Magister, to put some few qu^stions.

1. Whom he means by the word [Wee] when he says, which we call
justification? does he not mean Chiefly, yea only himself? if not, let him
name any of the Divines which deny against the Papists, the Magis and minus, or
degrees of Justification, but denies also against the same Papists, the twofold
justification, and maintains against their Sophisms, justification to be but
one, one only justification? I acknowledge my self not to be, that I am not
ambitious to be Librorum helluo, I have in sacred Doctrines but one Master. Yet
as many of our Divines as I have read, disclaim and detest this twofold
justification, not only as a Popish, but also as a new and Jesuiticall
invention, devised for the perverting and subverting of that justification
which is by grace. That this man therefore takes upon him to affix his Index
expurgatorius, not to their words, but to their meaning, that they must be
understood in another sense than they meant, because he will so have it, is not
only to usurp to himself a power above the Pope, but above God himself also,
who does not, cannot make that which was not to have been the meaning of any
man in what he has said.

2. When he says they must be thus understood, I demand what the necessity is,
either simple and absolute, or respective and secundum quid? a Necessitas
praecepti. or Necessitas Medij. If simple, and the duty enjoined by some
precept, where is that precept of God or man to force the understanding to
believe a lie? if respective, or in order to some end to which such a
misunderstanding subserveth as a mean; let us know what that end is, whether
good or evil? if evil, we must not do or think one evil, understand falsely
against understanding and Conscience, for the promoting of another evil. This
is worse than devilish, for he can say, video Meliora, -- Deteriora sequor Or
if good, their damnation is j^st that report (says the Apostle) we say, [much
more that would have us say] let us do evil that good may come thereof. To. 3.
8. Or must Master Baxters will or peremptory conclusion stand in stead of a
Divine precept to necessitate and determinate our understandings to a false
principle? Get thee behind us Satan, we own no such Masters.

3. When he says, we must understand Each of those Acts [i. e. Gods justifying
us first in title of Law, secondly in sentence of judgement] are in their own
kind perfect (not in the respect that either has to other, but that the
latter adds a perfection which was wanting in the form^r) I might demand
first, who besides the We in Master Baxters mouth has called the latter,
Justification? But of this already. 2 What new thing, as an increase or further
degree of Justification, does the latter Act add to the former? He
acknowledges that the former (which is the sole New Covenant Justification)
does acquit from Accusation and condemnation, These. 38. yea from all guilt and
obligation to punishment, pa. 189. and all this at once, not by degrees, as in
this These. 41. what new things, or farther degree does the latter feigned
justification add to this? Himself attributes no more to this which he calls
justification in Sentence of Judgment. This (says he) acquitteth from
Accusation and condemnation, These. 39. where now is the Magis here, or the
Minus there? the most Eagle and L^ncean eye cannot discern it in the
substantialls, we must therefore seek it in the circumstantialls of
justification. This he seems to place in two things.

1. The former only in Title of Law, the latter in sentence of judgment at the
bar.

2. The former to be from the accusation and condemnation of the Law simply,
the latter from the same accusation and condemnation pleaded by Satan. This is
the whole difference which he puts, as may be seen by comparing the 38, and
39 Theses together. To the first, I demand whether the Justification in this
life be not an acquitting by sentence of judgment at the bar? Whether it be
not a sentence of absolution pronounced to the soul and conscience of a sinner
drawn to Gods bar, and there impleaded, and confessing it self guilty of sin,
and of condemnation? Who was there ever of them whom Mr. Baxter vouchsafes to
call our Divines, that held otherwise? Where then is the difference? Yes, says
Mr. Baxter, this latter is at the public bar. I answer, so is the former even
that bar of God, at which all that ever have been, are, or shall be justified,
have, and shall have the sentence of Justification pronounced to them.

Object. But this latter shall be at the great and grand general Assizes,
before all the host of heaven, earth, and hell; whereas the former was but
between God and the soul.

Sol. This is nothing else but a public* declaration to the world, what God
had before granted to the soul; which indeed in judicatures of men, which are
mutable, and deny often in public what they had before acted in secret, may be
of some consequence to him that is so publicly acquitted; but in respect of
Gods judgment, who cannot be inconsistent with himself, and whose acts in
secret are as unreversible as those in public, here is nothing added to the
bulk of justification, nor any thing (but the solemnity of the manifestation of
it after the man is before completely justified) to the circumstances thereof.

To the second I have spoken before, that Satan's managing of the accusation and
condemnation of the Law is more properly, if not only in this life, and let
Mr. Baxter prove (if he can) any such accusation that he shall manage against
us in the day of judgment: If he can prove it, the thing proved proves no
addition or increase which shall be then made to our present justification,
because here also we are acquitted against all accusations pleaded by Satan. If
he prove it not, then there is in this respect a magis in the circumstance of
justification here, beyond that imaginary justification in the day of judgment.

4. When he adds, that we must understand our Divines affirming our
Justification to be perfect at first, and to admit of no degrees, that they
mean our Righteousness is perfect, and admits not of degrees, I demand which
righteousness himself means? that which he calls our Legal, or that which he
calls our Evangelical righteousness? or both? If the first, Christ made
Righteousness to us, this is indeed the righteousness, the whole, and sole
righteousness, the Gospel righteousness which we have given to us unto
Justification, a righteousness without us, which admits not of degrees: And
this righteousness is fully given us in this life, and not reserved to be given
us in the day of Judgment. This [ must] we are content Mr. Baxter should put
upon our understandings, that in this sense we must understand our Divines. But
this hews in pieces what Master Baxter adds in this Thesis, making the
Justification here unperfect, and to have but degrees toward our full and
perfect Justification at the last judgment; for if so, the imperfection here,
and the perfection there must be either in the righteousness given (as I
conceive) or in the act of giving the righteousness. Not the former, for
Christ, whole Christ (according to Mr. Baxter) is the righteousness given in
this life. Neither will he, I suppose, affirm that we shall have a doubled
Christ, or two Christ's given us for righteousness at the last judgment: Nor
the latter; For I will not entertain so slanderous a thought of Mr. Baxter, to
think he will say, that God gives Christ but unperfectly and seemingly here,
but there perfectly, and really: Nay he gives Christ perfectly and really
here; There he will but own and manifest his former gift, and grant.

Object. But the former acts of Justification do not forthwith and fully bring
a total freedom, and glorification after them, as does this last at the last
judgment.

Sol. This is not ad idem. Mr. Baxter here flirts from the question, which is
of Justification it self, to the consequents, and effects of justification,
which are total freedom from inherent sin, and from all sorrow,
glorification, and in truth also the sentence of life at the last judgment,
which is not another justification, but the fruit and effect of our present
justification. The supreme power of the Nation grants to Mr. Baxter great
immunities, and a large demeans to be entered upon at the next general Assizes
for the County, and withal appoints the Judge of the Assizes openly to
proclaim it. The Judge does according to his commission, and Mr. Baxter takes
possession, by the virtue of the aforesaid grant: will he say the former grant
was unperfect in comparison of the Judges proclamation at the Assizes, because
it put him not into the present possession? are not as well the Judges
proclamation, as his entry, the effects of the former grant? But how far, and
in what respects the possession of the effects of justification is suspended,
has been before examined. I^ he mea^s that which he calls our Evangelical
righteousness, consisting in Faith, and Gospel obedience, These. 20. that we
must understand this righteousness to be perfected at once, and not to admit of
degrees, this were totally to confute, and confound himself in wha^ he has
written, and all the Papists his darlings in what they have written about the
point of justification; and would put the lie upon most passages that remain to
be examined in these his Aphorisms. This therefore I cannot conjecture to be
his meaning. I would he could as well discharge himself of doubleness as of
silliness, and simplicity.

In the 42 Thesis he seems to have had a purpose to have brought somewhat
against that which they, whom he calls [ our Divines] do assert of the
perfecting of Justification at once, in the due and proper sense of their own
meaning; and to yield forth some show of reason, that (contrary to their
assertion) Justification begun admits of many steps and degrees one after
another tending to the perfecting thereof. To this end he brings in a whole
legend of stairs mounting up from the bottom to the top of Justification. A
sack full of Heterogeneous bugbears, like that army of Solomon whereof Mahomet
speaks in his Alcoran, consisting of men, beasts, angels, devils, creeping,
flying, swiming, crawling, and hopping creatures, all marching together in so
comely and harmonious order as confusion and ataxie can devise: with such an
army comes Master Baxter here against our Divines, with a catalogue of God and
Christ justifying, Men justifying, Angels justifying, self justifying, acts
justifying, passions justifying, relations justifying, qualities justifying:
One taking it from another hand, and each amending what the other had left
defective; so that at last the sinner so shifted from hand to hand, after many
hundreds, perhaps thousands of years, is at length fully justified; or if he be
a piece of knotty timber, perhaps comes not at last to be fully justified. I
shall leave the Reader to view the Aphorism in Mr. Baxters book; I hold it not
worthy the transcribing; so i^ seems does Mr. Baxter too; for reviewing his
company, of the whole number, which are no less then ten, he retains only
two, viz. Justification in title of Law, and that in sentence of judgment,
about which his former Thesis was occupant, disbanding all the rest, and so
leaving the cause as raw and unconfirmed as he found it.

CHAP. XXIV.
Whether Justification be, and remains to be conditional, and that to believers
during life, and the justified, and pardoned may be unjustified, and unpardoned
again? Also whether, and in what sense, and respects, there may be remission of
sins before they be committed?

These. 43. page 196. B. The Justification which we have in Christ's own
justification is but conditional as to the particular offenders, and none can
lay claim to it until he have performed the conditions; nor shall any be
personally justified till then. Even the Elect remain personally unjustified,
for all their conditional justification in Christ, till they do b^leeve.

These. 44. Men that are but thus conditionally pardoned, and justified, may be
unpardoned and unjustified again, for their nonperformance of the conditions,
and all the debt so forgiven be required at their hands. And all this without
any change in God, or in his Laws. See Ball of the Covenant, page 240.

These. 45. page 198. Yea in case the justified by Faith should cease believing,
the Scripture would pronounce them unjust again, and yet without any change in
God or Scripture, but only in themselves: Because their Justification does
continue conditional as long as they live here. The Scripture does justify no
man by name, but all believers as such. Therefore if they should cease to be
believers, they would cease to be justified.

I join together these three Aphorisms, partly because Mr. Baxter does very
little sever them by the interposition of very short Explications, which might
have been as well spared as used, for any light they give to his Aphorisms. But
principally because they all treat upon one, and the same Argument, conditional
Justification.

And here I could have desired that he had treated more Argumentatively, and
less Magisterially. That he had stated the questions which he here determines
into Conclusions, and by the best Arguments he could, have assayed to prove his
assertions, which he does here nakedly, and peremptorily lay down only upon his
own bare authority to be taken up, as if it were holy, and unerring. He could
not have wanted help to have handled these points more controversally, having
the Papists on the one hand, and Arminians on the others, suggesting matter,
and arguments to him, it being their, not Christ's cause and doctrine, which he
bids, and teaches here to stand alone; so that in case he had met with a
learned adversary that had driven him out of this field, he might have been
sure to have been succored with a whole brigade of these Sophisters, that
would either have laid in the place, or recovered the field for him again. But
we must give leave to a man that is all wisdom, sometimes for his recreation
to be servant to his will: And because we find him not here what we expected,
we must take him as he offers himself -- Stet pro ratione voluntas. Only I
think it fit to save the labor to answer Arguments, when he refuses to make
it his task to bring them: Bare negations of Conclusions being the best way of
answering, where they are peremptorily, and fastuously posited, without any
premissed reasons from whence to draw them, or following arguments to back
them. In matters of Faith asserted, not proved, Jack Straws negation being of
equal validity to John Scotus his affirmation; only we shall view his words,
to see what show of reason there may be found in them.

In the Explication of the first of these three Positions, vizt. the 43. He
tells us, This needs not explication. He saw it, and had acquaintance with it
while it was yet but a notion in his brain, therefore needs not any spectacles
to clear up unto him his own formed of spring; but for my part, such is my
dullness, that whether I seek for his meaning in some part of the Position, or
for truth in the rest, I profess my self unable to understand without an
interpreter. Let his words be not only glanced over, but well considered, I
might think there may be the like, though not so great an incapacity in
another brain, as in mine.

The Justification (says he) which we have in Christ's own Justification, is
but conditional as to the particular offenders. Let the acute wit here inform
my stupidness what he means by the Justification which we have in Christ's own
Justification? What is Christ's own justification? or what the justification
which we have in Christ's own justification? If we understand not what the
subject of a proposition is, we cannot judge at all of the truth of the
proposition, and do in vain enquire into the predicate. We can go no further
understandingly in this Thesis until we understand this, of which all the
rest speaks. Christ's own justification may be understood actively or
passively: For the justification by which he justifies others, or that by
which God has justified him. If Mr. Baxter had meant the former, I conceive he
would have said plainly (as he does every where else) Justification, without
adding to it Christ's, or Christ's own, which seems to be used to distinguish
here between the justification here spoken of, and the common Justification
whereof he treats throughout this Tractate. If in the latter sense, it may
not suddenly appear, how possibly we can be justified in Christ's own
justification. Neither can Christ's own justification properly taken, be
possibly made our justification: For all will apprehend (without help) by
Christ's own justification, the justification proper to his person, which none
had, or have in common with him. Yet I conceive Mr. Baxter means here Christ's
passive justification, Gods justifying of Christ; and that these words here do
relate to the words which he has within the 4 number of the foregoing, or 42
Thesis, where he says [4. His own Justification as the public person at his
resurrection.] which is not enough properly called Christ's own, because it is
not the justification of Christ as personally alone, but as mystically
considered.

Taking this to be his meaning, I shall first speak something of the meaning of
the phrase, and then examine the truth of the Position. 1. For the meaning of
the phrase; As the first Adam sustained the office of a public person in
relation to that Commandment of not eating of the fruit of the tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, so that if he had obeyed we had all lived, and been
justified in him; but in his disobedience we all sinned, and were condemned in
him: So also Christ, the second Adam, in making satisfaction to Gods justice
upon the cross sustained the office of a public person, stood in the room of
all the Elect, bare their sins as imputed to him, so that they all in him did
their law, were in him crucified, dead, and buried, and suffered the pains of
hell it self. And as he was a public person in his suffering, so also was he
in his resurrection; having paid the utmost farthing of our debt, he rose to
receive a full acquittance, or justification in his own, and our names for all
the sins for which, and all the vengeance which he had suffered for us, and
we in him. The justification and acquittance then given him, and to us in his
name by the Father, is that which (out of doubt) Mr. Baxter calls Christ's own
justification, yet was not his own so, but that it was every elect persons in
him.

Having the meaning of the phrase, let us now enquire into the truth, or
falsehood of the Position. The Justification (says he) which we have in
Christ's own Justification, is but conditional as to the particular offenders,
and none can lay claim to it till he have performed the conditions, nor shall
any be personally justified till then: Even the Elect, etc. He says much, and
audaciously (as all may see) but how strongly does he prove it? For
confirmation (says he in the Explic.) there is enough said under the 15, 18,
19, 20 Positions before.) And I answer, how valid and pertinent to his purpose
that Enough which he there said is, I there examined: And because he brings
here no new reasons, I may justly pass it by without giving any further answer.

Only it shall not be impertinent to take notice how ambiguously he lays
down every clause of this Position, to corrupt with an evil sense whom he
can, and to evade with the pretext of a good meaning where he cannot deceive,
if espied, and questioned.

1. When he says this Justification is conditional as to the particular
offenders, and none can lay claim, etc. Though by the whole frame of this his
Treatise, it is enough evident that he means what he speaks in the worst sense;
yet his words leave it here doubtful, whether he means that our Justification
which we have in Christ's justification be conditional* as Christ has received
it in his, or our names; or as he having received it for us, does offer it to
particular offenders upon conditions, upon the performance whereof they shall
have it, with the fruit, and comfort thereof declared, and evidenced to their
own souls. Though the former be his sense, yet knowing with what arguments
he may be encountered; That there was an absolute, and not a conditional
payment made* to which not a conditional, but an absolute discharge is due.
That Christ as a public person standing in our stead, received the same
justification for himself and us, from all the sins that had been imputed
both to him and us: but that he received for himself not a conditional, but an
absolute Justification; therefore for us also. That if particular offenders be
but conditionally justified in Christ, then are they not at all actually, and
really justified in Christ, and so the fruit of Christ's death being suspended,
upon conditions, may be none at all, in case none perform the conditions. That
it is against the stream of the Gospel, which affirms, that even upon the cross
he has cancelled, or blotted out the handwriting, spoiled the principalities
and powers, Col. 2. 14, 15. redeemed us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13.
purged the conscience from dead works, by his blood, Heb. 9. 13, 14. That God
was in Christ reconciling the world (while the world) to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
and made us accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. And all this, before we had a
being personally, therefore before we performed any conditions. Knowing (I say)
how he might be overwhelmed with arguments from the Scriptures by our Divines,
as he has read far more copiously then I have time here to particularize, in
their works against the Papists and Arminians, and might have been more pressed
and multiplied against himself; and that Truth is not only unconquerable, but
victorious: To prevent the inconvenience, he leaves a hole by which to escape,
viz. He meant not thus: But that our Justification is conditional as to our
claim of right therein, we are not personally justified, have not our
forgiveness declared, and evidenced to our own consciences till we perform the
conditions. Such sincerity and integrity is there in Mr. Baxters doctrines.

2. When he says, None can lay claim to Justification until he have performed
the conditions, nor shall be personally justified till then, he leaves it
ambiguous whether he mean till his faith, obedience, and good works (which with
him are the conditions) be in fieri, or else in factum esse, be begun, or else
finished, and perfected, in doing, or else fully done. His phrase directly
points out the latter, and the whole stream of his disputations in this Book
concurs with it. Neither is Mr. Baxter such an A, B, C, darian that he need to
be taught to speak Grammatically, and to deliver in proper terms his own
dictates, that we should think him to speak more, or less then he means,
saving when he will do so for his own advantage. Unless therefore he meant in
the latter sense, and would be so understood, he would give no advantage by
his words to any so to understand him. This being then his meaning, he leaves
us yet in doubt whether he joins with the Papists here, in implying that it is
possible to attain perfection of righteousness, and so to have fully performed
all obedience in this life, thereby meriting Justification, so winning it at
the hardest, before he wear it, as we have found him in, and under his 23, 24,
26, 27, Theses, maintaining enough fully behind the curtain; or else with the
Arminians, in holding that no man is justified in this life, and so confounding
Justification and Glorification either with the other, an assertion worse then
Popish, wholly contradicting the whole ^enor of the Gospel, as Romans 4. 10.
Abraham was justified while yet uncircumcised. Romans 5. being now justified, now
reconciled, ver. 9, 10. So Romans 8. 30. Ephesians. 1. 7. Yea not to stay
particularizing the whole sum of the Gospel, but because both Papists and
Arminians are his cabinet friends, that he might please both, and offend
neither, it suffices him to show himself an adversary to the truth, wherein he
has them both confederates with him, and either with the other; it being no
difficulty for him to close with both that differ but in words a little, but
are one in substance, like Sampsons Foxes hung together by the tails in a
firebrand, though their faces look several ways.

3. I might no less discover his subtilty in that ambiguous term of Personal
Justification, as he opposes it to Conditional Justification in Christ, how
many senses it may bear, and scarce ever a good one; yet in the ambiguity of
the phrase, a way left him to evade.

The 44 Thesis is ridiculous to all that desire to speak after the wisdom of
God, and not after the fallacies of men that are mere foolishness with God.
Men that are but thus conditionally pardoned and justified, may be unpardoned
and unjustified again, etc. ut supra. In this at last Master Baxter is not to
be deprived of his due praise; that he makes his foundation and building to
consist of homogeneous Materials: an imaginary foundation, and a fantastical
building. It is as much as if he had said, A fancied something made up of
nothing, may without the spilling of much blood or sweat, be resolved into
nothing again. The Cat in the Fable, which Venus turned into a fair Virgin,
because she would not leave to hunt mice, was quickly reformed into a Cat
again. If one dream make Master Baxter a Holy Pope, the next dream may unpope
and unhallow him again. And men that were but conditionally justified, may be
unjustified again, and be altogether as well justified while unjustified, as
when conditionally justified, and as fully pardoned while unpardoned, as when
conditionally pardoned; and all the debt as fully required at their hands when
it is conditionally forgiven, as when it is unforgiven again. And all this
without any change in God, or in his laws. For all these are not Gods, but
Master Baxters, and his Arminians, and Jesuits justifications, and
Non-Justifications pardonings and unpardonings, forgiving debts and requiring
them again. God is unchangable, His gifts and calling without Repentance. Romans
11. 29. But these are Protei and Chamelions, (specially when the change is from
evil to worse) and would feign to themselves and us a God like to themselves,
that should be a changeable God, no God.

It behoved Master Baxter to have proved from Scriptures this Popish Arminian
Doctrine of conditional justifying, and unjustifying, etc. from the word, that
it might appear to us that the Oracles of God, and not the Sophistry of men had
drawn him into this Topsie turnie tattle, rather than Doctrine of
justification. Not doing this, his breath smells of a Pope in his belly; That
his aim is to make the word of God to strike sail to the Sophisms of the
Papists and Arminians, and not these to the word. For so he proceeds in the
next, which is the 45 Thesis in their language.

B. Yea in Case the justified by faith should cease believing, the Scripture
would pronounce them unjust again, etc. because their Justification does
continue conditional as long as they live here, etc. if they should cease to be
believers, they would cease to be justified. If the Heavens fall, we shall need
no hobbies to catch larkes. If Master Baxter cease to be a man, he will cease
to be an Impostour. They are suppositions of things possible, or impossible,
which in both these his Theses he makes: if of possibles, why does he not
prove them? if of impossibles, what can he aim at but the deceiving of them
that are made to be taken, and the destroying of the peace of tender and
infirm consciences? He turns us over in the former position to Ball of the
Covenant. I have it not. But if there he be the same Ball with Ball of Faith,
there is no more agreement between Ball and Bax* than betwixt Christ and
Belial. I heard indeed long since, that this Master Ball seeing
fashionablenesse and formality tending somewhat to the Popish Outsidenesse in
Religion was the way to preferment, had before his death somewhat declined. But
unless I saw grounds for such a thought I cannot entertain it, so great an
estimation both of his ableness and holiness has his Treatise of Faith left
in me. But if otherwise, it is not unnatural to a Ball to roll, especially
down the hill. And we halt not between two opinions, we have the Lord, and not
Baal for our God.

But Master Baxter cannot put upon us this bull, that he should with a trick of
the hand beguile us into an opinion, that in this Doctrine he is a follower of
Baal. Nay first his popish Schoolmen and Jesuits have taught him, and then
Arminius, and his followers have polished him; so that in these two Theses he
does but speak parat-like, even word for word after these his Masters; as I
could (if there were need) allege cut of the Authors whom he follows. Yea
further, the more ancient Schoolmen, and the most learned and Metaphysicall
among the Jesuits, blow off as basely derogatory from the perfection of Gods
Nature, the frothy positions which he here lays down as Articles of Faith,
which he does not at all apply himself to prove, as if they were
unquestionable because his quill has dropped them.

He sees his Doctrine in these 2 Theses, such as either has nothing but words
in it, or if any thing real, such as tends to the advancing of the Popish
and Arminian Doctrines of Universal Redemption, Freewill, falling from Grace,
etc. Therefore entreats his reader [in the Explication] to suspend his
judgment till another Tractate of his about universal Redemption come forth,
which in the Postscript to these Aphorisms he tells us he is not certain whether
it will be ever; and in his Append. page 164. seems to conclude that it will be
never: And that, if I mistake not, is upon Saint Justifications day, according
to the Baxterian account. And in case it bring no better savor of Christ with
it then this his Tractate, better then, then sooner. To which time also if he
had suspended the publication of this book, I doubt not he might have obtained
more then a conditional Justification from the guilt of such a suspension.

And For that which intimates the falling away of the justified, (says he) he
speaks only upon supposition, etc. but does believe that the justified by
Faith never do, nor shall fall away. ibid. Explic. A larger profession in
respect to this Article of his Creed, then I expected from him, if it be single
and has no flaw of rottenness and deceit in it. But when we have found him
calling the sentence of judgment in the last day, justification by Faith, as
well as that which is in this life in title of Law, (as he terms it) page 185.
and makes the justification in this life to be merely conditional, and
consequently either null or reversible, in these 44, and 45 These. what can we
think can be his meaning, when he says, I believe that the justified by faith
never do, or shall fall away; but this, that they that are sentenced once to
life in the day of judgment, and already glorified, neither do, nor shall
fall away. And yet for him that holds our justification to be still but
conditional until the day of judgment, it would (I think) be a harder task to
prove that it remains not conditional after the day of judgment, then for the
truly Orthodox in this point to prove it to be in this life absolute and
unconditional. Were I the man that were fit to undertake such a dispute, I
should (as I conceive) have a great advantage against such an adversary; for
most of the arguments which he should bring to prove the absoluteness and
immutability of justification in the Kingdom of glory, would strengthen against
himself the same absoluteness and immutability of justification in the Kingdom
of grace. And almost all that he should be able to answer for the eluding of my
arguments against absolute justification above, would strengthen me to answer
his arguments against absolute justification here. But I hold it altogether
unproper to make so holy a thing the subject of ludicrous exercitations. The
Scripture is as full to prove the Saints perseverance in grace here, as their
perseverance in glory above, and as possible is the falling from the latter as
from the former.

Now before I wholly pass from these positions of Mr. Baxter, to make way for
the examination of other Positions of his which I shall annex to these in this
Chapter, because of the near affinity of their matter with that which is
contained in these: I shall speak something in opposition to Mr. Baxters
universal conditional Justification in Christ, or (as Mr. Baxter terms it) in
Christ's own Justification.

First then, whatsoever sins, of whatsoever persons were imputed unto Christ,
and for which he has made full satisfaction to Gods Justice, these are no more
imputed, but forever remitted in Christ absolutely, and unconditionally to them
who were the committers thereof. But all the sins of all the elect, and of
them only, and not of the world, were imputed to Christ, and he has made
full satisfaction, etc. Therefore, etc. The proposition is clear, unless we
will pronounce God unjust: For if he should impute to the offender any one sin
which was imputed to Christ, and for which Christ has fully satisfied Gods
Justice, then should God be unjust in taking vengeance twice of the same sin,
once from Christ, and another time from the offender, contrary to the both
equity of his justice, and infallibility of his truth, in either of which it is
unpossible for God to fail. Or if any should say that their sins were but
conditionally imputed to Christ, and that he made but a conditional
satisfaction for them, this were totally to deny the truth, and reality of
Christ's sufferings. It was not a conditional, but absolute, and real
satisfaction that he made to divine Justice; they were real stripes, real and
absolute wounds, groans, torments, death-pangs, by which he satisfied Justice:
He was not conditionally, but verily made fin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. a Curse for
us, Gal. 3. 13. himself bare our sins in his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.
24. was wounded for our transgression, bruised for our iniquity, Isa. 53. 5.
When all this was done absolutely, and really, and so a real, and absolute
condition made, shall all this produce only a conditional, and not a real and
absolute justification in Christ to, and for them who in him have made absolute
satisfaction, so that themselves in themselves must make absolute satisfaction
again? This possibly may agree with Mr. Baxters Justice, but never with the
Justice of God. The assumption is thus proved, as to his bearing, and
satisfying for the sins of the Elect only, and not of the world. He suffered
not for such as we call Individua vaga, certain uncertain persons, himself not
knowing who they were, or should be. The High Priest, that typifyed him,
offered not his sacrifices at adventures for he knew not whom, but bare the
names of them for whom he offered, before the Lord, Exo. 28. 9, 10, 11, 12, 29.
And this was to be fulfilled in Christ their Antitype. I lay down my life for
the sheep, says he, and know my sheep. Joh. 10. 11, 14, 15. For the sheep
only, for them whom he knew to be his sheep, he laid down his life. And lest
any should think he speaks here only of his called, and not his elect ones,
he adds, Other sheep also I have which are not of this fold, i. e. of Israel;
but of the Gentiles, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice. They
are his sheep, and he lays down his life for them, to satisfy for their sins
before they were believing, before they were in being, and brings them home by
the voice of his Gospel afterward, ver. 16. But to the unbeleeving Jews he
says, Ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, ver. 26. First sheep
purged, and redeemed by the blood of the Shepherd, and then believers
afterward. And if not sheep first, then unbeleevers forever. Neither says he,
ye are not my sheep justified and reconciled by my death, because ye believe
not; but ye believe not because ye are not of my sheep, in the number of my
Elect and justified ones. Justification, absolute justification in Christ,
still goes before faith in the so justified. Again for them all, and only,
did Christ as our Priest offer himself in sacrifice, for whom as our Priest he
offered prayers to God when the offering of himself was at hand; but he so
offered his prayers, not for the world, but for them which God had given him,
i. e. the elect, Joh. 17. 9. So in this part the Assumption stands firm; on
the other part, that he bare and satisfied for all the sins of all the Elect,
is plain; The blood of Christ purges from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. by one
offering he has perfected forever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. When
it is said they are perfected forever, it is included that there remains not
one sin unsatisfied for. And this is the privilege of all the Elect, of all
the Sheep both in being, and in futurition, both within, and without the fold,
as before was manifested.

2. If Christ has purchased, and we receive in this life only an universal
conditional Justification: It will follow also that God has in himself
decreed before all time only such a justification to men; and consequently
that he neither loved, nor elected to life them that are saved more then the
damned: For the Son was in the bosom of the Father, therefore privy to his
secret will, to his very bosom counsels, came down from heaven not to
transgress, but to fulfill his will, Joh. 6. 38. and 4. 34. and 5. 30. was
faithful to him that appointed him, etc. H^b. 3. 2, 6. So that he acted in
time according to the will and decree of God before all time. But it is false
that God decreed only such an universal conditional justification to all,
not preferring in his love and el^ction those that shall be saved, before them
which shall be damned, as appears Act. 13. 48. Rom 8. 30. and 9. 15 -- to the
25. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7. Therefore it is false also that Christ has purchased
only, and we receive only an universal conditional Justification.

3. Upon as good grounds as Mr. Baxter does in the ensuing part of this
Treatise argue from salvation or glorification to justification, might I also
argue from justification to salvation, that if justification be universally
conditional, so is salvation or glorification also; that if one, then both run
upon these terms dum been se gesserit, if he believe and obey he shall be
justified and glorified, if not, neither shall be his protion. And when any is
justified and glorified, his perseverance in that state depends upon his
freewill, runs upon the same condition still, so long justified and glorified
as he is willing and obedient, if he cease to obey he shall be unjustifyed and
unglorifyed again. And thus all the fruits of Christ's death shall be rolled to
nothing, and Christ righteosunesse and glory shall be a conditional and
mutable righteousness and glory, to day in splendour, to morrow in darkness,
and himself become a conditional Savior, a conditional King, at one time
complete and sitting among his golden Candlesticks, in the midst of his
glorious Temple; at another unchristed, unkinged; a head without a body and
members, a Savior of nobodies, a King without subjects; some not at all
submitting to his golden scepter, the rest that have submitted revolting from
him, some from the kingdom of grace, some from the kingdom of glory, as Adam
from Paradise, the Angels from heaven, so that he shall be left alone, and his
sufferings and merits lose all their fruit by means of this conditional
justification: There is I confess no weight in this Argument as to the truly
Orthodox. But it holds as firm to Mr. Baxter as his Arguments can hold to us
about conditional justification in Christ's justification.

If he object, that the Saints in the kingdom of glory shall be so confirmed
that they shall not fall away.

I shall answer, so are the Saints also in the kingdom of grace, and are as
absolutely fixed therein, upon the truth, love and power of God in Christ, as
the triumphant Saints in the kingdom of glory. I doubt not to prove the one as
soundly as he can prove the other.

I cease further to enlarge my self in Arguments to this purpose. That which I
have said being (as I before mentioned) spoken, not so much to prove an
absolute, and to show the vanity of a conditional justification by Christ, as
to make way to that which comes after to be handled.

From the 45 then I pass to the 55 Thesis of Mr. Baxter, because whatsoever
there is in the interposed positions worthy of examination, either has been or
will come to be considered in a place more convenient. Only by the way we shall
take a short view of what he has in and under the 54 Thesis; it runs thus,
page 209.

B. Remissian, Justification and Reconciliation, do but restore the offender
into the same state of freedom and favor that he fell from, but adoption and
marriage union with Christ, do advance him far higher. Here Mr. Baxter gives me
occasion to put up some Quaeries to him.

1. Whether remission, justification and reconciliation are equipollent terms
signifying one and the same thing in substance, or so many distinct things
differing each from other as well in sense as in sound? If differing things,
wherein does the difference consist? he answers in the explication,

B. The freedom from obligation to punishment is called Remission; the
freedom from accusation and condemnation is called Justification; and the
freedom from enmity and displeasure is called Reconciliation. These are all at
once, but he says, not [ all one.]

Excellently distinguished, as he that divided the word [malt] into four parts.
But does not every of these words imply all those freedoms? does not remission
free as well from accusation, condemnation and enmity, as from obligation to
punishment? And does not reconciliation free from obligation to punishment and
from condemnation as well as from enmity and displeasure? And does not
justification likewise do all as well as one? I know no absurdity to assert
that the same freedom is in diverse respects, but in the same sense (as Amesius
well expresses) called by all Ames. Med. lib. 1. cap. 27.. 22.
these names. As the state of sin from which we are freed, is considered as a
state of subjection to punishment or vengeance, so this freedom is called
Remission. As the same state is considered as enmity against God, so is it
called Reconciliation. As the same state is considered as a state of sin and
condemnation, so the same freedom from it is called Justification; and this
also so, that justification is all these, remission all, and reconciliation
all, and neither any thing effectually if it be not all. All together make up
one act of God by his Gospel, and may (as I conceive more properly be called
Gods act or acts [in their active sense] then concomitant consequents of one
and the same act of God. Besides if he take them for three differing things, I
would ask him whether there be any mystery in the order wherein he places
them? Whether first we have remission of sins, then justificaon from
condemnation, and then at last reconciliation? I speak of priority and
posteriority in order, notin time, for so he says they are concomitants and at
once. If some such mystery, I would be informed, whether by reconciliation he
mean the reconciling of our love to God, or of Gods love to us? if the former,
how can our love (as he teaches) be a condition of justification, if in order
it be not before but after justification? if the latter, then it seems Gods
love is not the cause of our justification (seeing it does in order follow it)
but that our love to God is the cause and ground of it.

Or if he put these three as Synonyma's for one and the same thing, why does he
then so curiously distinguish; and (as it were) give to them, their several
differencing forms, as we find him to do?

2 Whether he take them for the same or diverse things, I enquire whether they
be antecedents or consequents of our union with Christ? If antecedents, whether
it be possible for a man to be justified in the way of the new Covenant (for of
this justification Mr. Baxter speaks) being yet out of Christ? or how is he
then justified by faith, charity, and good works; except it be by a legal
faith, charity and works? and if legal, how are these then our Gospel
righteousness? or have they Gospel righteousness which are not in Christ? Or
if consequents of our union with Christ, whether then they do not presuppose
our union with Christ? and if so, whether the justified in Christ are not
advanced to a far higher state of freedom and honor by their being found
righteous in Christ, then they lost by being found sinners in Adam, and whether
their union with Christ be not the common foundation both of justification and
adoption? Or lastly is his meaning, that our union with Christ is the
foundation not only of remission, justification and reconciliation, which do
restore the offender into the same state of freedom and favor which we had
lost, and fallen from: but also of Adoption and of a far higher advancement then
that from which he fell? herein I shall not dissent from him. But why then does
he so transpose his words as to make the stream of Gods operations to run
backward, if not to make man's qualifications the ground of his union with
Christ, his faith and good works by which he is justified to be if not the
cause, yet the antecedent of this union, and not this union to be the cause or
antecedent of his both justification and holiness? So much I thought fit to
interpose here, that this Thesis of Mr. Baxter might not serve as a bridge to
carry over the reader captive unto some fallacious untruths in the after-part
of this his Tractate contained. Hence now let us pass to the 55 Thesis, which
has not a total disagreement with the former that have been examined in this
Chapter, but a dependence upon them.

B. Thesis 55. p. 211. Before it be committed it is no sin, and where there is
no sin the penalty is not due, and where it is not due, it cannot properly be
forgiven; therefore sin is not forgiven before it be committed, though the
grounds of certain remission be laid before.

The strength and evidence of this reasoning will the better appear if we lay
by it another to the same tune and upon the same terms. It cannot be denied to
be as good an argumentation as this, if I should thus argue. Before it be
committed it is no sin, and where there is no sin, there is no penalty due, and
where it is not due, it cannot properly be required; therefore the sins that
have been committed since the death of Christ, had not their penalty born by
Christ, before they were committed, and consequently, Gods justice remains
unsatisfyed for the sins of all, that have been committed since the death of
Christ, and every offender is to bear the condemnation of them in his own
bosom, though the grounds of certain remission were laid before [in God]
except another Christ be sent from heaven to bear, or the same Christ again to
bear the penalty of the sins after they are committed. Whether this
argumentation does not carry in it as great, if not greater, likelihood of
reason then Mr. Baxters, I leave to every rational man to judge. And thus when
a proud lust possesses us to reason from our own brain and not from Gods word,
we easily reason our selves into hell.

Neither do I see how Mr. Baxter according to this reasoning can ever look to
be justified or saved, except by one of these two ways, either by asserting
his own righteousness (which hitherto with his fellows) he has made but a
collateral with the righteousness of Christ to justify and save) to be at a
pinch allsufficient and effectual to perfect the work without Christ; as it is
with partners in a Trade, and buying and selling of wares, what one does both
do, and what bargain one makes both must stand to it: Or else by canonizing the
Popish mass, to offer therein Christ often unto God as a sacrifice for the
expiation and forgiveness of his sins when he has committed them, since
Christ's offering himself was in no wise the bearing of the penalty, or
satisfying of Gods justice, for his or our sins, because not then committed.

But let us see whether in any sense the reasoning of Mr. Baxter here, may be
made good or taken up as tolerable. Not to mention here Gods forgiving of sins
as an act immanent in God from eternity. For this would but make Mr. Baxter
startle, he is no more patient to hear this voice, then was Caligula at the
voice of Thunder; his blood rises at it, as do theirs at the sight of a Cat
whose natures have an antipathy to that poor creature that never meant them
hurt: Let us consider forgiveness and pardon in terms and ways as himself
grants a possibility of giving and receiving it. And

First, in foro conscientiae at the bar of God in the conscience of man, to
which he most limiteth and contracteth remission and justification. May not the
offender apprehend and apply to himself the pardon of his future (as well as of
his past and present) sins through the Lord Christ in some sense?

1. In respect of the seed of all the sins which he shall through infirmity
commit in the time to come of his life, I mean his corrupt nature or original
defilement and sin, from which as from their natural source, all their acts of
sin spring, every true believer is, and may apprehend himself pardoned; this
the very Papists acknowledge, denying original sin and defectivenesse to have
any mortality of sin in it, because the guilt thereof is purged from the soul
by the blood of Christ at his very first admission and entrance into Christ,
(as they say) In this respect I doubt not but Mr. Baxter will confess that all
their after acts of sin are remitted (in their seed and womb) to believers
before they be committed.

2. In respect of Gods not imputing them to the person that shall offend, so
the sins not yet committed are forgiven to every elect person. God has laid on
Christ's score all the sins of the elect, committed or to be committed, and
satisfied his justice for them upon Christ, who in their names has paid the
penalty of all, therefore their consciences are discharged, neither sins past
nor sins to come shall be any more imputed to them. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. There is daily new sinning, why not
also subjection to condemnation? because the person being in Christ, though
subject to a necessity of sinning, yet through the justification of his person
is exempted from the further imputation of sin so committed unto condemnation;
He that believes has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation,
Joh. 5. 24. He comes daily into the acting of new sins; how is it that he comes
not into a subjection and obligation to condemnation by those sins but because
they were forgiven to the offender before, therefore not imputed to him when
committed? It is one chief privilege of the new Covenant, Their sins and
iniquities will I remember no more. Now where remission of these is, there is
no more offering for sin? Jer. 31. 38. etc. Heb. 10. 17, 18. speaks the holy
Ghost here only of sin past and not of those to come, that they which are
within the new Covenant, have remission of them? then

1. The same person has some sins forgiven and some not forgiven by Christ,
that which is past is remitted, that which is to come is retained.

2. Then the privilege is no privilege, if only sins past are not remembered,
but sins to come are kept in Gods memory to impute them every moment as fast as
they are committed: For one of these last milstones tied to the neck of the
poor offender, sinks him into hell as surely as if all that are removed had
their weight returned upon him with that one to sink him.

3. If God has remitted and justified a believer from the sins which he has
committed, and not from the sins which he foreknoweth they will commit, but
imputes or will impute them, then is the same person both justified and
unjustifyed at the same time, and God at the same time both loves the same
person to eternal life, and hates him to eternal condemnation: which were no
less absurdity then to attribute two contrary wills acting in God at once, and
so the same person be declared in his own conscience at the same time both in
the state of life, and in the state of death; of life, in respect of the sins
past forgiven through Christ; of death, in regard of the sins to come not yet
forgiven.

Secondly, In Christ, or (as Mr. Baxter terms it Thesis 43.) in Christ's own
justification, either all sins are forgiven to the elect or none at all. When
having done their Law, and paid their debt, Christ appeared in the most holy
place, in the heaven at Gods mercy seat to mediate with his blood for them, he
either received acquitance from, and forgiveness of all the sins which his
elect in after times should commit, and so in Christ their sins to come were
forgiven, or else no sin was forgiven; for as yet they were not in being,
therefore neither were their sins yet committed. But he received then in their
names a full acquitance and forgiveness of their sins as has been before
showed, therefore of their sins before they were committed, and they were
forgiven before they had offended. Hence some of our Divines thus reason, if
since Christ's satisfaction any sins be imputed any more to the elect, they must
be such as Christ has or has not expiated with his blood, and made
satisfaction for to Gods justice; if such as Christ has expiated, then
notwithstanding that God imputes the sin, yet the person to whom he imputes it
is in grace and favor with God, and the full penalty of his sin (while
imputed) is paid to God: but this were injustice not incident to God to impute
a debt which is fully paid him. If such as Christ has not satisfied for, then
the faith of an elect person obtains at Gods hands forgiveness, or the not
imputing of such sins, for which Christ has not satisfied Gods justice, and so
there shall be here remission without the shedding of blood, and justification
out of Christ; or faith and Gospel obedience shall be the price and ransom of
their souls: All which is most absurd. Therefore, the sins of the elect yet
uncommitted, are in Christ as fully forgiven, as those that are already
committed.

Thirdly, If Mr. Baxters meaning be when he says [the sin is not forgiven
before it be committed] that the believer has not a singular apprehension of
the forgiveness of every singular sin before it be committed, and that God
has not declared to his conscience the forgiveness of every singular offense,
i. e. this evil which at this, and that evil which in that hour of his life
he shall drop into: I acknowledge in this sense neither are any of our sins
future forgiven, nor many of our sins past. For who in this case knows (not
only how often he shall err, but also how often and wherein he has erred? in this
respect the general pardon sealed in Christ blood to us, though it mention not
every singular error of our lives contained under the general, is
alsufficient for us.

But perhaps Mr. Baxters meaning is, that Christ has not purchased to the
elect a plenary and absolute forgiveness, but has conditionally dyed for all
if they shall believe and obey, and upon this condition runs the hope of pardon
as to the sins which they shall commit unto their lives end; their renewed sins
being daily pardoned upon the continuance and daily renewing of their
obedience, and so this Thesis runs in the same channel with the 43, 44, and
45. Positions, and for this cause I have annexed it to them; Neither do I speak
any thing to this Position in this sense here, because it is prevented by what
has been already said in the examination of what he has said there. And too
much has been said both to those and this Position in which nothing but
Magisteriall assertions without proofs are to be found.

CHAP. XXIV.
Arg. Mr. Baxters new Model of the causes of Justification examined; and first
his dispute about the efficients, and the material and formal causes thereof.

MR. Baxter in his 56. Thesis disputes very Logically, though but little
Theologically, of the causes of justification, and because he thinks them all
Athenians whom he has a lust to corrupt, viz. such as spend their time in
nothing else but in telling or hearing some new thing, Act. 17. 21. therefore
looking aside from that which all the soundest, i. e. (with him) the Antinomian
Divines have said upon this Argument, and disdaining it with a squint eye as
too rustic, and not enough pretty and dialecticall; himself presents me with a
new case and order of causes from the forge of his fancy, viz. some sole and
some sociall, some single and some double, some proper and some improper
causes, some causes that are causes, and some causes that are no causes;
without further particularizing take him thus in his own words,

B. Thesis 56.

By what has been said it is apparent, that justification in title may be
ascribed to several causes.

1. The principal efficient cause is God.

2. The isntrumental is the promise or grant of the new Covenant.

3. The Pr^catartick cause (so far as God may be said to be moved by any thing
out of himself, speaking after the manner of men) is fourfold.

1 And chiefly, the satisfaction of Christ.

2 The intercession of Christ, and supplication of the sinner.

3 The necessity of the sinner.

4 The opportunity and advantage for the glorifying of his justice and mercy.

The first of these is the meritorious cause: the second, the moral persuading
cause: the third is the objective: and the fourth is the occasion.

2. Material cause properly it has none, if you will improperly call Christ's
satisfaction the remote matter, I contend not.

3. The formal cause is acquiting of the sinner from the accusation and
condemnation of the Law, or the disabling the Law to accuse or condemn him.

4. The final cause is the glory of God, and of the Mediator, and the
deliverance of the sinner.

5. The Causa sine qua non, is both Christ's satisfaction, and the faith of the
justified.

It must be granted that he is not a man of delicacies, has a dull eye, and
dry brain, whosoever is not enamoured with so fair a show of causes, like a
cup-bord of rich glasses set in artificial order, and able to dazzle the eye of
the beholder; what pity is it that any one of them should meet with a knock and
be broken, and so the beautiful order in which they were placed, be on a
sudden marred; yet if such a thing should fall out, it were no great wonder.
Pretinesse and strength are rarely twins, and we speak of pretty things but
rarely, long in the present tense, before their perishing by weakness forces
us to take up another tone, and to tell that there was such a delicate toy, but
if we seek it, the place thereof is not to be found. It is possible such a
stroke may befall the image that Mr. Baxter has here set up in imitation of
that of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. 31, 32, 33, etc. it has clay in the feet,
cannot go without halting, if it meet with a stone to crush its toes, it may
possibly fall all to shivers. Himself seems to doubt of it, therefore prepares
himself to defend it, as seeing, it cannot defend him or it self. So says he
in the Explication.

B. Here it will be expected that I answer to these Questions,

1. Why I call the Gospel the Isntrumental cause? 2. Why I call Christ's
satisfaction the Meritorious cause, and the Causa sine qua non? 3. Why I make
not Christ's righteousness the Material cause. 4. Why I make not the
imputation of it the formal cause? 5. Why I make not faith the Isntrumental
cause? 6. Why I make it only the Causa sine qua non?
To these Quaeries it will be expected (says he) that he answer. But what if
other besides these exceptions be made, though it be in his power to deny his
answer, yet it is not in his choice or authority to restrain any from excepting.

1 Perhaps some may except why he in asserting God to be the principal
efficient cause of Justification, lets it pass so nakedly without an adjection
of any of his attributes; so leaving it doubtful whether it be the grace or
the justice, the love or the hatred, the mercy or the wrath of God that is the
efficient of Justification. We may easily answer our selves as to this
question, It is not Gods, but Mr. Baxters justification whereof the causes are
here assigned, such as the Scriptures are unacquainted with, a justification of
his own devising, defining and distinguishing, himself and none before himself
(that I know) was in every point acquainted with it: No marvel then if he
speak differingly in setting forth the causes of his, from our Divines in
laying down the causes of Gods justification. And indeed it is a difficult
question to determine whether his justification (if it were at all granted to
be of God) might challenge more properly the love or the hatred, the grace or
the justice of God for its womb: It being a justification that leaves all men
under the curse, under the wrath of God, both in life and in death, until the
very day of Judgment, (as we have found him disputing most profoundly in and
under his 9. Thesis.) A justification that gives only a titular title without
actual and absolute possession of any greatest or least benefit to the
justified, [which according to Mr. Baxter is the same thing as if we should say
to the unjustifyed,] A justification more unpossible to be apprehended and
held, then was the first justification by works, that was held forth upon
possible terms, exacting from a living man only continuance in the works of
life; this upon unpossible (as respecting our present state of infirmity)
offering to a dead soul righteousness and life, upon condition the dead soul
will quicken and arise from the dead to fetch it thence, whither if it come it
must still abide empty as it came, until the day of Judgment, and then Mr.
Baxter will come again to tell us more of his mind whether it be at all
attainable. I do not at all injury the man in saying he offers justification to
a dead soul, etc. upon condition the soul will quicken it self. For let there
be found but one clause in his whole book that implies a concurrence and
effusion of grace from God, more to the quickening and justifying of Peter and
Paul, then of Cain and Judas, of the damned then of the saved. Or what does he
less that brings in works to justification, then destroy grace, to set up
justification after the order and rule of strict justice? Or when Mr. Baxter is
so exact in enumerating the Procatarcticall or outwardly moving causes; to what
purpose does he jumpe over the Proegumene or inward moving cause, viz. the
grace, love, and mercy which is within God himself, but to imprison it in
darkness and eclipse its glory, that man's righteousness might have the praise
which pertains to God alone?

2 It may be also questioned, why amongst all the causes of justification here
assigned, there is no mention made of union and communion with Christ; when as
our Divines following the rule of the Word, makes our union with him the very
chief cause and ground of our being justified or declared to be justified
according to the Gospel justification, 1 John 5: 12. Phil. 3. 9. 1 Cor. 5. 19.
and a multitude of other Scriptures which they allege, and if there were the
least need I might here quote a score. What else but an evil eye, maligning
the praise of God and of his Christ, suppresseth in silence and suffers not to
appear in the chain of the causes of justification this link of union with
Christ. Is it not that he will make our faith and works yet out of Christ the
cause of our union with Christ, and not this the ground of the other?

3 To come to those questions which Mr. Baxter answers because he conceives
it will be expected.

1. About the isntrumental cause, we question not what he goes about to answer
why he calls the promise or grant of the new Covenant, or the Gospel, the
isntrumental cause of justification actively considered? but 1. Why he makes
it the only instrumental cause, of justification howsoever considered? For this
grant and promise does by it self no more justify the believers then the
infidels, the justified then the unjustifyed. Does not God also make the spirit
his instrument of justifying, by declaring and unfolding the doctrine of the
Gospel, and evidencing and witnessing to the soul remission and justification,
together with the love and grace of God from which this justification flows?
Why does he stifle the working of the Spirit from having to do in this great
work, except either with the Sadduces he denies the being, or with the
Socinians the divinity and divine operation of the Spirit, or else to leave
open a door to let in justification by the flesh not by the Spirit, by the
strength of man's free will without the preventing helps of the Spirit of grace?
Or as justification is taken passively for our being justified in our selves,
why is not faith put as an isntrumental cause also? But this Mr. Baxter will
answer anon, and I shall wait on him to hear how satisfactory his answer is.

2. Whether in his answer to the Question as he puts it, when he makes a man's
lease or deed of gift, and a Kings pardon to have their force from the hand and
seal annexed to it, is it not much more employed that the grant of the Gospel
without hand and seal put to it is not a sufficient instrument to the
justifying of any man. For the grant of the Gospel is made to the world
indefinitely, but when faith as the impression of Gods hand upon the soul, and
the Spirit witnessing and sealing to the conscience thou art the person to whom
the justification generally proposed in the Gospel does particularly belong,
and so are applied by God as true accessory evidences to the grant of the
Gospel, to terminate justification upon the soul of man, can Mr. Baxter deny
these being acts of God distinct from the word of promise, to be isntrumental
to justification as properly and fully as the said promise and grant?

3. To his Procatarctick causes which in the Thesis he gives [ viz. so far as
God may be said to be moved by any thing out of himself, speaking after the
manner of men, says he] I ask

1 Whether God may be moved in his will, by any thing out of himself? If so,
whether then something out of God do not give magis and minus, increase and
diminution to God? For every change of Gods will is a change of God himself,
and what shall it avail any to be justified by a mutable God that to day will
justify, to morrow unjustifie again, being apt to take impression of change
from things without him? yea if a God mutable, then in truth no God, but one of
the Pagans Idols or Puppets. Or how little does his additionall cause help him,
[ to speak after the manner of m^n] he ought not to speak a lie for God to
please men; much less to lie against God, to fashion himself to the manners of
men, foolish or wicked men. If he say God cannot be moved by any thing out of
himself, how can he excuse himself from being a slanderer of the most high God,
by devising and asserting here 4. causes out of God moving him to justify us,
having before wilfully suppressed in darkness the riches of Gods grace within
himself alsufficient without any auxiliary strength from the creature to move
him? How preposterous is he herein to the order of nature, making the fruit to
bear the tree, and not the tree the fruit? What less does he in making Christ's
satisfaction and intercession, the sinners supplication and desire of supply,
and the opportunity or advantage, for the glorifying of his justice and mercy,
the causes of Gods will, and gracious willings, when contrariwise Gods gracious
will is the cause of all these?

2 Whether he jears at the invaluable means of our salvation, or else that he
thinks himself matching cocks for the game, that he counterpoiseth the highest
perfections of Christ's mediatorship with man's vanity? how unsufferable is it to
see him putting into the one scale a precious pearl, into the other a
peppercorn or cherry stone? To match Christ's intercession with the sinners
supplication? To make the feebleness of man, a collateral and concause in the
same order and degree of efficacy to justification, with the virtue of Christ
glorified? It is to be acknowledged that the nothingnesse of the one is of as
full validity as the omnipotency (if I may so term it) of the other to beget
new love, new purposes, new acts in Gods will. This is that which God himself
cannot do, not because it is a work above his power, but beneath his nature and
perfection, to work or to be capable of the working of any new impressions or
changes in his will. Nevertheless this excuses not Mr. Baxters vilifying of
Christ in mating his intercession with the sinners supplication, as if the
former were a star of the same magnitude with the latter: like that profane
fellow that twisted together Religion and Cheese.

3 Not to trifle away time upon every trifling word of Mr. Baxter, I demand of
him why (seeing in the Explication, pa. 215. he acknowledges that
Procatarcticall or [outwardly] impulsive causes have properly no place with
God] he does yet in his Thesis here fetch about again his four impulsive causes
to mark them with several names in their foreheads in Aristotle's print? is it
not a testimony under his own hand that he will rather play and dance about God
as if he were a mere may pole, then lose the ostentation of one least piece of
his wit and art?

4 Though I mean not to contend about the meritorious causality of Christ's
satisfaction, because in this he has as well many orthodox writers as Papists
speaking in the same tone with him: nevertheless I should deny his assertion
unless he he will grant me these 4. or 5. suppositions.

1. That so far as justification is an act eternal and immamanent in God,
Christ's satisfaction is not the meritorious cause of it.

2. If in some other respect it be the meritorious cause, that God does therein
merit from himself. For the satisfaction made to him is of his own proper
money, himself paid the price in delivering his Son for our sins, the body
which Christ offered for us was given him by the Father to offer in our behalf.

3. That this merit must in no wise hinder, but that the entire benefit of
justification must come to us freely without money and without price.

4. That it is but unproperly termed merit even then when it respects the
discharge which God gives into a man's conscience, it being so called
metaphorically as our state in sin is considered as a state of debt, which when
Christ our surety has paid for us he has so far merited only, as the payment
of our debt may be said to deserve that we should receive a full acquittance
from the debt. In which Mr. Baxter goes yet further, that it was so paid, that
the Creditour might have chosen to accept it for satisfaction, much more to
have given us a full acquittance and discharge. So that in relation to him and
his principles, it is less properly merit, then to another.

5. That Christ's satisfaction is more properly to be called Gods foundation of
this our new relation of justified persons, upon which he has enabled himself
to justify us in mercy, without any seeming diminution of his justice and
truth. These things granted me, I dismiss Mr. Baxter with his meri^orlous
cause.

5 When he calls Christ's interc^ssion and the sinners supplication the moral
persuading cause, etc. I demand whether there were such a total deficiency, or
so great a scarcity of moral reason in God, that it needed a begetting or
quickening by persuasions from without him? or whether he were so flinty a^ that
without strong persuasive reasons he could not be induced to melt out his mercy
in justifying us? How then was he in Christ reconciling the world to himself
before all such actual intercession and prayers? 2 Cor. 5. 19.

6. The like might I say of his objective and occasional causes; that objects
and occasions have their being and qualifications from Gods either directive or
promissive providence, that they may serve to his eternal and absolute
volsitions and purposes; not that they work any new thing in the will and
purposes of God, for then like the Mass Priests should they be the creators of
their Creator.

4. To his second Question, Why he calls Christ's satisfaction, both the
Meritorious cause, and the Causa sine qua non; If he had not, I should not have
made it a question. But because he delights both to put the question and to
answer it, I shall not permit his answer wholly to pass without a short reply.

B. Page 215. That it is the Meritorious cause I know few but Socinians that
will deny. He must needs mean few Baxterians, that are not also Socinians, i.
e. few of them that with him deny justification to be an eternal immanent act
in God. For Mr. Baxter himself whether he be, or be not a Socinian, will and
must grant, that if justification be, and as far as it is an eternal immanent
act in God; Christ's satisfaction neither is nor can be the Meritorious cause
thereof. But as we look to the justification, as in time applied and declared
to the soul and conscience which Mr. Baxter calls the justification of the
new Covenant, and the Scriptures justification by faith, of this justification
I will not contend with him, but Christ's satisfaction (though no where in the
word totidem verbis so termed) yet may enough properly be termed the
Meritorious cause.

But why he will also have it called the Causa sine qua non, a blind man may
easily see his reason; what else does he drive at but to put it in the same
order of Causality with faith and good works, which also in the whole sequel
of this Treatise is with him the Causa sine qua non, and consequently to make
Christ's sufferings and man's qualifications collateral causes of Justification?
Hereunto pertains his extolling the cause sine qua non, and exalting the
praise thereof above other causes, Page 216, 217.
not so much to attribute it to Christ's satisfaction, as preparatively to
deifie and equalize with Christ the meritorious perfection of man's
righteousness, which he is bringing in as a rival of Christ for the honor of
justification; and herein he will rather turn Cynick then leave the praise of
man in his justification any one inch beneath the praise of Christ. For
hereunto pertaines his Quare me non laudas qui dignus sum ut accipiam? Plus
enim est meruisse quam dedisse beneficium? If God be to be praised for giving
justification, why not I that am worthy to receive it? for it is more
honorable to have deserved then to have given a Benefit. How well this agrees
with that which he has in and under his 24, 26, and 27. Theses, I leave the
Reader to consider; and how fully he speaks it out in the following doctrine of
this book, we shall see more fully afterward. Yea when he here puts Christ's
satisfaction in the same kind of causality with faith and works, which he here
calls the Causa sine qua non, elsewhere the conditions of justification; and
Thesis 62. pronounces faith to be the principal, and works the less
principal condition; what place does he leave for Christ's satisfaction, but to
be a footstool to our faith and works?

Ob. Yes he reserves the entire praise of merit still to Christ's satisfaction
alone.

Answ. Not so, for though in words he sometimes asserteth Christ's satisfaction
to be the merit of our justification, yet he makes the worthiness of our own
righteousness to be that which makes both Christ's merit and justification
merited to be ours, and so we out-merit Christ, deserving not only
justification but Christ the meriter, and the merit of Christ to be made ours:
In this he is worse then the Papists. They give the praise of our m^rit to
Christ; he has merited (says they) a power ^o our works to merit. This man
contrariwise, that neither Christ's merits, nor justification the fruit of it
becomes ours, until we by our merits and worthiness have put our selves into
the possession of it; so according to the Papists the efficacy of man's merits
depends upon Christ's merits: according to Mr. Baxter the efficacy of Christ's
merits (as to this or that justified person) depends upon a man's own merits, as
in the fore quoted Thesis he manifests himself: Let all men judge whether his
ambition bends not to be more then an approver, even an eminent improver of
Popery.

5. To his third question somewhat also. In the Thesis where he gives us the
order of the causes of justification, to set up his own, not Gods
justification, he says,

B. Material cause properly it has none; if you will improperly call Christ's
satisfaction the remote matter, I contend not. And in the explication pa. 214.
against what he had said in the Thesis, he supposes it will be questioned.

B. 3. Why he makes not Christ's righteousness the Material cause? And page
217. He thus answers the question:

B. Christ's righteousness cannot be the material cause of an act which has
no matter. If any will call Christ's righteousness, the matter of our
righteousness, though yet they speak unproperly, yet far nearer the truth then
to call it the matter of our justification. We have here as elsewhere a Momus
among the Gods, a curious and carping Critic against not only Ecclesiastical
but Canonical writings also, no farther owning what they speak then as they
speak it in a dialecticall dialect, so setting Aristotle above Christ and
weighing all the sentences of the Gospel in the scales of Logical terms and
maxims, and Socinus-like submitting all the truths of the Gospel to reason,
yea to the rules of Aristotle's logic or reason; Justification is an act says
he, and there is no matter of an act, ergo, it has no material cause. Christ
therefore and his Apostles, yea all the Doctors of the Church that speak after
the Scriptures, are dunces, delivering a vain Theology not truly
Theological, because not after the Peripateticks precepts totally Logical.

But what law of Medes and Persians can bind the holy Ghost never to mention
justification but strictly under the consideraration of an act? Will Mr. Baxter
deny it sometimes to be used in a passive sense? Or what he says of faith
Thesis 62. may it not more truly be affirmed of justification, That as a whole
Country often takes it name from the chief City, so may all the privileges and
benefits of the Gospel from justification, so that when it is named all the
rest are employed and named under it? The thing in question I acknowledge, (Mr.
Baxter granting what he grants) is not of great moment; but the supercilious
haughtiness of the man puffed with the opinion of his secular learning so high
as to puf and pif at so many excellent Divines for learning and holiness, to
many of which he is not worthy to be an Amanuensis, is unsufferable. I shall
therefore as briefly as I can express upon what grounds our Divines and how
far they make the righteousness of Christ the matter of our justification, as
near as I may upon good probabilities conjecture.

The Doctrine of justification by Christ, is no where in the four Evangelists
held forth under the name of justification or justifying. Many both Parables
and clear doctrines that proceeded from the lips of Christ, do indeed in other
words fully display it; specially John the Evangelist, who made it more his
task to record the doctrine then the acts of Christ (because he saw those
historifyed somewhat largely by the other three Evangelists which had written
before him,) Eagle-like mounting on high to the contemplation of his Celestial
and Divine nature and doctrines, very exactly sets it forth but under other
words, naming it Life, eternal Life, everlasting Life; He that believes in
the Son has everlasting life, Joh. 3. 36. Is passed from death to life, Joh.
5. 24. Has eternal life, Joh. 6. 54. My flesh which I give for the life of
the world, Joh. 6. 51. And ye will not come to me that ye may have life, Joh.
5. 40. Except ye eat my flesh and drink my blood, ye have no life in you, he
that eats me shall live by me, Joh. 6. 57. In all which and many other texts
of this Evangelist none can deny but by life is to be understood chiefly, if
not only, life in law, the life of justification, not that of glory which is to
be received above, but that of grace here. For so those Scriptures point out a
life here in this present world enduring everlastingly to all eternity, and not
a life here only to be hoped for, and hereafter to come into our fruition.
Neither do I find the word [justifie] used but once by Luke in the Acts of the
Apostles. Nor yet at all in any one of the Epistles of the Apostles (St. James
only excepted in one Chapter) but by the Apostle Paul alone. Yet the substance
of justification was the chief doctrine in* all their Epistles handled, but the
same set forth under the name of Salvation, saving, life, and other phrases
which our Savior himself used. And these phrases also does St. Paul use as
equipollent with the word Justifying in all his Epistles.

Now the reason why this Apostle more then the rest treats of this doctrine
under the name of [justification] I conceive to be this: Because he was forced
to handle it by way of controversy against the false Apostles, some
professing, some rejecting Christ, that taught justification and salvation by
the works of the Law in part, and not by faith only; whom therefore he must
needs in his disputes treat with in their own terms and words. Their
Argumentation against the Apostle (as may be gathered from the Apostles
answers) ran in this tenor and to this effect, That righteousness alone which
justifyeth or makes a man perfectly righteous, saves. But the righteousness
of the Law, is that righteousness alone which justifyeth or makes man
perfectly righteous, at least by procuring proper righteousness to him:
therefore that alone saves.

The Apostle here grants the proposition, that no other righteousness but
that which justifyeth or makes a man perfectly righteous saves: But denies
the assumption, that the righteousness of the Law only or at all justifyeth or
makes a man perfectly righteous: Because only the perfect doers of the law are
perfectly righteous, not the hearers. But no man can perfectly do it. And
contrariwise proves that the righteousness of the Gospel which he calls the
Righteousness of God, the Righteousness of faith, the Righteousness of God
by faith, which consists in Christ's satisfaction imputed to us, is the
Righteousness which justifyeth and makes perfectly righteous, because it
cleanses from the guilt and freeth from the imputation of all sin and
unrighteousness. Romans 1. 17. and 3. 5, 21, 22, 25, 26. and 4. 3, 5, 6, 11. and
5. 17, 18, 21. and 9. 30. and 10. 3, 4, 6. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 3. 9. In all
which places and in many other the Apostle having rejected the righteousness
of works from being, asserteth the righteousness of God in Christ by faith, to
be the righteousness, the matter and substance of the righteousness by which
we are justified. This he illustrateth Romans 5. 19. by a comparison between Adam
and Christ, Adams disobedience and Christ's obedience, As by the disobedience of
one man, many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one shall many be made
roghteous: the ones disobedience was not only the merit, but also the matter of
our sin, as far as sin is capable of matter, the very sin it self, which being
imputed to us as being in him, without any personal and actual sin of our
own, makes us sinners. So the obedience of Christ in offering himself a
sacrifice for sin, and giving satisfaction to Gods justice in obedience to that
positive command of the Father which required it, was and is not only the
merit, but also the matter of that righteousness which being imputed to us (as
being in Christ) without any personal obedience of ours added to it,
constituteth us righteous and justified in Gods acceptance, or is that for by
and in which the Lord pronounces us just and justified to our own consciences.
Such is the frequent dispute of the Apostle about the substance and matter of
that righteousness by which we are justify ad, which he concludes not to be a
righteousness inherent in us, but this Righteousness inherent in Christ, but
imputed to us and apprehended by faith to justification; whom God has set
forth as a propitiation for our sins through faith in his blood, Romans 3. 25.
And this is all that I find our Divines to mean in saying the righteousness
or satisfaction of Christ is the material cause of our justification defending
against the Papists as the Apostle did againsts the Pharisees, that the matter
of the righteousness which God accepts and imputes to us in justifying us,
or unto righteousness and justification, is this righteousness of Christ
only, not the righteousness of works. Mr. Baxter in rejecting the phrase, 1.
As rude and not Logical; 2. As at the best unproper; does first, accuse the
Apostle; and secondarily, them that follow his Apostolical doctrine and
phrase, of this rudeness and impropriety of language: One of them speaks out
the mind of the rest, Deus justitiam, i. e. Obedientiam and satisfactionem
Sevarpius ^rs. Th eol. ^ justif. ^. 925.
Christi nostram facit ac pro nostra ducit, etc. atque ita nos antequam justos
pronunciet justos facit; God makes the righteousness, i. e. the obedience and
satisfaction of Christ ours, accounts it for ours, etc. and so before he
pronounces us he makes us righteous. Let us be rude with the Apostle as long
as we stand fixed in the doctrine of grace with the Apostles. That Mr. Baxter
speaks more Logically after the Sophisters, and captivates himself to their
learned errors (however he may applaud himself therein) we conceive it to
deserve more pity then envy.

6. To his fourth Question I shall speak but little, because I understand him
but little. Neither have I that edge upon my dull brain to discern whether in
his acuteness he does more contradict others or himself? or what other least
cause he has to contradict (granting what he grants) save ^^ly the spirit of
contradiction. The formal cause of justification in his Thesis we have thus;

B. The formal cause is the acquitting of the sinner from the accusation and
condemnation of the law, or the disabling the law to accuse or condemn him. The
question that he conceives will be put to him here to answer is;

B. Why he makes not the imputation of Christ's righteousness the formal
cause? To this he answers, p. 218.

B. That imputation is not the form is undeniable. The form gives the name:
especially to actions that have no matter. Imputation and Justification, denote
distinct acts; and how then can imputing be the form of justifying, etc. Here
before I can understand the depths of Mr. Baxter, I must be resolved by him in
some Queries.

1. Whether justification has its being before it has its form? For the form
does more unexceptively give the being then the name; and is in order of nature
before the thing formed or named.

2. If not, Whether then there were ever a justified man (after the tenor of
the new Covenant) upon earth, or ever shall be such? For if the acquitting of
the sinner from the accusation and condemnation of the Law, or the disabling of
the Law to accuse or condemn, be the form of justification, then is
justification unformed and without being (according to Mr. Baxter) until the
day of Judgment. Until then he binds all hand and foot under the threatenings
and curse of the Law; as we have seen in and under his 9, 11, 12, and 13.
Thesis, and how long after he does not yet certify us: so that if this be the
form of justification, then after his principles there neither is nor shall be
either justification or any justified person as long as the world lasts,
either in heaven or upon earth. Except Mr. Baxter will say the law is so dealt
with by Christ, as Cnipperdoling was by John a Leyden, of the highest
magistrate and judge made tormentor or hangman, deposed from being any longer a
righteous Accuser, Judge or Condemner of guilty persons; and made an
Executioner and Tormentor of them whom no Law accuses or condemns.

3. Whether the Law accuses or condemns of any thing else but of sin? And if
not, Whether Gods acquitting the sinner from the Laws accusation and
condemnation, be not his acquitting the sinner from all sin that might expose
him to the Laws accusing and condemning? This Mr. Baxter must grant except he
will say a man may be acquitted from the Laws, yet left unto the Devils
accusation and condemnation, as he seems before to hint. But this is no other
acquitting but from the drying pan into the fire, from a just accuser and
Judge, into the tyranny of an unjust slanderer and destroyer. Such a
justification with its form we decline as damnation it self: if Mr. Baxter can
with his Sophistry charm the Devil, let him grapple with him.

4. Whether the imputation of righteousness and the not imputing of sin be not
the same thing, neither an act distinct from the other, but each connoting and
implying the other? For so he answers the question, denying imputation to be
the form, viz. imputation of righteousness, without the adject term of
diminution, the righteousness [ of Christ] knowing well that some of the most
considerate of the Antipapisticall Divines place the form of justification, in
the imputation of righteousness, not in the imputation of Christ's
righteousness (viz. which he has done) These two Quae^ies he must grant us,
except he will sink from his own principles, and contradict himself.

5. Whether then there be any difference between Mr. Baxters form of
justification, and that form which he impugneth? Whether the acquitting of the
sinner from the Law, from sin which exposes to the Laws accusation and
condemnation, be not the same thing in substance with Gods imputing of
righteousness, and not imputing of sin to him? What has the one of these
(save words alone) more or less in it then the other? They must be Mr. Baxters
Lynces eyes that are busied in the speculation of Democritus his Atoms and
Platoes Ideas, that can discern the difference, my blunt fancy is incapable
and uncomprehensive of it.

B. I believe (says Mr. Baxter) that this imputing does in order of nature go
before justifying.

And does not the form in order of nature go before the thing formed? how else
does the form give it its ultimum esse? This more proves then denies imputation
to be the form.

B. And that the righteousness so imputed is the proper ground whence we are
denominated legally righteous, and why the Law cannot condemn us. This also
makes more for us, then for him. He tells us before that the form gives the
name. Now to be Legally righteous in Mr. Baxters phrase, is to be righteous in
the righteousness of Christ's satisfaction. He that is so, is justified in
title of Law, (as Mr. Baxter terms it, and here treats of it) if then it give
denomination of legally righteous, it gives the name of justification in title
of Law; (except he will say that a man is legally righteous in Christ before
Gods gracious act makes him such) if so, then is imputation the form of
justification because it gives it its name. He concludes well;

B. It is a vain thing to quarrel about the Logical names of the causes of
justification, if we agree in the matter. Yet see I no other ground that Mr.
Baxter has to take up this quarrel against the whole stream of Protestant
Divines in refusing and oppugning the form of justification which they give,
but to quarrel about names and words. The form which he substituteth in place
of theirs, being the same with theirs in substance, and differing only in
Logical not Theological names and words. Unless some will say there is a
real as well as a nominall difference between the disabling of the Law to
accuse of sin, and Gods not imputing sin; i. e. between the Laws acquitting,
and Gods acquitting from sin; between the Laws not imputing unrighteousness,
and Gods imputing righteousness; which is all one as if I should put a
difference between the pardon that disables the Law of the Land from accusing
and condemning of a malefactor, and a pardon which acquits him from the offense
which the same Law had power to accuse him of, or between the not accusing or
condemning of a man, and the not imputing any thing to him to his accusation
and condemnation.

CHAP. XXV.
Arg. of the Causa sine qua non, or the condition or the isntrumental cause,
and whether faith be the instrument? And in what sense it is so? The
absurdities wherewith Mr. Baxter charge this doctrine, removed; and those
that follow his doctrine in part particularized.

TO the first Question we must apply our selves somewhat more fully, because in
answer to the former Questions Mr. Baxter seems to me to have aimed chiefly to
the ostentation of his wit and Logical both acuteness and profoundnesse, to
make himself thereby admired and formidable. But in answering this and the next
he collects in one all his subtilty and Sophistry ^o beguile and deceive (if it
were possible) the very Elect. And indeed if he carry these two Questions in
captivity to his own sense and purpose, he shall thereby make at least a
seeming way by which to introduce all his Popish soul-subverting errors (about
justification) which follow and hang as at the tail of these Questions. His
words in the Thesis are.

B. The Causa sine qua non is both Christ's satisfaction, and the faith of the
justified.

As much as he thought would be objected against his putting Christ's
satisfaction in the same place and degree of causality as a collateral with
faith, he has spoken to in his answer to the second Question, and the
firmness of this his answer has been there examined. But what concerns
faith, that which he thinks he shall be opposed in, he forms into two
Questions, Explication, pa. 214.

1. Why he makes it not the Isntrumental cause? 2. Why he makes it the Causa
sine qua non?
The former which is his 5. Question, he applies himself to answer pa. 219. in
these words,

B. To the fifth Question, perhaps I shall be blamed, as singular from all men
in denying faith to be the instrument of our justification: But affectation of
singularity leads me not to it.

1. If faith be an instrument, it is the instrument of God or man: Not of man,
for man is not the principal efficient, he does not justify himself.

2. Not of God: for 1. It is not God that believes; though it is true he is the
first cause of all actions. 2. Man is the causa secunda between God and the
action; and so still man should be said to justify himself. 3. For (as
Aquinas) the action of the principal cause and of the instrument, is one
action; and who dares say that faith is so Gods instrument? 4. The instrument
must have influx t^ the producing of the effect of the principal cause by a
proper causality, and who dare say that faith has such an influx into our
justification?

Here I know not whether we have more of the subtle serpent, or of the roaring
Lion.

1. He uses his winding Sophistry to entangle.

2. His daring threats to them that being not entangled will be so bold as to
contradict him. Let us examine what efficacy there is in either or both these,
and first in his Sophistry.

To insinuate or (as the Apostle says) to creep into the hearts of his Readers
to deceive them, he tells us, Perhaps he may be blamed as singular from all men
in denying faith to be the instrument of justification. It seems he doubted
that some of his Readers for lack of acquaintance with many Authors upon this
subject, would not, or could not take notice that it is a new doctrine which he
here delivers, and so he should be robbed of the glory of his new invention.
That the praise thereof might therefore wholly redound to him, he tells them, he
is the first of men that ever saw and taught Faith not to be the instrument of
justification; that herein he is singular from all men. B^t had he not rubbed
his forehead, that with open face he thus vindicateth to himself that which he
has received from the Priests and Jesuits? Let him name himself singular and
abhorrent from all Protestants, yea from Christ and his Apostles, not from all
men; he is singular and alone in this and most his assertions from the
Orthodox, from whom, but holds it in common with the whole herd of Antichrist,
to whom he is fallen. Does not Bellarmine deny that faith can truly be said to
justify us, except it does obtain and in some sort merit Justification from
God? Do not all his brethren with one voice shake off the isntrumental
causality of justification and make it as a perfect quality or good work to
merit it? A two fold subtlety, yea falsehood, is there to be found therefore* in
this his insinuation:

1. That he affirms himself singular in this point, to catch after an usurped
praise to himself, as if he had seen what none in the world before him had seen.

2. In pretending it to be a new doctrine, thereby to draw disciples after him
in a time wherein the ears of men itch after new in disdain of sound and true
doctrines. But further to insinuate he tells us that affectation of singularity
leads him not to it. We believe him without oath or protestation. It is not the
desire of them that are of his hair to trudge single, but accompanied with a
whole Brigade of disciple under their conducting and seducing unto Rome. But
let us come to his Arguments.

B. If faith be an instrument, it is the instrument of God or Man. But of
neither of these; Ergo not at all an instrument. His Proposition or Major we
grant him. And it were enough and full to that which can be expected to refell
his reasons which he brings for the proof of the minor. Yet because my drift is
not so much to answer him, as to stablish some weak and unwary Christians
against his impostures, I shall endeavor first to confirm what he denies and
seeks to shiver, and then to examine the strength of reason which he brings
against us.

When he says in the Minor, that faith is the instrument neither of God nor
Man in justification; What if I should undertake to prove and defend it to be
the instrument of both? He speaks here of Justification as taken Passively,
declared to, and termined upon the conscience. For if we should mention
justification as taken merely Actively, for that internal, eternal and
immanent act in God; not transient upon an extraneous subject, but hid in God
before the world was, or any justified or unjustifyed persons began to live or
be: Mr. Baxter would be ready to deal with us as did the Jews with Steven,
Act. 7. 57. stop his ears and cry out against us with a loud voice, Blasphemy,
blasphemy. Yet in this sense we acknowledge that says is neither Gods nor Man's
instument of justification. But in that sense which alone Mr. Baxter here
takes justification for that gracious act of God by which he discharges for
Christ's sake the sinner from condemnation, by virtue of the new Covenant, and
that precious Gospel promise, He that believes in the Son shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to life: so I affirm faith to be both
Gods and Man's instrument, Gods effective and man's receptive instrument in
relation to justification, as shall be beneath more fully explained.

First, it is Gods instrument. This justification is but Gods pronouncing and
declaring a man to his own conscience to be just and discharged from sin and
condemnation through Christ, so that he perceives and apprehends himself
absolved and does acquiesce in this absolution. One chief instrument by which
God does thus justify or declare and manifest man to himself just and
pardoned, is faith. This is Gods instrument in the same sense in which Mr.
Baxter makes the promise and grant of the new Covenant to be Gods instrument,
and that more fully (as I in part showed before.) For that grant does but
declare a possibility to a man (as it is considered by it self) to be
justified; promising forgiveness and life to all that shall believe. By this
act alone no singular person is actually justified. But now this grant
premised, when God is pleased to infuse faith into the soul of any singular
person, by it as by his instrument he declares that person to himself just and
acquitted from condemnation; so that he can thenceforth plead out his own
justification. God has pronounced them all just and pardoned which believe in
his Son: I so believe, therefore I am pronounced and declared of God just and
pardoned. So this faith is the instrument of God, (for so Lawyers term Deeds
and Grants in writing, instruments, yea instruments of him that makes the Deed
or Grant.) And the promise of the new Covenant or the new Testament is called
novum Instrumentum; as it is his evidence written (not without the man as that
Gospel grant) but by the finger of Gods Spirit in the hearts of the Elect, so
that they may read this instrument of Gods writing within their hearts
evidencing and manifesting to themselves their justification from God. And this
is one principal instrument and evidence of God promised under the new
Covenant, Jer. 31. 31-35. recited (as now fulfilled) by the Apostle, Heb. 8.
8-12. and 10. 16, 17. I will write my Laws in their hearts, etc. what Law but
the rule, doctrine and evidence of life and salva^ion? But what benefit by
having it written within them, more then if it were in writing without them?
Yes this, They shall not need [externall] teaching to know the Lord, for they
shall all know me from the least to the greatest. What knowledge of God was this
whereupon they should not need teachers? They shall know him to be their God,
their Justifyer, their Savior, for so much intimate the next words, For I will
forgive their iniquities, and remember their sins no more. This was one chief
part of the Law, or will of God written in their hearts, justification or
everlasting remission of sins. This they should not need to be taught from
without, the instrument of writing or evidence thereof should be within their
own hearts apparent, not to others but their own reading. And what more
principal evidence or instrument of writing within our hearts thus to assure
us, then our faith, engraven by Gods own hand in us? I appeal to Mr. Baxter
himself whether I wrest this Scripture from its proper sense; or if any shall
except against me, I doubt not but I shall make it good to be the mind of the
holy Ghost, which I have here given. To the same purpose is it, that Faith is
called the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. Whose evidence? Gods
evidence given us, by which he declares to us, and manifests to our
consciences the invisible things of our justification and salvation: and when
given, then our evidence also by which we not only apprehend, but also plead
against all the accusations of the Law, yea of sin and Satan, our actual
justification. And that it is called the witness of God in us; or, within us;
because God by this witness as his instrument declares and evidenceth us to
our own consciences justified, 1 John 5. 10.

Secondly, It is man's instrument by which he applies to himself, and without
which he cannot apply to himself this justification, and remission of the new
Covenant to know and be sensible of it, that he may rest and rejoice in it,
being justified in himself, i. e. in his own knowledge and conscience; God was
in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing to them their
trespasses, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Reconciliation and Justification (as has been
showed) are one and the same thing. That we may receive it therefore from him
in Christ, he gives us (as many as are his Elect) this living faith as an
instrument by which he may apply it and bring it home into our bosoms.
Therefore is the operation of the soul by faith, set forth in the Scripture by
a comparison of a man's working by the several members of the body as by his
instruments: Calling Faith sometimes the e^e of man by which he looks to
Christ crucified as the Israelites to the brazen Serpent, thence to obtain cure
to the wounded and poisoned soul, Joh. 3. 14, 15. Sometimes the foo^ of the
soul by which it runs and comes to Christ for life and justification, Joh. 5.
40. Sometimes the hand of the soul by which it apprehends Christ and the
justification that is in and by him: To as many as received him, to them he
gave power to become the sons of God, even to as many as believe in his Name,
Joh. 1. 12. Sometimes the mouth of the soul by which it eats and drinks in
Christ with the life that is in him, both to justify and sanctify, He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, Joh. 6. 54. If ye
have tasted that the Lord is gracious, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Sometimes the arms of the
soul, by which it embraces and holds in possession Christ with his life and
righteousness; He that has the Son has life, he that has not the S^n has
not life, 1 John 5. 12. What does all this imply less then that faith is
isntrumental to our justification? Yea given to us to be the sole instrument
on our part by which to apply to our selves the justification offered by God in
Christ, Or what else is meant by the general voice of the Gospel pronouncing
us to be justified by faith, but by faith Gods instrument and evidence to
declare and manifest it to our souls, and our instrument to apprehend and hold
it fast and firm to our selves? It remains now to examine Mr. Baxters reasons
by which he assayeth to prove that it is neither man's nor Gods instrument.

First, that it is not man's instrument, he thus argues,

B. Not man's instrument, for he is not the principal efficient, he does not
justify himself. Both this and all that which follows in this his dispute,
he has out of Schiblers M^taphysicks, sound enough (I acknowledge) as Schibler
proposes it in Thesi, but fallacious and misapplyed by this man to his
Hypothesis. Yet what ever it be (though not the least portion of Gods word in
it) let us examine the strength of it It is the principal efficient, of the
act or effect, that works by the instrument, says he; but man is not the
principal efficient, therefore works not in this business by instruments or
isntrumental helps.

I answer 1. (not only in resevence to this, but to that which also follows
in his Argumentation) We are to distinguish between instruments, that they are
of two kinds, effective or receptive. Effective, so is a knife the instrument
of cutting: Receptive, so is the hand the instrument of receiving. Mr. Baxters
Arguments are applied to the former only, not at all to the latter. For

1. Of an Effective instument it may be said, the knife cuts and the Man cuts
likewise: But a Receptive instrument has a double relation; 1. To the giver;
2. To the receiver. As if a rich man give a great treasure to a poor man, he
receives it in his hand: the receptive instrument of the poor man's enriching
is his hand. Now if a man should argue as Mr. Baxter does; the hand if it be an
instrument it is an instrument either of the giver or receiver; not of the
receiver, for he does not enrich himself, he is not the principal agent
enriching: not of the giver, for he does not receive any riches, but the act of
the hand is to receive; therefore the instrument of neither, nor at all an
instrument: Who sees not the vanity of such an Argument? Yet such is this
paralogism of Mr. Baxter. I say therefore that the Canons of an instrument
which he cites out of Aquinas and Schibler, hold only of effective, not of
receptive instruments. Yet as faith is Gods effective instrument to justify
man, and not himself, (as Mr. Baxter trifleth) so these Canons hold of it also
in the sense before specifyed.

2. I deny the Assumption or Minor; he proves it thus, Man does not justify
himself. This is an equivocation, and besides the question. None ever made man
the causa prima of his justification, none I mean of all those whom Mr. Baxters
disputes against. Himself indeed and his followers asserting the perfection and
merit of man's righteousness consisting in faith and good works, and affirming
that this righteousness of man, and in man, does give him title to the
righteousness which is by Christ, cannot well be cleared from making man the
first tause of his justification. But we speak nothing tending to this purpose;
and in no other sense do we say that man acts to his justification, but by
this apprehending and applying to himself the justification of God. And in this
respect man is not only the principal but also the sole efficient of
apprehending or receiving Christ to justification, and faith his alone
receptive instrument therein, by the isntrumental subsurviency of his faith in
receiving Christ. We make it not man's instrument of Christ's satisfaction, or of
Gods acceptance, or of his declaring, but only of our applying it to our
souls.

That it is not Gods instrument, he has these reasons to prove.

B. 2. Not of God: for 1. It is not God that believes, though it is true, he is
the first cause of all actions. A mere bull, with which he jeers and scoffs,
not only at all the Protestant Divines, but also at Christ and his Apostles, as
poor sorry animals and asses, unworthy to be answered with reasons, but with
absurd nonsense.

1. Faith in one was never used or ordained to be an instrument of justifying
another, much less faith in God to justify man.

2. He can conclude nothing else hence but this, God believes not, therefore
God is not justified or discharged from condemnation by the new Covenant.

3. He does in the Magisteriall confidence of his heart, implicitly accuse
Christ his Apostles and faithful Teachers in his Church, to hold that God is
the instrument of our justification, that the Principal agent and the
instrument are the same thing, that the instrument must be in the Agent or
cannot be his instrument, so that faith must be G^d himself, for whatsoever is
in God is God himself; the immanent acts of God, are Gods acting. These are all
but slanderings of the Lords servants, to make odious the doctrine which they
deliver.

4. We make faith in man, not in God, Gods effective instrument, which he
infundendo creat and creando infundit, and having wrought it in the soul, he
does put it also in acting, thereby to evidence to man his justification. As
some great and munificent Lord having laid up a great treasure for one of his
poorest and most abject servant in some secret place; tells him first what he
has done, bestows it fully and freely upon him: but the servant not finding
it is never the richer, because he has not the possession of it. At length the
Lord lights a torch, guides his servant to the secret place, and by the light
of the torch shows him the treasure (which before in the mind and purpose of
the doner was wholly his) bids him to see and possess: Here the torch is that
Lords instrument by which he discovered to his servant the treasure, and
evidenced him to be indeed enriched. So and much more completely is faith Gods
instrument by which he justifies us to our selves, i. e. declares and
evidenceth us to be just and justified.

B. 2. Man is the causa secunda between God and the action; and so man should
be still said to justify himself. Either I understand him not, or he speaks
words without matter, or words that are nothing to the matter in hand. He is
speaking of justification as of a transient act of God upon man in time. This
act of God we acknowledge no other but Gods declaring and evidencing man to
himself justified, Gods manifestation or pronouncing his justification to his
conscience. How man in this act of God should be the causa secunda between God
in the action, he explaines not, and I perceive not. That man is the causa
secunda between God in the application of justification so manifested, I deny
not. But in this does man no more justify himself then is above expressed. Or
because it is faith in man which we pronounce to be Gods instrument of
justifying; is therefore man causa secunda, or a self-justifyer: nay, faith
even in man is Gods Creature, and the same, nothing of man's essence; Not of our
s^lves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. May not God lay up his own
instruments where it pleases his will and wisdom, for his own use? or cease
it to be Gods instrument or in Gods hand, when it is laid up in the heart of
man for his good?

Obj. But faith acts not in man without man as the second cause acting it, and
by such acting his faith, man should justify himself.

Sol. We make not man a stone, nor degrade him into a dead block, we grant of
him that actus agit. He has not lost his free will, but all possibility of
being saved by it, all the spiritualnesse of it, that without a new reparation
of it, it can will nothing in matters of salvation concurrent and conforming
with the will of God. But all man's actings of his faith when he is so renewed
and moved by the prime cause, is but to the receiving and application of his
justification evidenc^d to him: As it is Gods instrument and acted by God, so
it is Gods evidence to manifest to him his justification. It is Mr. Baxt^r and
his fellows that by their doctrine make m^n self-justifyers. Teaching that
Gods justification is conditional, and the alone instrument of God therein,
viz. the Gospel, holds forth the same universally to all, no less eff^ctually
to them that reject it, then to them that embrace it. But that it is a man's
faith and obedience begun and continued in until the day of judgment, that
makes this justification to be the justification of each singular person that
is to be justified; and so Gods instrument of justification justifyeth but
conditionally; i. e. no one singular man actually and absolutely. It Is man that
by his faith and works makes Gods universal justification to be his proper
justification and Gods conditional justification to be his actually and
absolutely. It is God that justifyeth all with a common and conditional
justification, but it is every man's task to make, and his own act when he has
made this justification to be really and undoubtedly his. Therefore he does but
gaze here to find a moate in his brothers eyes, fastening the beam in his own.

B. 3. For (as Aquinas) the action of the Principal cause, and of the
instrument is one action; and who dare say that faith is so Gods instrument?

4. The instrument must have influx to the producing of the effect by a proper
causality; and who dare say that faith has such an influx into our
justification?

I couple these two together because they are as twins that show no malignity
in their faces, but are by Mr. Baxter made to carry fire in their tails, Who
dares to say? and who dare say? What if we should say it? must we expect a
broken head from the Challenger? Is it but a word and a blow with him? Or does
he affright us with Gods judgments from saying it? is it his meaning, who has
so little fear or conscience toward God as to offend him and derogate from his
glory in saying it? O that there had been but a moytie of the reverence and
conscience toward God, to annihilate man, and advance the glory of Gods grace,
in Mr. Baxter, which abounds in many of those whom he here opposes; he then
surely would have cast this pernicious pamphlet of his into hellfire, (if it
had been possible) rather then published it to the nulling of Gods, and
deifying of man's righteousness. But to the matter, we dare and that in the
fear and presence of God to aver,

1. That the declaration of a man to his own conscience and evidencing to his
soul that he is justified in Christ, to be the one and same action of God the
principal cause and of faith the instrument. The declaration and manifestation
of justification to the soul is here the action, God as the principal cause
does it by faith his evidence and instrument; faith as the instrument and
evidence does it from God as the principal cause, in manner before expressed.
God healed Naaman of his Leprosy by the water of Jordan as his instrument; did
many wonders in Egypt, and in the Sea, and in the wilderness by Moses his Rod
as his instrument; subverted the walls and Towers of Jericho by the
isntrumental subserviency of men's voices and the sound or wind of Rams horns
and Trumpets: Christ gave sight to the blind man by a plaster of clay applied
to his eyes. Will he not acknowledge all these wonders to be the actions both of
God the principal cause, and of these so feeble instruments also? The
despicablenesse of the instruments and means do not spoil God of, but visibly
attribute unto God the whole glory of his grace and power which in the use of
more noble instruments would not appear so sensibly unto some apprehensions;
much more is the same action the action both of God and faith his instrument,
and this without all seeming ground of contradiction, when we attribute not to
faith any instrumentality under God to the working or effecting, but only to
the declaring and evidencing to man his justification, before effected and
completed in God and in Christ.

And 2. That faith as Gods instrument has influx (in its kind) to produce
this effect [the evidencing of man's justification to himself] by a proper
causality. I mean not, Mr. Baxter I think means not by a causality that is
naturally its own and proper to it: but by a proper causality which God has
given it in appointing and using it as his instrument to produce the effect.
Will deny any this to be true of the forementioned instruments? He that made
them his instruments begat in them a causality, and power instrumentally by and
under him to produce those effects.

Indeed to Mr. Baxter in respect of his principles, that denies Justification
as an immanent act in God constituting and accepting us righteous, and will
have this to be done only by a temporaneous and transient act of God by the
grace of the new Covenant, these assertions must seem to have some monstrosity
upon their faces, that faith should be so the instrument of God in justifying
or making us just. Yet such as he can easily swallow, because on the other side
his justification is but an universal conditional justification, i. e. a
justification in a possibility, or impossibility, but not at all in being; and
that faith should be termed the conditional instrument of God in producing a
conditional justification* I see not why it should set the man in a chafe, he
puts the dare to it therefore (I suppose) to make it too hot for the swallowing
of weak and fearful Christians. To them that know whosoever are justified in
themselves, that is, declared to be such within their own consciences, the same
were justified in God in Christ from all eternity: so that fai^t is Gods
instrument only to evidence them to themselves and in themselves justified, not
to justify them in Gods mind and will: (for there they are justified without
instruments) there is nothing formidable, nor rough in these assertions.

The objection which he adds, by which he pretends we seek to evade, we own
not, neither have we need in the defense of truth to seek evasions. Let him
name some one of his [some] that have so objected a passive instrument of
justification, or else leave us to conclude that the objection is of his own
head; partly to take advantage thereby, yet further to take his pastime in his
Logical and Metaphysicall learning, which may possibly please him but never
justify or save him; and partly by showing the weakness of the objection to
gull his unwary reader with an opinion of the weakness of their cause, who are
forced with such Egyptian reeds (for lack of better pillars) to sustain it. It
is one of the Jesuits principles to fetch arms indifferently either from
heaven or hell to storm the Church and truth of Christ, and to promote the holy
mother harlot of Rome. But I am weary following him while he brings nothing but
the Socinians right reason to be judge of the Mysterious doctrines of Christ;
and fear whether it be answerable before God, to spend time in answering his
babble with babble again; for the truth of Christ does neither stand nor fall
by what can be said for it or against it out of the principles or learning of
abused Aristotle. Let Mr. Baxter call to mind what he has read as elsewhere,
so in his adored Schibler in the second book of his Metaph. Cap. 3. in his
interserted oration, a little before the end of that book, pa. 211. (of the
book printed at Oxford) concerning the sophister, convinced by an unlearned
Confessor after his almost victorious disputes against all the Doctors of the
Nicene council many days together: If he take it for a truth, it may help to
convince him, that God is more effectually present in disputations about
Evangelicall matters, when they are totally confined to the Word, then when
they are handled after the rule and in the Predicament of carnal reason. It
argues that he undertakes a business not for God, but against him, else would
he not cast away spiritual and take up fleshly arms to maintain it. But fith
Mr. Baxter is Mr. Baxter, we shall crave leave to speak the less to him
henceforth where we find him to have little of the word, and reserve our selves
to speak more largely where the man for his recreation vouchsafes to abase
himself so low as to meddle with Scriptures.

B. Quest. But though faith be not the instrument of justification, may it not
be called the instrument of receiving Christ who justifyeth us?

Ans. I do not so much stick at this speech as at the former: yet is it no
proper or fit expr^ssion neither. For

1. The act of faith (which is it that justifyeth) is our actual receiving of
Christ, and therefore cannot be the instrument of receiving. To say, our
receiving is the instrument of our receiving, is a hard saying.

2. And the seed or habit of faith cannot fitly be called an instrument. For

1. The sanctified faculty it self cannot be the souls instrument, it being the
soul it self: and not any thing really distinct from the soul, (nor really
distinct from each other, as Scotus, Dr. Orbellus, Scaliger, etc. Dr. Jackson,
Mr. Pemble think, and Mr. Ball questions.)

2. The holiness of the faculties is not their instrument. For

1. It is nothing but themselves rectifyed, and not a being so distinct as may
be called their instrument.

2. Who ever calls habits or dispositions the souls instruments? The aptitude
of a cause to produce its effect, cannot be called the instrument of it: You
may as well call a man's life his instrument of acting, or the sharpness of a
knife the knives instrument, as to call our holiness or habitual faith the
instrument of receiving Christ.

I have before expressed in what sense we make or at least hold faith to be
man's instrument in applying Justification to himself. And 2. have manifested
the testimonies and authority of the Scripture herein; so that Mr. Baxter if he
list (as it lists him) to cavil, cavils not so much against all godly
Protestant writers whom he opposes, as against the holy Ghost, speaking by the
mouth of Christ himself, and his Apostles, whom through the loins of those he
smites at. It is not the first time that he has accused Christ and the holy
Ghost in this manner of impropriety and unfitness of expressions in
Scriptures. And why? because they speak not enough logically, and in all
probability never read through Aristotle's Metaphysics. But let us hear what he
can say here to prove the unpropernesse of that language which calls faith an
instrument of receiving Christ and justification in and by him. His reasons are
above in his own words rendered.

To the first I answer, Mr. Baxter makes and lays his own principles of
Religion, and from them, as from an impregnable mount he battereth Christ and
his doctrine. Should we grant him that faith is the receiving of Christ, yet

1. How shall it appear otherwise then by Mr. Baxters own Magisteriall
dictates, that justifying faith is nothing else but the receiving of Christ?

2. Why else does he make it simply and only a quality or act of the soul
without the adjection of its original from above, but to ingenerate into the
minds of men an opinion that it has its emanancy and rise from nature, from
freewill, that every man may have and act it, if, and when he will; and that it
is not infused of God to be isntrumental by his appointment for the producing
of any spiritual effect?

3. How does he prove that only the act of faith justifyeth? Yet

4. If all these dubious things were granted to him, his own words therein tend
to the confirmation rather then the infirming of the main conclusion which he
opposes that faith is the instrument of justification. For if the act of faith
be the receiving, then must faith it self so acting be the receptrix, or that
by which we receive Christ: but that by which man receives Christ is
isntrumental to his receiving of justification; for Christ is made of God to
us righteousness, he that has Christ has life; specially this will follow
upon Mr. Baxters principle of Christ and justification given to all
universally, to none in particular; he must be made ours therefore by receiving
him; and if faith does receive, how does it receive but as an instrument? or
whereas the well is deep, and we have nothing of our own to draw with, what
shall be the instrument of drawing and receiving if faith be not it?

5. And in this lies Mr. Baxters Sophism, that he puts the act of faith for
faith actuated. Though the act of faith were the receiving of Christ, yet faith
actuated and acting is that by which we receive Christ, and to say that by
which we receive is the instrument of our receiving is not a hard but a proper
saying. The act of Mr. Baxters hand was the writing of these lines. To say that
his writing was the instrument of his writing is a hard saying; but to say his
hand acted in writing was his instrument of writing it is not a hard saying.

To the second. It is wholly Sophistical. For when he says,

1. The sanctified faculty it self cannot be the souls instrument, because it
is the soul it self: what is this to the purpose? Wherefore puts he the soul
for the man, but to cheat in stead of informing his reader? If any say faith is
the instrument of the soul, he speaks by a Synecdoche, putting the part, the
chief essential part of man for the whole man, after the common use of the
Scriptures; and why may not the several faculties of the soul be as well man's
instruments as the several members of the body? It is not unproper to call the
eye the instrument by which man sees; or his ear the instrument of hearing; or
the the tongue of speaking; or the hand of working, etc. and why should it be
then unproper to call the faculties of the soul the instruments of man to act
those offices by each faculty to which each faculty is appropriated? Or when
faith is infused into the soul, does it disinstrument the faculties thereof,
that they become no more isntrumental to man in their places? Nay it makes
them isntrumental to work henceforth upon spiritual, as before upon natural
and moral objects. And this also answers his second reason why the habit of
faith cannot fitly be called our instrument; because (says he) the holiness
of the faculties is not their instrument. I grant it, but this is not the
question. That which he was to disprove is, that faith makes not the faculties
of the soul into which it is infused, isntrumental to the applying of Christ
to justification. The Compass is the Mariners instrument by which to steer his
ship, yet would it be nothing isntrumental to this purpose were it not touched
with the Loadstone that points it to the North Pole; so are the will and
understanding isntrumental to the receiving of Christ and justification in and
by him: not by any innate power in themselves, but as they are touched and
pointed directly by faith, to the blood of Christ for justification; as to the
doctrine of Christ for illumination, and to the Spirit of Christ for
sanctification. And for this cause we call not so much the faculty of the soul
the instrument, as faith, because faith makes it isntrumental to
justification. The power and disposition which it has to this act being not
natural from it self, but supernatural from faith infused into it, and
working on it. In stead of answering in order to every particle of what he
adds, it shall suffice to discover his Sophistry by which he seeks to elude
a sacred truth of the Gospel, in all that he says upon this Argument, and
this will be enough in answer to all that he says, yea manifest him unworthy
of an answer. As before he first makes all the instrumentality or causality
(whether proper or improper) of faith to consist in the act of faith, or faith
actuated; as if the Surgeons instruments were not his instruments while they
lie by him, but then only while he actually uses them in the several offices
to which they are appointed; and faith were no longer an instrument (if an
instrument) of justification, then while it is actually receiving Christ, and
so the same man should be justified and unjustifyed often in the same day, in the
same hour, being no longer justified then while faith is in the act of applying
Christ. And

2. In contracting the whole man, yea Christian into a soul as if we did make
such a faculty of the soul the souls and not the man's instrument to receive
Christ, which himself knows to be the meaning of no one of them against whom
he fights, but a slanderous and subtle trick of his own devising to make
their doctrine seem absurd in an alien sense, which in their own sense he can
in no wise confute. So

3. Here he further sophisticateth and perverteth their doctrine, in
contracting the whole man (not only into a soul, which he had done before, but)
into some one or two faculties of the soul into which faith is infused and
inherent as in its subject, as if they taught that faith is the instrument of a
faculty, and not man's instrument. The holiness of the faculties is not their,
i. e. the faculties instrument (says he) but themselves rectifyed. The
absurdities therefore which he infers as consequents of such an assertion are
the consequents of his slander, not of their doctrine. None ever taught faith
to be the instrument of a faculty, or isntrumental to justify a faculty, but
man's instrument and nstrumentall to justify man.

4. In supposing it as a thing granted that faith in the soul or faculties of
the soul is nothing but the holiness of such faculties, or their being
rectifyed, and not a being distinct so distinct as may be called their
instrument; a doctrine well agreeing with his principles who makes
sanctification the condition of justification, and no further attributes any
thing to faith but as it is a part of our sanctification, Page 195. n. 5, 6.
and thorowout this whole Treatise: but altogether denied by the Protestant
Churches, which ascribe not to faith any instrrumentality to justification, as
it is a part of our holiness and rectitude; but as by a supernatural virtue
which it infuseth into the soul to carry it out to Christ, to God in Christ for
remission and reconciliation. Otherwise godliness, hope, love, meekness, and
all other the fruits of the Spirit, should justify us equally with faith,
because the holiness and rectitude of the soul consists no less in these
then in faith. And this is the thing in question, if we grant it all is granted
which the worst of Jesuits seeks, or Mr. Baxter in this whole book contends
for; so that to make the whole thing in question, a known and granted
conclusion from which he will prove a particle in question, is too gross and
un- Baxterlike a Sophism; he is wont to spin finer webs, what make such course
threads in his fingers? And why says he, Not so distinct? is faith a being
distinct from the faculty in which it is? Even this that it is a being distinct
from the essence of man, speaks it capable of an instrumentality to man's
justification, especially God having appointed and fitted it to that end; much
more of being an instrument in general for man's use, which is all that Mr.
Baxter should have denied, when he denies it to be the faculties instrument.

5. In reiterating the soul for the whole man, and annexing captious words to
it, Who ever called habits or dispositions the souls instruments? Thus he
plays the Sophister to make the instrumentality of faith ridiculous, as if we
affirmed it isntrumental to justification quatenus as it is, and only in this
respect because it is a habit or disposition of the soul; when contrariwise we
ascribe this power and office to it, as it is a virtue or gift of grace,
endewed with this property from the author of it to cleave to Christ, and draw
forth the soul with it to Christ for justification, as has been before
expressed; and in this office it has no other habit, power, or disposition of
the soul natural or infused, a corrivall with it.

6. He at last deals no less sophistically in his comparisons; You may as well
call (says he) a man's life his instrument of acting, or the sharpness of a
knife the knives instrument, as to call our holiness or habitual faith the
instrument of receiving Christ. The aptitude of a cause to produce its effect,
cannot be called the instrument.

There is no parity in the Comparison: Life to acting, and faith to receiving
of Christ are not (Mr. Baxter will not say they are) in one and the same kind
and order of causes and effects. Besides, one of the effects is put with the
other subtlely left without an object, as if the receiving of Christ were no
more then, and altogether as natural to man, as receiving indefinitely any
natural object; so that albeit this Comparison may stand in some parity with a
natural and civil faith without the object Christ annexed to it, yet the
divine faith, whereof we hear speak, is of an another, an upper and higher
region, and agrees not in motion with the natural life, or with the natural
or civil faith. The one moves its course and operation in a way that God by
nature has prescribed, and the other in the way which God by grace has
prefixed. Their orbs are severed, and not confounded either with other. As for
the other Comparison, the sharpness of the knife: Nothing else undoubtedly but
the sharpness of M. Baxters wit could have devised it. Is then faith in man no
more then sharpness in a knife? What good then might a ship-load of
whet-stones and grinding-stones do among the Turks to make them Christians? The
sharpness of the knife is not any thing really distinct from the knife; it is
otherwise with the faith of a man. The knife is man's instrument, the sharpness
thereof is but the aptitude of the instrument by which man as the efficient
produces the effect. How shall this square in the Comparatum? Man must be the
principal efficient cause, what will he assign to be the instrument whereof
faith is the aptitude to produce the effect?

But I fear of transgressing by following him, that -- Parvis comp^nere magna
solebat: That dares with audacious arrogance to measure the bottomless ocean
in his fist, and to try Celestial and Spiritual things in the scales of
Nature, and to compare, not with the Apostle, spiritual things with
spiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 13. but with carnal; profanely making the Mysteries of
Christ to be rather the whetstone of his wit, then the object of his reverence
and ballast of his conscience.

I shall forbear here to add my judgment concerning what faculty or faculties
of the soul are the subject of faith; Whether faith may be more properly said
to receive Christ by the faculty, or the faculty by faith? How far faith in the
habit, and how far in the act may be said to justify? These and other things
may come more properly to be handled afterward then in this place. It shall
suffice that here notwithstanding Mr. Baxters winnowings, yet faith fails not
from being our instrument of applying or receiving Christ.

Eighthly, The latter which he makes his sixth Question, Why he makes faith
the C^usa sine qua non, he thus endeavors to maintain, as it follows in the
n^xt Chapter.

CHAP. XXVI.
Arg. Mr. Baxters further dispute upon the same Subject, examined and answered.

B. Page 223. TO the 6. and last Q^estion I answer, Faith is plainly and
undeniably the condition of our justification. The whole tenor of the Gospel
shows that. And a condition is but a Causa sine qua non, or a medium, or a
necessary antecedent.

Short and in compass of words little is it which he here speaks, yet if we
look to the matter thereof in it two things are principally to be examined.

1. That he makes faith the condition of justification, and what he means by
that term?

2. That he calls it the Causa sine qua non. He means (questionless) the same
thing by both, but the words differ, and he uses both, as by both together, so
by either part to get advantage to his cause. Therefore I shall examine them
severally.

To the former I have spoke somewhat largely before in the examination of his
13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 43, 44, and 45. Theses, as he gave me occasion in
these several positions to answer what he there asserted of conditional
justification. I have therefore here the less to speak, referring the reader
to what has been spoken before. Yea in this point I should be totally silent,
because Mr. Baxter in words speaks no more here then what some of our most
sound and godly Divines have spoken before him (that faith is the condition of
justification) were it that Mr. Baxter means as they mean. For though in the
best meaning of the best men the propriety of the terms or phrase may be much
questioned and give occasion of much dispute, yet traversing controversies
about words, when there is agreement in the substance to which both parties
drive, is in my apprehension a business so far tending to distractions and
breach of union among the Saints, that it is the last and least Trade (I am
confident) that ever will befall me to drive. But in this point though Mr.
Baxter here speaks in words what some of ours have said, and do say still, and
that without any detriment (that I can see) to the Gospel: Yet his meaning and
theirs are in no less antipathie then a Hawk and a Heron, and that as in other
lesser, so principally in these particulars of moment.

1. By faith they mena our application, or faith as it is our instrument of
applying Christ and the grace of God in Christ to our justification; he by
faith means not only the (...) credere as a part of our inherent
righteousness, but as a general and common word that compriseth within it
self all good qualifications and good works whatsoever, as elsewhere, and
specially in and under his 70, and 71. Theses he declares himself; so that he
makes and under the word Faith understands all these as equal conditions
with faith of our justification.

2. By condition they mean that which being once attained and once fixed upon
Christ, speaks us absolutely justified for ever. So that in calling faith the
condition of justification, they mean we cannot be justified without it, but
having once by faith apprehended Christ we are by it united and joined to
Christ, and by force of our union with him are thenceforth absolutely and
irrevocably pardoned and accepted as righteous in Gods fight. He calls it so a
condition as that it continues still a condition, justifying us only
conditionally and not absolutely, so that it leaves our estate still one and
the same, no more justified and pardoned when believers then when unbeleevers:
For by the satisfaction of Christ we are before faith comes conditionally
justified if we believe, and when faith is come we remain still but
conditionally justified if we believe, our safety being as loose and uncertain
then as before, depending still upon the residence and abode of faith in us as
before it did upon the possibility of its future ingeneration into us and
acting in us; and that we are no longer justified then while we believe and
obey: so that by believing and unbeleeving, obeying and rebelling we may be
justified and unjustifyed again a thousand times before we die, and how often
after, himself expresses not. I need not mention more, these two differences
are enough to declare that although here he speak in the same tone with some of
our Divines, yet his judgment no more agrees with theirs then the Pope with
Luther and Calvine, Elymas with Paul, Simon Magu^ with Peter, or the Scribes
and Pharisees with Christ.

In stead of speaking what might be further expected, I shall only content my
self here to lay open some of the many monstrous absurdities and mischiefs that
follow this doctrine.

1. It proclaims mutability in God, and alteration in his mind and will, as
swift and sudden as in mutable and sinful man. For if God justify and
unjustifie, forgive and unforgive, love and hate, as often as belief and
unbelief, obedience and disobedience do nod and succeed either after other in
man through infirmity, then is there no more steadfastness and consistency with
himself, in God then in man: but rather God is swayed hither and thither in
willing and nilling, love and hatred by influx from man (as the Sea by the
influx of the Moon) then man by influx from God. Mr. Baxter sees this
absurdity, as well as his fellows the Arminians, and goes about here and there,
by the Arminians Sophisms (for lack of better) to wipe off the stain: telling
us that the change is in man the object, and not in God. God hates Paul
unbeleeving and persecuting, but loves him believing and obeying, the change is
here in the object, not in God, No more then the Sun is changed by the variety
of the Creatures, which it enlightneth and warmeth; or the glass by the
variety of faces, which it represents; or the eye by the variety of colors,
which it beholds, page 174. But Aethiopem dealbat. If God love to salvation,
and hate to damnation one and the same person, and love succeeds into the place
of hatred, and hatred into the place of love, and God that erewhile willed the
salvation, anon wills the damnation, and after that again the salvation of
the same man, etc. (as this kind of Anti-Gospellers assert) this is one and
the same mutablenesse in God, whether it proceed from a principle of
inconstancy within, or from the mutation of the object without him. It denies
not the Chameleons that change their color from white to black, and black to
white, to be mutable, because these changes befall them from outward objects
the diverse colored Carpets on which they are laid. Or if he shall object (as
do the Arminians) Here is no show of change in God, for God changes not his
purpose of saving, because he had never but a conditional purpose and will to
save, viz. if man will believe and obey; and this conditional intent remains
in God still, together with a conditional intent to hate and damn him if he
perform not the conditions. I should answer him in the words of our Divines in
answer to the Arminians; and Mr. Baxter knows them to be beaten with shame out
of this plea, therefore to decline the strokes, I find him not yet adventuring
to make use of this objection.

2. It denies (in effect and substance) the justification and remission of any
man in this life, for to forgive upon such a condition, as no man has power in
himself to perform, is but a verbal; not a real forgiveness. And Mr. Baxter
will not let out one gry or jot from his lips that shall give hope to the
sinner, yea to the believer of any dram of grace and power, that the Lord will
minister to the Elect more then to the reprobates for the supportation of their
Faith: and from themselves they have all propensivenesse to fall, and no
strength to stand. In this respect therefore he makes the state of believers
worse then the state of unbeleevers. For Miserrimum est fuisse beatos, To have
had Faith, yea Christ in hand, and Heaven in hope, and then to fall from all,
makes their case more miserable, in the loss of it, then it would have been if
they had never had any thing in hand or in hope.

It utterly destroys all joy in believing, all peace of Conscience, all
consolation in the holy Ghost, while it sets the believer in the arms of
Christ's love, and participation of his merits and benefits, as Dionysius placed
Damocles at his table with all sumptuous provisions before him, Music,
attendance, and whatsoever else was Majestical or delightful to cheer him; but
with a sharp sword hanging by a single hair over his head threatening him. No
other (after Mr. Baxter) is the state of a believer, in all his most spiritual
enlargements and comforts in Christ, there is but a single hair between him and
hell fire. Death is in the pot of all his contentments. Fear of imminent
vengeance gives him not leave to taste one of the sweet morsels upon, or crumbs
that fall from Gods table. And this is a Gospel from hell, contrary to the
everlasting Gospel which Christ brought from heaven, giving a joy that none
shall take from believers, Joh 16. 22. The foundation thereof, the love of God
in Christ, remaining immutable, impregnable; I am persuaded that neither death
nor life, nor angels nor principalities, etc. shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Rom 8. 38, 39.

4. Whereas there are three acts considerable about our Justification, 1.
Christ's giving; 2. Gods accepting the satisfaction given for us; and 3. Gods
justifying or declaring, and evidencing us justified in and to our consciences,
for this satisfaction so given and accepted; I would here demand of which of
these Faith is a Condition. If he say of Christ's giving satisfaction, this is a
contradiction; for Christ gave satisfaction before we believed or lived; so
that Faith which came after could not be the Condition of an Act that went
before, except he will say that Christ must so often dye as sinners attain to
believe: If of Gods acceptance, then more is ascribed to our faith then to
Christ's death for our justification, and faith shall be more then collateral
with the sacrifice of Christ to our salvation, the sufficiency of satisfaction
remaining only in Christ's blood, but the efficacy thereof arising from man's
faith: yea and so Christ should have paid our debts, and spilt his blood for us
at the feet of the Father without knowing whether he would accept it or no, and
so whether there should be the least fruit of his death (for the justification
of the believers before his death is but conditional until the day of
Judgment after Mr. Baxter, and what may fall out as touching the apostasy of
their souls before that day is uncertain.) And it being not known of those that
should come after him, who or whether any would believe and persevere in
believing. If of Gods justifying us in our selves, i. e. declaring and
evidencing us justified, we do in some cases acknowledge that God hides his
face and evidenceth not his love in Christ in the same degree to all believers,
but in God and in Christ they are still justified, and their salvation is sure.
But Mr. Baxter shakes off this Act of Justification in disdain, therefore the
absurdities which follow in his conditions in respect of one of the former
cannot be avoided. I forbear to enlarge my self further in this kind here
having spoken to it before, and finding a necessity of speaking more afterward.

But it will be expected that Mr. Baxters Arguments be rather answered, then
his conclusion denied and opposed; let us therefore examine them; as far as I
can find they are in number two, by which he proves faith to be the condition
of justification.

1. It is plain and undeniable. This I acknowledge is a Noli me tangere,
strikes dead in the place, renders the respondent as mute as a fish: Let a
wiser man undertake, it is past my skill to answer.

2. The whole tenor of the Gospel shows that: specially such Scriptures as give
their testimony of our justification in Christ before faith entered to purify
our hearts: When we were without strength, when sinners, when enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death, and justified by the blood of his Son, Romans 5.
6, 8, 9, 10. While we were in our blood, polluted, Ezekiel. 16. 6. While yet
unborn, and had done neither good n^r evil, Romans 9. 11. 13. When yet of the
world, and not served from the common mass of mankind, Joh. 3. 16. God loved
us to salvation, While yet dead in sins and trespasses, he has quickened and
saved us by grace, Ephesians. 2. 5. Blotting out the handwriting, etc. forgiving
all our trespasses, unto us in Christ while yet hanging on the Cross, Col. 2.
13, 14, 15. making us accepted in Christ the be* loved, Ephesians. 1. 6. putting
away our sin and perfecting us for ever by the sacrifice and blood of Christ,
i. e. in Christ offering himself and his blood in sacrifice, Heb. 9. 26. and
10. 14. and all this before we had a being who now live, much more before we
were in a capacity of having any condition in our selves of Justification: As
also such Gospel Scriptures as affirm this remission, or justification
unreversible, calling it an eternal redemption, Heb. 9. 12. a perfecting of us
for ever, Heb. 10. 14. so that there is no more condemnation, Rom 8. 1. no more
remembrance of iniquity, Heb. 10. 17. no more separation from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 39. and other many such testimonies before in
part quoted, and partly remaining to be alleged if occasion shall require;
all which do concur in one harmony to evince Justification once obtained to
depend upon no conditions, but to be absolute and indefeasable, that if any
fall away, it is because they only seemed, but never were in the number of the
truly justified, 1 John 2. 19. Whosoever lays all these together, and will
not be convinced that Faith in Mr. Baxters sense is the condition of
Justification, but will believe the Gospel it self more then what Mr. Baxter
speaks of the Gospel; for any thing that I know, he may remain the Disciple
of Christ, and unconvinced still.

In the Appendix, in the answer to the six and seven Questions or Objections,
page 41. to the 46. Mr. Baxter makes it his task again to prove the
justification of the New Covenant to be conditional and not absolute. But so
poorly does he there handle his dispute, so unlike Mr. Baxter, who when
Scriptures fail him, is elsewhere wont to play his game with Sophistry (which
here does very little help him;) that unto a discreet man nothing can more
breed a suspicion of the goodness of the cause, then the hard shifts,
confusednesse, contradictions, and other weak devices and extravagancies, to
which so accomplished a scholar is put (even when he has no opponent but a mere
question) to make it seem probable. How does the man put himself here into a
wood or wilderness, seeking but finding no certain way out, acting his wit and
study to the highest to expedite himself in a clear way that might be visible
and plain to himself and others? and not finding it, he at last does what may
be done in such a labyrinth, trusts to groping for what he cannot see. And
first he seems to have found in the dark a twofold Covenant of Grace, one
absolute, and the other conditional. First then he follows the absolute
Covenant, if that will or can lead him with certainty to any safety or show of
reason what to speak of it, as he makes it contradistinct to the Conditional
Covenant, or Justification; that the former which he cannot deny may stand as a
cipher, but this be the Numeral, and only in power and force: here he is
carried in a maze of doubts and rovings, not finding where to pitch.

1. Page 41. Sect. the 42. he would shake off this absolute Justification as a
Prophecy and promise made only to the Jews, not extending to us: but here the
Apostle meets him in the way, Heb. 8. 8, 9. otherwise expounding the Scripture
that holds it forth: so that this shift fails him.

2. He questions whether the Apostle mention it as an absolute promise, or else
in an opposition to he knows not what; but foreseeing what would herein be
answered, he lets fall this too, page 42.

3. He brings something which he thinks will hold water: that this absolute
Covenant of Justification is made with the Elect, and not with mankind in
general. What is this to the purpose? He is here treating of the New Covenant
as it respects Justification. And what one Scripture can he produce that tells
us of all mankind, and not of the Elect only justified? In what a straight is
the man, that in stead of distinctions, which were ever wont to be his Egyptian
Reed to succor him, he is forced to fly to confusions for help? For so he
confounds together here the promulgation of Justification with Justification in
its being, or with the being of it, when these are different. As well might he
pronounce the rich glutton to be no less blessed in seeing then was Lazarus by
being in Abraham's bosom, as to pronounce all mankind justified, because
Christ is conditionally offered to all for Justification. We have granted
before the promulgation and offer of Justification by the Gospel to be
conditional, but the gift and being of it to be absolute. Neither is there
any thing in this offer to our Justification in Christ which is absolute before
and without any promulgation or conditional offer thereof to us. Nor any thing
to the justified and actually declared just in themselves: Justification is no
longer in a conditional offer to them, but in its absolute being within them.
Whatsoever therefore he adds there page 43, 44. is wide from the question,
being not limited to the Justification of the New Covenant which is the subject
of his Treatise, which here he shunneth and talks extravagantly about
sanctification, because he cannot confute the absolute justification, but that
it does and will stand, and standing will not admit a conditional justification
to stand with it and by it, in its being, though the offer thereof (before it
is in being) be conditional.

And this is all which at length he concludes page 45. of the conditional
Covenant of Grace, which without all this circuition would have been granted
him: viz. that it is propounded and offered to mankind conditionally, if they
will believe, and without this faith none has or shall have the benefit and
comfort thereof to themselves and in themselves, because all these that do not
or shall not (being in a capacity to) believe are reprobates, and as many as
are elect shall come to Christ and believe in him, as has been before showed.

What he adds for the application may have some pertinency to the matter
there objected, but it has none to the thing here in question. Therefore I
pass it by as not concerning us.

2. To his Causa sine qua non, briefly thus.

1 In so tearming Faith he denies faith to be any cause at all of our
Justification, for that is but Causa ^quivoca, or nomine tenus, or titulo
tenus, has but the name not the nature of a cause, has no causality upon,
gives no influx into the effect.

2 Neither whatsoever it be, is Faith the Causa sine qua non of Justification,
in that sense as Mr. Baxter takes and defines it either in his stricter or
larger definition: except he will say that no Infants are justified, who do
not, cannot accept Christ, much less so believe as in his larger definition he
sets forth faith.

3 Faith is not the Causa sine qua non of our justification in God, no nor yet
in Christ's Justification (as he terms it) for these are antecedaneous to our
faith, and our faith not an antecedent to it.

4 At the utmost it can be but the Causa sine qua non of Gods declaring and
evidencing of our selves to our selves justified; and this justification Mr.
Baxter so disdaineth and snuffs at, that he will not own it much less mention
it. Yet can he not with all his Sophistry name any other act of justification
in this life whereof faith can be proved to be the Antecedent, Medium, or Causa
sine qua non.

5 Why does he call faith and all the conqualifications wherewith he loadeth
the shoulders thereof, and all the works which he makes its Concomitants, the
Causa sine qua non, as if all these with their Colaterall in the other scale of
his balance, Christ's satisfaction, did make up the one and sole Causa sine qua
non of our justification; can none else be named? Besides other, the weakness
and infirmity of the Law to justify, as it removes the impediment of
justifiablenesse in Gods Court of strict Justice: ( For had there been a Law
given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by
the Law, Gal. 3. 21.) and sin which removes the same impediment, might more
properly and socially then Christ's satisfaction have been placed on horseback
in the same saddle of Causa sine qua non, had not Mr. Baxter thought Christ
would bless, but these would have defiled this golden saddle of his own either
making or appropriating to this use, and so bespattered and undressed the
righteousness of his Qualifications and good works that they would never more
become fit to ride on horsback in procession with the Holy Wafer. Thus his
condition and Causa sine qua non must be new modelled ere they will be
Canonical.

But see we here the man's wit which never fails him at a dead lift. What he
cannot act by power he seeks to compass by a stratagem. Because he cannot
cover the nakedness of his assertion, he labors to make bare ours, and cast
filth in it, that having diverted the eyes of his Reader thither, he may forget
the vanity of his Condition, or Causa sine qua non. And thus he does it.

B. Here by the way take notice that the samemen, thus blame the advancing of
Faith so high, as to be our true Gospel Righteousness, Posit, 17 20. and to be
imputed in a proper sense, Posit. 23. do yet when it comes to trial, ascribe
far more the faith, then those they blame: making it Gods instrument in
justifying. In examining all these quoted Theses, I have showed both who they
are which blame him, or at least his doctrine, which was born before ever he
commenced such a Doctor, viz. All the Orthodox Protestant Divines and
Christians; and withal for what they blame it, viz. as it is Papism,
Socinianism, and at the best Arminianism. 3. To which I have also made out
their just grounds of blaming it, as may be there seen; yet to cheat his
Reader, he calls these, those very men, as if there were some few contemptible
Antinomians lately sprung up: when himself knows them to be all the Churches of
Christ, which since the Reformation have been called Protestants. But of what
blasphemy or evil fact does he accuse them? That they ascribe more to Faith
then those they blame, making it Gods instrument in justifying. Yea but we have
seen or thought we had seen (at least) just grounds for their so doing: how
does Mr. Baxter aggravate it to make it odious?

B. 1. And so to have part of the honor of Gods own Act. Fie upon the Hugonets
and Lutherans! if this be true, who then will not run from them at Mr. Baxters
heels to Rome? But the Scriptures make Balaams A^se Gods instrument to rebuke
the madness of the Prophet, Namb. 22. 28, 30. 2 Pet. 2. 15, 16. The Raven his
Instrument to feed Elijah, 1 King. 17. 6. The brazen Serpent his instrument of
healing the Israelites bitten with fiery Serpents, Joh. 3. 14. Numb. 21. 9. The
Assyrians his instruments of chastising and reforming his people, Isa 10. 5.
etc. and the very Devil his instrument of trying Job, Job. 1. 12. and of
executing his pleasure upon Ahab, 2 King. 22. 21, 22. Shall we now fall foul
with the Scriptures, and accuse them that they ascribe part of the honor of
Gods own acts to the Ass, the Raven, the Serpent, the Assyrians, the Devil, by
affirming these to be the instruments by which God acted? Does not the
seeblenesse of the means and instruments speak out the whole honor of the
action to pertain to the Lord? Was it to honor his slaves, and abase his
freemen and subjects, the Lords Israel, that Solomon made the former, not the
latter his instruments in building the Temple? Mr. Baxter himself must conclude
the contrary.

B. 2. And that from a reason intrinsecall to faith it self. So acted the
Assyrians and the Devil in the acts before mentioned, as instruments in Gods
hand from a reason intrinsecall to themselves. Did this increase their honor?
Rational men in their actions make use of instruments that are fittest from an
intrinsecall reason within themselves to produce the effect purposed. They seek
not to speak with their ears, or hear with their eyes, or see with their heels,
etc. because these have not a reason intrinsecall in them to such effects; do
they therefore ascribe honor to the tongue above other members, as the eyes or
hands, etc. because they speak with the tongue and not with their eyes and
hands? And do we ascribe to God or derogate from him, when we say he has no
less wisdom then a man, therefore uses, yea makes instruments both within
and without fitted for his work? when the Apostle affirms the foolishness of
Preaching Gods power to save, he robs God of none of his power to deifie either
the foolishness of Preaching, or the Word preached, or the mortal Preacher
thereof with Gods power.

B. And from a reason that will make other graces to be instruments as well as
faith. For love does truly receive Christ also. 1. Qui alterum accu^at probri,
ipsum se intueri oportet. This trick he has learned of Potiphars wife to
accuse innocent Joseph of the fault whereof her self, not he, was guilty. Mr.
Baxter indeed makes Faith and Love con-causes (of one and the same kind) to
Justification, viz. the several parts that make up the body of Evangelicall
Righteousness which he says justifies us, page 236. na. 3. why does he
proclaim it a scandalous crime in us, which he fastens to himself as a praise?

2. We affirm not faith to be Gods instrument as it receives Christ, nor any
further to be the instrument of Gods justifying, then of his declaring and
evidencing us to our selves justified: We affirm it to be our instrument (yet
as given us of God) as it receives Christ. Gods as by it he evidenceth life and
righteousness to be ours; ours as by it we receive Christ and the
justification, yea justifier in receiving Christ. And when that Mr. Baxter
shall make it his task not only to say (as here) but also to prove that God
has qualified love for this Office, I shall not doubt to undertake the task to
answer him.

B. 4. And worst of all, from a reason which will make man to be the Causa
proxima of his own justification. For man is the Causa proxima of believing and
receiving Christ, and therefore not God but man is said to believe. Here is
much of sound to astonish fools, but nothing of substance to satisfy the
judicious; For

1. Did we hereby make man the Causa proxima, yet it is but the Causa proxima
instrumentalis passiva of his Justification, the next instrument to apply it,
and that not by any thing naturally his own, but by the new hand of Faith,
which God has given him to this end. And this obscures not but cleers up the
Grace of God. Therefore by faith that it might [appear to] be by grace, Romans 4.
16. The beggar by receiving the freely given treasure may be as properly called
the Causa proxima of his enriching: yet has the Benefactor that freely gave
it, the entire praise of it.

2. Or if there were any damage herein done to the Grace of God, how much more
guilty is Mr. Baxter of the fact, in making man's faith and works the very
righteousness which gives man right and title to Christ, and the
Justification which is by Christ; yea a righteousness perfect and worthy: as
he has expressed himself before in what we have already examined. Is not this
to make Christ's satisfaction the remote Causa sine qua non (as he calls it in
this 56 Thesis) and man himself the Causa proxima sine qua non? and if the
Causa proxima must in his judgment have the pre-eminence, then in his
judgment man's righteousness has herein pre-eminence above the righteousness
of Christ.

3. Yea not only this but the very devil is the Causa proxima sine qua non of
our justification (according to Mr. Baxter) and so must in this great business
have the upper hand of Christ. For the Justification here is but a mere Embryon
of Justification with him; which most times comes to naught and naught. But
Justification in the day of Judgment is the thing consummate and in its
perfection, which (he tells us) is our acquitting from accusation and guilt,
which shall be then pleaded and managed against us by Satan. Here he makes the
Devils plea and managing of the Laws accusation, the next Causa sine qua non,
upon which our final and complete justification follows. These. 39. page 188,
189. Where now is his worst of all, in his or in our Doctrine? Thus while Mr.
Baxter fights against us with a sword that has neither edge nor point, he
neither hurts us, not provides for his own defense, but by brandishing his
weapon untowardly, wounds his own face with the hilts.

B. And yet these very men do send a Hue and Cry after the (...) credere for
robbing Christ of the glory of Justification, when we make it but a poor
improper Causa sine qua non. Why and yet? All that he has said against them is
not against them but against himself: and for himself he has said nothing.
Only he has entertained his Reader with a declamation against us, who expected
his own assertion should have been confirmed, he has by all laid never a
Millstone, no nor a Cherrystone in the way to hinder the pursuants of the (...)
Cr^dere at all for its sacrilege in robbing Christ. When we make it, etc.
which we, with whom does he side? or whom makes he to side with him, but
Socinus, Arminius, and one or two possibly of their scholars among us, which
have carried this and many other monsters in their belly long before they were
delivered of them, and most probably have yet more behind which have not yet
seen the Sun. It is Mr. Baxters unhappiness that these notwithstanding his
wresting and catching them by the heel, come to the light still before him.
This is that (most likely) which stifles his Universal Redemption in the womb.
But having nothing else to do to make him gracious at Rome, because he could
not speak first, his care is to speak all bigger then they all that have spoken
before him. We make it a poor improper Causa sine qua non: i. e. in true and
plain English, a poor perfect mer^torious righteousness, a collateral of and
no less necessary then the righteousness of the Lord Christ, as in this 56,
and before in and under his 17, 19, 20, 23, 24, and 26 Theses he has enough
manifested himself.

B. Some think that Faith may be some small* low and impulsive cause: but I
will not give it so much: though if it be made a Procatarctick objective cause,
I^ will not contend. If he mean any other difference between the impulsive, and
the Procatartick objective cause, besides that which is between the General
and the Special, it is past my skill to understand him, or to comprehend what
he denies and what he grants; no doubt either he would not be understood, or
else he attributes to his righteousness of faith and good works an excitation
(but not an impulsion forsooth) of the Grace of God actually to justify those
whom he beholds Schild. Metaph. li. 1. c^. 44. N. 24, 25, 40.
fairly dressed therewith, and so the beauty of the object enamors God to love
and justify. And what more do the P^pists teach? and so our justification as
Gods act is but in posse till our righteousness as a sufficient cause brings
it into esse or act.

Thus far of Mr. Baxters causes of Justification, in which if he has
illustrated or confirmed any truth of God, God is much beholden to him and
Aristotle for it. For distrusting the succor of the Scriptures, he has left
them, and brought nothing else but Logical and Metaphysical notions and reasons
to prove all that which he has said.

CHAP. XXVII.
Arg. Whether the sinner be justified only by the act, not the habit of faith?
And whether it be not ordained to this use by reason of the useful property
which God has infused into it, to receive Christ? Whether and in what sense a
man may be said [properly] to be justified by faith? In which also some things
are intermixed about Mr. Baxters (...) Credere, and conditions of Justification.

B. These. 57.

IT is the act of faith which justifyeth men at age, and not the habit: yet not
as it is a good work, or as it has in it self any excellency above other
graces: but

1. In the nearest sense directly and properly as it is [the fulfilling of the
condition of the new Covenant.]

2. In the remote and more improper sense, as it is [the receiving of Christ
and his satisfactory righteousness.

It is not for nothing that Mr. Baxter puts here a restriction upon
justification by the Act of faith, limiting it to [ men of age:] Are then elect
infants that die before they attain age and strength of reason to put forth
their faith into act, justified only by the habit of faith? It seems then
that the hue and cry has apprehended the (...) credere, as to them, and laid
it fast from justifying them. Again, if they are justified by the habit of
faith as a habit of inherent grace, (though not such as he here denies to have
an excellency above other graces) what difference does he put between
Justification and Sanctification? Does he not speak the same things here with
the Papists? Yea in a higher dialect then any of them? For they grant to
Infants justification only by the washing of Christ's blood conferred upon them
in Baptism, without any qualification of their own. But this man (if he thus
say) justifies them by an inherent righteousness of their own. But if Infants
are justified without the act of faith, and yet not by its habit, how are they
then Justified but by that which he calls Christ's own justification as a
public person at his resurrection? which notwithstanding he utterly denied
These. 42. and its Explication: and if they are so justified, will it not follow
then that justification by the act of faith is Gods declaring and man's applying
of his justification to his present comfort and full assurance? (which Mr.
Baxter explodeth as an unsufferable conclusion) But dying Infants are to have
no use of this present comfort and full assurance, therefore it suffices them
to be justified in Christ, though not in themselves. Lastly, or do they depart
hence unjustifyed, because without actual believing and receiving of Christ,
and so shall be justified in the day of judgment, because at the resurrection
they shall actually believe? What a cry do the poor souls in the interim then
make in that Limbus insantum? And why may not then (according to Origin) all
the Devils and reprobates in hell be then justified and saved also, because
then they may actually believe, and (according to Mr. Baxter) the condition of
justification lasts until that day.

B. Explication, That faith does not properly justify through any excellency
that it has above other graces, or any more useful property, may appear thus:

To the excellency of faith above other graces I have nothing to say. But to
the reasons which he brings to deny the more useful property of it, I shall
speak briefly.

B. 1. Then the praise would be due to faith. No more then when God gives us
meat, the praise of our nutriment and life is due to our teeth, because they
have a more useful property to grind and chew the meat, then our eyes or ears.

B. 2. Then love would contend for a share if not a priority. This is only said
and not proved, or declared upon what grounds love should contend.

B. 3. Then faith would justify though it had not been made the condition of
the Covenant. 1. We deny faith to be the condition of the Covenant in Mr.
Baxters sense. If he would have spoken directly to them against whom he
argues, he should have said, Then faith would have justified though it had
never been appointed and given of God as an instrument to receive Christ the
justifyer. And then we should answer,

2. That it is so much as if he had said, Then our teeth would have nourished
and preserved life, although God had never appointed and given them to us as
instruments to chew the nourishing meat. And thus the Caveat that he adds
becomes useless, viz.

B. Let those therefore take heed, that make faith to justify, merely because
it apprehends Christ; which is its natural essential property. For none
affirms faith to justify merely because it apprehends Christ, without
considering also Gods ordering and fitting it to this office, together with his
promise, and the virtue laid up in Christ to justify all that do by faith so
apprehend him.

B. That it is faith in a proper sense that is said to justify, and not
Christ's righteousness only, which it receives, may appear thus,

1. From a necessity of a twofold righteousness, which I have before proved,
in reference to the twofold Covenant.

2. From the plain and constant phrase of Scripture, which says, he that
believes shall be justified, and that we are justified by faith; and that
faith is imputed for righteousness. It had been as easy for the holy Ghost to
have said, that Christ only is imputed, or his righteousness only, or Christ
only justifyeth, etc. if he had so meant. He is the most excusable in an
error, that is led into it by the constant express phrase of Scripture.

3. From the nature of the thing. For the effect is ascribed to the several
causes (though not alike) and in some sort to the conditions, especially me
thinks they that would have faith to be the instrument of justification, should
not deny that we are properly justified by faith as by an instrument. For it is
as proper a speech to say [our hands or our teeth feed us,] as to say [our meat
feeds us.]

I shall not have need to speak much to this passage, because Mr. Baxter has
before said and I have answered to the greatest part of it in examining his 23.
These. with the explication thereof. Here as there I shall defend against him,
that it is not faith as it is righteousness, but Christ's righteousness by
which we are said to be justified.

The first reason which he brings to evince the contradictory and contrary
conclusion, has been there examined, and I will not here actum agere.

To the second, 1. He should have quoted that Apocryphal Scripture which says,
He that believes shall be justified (as if he were not already justified:) I
find it not in the Canonical.

2. Those Scriptures which say we are justified by faith, say not that we are
justified by it as it is our righteousness, or any part of our justifying
righteousness; and those that say it is imputed to us (as Mr. Baxter will have
it) for righteousness, have been sufficiently spoken to under Thesis 23. And
by the way Mr. Baxter is not ignorant that the original text may be more
properly rendered unto or to righteousness then for righteousness, and that
the old translation and most of our Protestant Divines so render it, neither
have I met with any one that declares his dislike of that version. And from the
text so read what Mr. Baxter can suck out to stablish the righteousness of
faith not as the same but as a collateral with the righteousness of Christ's
satisfaction to justification, I understand not.

3. To his Only, only, and only, I answer,

1 That it is not the first time that Mr. Baxter has taken the boldness to
teach the holy Ghost to speak properly and fully.

2 When the holy Ghost says, That the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin,
1 John 1. 7. that whosoever is washed [therein] needs no other washing, Joh.
13. 10. that he is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, Joh.
1. 29. that by his one offering he has for ever perfected them that are
sanctified, by taking away their sins and iniquities, Heb. 10. 14, 17. That he
is made of God righteousness to us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. that he was made sin for us,
that we might become the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. That he is
all in all, Col. 3. 11. Will Mr. Baxter elude all these and a whole century
more of the like Scriptures with this evasion; yea Christ has done, and is all
this in part to us, leaving the other part of righteousness not perfected by
him to be supplied by faith his collateral to our justification? Or when it is
said, There is salvation in no other, nor any name else given us under heaven
by which we may be saved besides Christ, Act. 4. 12. and the Apostle professes
it his whole labor to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness
which is of the Law, but the righteousness which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith; so making Christ put on
for righteousness, the righteousness which is through the faith of Christ,
the righteousness which is of God by faith, not several kinds of
righteousness, but one and the same righteousness which he opposes there to
his own inherent righteousness which he excludes: are not these speeches
equipollent to that which Mr. Baxter requires, the Christ only, or the
righteousness of Christ only? It is but a flourish wherewith he concludes this
argument, about the constant express phrase of Scripture. For let him either
produce one Scripture that affirms faith by any inherent righteousness in it
self, or of her own conveyed into us to contribute somewhat to our
Justification, or else confess his error to be derived from the scriblings of
Bellarmine, Socixus, Grotius, and Arminius, where this Doctrine is to be found,
and not from the Scriptures of Gods inspiration that are wholly against it.

To his third reason I can say nothing because I understand nothing of his
meaning therein; or if I do understand it, nothing needs to be said, because
it has nothing for himself or against us. But to that which he adds of his
thinking.

1. Let him say whether by them that (he says) would have faith to be the
instrument, etc. he does not mean all the Protestant Churches, both Lutherans
and Zuinglians or Calvinists, as they are by some distinguished: whether the
best that have opposed them herein have not been the Arminians, and from what
Rome or Hell these first drank in their opinion, he is not ignorant having
fished in the same pools after them.

2. When he thinks these should not deny that we are properly justified by
faith as an instrument: I answer,

1 If they will not deny it, will Mr. Baxter with them confess it?

2 The word [properly] is vox aequivoca; a phrase may be said to be proper, as
it is enough fit and proportioned to declare the meaning of the speaker, and in
this sense we deny not that faith as an instrument subservient to the
principal efficient, does so properly as an instrument can, justify us in our
selves or to our own consciences.

Again, it may be said to be proper in opposition to a tropicall way of
speaking: and in this sense we cannot say that faith does so properly justify,
specially in that extent wherein Mr. Baxter and his Masters will have it to
justify, without a trope in the phrase of speaking, which I would show if it
were pertinent to the question.

I shall spare to transcribe at large his next section which he puts under n.
4. of his Explication. Because if he meant singly and precisely as he speaks,
all might be granted in a positive sense without prejudice to our cause or
advantage to his; viz. that faith does directly and properly justify in and to
themselves those that were before justified in Christ, as it is (in a good
sense) the condition of the new Covenant, and a means or instrument of Gods
stamping by his commandment and promise to the attainment of this
justification. For this denies not that truth which before he kicked at, that
faith does so justify also in regard of that useful and essential property
which it has above all other gifts of grace, to be isntrumental to apprehend
Christ for righteousness. Nay even for this cause has God either ordained and
commanded faith to this end, because it has this property, or because he has
ordained and given to it this property, therefore he not only requires but
also concurreth with it to bless it, even it alone to this end. Here to
determine peremptorily whether of these acts of God, his qualifying of faith
for, or his commanding it to this use, is more and less direct or proper to
the end, or whether they are coordinates thereunto, I fear may proceed more
from a headie rashness then from the modesty of Christian wisdom; especially
because I take justifying faith to be more then a natural or moral virtue,
(which Mr. Baxter possibly will deny) viz. an infused habit qualifyed by God
himself that infuseth it with this peculiar property to cleave unto Christ and
receive him.

But by the way it shall not be impertinent to show in some particulars what
mental Reservations Mr. Baxter has in his words, not easily appearing to a
cursory reader.

1. When he says,

B. Faith justifyeth, as it is the fulfilling of the condition of the new
Covenant. His meaning is, that it only so far justifyeth as it fulfilleth the
condition. But throughout our whole life, according to his principles, we are
but fulfilling, have not fulfilled the condition of the new Covenant, therefore
throughout our whole life we are but in justifying not justified. And then
consequently (if it be true what most of our Divines conclude) that in the next
life there shall be no use of faith (because vinon and fruition are proper to
that state) believers shall not be justified at all, because the condition was
never fulfilled.

2. When he says,

B. Because God has commanded no other means, nor promised justification to
any other, therefore it is, that [faith] is the only condition, and so only
thus justifyeth. The reader that does but catch here a little and there a
little of his doctrine, would think him by what he here finds: no less
Orthodox in the point of Justification then Luther or Paul himself: that he
explodes all works, all inherent righteousness from bearing the least part
with faith unto justification: whereas contrariwise he speaks not here of the
faith of Gods stamping but of his own coining; of a faith that brings in all
good works, that is it self all good works to justification; attributes no more
to faith then he does to any other part of our inherent righteousness, nor any
thing to faith it self as useful to justify, but as it is our whole inherent
righteousness, or at least a part of it: as partly by that which has been,
but principally by that part of his treatise which remains to be examined,
appears. The rest of this Section I let pass without examination.

I come now to the fifth and last Section of his Explication, page 230.

B. 5. That faiths receiving Christ and his righteousness is the remote and
secondary and not the formal reason why it justifyeth, appears thus. We
find verifyed in Mr. Baxter that of the Poet, Dolus an virtus quis in host
requirat? having professed open war against the doctrine of all the
Protestant Churches, yea of the Gospel of Christ, he manageth it more by
stratagems then by valor. We find him here perverting in stead of rightly
stating the question, thereby to get advantage to answer what he will and to
what he pleases. The question controverted between us and the Papists first,
and in these latter times the Arminians also, is not whether Gods instituting
of faith in Christ, or else the acting of faith so instituted, be the one the
formal, and the other the remote reason why it justifyeth? But whether faith
so instituted of God to be the mean or instrument of our Justification, does
justify by virtue received from Christ its object, or else by its own virtue,
as it is a good work, or as it is an act of righteousness performed in
obedience to Gods commandment? That which they maintain is that faith
justifyeth by virtue of its object Christ, denying the Papists work and the
Arminians act. If Mr. Baxter did labor more for truth then for victory, we
should not find in him so much fraud and so little of sincerity. It is not
Christ's but Antichrists kingdom that is maintained by the pillarage of shifts
and sophisms. Let him not astonish the poor Saints of Christ with words that
they cannot understand, obscuring the truth with needless terms of art; his
poor flock of Kederminster, for whom he affirms himself to have compiled this
work, are in all probability as well acquainted with the formal and remote
reason why faith justifyeth, as they are with Hocus Pocus his Liegerdemain. In
this point let him either confute the assertion of our Divines, or maintain the
adversaries assertion; here he does neither directly, but beats the air and
makes a great noise to little purpose. Yet let us see how well he proves his
own assertion.

B. Suppose Christ had done all that he did for sinners, and they had believed
in him thereupon without any Covenant promising Justification by this Faith,
would this Faith have justified them? By what Law? or whence will they plead
their Justification at the Bar of God? This supposition is not full, there must
be another supposition antecedaneous to this supposition. A true supposition
that will show the invalidity of this feigned one. Suppose that upon a
foregoing Covenant between the Father and him, Christ has done all this for
his elect whom he knows by name, and so Christ in their names has given and
God has taken full satisfaction for all their offenses, and hereupon Christ
has received in their behalf a full acquittance and discharge: Who now shall
lay any thing to their charge? It is God that justifies, Romans 8. 33. under
this supposition they are for ever freed from pleading at Gods Bar: They have
there an Advocate to plead for them, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. Sits at the right hand of God with
the effectual Oratory of his precious blood making intercession for us, Romans
8. 34. so the supposition of Mr. Baxter extends no further then this, if
without any Covenant promise of Justification by Faith in Christ, could they by
believing in him have had the being and comfort of Justification within their
own souls? Unless God had by some other way ratified and sealed this benefit
to them, I acknowledge they could not: yet had their justification been still
nothing the less firm before God in Christ. But now by the promise of the New
Covenant, through Faith they have the sweetness and joy thereof in themselves
also.

B. But suppose Christ having done all that he did for us, that he should in
framing the New Covenant have put in any other condition, and said [whosoever
loves God shall by virtue of my satisfaction be justified] would not this love
have justified? No doubt of it. I conclude then thus: The receiving of Christ
is as the silver of this coin, the Gospel promise is as the Kings stamp which
makes it curraut for justifying. If God had seen it meet to have stamped any
thing else, it would have passed currantly.

We cannot so suppose, for one absurd supposition being granted a thousand more
will follow after: Mr. Baxter begins too low in his suppositions. Let him here
advance a stair higher with us, and suppose first a truth, before he supposes
that which is false and unpossible in respect of that truth that must
necessarily be presupposed: viz. That God before his Covenanting with man had
decreed within himself ( Salva Justitia, without obscuring at all his Justice)
to make known on the vessels of mercy (i. e. in justifying and saving miserable
sinners whom he had before prepared to glory) the riches of his glory, i. e.
the praise of the glory of grace, Romans 9. 23. Ephesians. 1. 6. that himself and his
free grace should be all, and man nothing to his justification and salvation;
and to the end that his justice might appear still in all its luster, had taken
full satisfaction from his own Son: here to manifest the freeness of his
grace, the all to our happiness residing in his mere mercy, and the nothing in
our selves, I see not what other condition or means besides faith God could
have put, out of which man's proud heart would not have arrogated something to
himself to have swollen therewith, and so the glory of Gods grace, should have
been obscured. Or does Mr. Baxter see farther then the Apostle? He tells us, It
is of Faith that it might be by Grace, Romans 4. 16. If by other means it might
have been, and yet by grace there would be a notable flaw in the Apostles
arguing, which limits it to faith that it might be of grace. To the same
purpose are those many Scriptures in which he affirms it to be by faith that
all man's boasting may be excluded, implying that if it had not been only by
faith, there would have been something of man in it clowding the glory of Gods
grace, and giving to man occasion of boasting that there is something of his
own to his justification, and so to glory partly in himself and not wholly in
the Lord. So Mr. Baxters arguing, If God had put some other condition, no doubt
it would have justified; is one and the same with this; If God had acted
against his own purpose, and betrayed the glory of his Grace, no doubt it had
been betrayed. But the former supposition is no less absurd then the latter.
And almost so much at the full, Mr. Baxter, either to toll on his Reader into
more snares which afterward he lays, by his magnificent elogies of Gods
grace, or from the throws and checks of an accusing conscience; speaks in the
following part of this Section. Yet so that he cannot cease from the
interweaving of man's works with Gods grace unto Justification: which because he
does more fully and grossly in the following part of this Tractate, I shall
here forbear to anticipate what there is to be said by way of answer to him.
The next Position is of near cognation with this; his words are these:

B. Thesis 58. The ground of this is; because Christ's righteousness does not
justify us properly and formally because we believe or receive it; but because
it is ours in Law, by divine donation or imputation.

This is plain in it self, and in that which is said before.

How this is plain in that which is said before, we have before examined; how
it is plain in it self we are here to examine. To omit how after Mr. Baxters
Principles the righteousness of Christ can be said to be ours by divine
donation and imputation, when he holds it no otherwise by Gods donation ours,
then the wild Goose is his: his, if he can catch her, and as long as he can
hold her: so his as it is every ones else as well as his if they can take and
hold her. For she is the worlds Goose, and proper to no one before one has
taken her, and no longer that ones then while he holds her, if he let her go
she is the worlds Goose again. If Mr. Baxters righteousness be stablished upon
such a law, donation, and imputation, let it be his, not mine, I shall not
contend with him for a share in it, because the Lord offers me a righteousness
of a better Covenant established upon better promises, Heb. 8. 6. But to let
this pass; When M. Baxter says the ground of this is; what means he by
this? That no doubt that went before in the former Position. But in it are many
things, and which of them is plain upon this ground in his meaning I cannot
easily judge, because to my understanding no one of them is upon this ground
plain. Nay upon this ground no man living is justified in this world. For it is
not ours, says he, by believing and receiving it, but by divine donation; And
this donation he will not have to be confirmed, until all the conditions be
completed, and that is not until the world be ended. But to give my best
conjecture of his meaning, I think he will be understood that the two last
clauses of his former Thesis are plain upon this ground, viz. 1. That Faith
does justify* properly as a condition, etc. 2. Improperly as it does receive
Christ. The ground says he is this, because, etc.

Here by the way we may take notice of the man's subtilty and sophistry, in
shifting from one term of Art to another, These. 57. he tells us that faith does
[ properly] justify thus, and [ improperly] thus; but in the Explication, he
foysteth in the word formally and formal, page 230, 231. and here These. 58.
puts both together, properly and formally, as if there were no other proper
cause and reason but the formal cause and reason of a thing, and that every
proper cause were the formal cause. And thus whatsoeverr Scripture says
illiterately, Christ himself after Mr. Baxters proper language, should not be a
proper cause of our justification. And who sees not the end of this his
project? If he be put to it, he lays a ground for the diverting of the whole
dispute from the Scriptures, unto Philosophy, Logic, and the Metaphysics,
where there may be a cavil about the nature of the formal cause, so long
until both sides be out of breath, and in the end both parties be as wise to
Justification as in the beginning. This is the calamity of the Church in these
times, that they which hold themselves the chief Doctors and eminent lights
thereof, darken every sacred truth with the mist of humane Learning cast upon
it, in stead of clearing it to the comprehension of Gods babes and sucklings.
No marvel then if the justice of God has stirred up among us so many
Earth-born and Earth-bred Meteors, persons of no learning, (Ranters and
Enthusiasts I mean) like Balaams Ass to rebuke the madness of these Prophets.
And doubtless either by these or some other the Lord will prevail against
them, if they shall not cease to pervert with Elymas the plain ways of God.

Now to the matter it self about which his sophistry has bin occupant. In
these two Positions, viz and 57, and 58. Mr. Baxters aim is at two assertions
of the Protestants to smite them through, viz. the instrumentality of Faith,
and the virtue which it deriveth from Christ's it object, to justify and to set
up his (...) Credere or act of believing under the name of a condition of the
New Covenant without any respect of instrumentality that it has to apprehend
Christ, or any virtue that it receives from Christ apprehended to justify.
This he does in the last words of the 57. Thesis, telling us that faith can be
said only in a remote and improper sense, as it receives Christ, to justify;
where by receiving he shakes and shifts off the instrumentality of faith, and
by Christ the virtue of faiths object, into a remote and dark corner as not
working at all or very obscurely in our justification. But his act of believing
he exalts as the proper and formal reason of faiths justifying. This he
illustrateth in the Explication pa. 230. Suppose Christ had put some other
condition of the new Covenant, as Love, Patience, Temperance, Mercy, etc. that
could not be instruments of receiving Christ, nor have Christ their object to
draw virtue from him: should not either of these notwithstanding though neither
instruments nor in a capacity to have Christ their object from which to have
drawn virtue, by their own act have justified? So faith being the condition of
the new Covenant does by its act justify. So argued he under These. 57.

But doubting of the validity of his reasons there either to weaken ours, or to
stablish his own assertion, he adds this Thesis more fully to confirm what he
had there endeavored.

The ground of this is (says he) because, and because; as is before expressed.

I answer, there is no sufficient ground laid for the confuting of ours, or the
strengthening of his tenent. For be it that Christ's righteousness be ours by
divine donation or imputation, how does he build his opinion upon this ground,
that the act of faith as being the condition, etc. does properly justify? He
must show his meaning in words at length and not in figures, before he shall
win us to build with him straw and stubble upon the ground; that is good and
fitted to bear a good structure. But very remarkably does he here dispute in
opposing Gods donation or giving, or our believing or receiving of Christ's
righteousness as if they could not both consist together in justifying us, at
least properly. Then it seems we are properly justified by the donation of
Christ without his (...) credere or act of faith. Yea then are we properly and
formally justified in Christ before we yet believed: For he will not deny that
Gods donation of Christ (at least in his sense) is before our receiving him.
And thus with one breath he will throw down all that before with so much labor
he has built.

But let us see how from this ground he batters our assertions, and what force
there is in his battery. If we look to the Prothesis of his Thesis alone, the
argument in substance runs to this Tenor, Faith does not justify us either as
an instrument, or by virtue of Christ; or Christ's righteousness its object;
because it does not justify us as an instrument or by virtue of its object.
Who can shake his buildings that founds them on such firm ground? That this is
the force of his reasoning is evident to them that observe him, that by the
word [receiving] he excludes the instrumentality, and by [Christ] excludes the
object of faith from any proper acting to justify us, as I said before. But we
will annex the Antithesis to his Prothesis, and so fill up his Thesis, and then
see what strength there is in the whole to his advantage, or our disadvantage.
What he must prove in his and refute on our part, has been already declared.
Only in the forecited Prothesis he begs the conclusion, that he should have
proved. Therefore we must lay his whole argument from the donation or
imputation alone: yet will we put his Argument fully thus, If Christ's
righteousness does not properly justify us because we believe or receive it,
but because it is ours in Law by Gods imputation or donation, then faith does
not justify as an instrument or by virtue of Christ its object, but as it is
an act containing the condition of the Covenant. But the former is true,
therefore the latter also.

I deny the assumption as to the former member thereof, the believing and
receiving, etc. And Mr. Baxter brings not so much as a gry to prove it. And as
to the latter member, Gods donation, etc. I deny the consequent of the Major,
Though Christ's righteousness justify us properly, because it is ours in Law
by Gods donation or imputation, yet it follows not that either faith as an act
or condition does so of it self justify, or that it does not justify as an
instrument and by virtue of its object, or as some say, its correlate, or as
others by the communion that it puts us into with Christ: this I prove thus,
not from terms of art, but from the authority and testimonies of the most high
God.

1. From the relation between the brazen Serpent the Type, and Christ Jesus the
Antitype; Joh. 3. 14. The brazen Serpent was of Gods donation to Israel; so
also was the Sovereign power that was infused into it to heal; but the eyes of
the wounded Israelites must be directed unto, and fixed upon the Serpent for
cure, and then virtue issued from it to heal. So was the son of man lifted up
with virtue in him to heal. Christ with this virtue is of Gods donation, yet
this donation hinders not, but that our faith as an instrument must be directed
to, and fixed upon him alone for justification, and so that justifying virtue
or righteousness in him comes from him upon us to justification. It is no more
the act of faith that of it self because a condition (if indeed a condition)
does it, then the act of the eye* cured the wounded without virtue drawn by it
from its object.

2. From the cure of the woman which had the bloody issue, Mark 5. 25. it will
not be denied that the virtue by which she was healed was of divine donation,
yet it was brought home to her not by the isntrumental service of her hand
touching Christ's garment; for the multitude touched his garments and thronged
him, yet had no benefit by it, verse 31. But her faith apprehending Christ
himself, so said the Lord, Thy faith has made thee whole, verse 34. yet not
the act of faith as a condition, but faith as an instrument by which the poor
woman drew virtue from Christ its object, Jesus perceived that virtue had gone
out of him, verse 34. So it was not the virtue of the (...) or act of
believing, but of Christ believed on, which wrought the cure: such are the
operations of Christ and faith in the cure of the soul as here in the cure of
the body.

3. From 1 G^r. 30. 31. Christ is of God made unto us Righteousness, viz. to
Justification, That he which glories may glory in the Lord. God has made him
righteousness, but how to us, or our righteousness that it may be of his
donation to us? Mr. Baxter must answer, by faith, else farewell his condition;
but if by the act of faith as our righteousness in fulfilling ^he condition,
or otherwise then an instrument to apprehend the righteousness of Christ to
justification, then have we somewhat of our own righteousness wherein to
glory, all would not be the Lords that we might glory in him alone.

4. To this I might add also the phrase which the Apostle uses, that we are
justified (...), by faith, through faith, as an instrument; and never (...),
for our faith, or upon our faith as for a cause or upon a condition fulfilled,
as some of our Divines have well observed.

I proceed to the next position.

B. Thesis 59. Justification is not a Momentaneous act, begun and ended
immediately upon our believing, but a continued act; which though it be in its
kind complete from the first' yet it is still in doing till the final
justification in the judgment day.

All this together with most of the Explication may be granted as being capable
of an Orthodox sense.

1. That justification as an act immanent in God is such as is here described
is confessed. But Mr. Baxter is deaf in this ear.

2. That our justification in Christ is such (in some sense) we also grant, but
neither will he listen to this.

3. Therefore if he would take off all ambiguity of his words, and declare his
sense to be the same with the sound, we would grant to him also that such is
our personal justification in our selves, which he owneth only for
justification. For as it is an act of God it is never interrupted or dissolved
till the day of judgment, though as it is taken Passively, there may be many
interruptions of our sense and apprehension of it.

But his Thesis is faced like Janus, looks two ways at once, is set forth in
such words as will more properly admit of an evil then a good sense. And that
he speaks them after the Remonstrant, not the Protestant dialect, is too
probable though not infallibly evident, from these reasons, to be meant in an
evil sense.

1. Because he delivers it in the Arminian phrase. For so his St. Episcopius,
Justificatio est actus continuus qui est Episcop. Disp. 22. These. 12. de Justif.
and durat, quamdiu durat ipsius conditionis requisitae praesentia,
interrumpitur vero semper and toties quoties actus praestantur ejusm^di qui cum
vera fide and conscientia bona consistere nequeunt, i. e. Justification is a
continued act which is and dureth as long as the presence of its requisite
condition continues, but is interrupted so often as such acts are done which
cannot consist with true faith and a good conscience. To the continuance of
justification Mr. Baxter here speaks the same thing with him, and though as
to the interruption of it he speaks here as out of a cloud, yet compare with
this his 45. Thesis and you will have the whole of Episcopius from the pen of
Mr. Baxter.

2. Because his words do seem here to suppose a Magis and minus in its active
acceptance or sense. It is not begun and ended immediately, says he, but is
still in doing [in a way of perfecting] until the judgment day.

3. His restriction added to the compleatnesse or perfection thereof at the
first. It is complete at first, says he but in its kind, which restriction
makes the compleatnesse of justification incomplete, and its perfection
imperfect till the day of judgment, as himself has expressed himself before
Thesis 41. These things from the position it self. From the explication will
follow.

4. The heartlesse and comfortless proof that he brings to prove the
continuance of this justifying act, making it to reach only to the Genera
singulorum, not to the singula generum: to such a kind of men, not to any
singular man, or individual person upon earth: to Believers, but not to this
or that believer. So that the holiest Saint if at any time his faith in some
temptation faint, and cannot be brought to sensible acting, is left destitute
of all comfort from the Gospel or new Covenant after Mr. Baxters principles.
It justifies only so long as faith actually receives Christ; if faith
through infirmity cease to act, he gives the distressed soul no comfort that
God continues to justify.

5. From the first use of instruction which he draws from this position. This
shows us (says he) in the first place, with what limitation to receive the
assertion of our Divines, that remission and justification, are simul and
semel, performed: his meaning is, that we must understand them in this
assertion to deal as Mr. Baxter is wont, viz. to say one thing and mean
another. Not to think as they speak, but to equivocate and retain a mental
reservation within themselves. That our justification is begun and perfected
both at once and together, but all this is but suo genere, in its kind; that
is, conditionally, even as the Usurer frankly and freely forgave to his debtor
all that he owed him, but with this limitation that if he were not paid the
whole debt to day, he would cast him in prison to morrow there to lie until he
should pay the whole forfeiture.

But because Mr. Baxter is disposed here to lisp and not to speak alowd and
plain his mind, we shall leave him to his humor, and proceed to hearken to
him where he speaks plainly and without parables.

Mr. Baxters APHORISMS EXORIZED AND ANTHORIZED: OR, An Examination of, and
Answer to, a Book written by Mr. Rich. Baxter Teacher of the Church at
Kederminster in Worcestershire; ENTITLED, Aphorisms of Justification.

THE SECOND PART.

By JOHN CRANDON an unworthy Minister of the Gospel of CHRIST at Fawley in
Hantshire.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. 1654.

Mr. Baxters APHORISMS Exorized and Anthorized: OR, An Examination of, and
Answer to, a Book written by Mr. Rich. Baxter Teacher of the Church at
Kederminster in Worcestershire; ENTITVLED, Aphorisms of Justification.
THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
The following Doctrine of Mr. Baxters Book reduced to some few heads, and the
question between him and the Protestants about Justification by works stated.

HItherto we have been busied about the view of Mr. Baxters swelling, which the
more and the farther we gazed on, the more it increased, and after a long
expectation of an issue, at length the imposthumated matter breaks out in the
sight of all men, to the offense of all spiritualized men, Justification by
works. This is the declared and professed Subject of all the following part of
this Treatise, what before he did but hint and whisper in a kind of darkness,
now he preaches on the top of the house, proclaiming it as the sole
Soul-saving doctrine, canonizing as Saints the Papists for the constant holding
forth of it, and Anathematizing all the Protestants Churches as Apostaticall
for departing from it, as by examining what follows in this his Tractate will
appear.

For the avoiding of confusion, and prevention of a voluminous prolixity, into
which I see my self already carried by following him Thesis after Thesis,
(being necessitated thereby as he speaks, so to examine and answer the same
things often in many places;) I shall endeavor to reduce unto some few heads,
the sum of what he says upon this Question, examining that which is to the
purpose, and leaving the rest that is inconsideraable or impertinent to it.

1 Then I shall endeavor to draw out from him the state of the Question what
he holds, and how he holds it forth to us.

2 I shall examine his Arguments and Reasons, by which he endeavors to
confirm his assertion or assertions.

3 I shall also examine what force there is in the Reasons which he brings to
clear himself and his doctrine from being derogatory to the grace of God and
full efficacy of Christ's mediation; or from all tainture of Popery,
Socinianism, or other heresies. Within this Triangle I conceive the whole
fabric of his doctrine of works to be comprehended; and in examining of these
fully, nothing to be left unexamined, that may make for his purpose.

1 The state of the Question, or his assertions which he maintains, I shall
(as near as may fitly be done) transcribe from him in his own words: thus,

1 The bare act of believing is not the only condition of the new Covenant but
several other duties also are part of this condition, [viz. of Justification]
(For this is his meaning, and if he be not so understood, he is understood
besides his meaning, and in what he says he says nothing. His Tractate
contains Aphorisms of Justification only. And the conditions of the new
Covenant which tend to Illumination, Sanctification, Glorification, etc. must
not be confounded with those of Justification; if it were granted him, that the
Gospel dispenses all or any of these upon conditions. In this sense therefore
he must, he will be understood.) These. 60. pa. 235.

2 That these duties coordinate with Faith to our Justification as conditions
thereof, are Repentance, praying for pardon, forgiving others, love, hearing
the word, consideration, conviction, godly sorrow, knowledge of Christ, assent
to the truth of the Gospel, subjection, consent, acceptance, cordial
covenanting, self-resigning, esteeming and preferring Christ before all, loving
him above all, sincerity, perseverance, affiance, sincere obedience, and works
of love, serious, painful and constant use of Gods ordinances; hearing,
praying, meditating; in a word, all good works, i. e. all the works of
Righteousness, holiness, mercy, etc. which the Law requires: [yet with this
proviso that all these legal works must be called not our Legal but our
Gospel Righteousness.] These. 60. p. 235, 236. and p. 240, 241, 242. and These.
73, 74, p. 289. 290, 291, 292.

3 That the nonperformance of any one of these does hinder, but it is not one
or many, but a concurrence of all these together in one, that suffices to
condition us unto Justification, These. 61. So that when the promise of life is
made in Scripture to our believing in Christ, or to any other inseparable
concomitant of Faith, you must understand it Caeteris paribus, viz. that your
knowledge, repentance, obedience, good works, etc. are not an inch behind your
faith; or in sensu composito, that it is a compounded Faith, has all other
virtues not only included in it, but also actuated, and cooperating with it for
justification, or else you must be shaken off unjustified; yea though all the
rest be in act and but one out of act, These. 61. and its Explication. He says
not this indeed totidem verbis, word by word: But let him deny the least
particle of all this to be his meaning, he shall by such a denial extremely
wound, if not wholly subvert his cause, and yield it to us.

4 It is not the habit of these virtues as infused from above into us, but the
act or work of them as set in operation by us, that justifies. For so says he
of Faith it self (much more implies it of the other virtues) that it is the
act of faith alone, as it is our act or work that justifyeth, and
consequentially that we are justified wholly by works, viz. as the alone
condition or causa sine qua non.

5 That some of these justifying virtues or works, are antecedaneous to, or
foregoing preparatives of, some integrall parts, some proper, essential,
formal acts, some differentiall and essential* parts, some modifications,
some in separable products, some both parts and necessary consequents, and
subservient acts, some necessary continuing and exercising means, and lastly
some separable adjuncts of Faith, yet tending to the well being thereof; and
thus having adorned faith like the Cornish Chough with the feathers of all the
best birds, he sends it to scar aloft with these plumes to heaven for
justification, which without this borrowed help, of it self it was not in a
capacity to do, pa. 240, 241, 242.

In these particulars I take the whole sum of his doctrine about this Question
to be comprehended. He adds indeed some lenitives here and there to mitigate
and make tolerable the asperity and harshnesse of these his assertions, which
we shall examine among the reasons that he brings to manifest his doctrine not
to be derogatory from the glory of Gods grace, etc. as being more proper to
that then this place. All the forementioned particulars may be summed up in
this one, That all the acts or works of all moral virtues, and of all insu^ed
Habits (if he grant any such) are required coordinately with faith to make up
the conditio, upon which we shall, and without which we cannot be justified.

In opposition to this, all the Protestant Churches do and still have
maintained that Faith alone, and the same not as it is in the consideration of
a habit or virtue, or as an act of ours, but by way of a means or instrument
(as has been before explained) justifyeth, without any concurrence of works
with it in the act and office of justifying. This assertion he endeavors to
destroy, and establish his own, with many Arguments, which we shall examine
severally either after other.

CHAP. II.
Mr. Baxters preface to his first Argument drawn from Scriptures to prove
Justification by works, examined; and the Scriptures which the Protestant
writers bring against it, and Mr. Baxter would have stifled in darkness, here
brought to light; together with the opinion of the most eminent Protestant
writers upon this Subject.

HIS first argument is drawn from Scriptures, unto which he thus prefaceth,

B. 235. I desire no more of those that deny this, but that Scripture may be
judge: and that they will put by no one Text to that end produced, till they
can give some other commodious, and not forced interpretation. We gladly accept
this rule of dispute, and pronounce all other rules in Questions of this kind
to be irregular. Yet have we somewhat to say to the proposer of it.

1 Why has he in the former part of this Tractate so much wandered from the
rule of Scripture as insufficient or improper to try his opinions, and make use
(in stead of it) of so much exotic learning, the Jesuits sophistry, and
Socinus his right reason, as if the Scripture were not, but these were to be
attended on as proper Judges in such matters?

2 When all the Scriptures which he here brings to prove a cooperation of
works with faith to justification (scarce any one of them excepted, as I
undertake if he call me to it to show) have been alleged by the Monks and
Jesuits against us, and been answered over and over a hundred times by our
Divines; why does he here urge them as Scriptures of his own collection, and
require an interpretation to be given to them that might manifest they hold not
forth Justification by works? how does he abase the Ministers his readers, for
whose seducing he has compiled this Book, by imprinting within himself a
supposition, that their Libraries consist only of Aristotle and Schibler, and
that they are as ignorant of the controversy between the Papists and us, as
they were born? Else if he supposed they had read such controversies, he would
not have called for an interpretation of these Scriptures as now first alleged
by himself. Simplicity in handling the truths of Christ is necessary to
declare the heart upright. If Mr. Baxter had possessed such a jewel within his
bosom, he would have exploded all tricks of subtlety and craft with an
Anathema Maranatha; and told us plainly, these Scriptures have been urged by
the Papists for their justification by works, that the Protestants have said
somewhat to elude the force of such Scriptures by forced interpretations of
them, but against every interpretation of every such Scripture, he thus and
thus excepteth, and desires these exceptions of his to be answered, else he
cannot be convinced but that works cooperate with faith to Justification. But
in the midst of a room that is hung with a thousand candles and torches, to cry
out, O that some one would give me one spark of light in this dark dungeon!
this is no less then to pronounce all save himself within the room blind, that
in the midst of light they see nothing. Or otherwise to pronounce all these
lights darkness in comparison of his more shining light. Let not Mr. Baxter so
contemn all the Anti-papisticall worthies as smoking snuffs in comparison of
his beams; nor think all his yoak-fellowes in the Ministry at the present to
be such glow-wormes and slimy sots, that being thus spitted with his base
*esteem of them, they should be insensible of it, and go away rejoicing, as
sprinkled with his holy water.

3 Why does he only quote Scriptures and bring for himself and against us only
Arithmeticall figures and ciphers, without the words of those Scriptures, and
telling us how they make for him and against us? would he have us to understand
that he means to argue from them no otherwise then the Priests and Jesuits
have done before him? we might then answer all in a word by sending him to
those precious servants of Christ who have answered the Argumentations of these
Priests and Jesuits from these Scriptures. Or is it to straighten us with a
doubtfulnesse, what to answer, because we know not how he will argue from these
Scriptures? and to reserve to himself an advantage to except against all our
answers, that we have not spoken to the purpose, he meant not so, but thus and
thus to have argued from these Testimonies. What better answer to such a roving
disputer, then to leave him roving, until he will cease from circling, and
fall upon some point wherein he will declare himself that he would be answered?
This I should do, had it been my only purpose to have answered Mr. Baxter; but
because my aim was and is least to grapple with him, (from whom I expect
nothing better but many things worse, after all wiser men's endeavors then
mine, [and could show reason for it]) but chiefly to preserve the single
hearted Christians free from his infection; I shall not wholly pass by,
without examination, these Scriptures, that none by the misunderstanding of
Scriptures may be carried into Anti-scripturall errors.

4 But how seasonable is the Caution that he gives us, to take heed of giving
any uncommodious or forced interpretation to those Scriptures which the
Papists, and after them the Socinians have urged for their justification by
works? As if all our Divines and Martyrs for Christ in these last 200. years
have abused the Seriptures with false interpretations, and so have been
Apostates from Christ in departing from Rome: and that the Jesuits and
Socinians have been the only sincere interpreters of Scriptures: when
contrariwise all that have but looked over the pale into their writings, find
nothing so sacred, no Scripture so plain which they do not violate and distort
with their Sophistical cavillations. That Hell it self has in no age vomited
out any brood of heretics that can parallel these in audacious abuse and
violation of Scriptures; yet while Mr. Baxter fights with their Arguments and
maintains their assertions, he calls upon us, Take heed, abuse not Scriptures.

5 Why does he not produce first, (seeing he professes himself a Protestant
and Anti-papist) those manifold and clear Scriptures which all the Protestant
Churches allege for stablishing of justification by faith alone, and the
expelling of works from having any part with faith in this work, and answer
their Arguments drawn from such Scriptures; before he brings in the Scriptures
which the Jesuits have mu^^ered up against their assertion? At least why does
he not declare as well what the Protestants have to say for themselves, as what
the Papists have to say against them, that both sides may be heard? But to make
a roar on the one side, and to exhibit the other party as mute as fishes,
having nothing to say, or reason to give for their own Religion, nor to gainsay
the adversaries in opposing it; is this fair and Christian dealing? Thus to
stifle our cause, or rather the cause of Christ in darkness, and to imprison
the light by which we have walked from the time of Luther until this day, what
does it argue in him less then what Christ tells us, He that does evil hates
the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds which are evil should
be reproved? Joh. 3. 20.

These things thus premised, let us come now to the Scripture, making it the
Judge and touchstone in this Controversy: But so, as that it shall be
requisite for me to supply what Mr. Baxter has left untouched, what Scriptures
our Divines bring to prove justification to be only by faith, and to deny all
cooperation of works therein. And herein I shall put limits to my self not
letting out all that they produce, (for so should I offend with immoderate
length) but some particulars, that the weakest reader may see, what Mr. Baxter
would not give him to see, that our Churches are not destitute of strong
grounds for the bearing up of their faith and assertions. And when this is
done, I shall descend to examine the force of those Scriptures quoted by Mr.
Baxter, to see whether they make for him, and against us.

I shall begin from the reasoning of the Apostle Romans 3. 20. etc. having before
proved both the Jews by and under the Law, and the Gentiles without the Law, to
be guilty before God; he concludes, Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there
shall no flesh be justified, etc. and ver. 21. The righteousness of God [viz.
to justification] is manifested without the Law, being witnessed by the Law and
the Prophets (to wit, a righteousness which the Law is ignorant of, the
righteousness or life which is by faith. From this righteousness the tenor
of the Law or legal Covenant turns aside, telling us, he that does them shall
live in them, Gal. 3. 11, 12.) ver. 22. Even the righteousness of God which is
by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all that believe. Lo here it is
denied to be by the most righteous works which the most perfect Law of God
himself prescribes, and attained by faith only, ver. 24. Being justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption which is by Jesus Christ, what can
be said more fully? It shall not be impertinent to annote briefly out of
Zanchy, what he has upon Hier. zanch De natura Dei Lib. 4. Cap. 2. Th. 2.
this verse more largly: when the Apostle says we are justified by his grace,
Per Gratiam intelligit gratuitum Dei favorem, omnibus nostris exclusis, sive
naturalibus, sive supernaturalibus dignitatibus, says he; i. e. by Grace the
Apostle means the free love or favor of God, excluding all parts and pieces
of our worth both natural and supernatural: and adds, that the Apostle
still opposes grace to all our works, and to all our inward virtues wrought in
us by the holy Ghost himself, [as well as to our legal and moral
righteousnesse] yea to faith it self as it is a work, as is manifest to every
one that has with any consideration read this Epistle. Therefore says he, he
excludes all works, that he may conclude our Justification to be by grace
alone. Yea more, the Apostle (says he) not contented to say we are justified
by grace, adds thereto (...) his grace, that is, by the grace which is in
God, not by any gift of grace infused by him into ourselves, that it might be
wholly of God and not of our selves at all in the least part. Yea not contented
with all this he adds freely, to notify that there is not required any work
or qualification on our part to put us into the possession thereof, for so it
should not be wholly by the free and naked favor of God, as he terms it. And
lastly he adds by the redemption which is by Jesus Christ, by this work of
Christ excluding all ours; hitherto that profound Zanchius. Neither cannot it
be freely by the redemption of Christ, if our qualifications and conditions be
brought to interesse us to it, for so should we be in some kind purchasers and
not receive it freely. The Apostle proceeds, ver. 25. Whom God has set forth
as a propitiation through faith in his blood to declare his righteousness for
the remission of sins, etc. The whole thing of Gods ordination to make the
redemption, propitiation and remission of sins which is by Christ, actually
ours to our comfort, is here assigned to be says in his blood, and not any
foregoing, concomitant, or subsequent virtue or duty of ours annexed to it; and
all to declare his righteousness. Ver. 26. His righteousness (he says again)
that he may be just and the justifyer of him that believes in Jesus. If Mr.
Baxters fancy stand of the Legal righteousness in Christ, and the
Evangelicall righteousness in us; the Apostles assignation of the end of Gods
justifying us by Christ should be maimed. For he should have said, To declare,
to declare I say his righteousness, and our righteousness, that he might be
just and a justifyer, and we might be just and justifyers of our selves. And
then we are to expunge the next verse, Where is boasting then? it is excluded;
by what law? of works? nay but by the law of faith. For boasting should not be
at all excluded, if our works should bear a part with faith in justifying: so
should we have matter of glorying in our selves still. How full is the Apostle
here in the confirmation of Justification by faith without works? had he seen
what the Papists and Mr. Baxter over their shoulders would have objected
against it, he could not have spoken more punctually. Yet as I know what the
Papists say for themselves, so I am not ignorant what Mr. Baxter will except
for himself. But I reserve the Examination thereof for another place where he
goes about to purge his doctrine from all contrariety that it has to the
doctrine of the Apostle, and from any derogation from the Grace of God.

A second Testimony or authority from Scripture we may draw from Romans 4. 1,
etc. I shall be short in it. The Apostle here denies,

1 Our father Abraham the father of the faithful himself to have been
justified by works, for then he should have whereof to glory, ver. 2, 3. But as
Abraham was, so all the faithful are justified by faith without works; or to
render the words of the Text, By faith and not by works. Here Mr. Baxter has
no evasion, as in the former Chapter, viz. that the works of the Law only are
denied, for Abraham was under the promise, not under the Law, nether was the
Law then given; and the promise, under which he was, was without all condition
of works; so that the Apostle here excludes works indefinitely: I mean not
good and evil works, for no man ever brought evil works as evil to be
thereby justified. But good works, whether Legal or Evangelicall, all acts and
deeds both of natural and infused righteousness and holiness.

2 In affirming of him that works, i. e. that seeks justification by works,
that the reward is reckoned of debt to him, that he requires it as due, and
shall not receive it if it be not found due in Justice; but to him that works
not, but believes on him that justifyeth the ungodly, his faith is imputed to
righteousness, i. e. as has been already evinced, Christ by faith apprehended
is of the free grace of God made righteousness to him. When Mr. Baxter
therefore claps his bundle of works upon the shoulders of faith to officiate
with it to justification, he teaches us to reject the grace of God, and to
exact at Gods hands both the righteousness of Christ, and the end of it our
salvation, as a debt and due in justice. The Apostle puts no medium here either
between faith and works, or between grace and debt; where works peep up with
faith to justify in any degree, faith is destroyed, grace rejected; works
alone stand pleading for justification and salvation at the bar of Gods
justice, from thence alone God hears the plea of works; in vain is it to
plead them at the throne of grace, there nothing else but the plea of faith in
Christ is heard and excepted, ver. 4, 5.

3 In describing the righteousness of justification to be a righteousness
without works, a blessedness consisting in the covering, forgiving and not
imputing of sin, ver. 6, 7, 8. so that to obtrude works with faith into the
office of justifying, is to subvert Gods justification, and erect our own, i.
e. our own condemnation.

4. Ver. 16. From all his precedent reasoning the Apostle concludes, Therefore
it is of faith that it might be by grace: and left this should be taken for a
justification peculiar to Abraham and not common to all believers, he adds,
that the promise might be sure to all the seed etc. which is of the faith of
Abraham: as before he had said, that he might be the father of all them that
believe, that righteousness might be imputed to them also: even to them which
walk in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham, ver. 11, 12. And again
afterward, ver. 23. It was not written for his sake alone that it was imputed
to him, but for us also to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe in him that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, ver. 24. In all which places though
faith and believing alone are named, yet are they named in opposition to and
with an exclusion of works: as the attentive reader of that chapter will easily
perceive.

Not to fill up the paper with any other series or body of disputation which
the Scriptures plentifully afford for the confirmation of our doctrine, I shall
only annex some scattered testimonies thereof completely proving the same. The
whole stream of the Gospel runs this way; We that are Jews by nature [in
covenant with God] and not sinners of the Gentiles, Knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we
have believed in Jesus Christ that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the works of the Law, etc. Gal. 2. 15, 16. By the position
of faith works are here deposed. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that
not of our selves, it is the gift of God. Not of works, lest any man should
boast, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Not of works, but of him that calls, Romans 9. 11. Not
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy,
Romans 9. 16. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy, Tit. 3. 5. This is the work of God, [that which is in stead of all
works, and effectual to justification without all works] to believe in him whom
he has sent, Joh. 6. 29. They which are of faith are the children of Abraham,
and blessed with our father Abraham, for as many as are of the works of the Law
are cursed, Gal. 3. 7, 9, 10. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved, Act. 16. 31. Not by the Law of works, for it is written, The just shall
live by faith, Gal. 3. 11. If by grace, then it is no more of works, else grace
should be no more grace: if of works then, it is no more grace, else should
work be no more work, Romans 11. 6. Hence is the opposition which the holy Ghost
every where makes between Gods righteousness and our righteousness, Romans 10.
3. The righteousness of faith and the righteousness of works, Romans 9. 30, 31,
32. Phil. 3. 9, 10. and the consenting harmony of Scriptures that so oppose Law
and Gospel, faith and works, Gods grace and man's righteousness, Moses and
Christ, the righteousness which is by promise, and that which consists in
doing, Gods imputation and our qualifications; so that if the one be admitted
the other must be excluded from justification. Unto which if I should add all
of the the rest Testimonies and examples of Scripture, together with the
Arguments which our Divines bring thence, I should (to use Mr. Baxters phrase)
be necessitated to transcribe almost all the Scripture that relates to the New
Covenant.

The conclusion therefore of our Divines is not only that works have not, but
also that they connot have any place in or to our Justification, because
righteousness and life are merely and wholly by promise, even by the free and
absolute promise made to Abraham, which was without all conditions annexed,
Gal. 3. 8, 16, 17. 18. therefore without works, freely conferred on the
children of the promise. That they are by inheritance, therefore descend freely
upon them that are sons by says, Gal. 3. 18. Heb. 9. 15. Romans 4. 13, 114, 16.
and not attained by works. That in respect of the righteousness of works, Paul
knew nothing by himself, wherein he was not perfectly sincere, and sincerely
perfect, yet deems not himself to be thereby justified for the Lord is his
judge and justifyer [whose justifications are free] 1 Cor. 4. 4. That if
justification were in any part by works, then had man somewhat at least,
whereof to glory before God; but he has nothing whereof to glory, therefore
etc. Romans 4. 2. That it is by imputation wholly, therefore cannot be from any
inherent good in our selves, Romans 4. 3, 4. That if flows wholly from faiths
object or correlate, not at all from any virtue of faith as a qualification
inherent in us: much less therefore from any other qualification or work of
ours whatsoever. To which I might add their many other reasons proving that
works cannot justify. That it is by promise (as I said) which is still opposed
to works: Gal. 3. 17, 18, 22. even by that promise that was made to Abraham,
which was free, absolute, and without all condition of works, that Gospel
promise, In thee all Nations of the earth shall be blessed? A promise admitting
only them that are of faith to blessedness, but rejecting them that are of
works to the curse, Gal. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. Yea by the same absolute and
unconditionall promise or covenant often renewed, Jer. 31. 31,-34. and 32. 40.
That this promise is made Yea and Amen, ratifyed and effectuallized in Christ
Jesus, 2 Cor. 1 20. Not in works, no nor in faith as the Papists work, or
Arminians act and deed, or otherwise then as it is (as Luther describes it
Allegorically) Luth. in Gal. Ca. 2. v. 16.
the matter whereof Christ is the form, imforming and giving life and virtue to
it; an act apprehending Christ as its object in whom all its virtue lies; the
cloud or darkness in which Christ dwells, as God was formerly in a cloud or
darkness upon mount Sinai and in the Temple: or as all our Divines say, the
hand by which we receive Christ made of God righteousness to us and in us,
Gal. 3. 27. 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21. That the life of justification
consists not in works at all, nor in faith considered in a sense divided from
Christ, but in Christ our life living in us; so that the life which we live is
by the faith of the Son of God, by the recumbency of our souls by faith upon
the Son of God which is our life, and that this is to live by faith, Gal. 2.
20. Col. 3. 4. Gal. 3. 11. That Christ with all his righteousness to remission
and salvation, is given us freely of God, (not sold as by Judas to his enemies)
and so made ours without money without, price, without fine, or rent. In the
Covenant of grace there is nothing smelling of a Simoniacall contract, it is
wholly of Gods giving, not in the least particle of our purchasing, Isa. 9. 6.
Joh. 3. 16. Isa. 55. 1. That the life and justification which are by the second
Adam, descend to us in the same manner with the sin and condemnation from the
first Adam. But these descended by our natural union and communion with the
first Adam, not by our imitation of him. For death reigned from Adam, over them
that had not sinned, after the similitude of Adam: Therefore also
righteousness and justification descend to us by the union and communion which
we have with the second Adam Christ Jesus, and not from our imitation of him
and configuration to him; for when we were yet enemies we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son. Not but that every one to whom the sin and
condemnation of Adam once descended, are thenceforth imitators of and
configured to Adam: or that they to whomsoever the righteousness and
justification of Christ have descended, do not thenceforth become imitators of
and are configured to the image of Christ; but that these imitations and
configurations do follow and not go before such union and communion, declaring
not producing the sin and condemnation which are from Adam, or the
righteousness and justification which are from the Lord Christ, Romans 5. 11.
19. And this is a sound Argument which the Apostle brings to prove that works
can in no respect justify or save: For we are Gods workmanship (says he)
created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God has ordained before that we
should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 9, 10. where we may take notice that good works
are Gods end in saving or justifying us from sin. But the means do always in
order of nature go before and not follow the end, (in execution I mean, though
not in intention.) That we are first in Christ the justifyer and in possession
of the justification that is by him, and then being new created in Christ to
the image of God are enabled to do good works. That God has ordained before
that we should walk in them being saved or justified, not that we should be
saved or justified by them. That the righteousness of God [by which we are
justifyed] is from faith to faith, not begun by faith and ended in works, which
according to the Apostle is a beginning in the spirit, and a seeking to be
perfected by the flesh, Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3. 3. Should I proceed so far as the
Scriptures as a leading thread would guide me for the confirmation of
justification without works, I should be taken as exorbitant. For the rest I
shall refer the reader to such writers as have handled the point of
justification against the Papists; or to the disputations of the Apostle
himself against the false Apostles who taught the same doctrine with Mr.
Baxter, though not expressly in the same words. They taught that we cannot be
saved by Christ, by faith in Christ alone, except we be circumcised and keep
the Law, or do the works which the Law commands, Act. 15. 1, 24. Mr. Baxter
teaches in this his 60. Thesis, that

B. The bare act of believing is not the only condition of the New Covenant;
but several other duties also are parts of that condition.

If we take together with his words that which in the precedent Chapter we have
manifested to be his meaning in these words, and that by the bare act of
believing, he understands faith without and in opposition to works (for himself
knows that it is his Pontificall-Arminian-Socinian, not our Protestant
Evangelicall doctrine which holds out justification by believing as either a
bare or a clothed act or work) then he teaches the same doctrine for which
the Apostle anathematized the false Apostles and arch-church-troublers in his
time, Gal. 1. 7, 8, 9. and 5. 12. And what the Apostle has against them is
against Mr. Baxter their own son (I will not say in the faith, but) in
perverting the faith and Gospel. For neither did they deny faith, but Mr.
Baxters bare faith, faith without works to be effectual to justification.

Against this assertion common to him and them, if there were no other
Scriptures contradicting, but what I have alleged, no arguments brought by our
Divines to subvert it, and to establish the contrary doctrine, but what have
been here expressed and implied; (al which are scarce a drop of their full
bucket) yet does Mr. Baxter declare any finglenesse of heart, or sincere aim
to advance the glory and truth of God, in suppressing all this and all the rest
in silence, so to beguile his more Logical then Theological readers (whom he
knows to be more acquainted with Sophistry then Divinity, with exotic
scriblings then Canonical Scriptures) with an opinion that the stream of
Scriptures run all to his Mill, and that we have nothing from the Word
favoring our cause?

Neither let any object that our Churches do only deny the merit of works, not
the necessity of them as a condition to justification. Herein I shall have a
fit place to speak afterward as to Mr. Baxter and as it is his plea to lenifie
his self-arrogating assertion. In the interim to manifest the simplicity of our
gudgeons that are apt to swallow the most portentous errors if offered to them
involved in fine terms of logical notions, among whom some that erewhile did
prosecute with bell, book and candle, some to death, some to banishment, some to
sequestrations whom they thought but to smell a little of the perfumes of the
purple whore; These very same men now having enriched themselves with the
spoils of them whom by their outcries they erewhile pursued, are mad to drench
themselves with the very dregs of the cup of fornication which is in the hand
of the whore, and kiss the lips of Mr. Baxter which has blessed with
plausible words the doctrine which before they detested as cursed; and withal
to show how degenerate these are from our ancient worthies, who as Champions of
Christ have defended this article of justification against the whole rabble of
Antichrist; I shall declare how little difference they were wont to put beteen
merits and conditions, that though they held somewhat to differ in the sound,
yet held them to be one in substance, and still concluded against the Papists
that there is no place for works in the office of justification, either as
merits or conditions thereof; but that when the Scripture says we are
justified without works, all works both of Law and Gospel, are excluded from
being any way subservient to justification, either to the beginning or
finishing thereof, either as meriting it or conditioning us for it. I shall
mention only some few (lest I should seem to attribute much to the authority of
men) yet so that these few speak out the mind and deliver the common judgment
of all the rest.

First, I shall produce that famous Martyrologist Mr. Fox, what he speaks to
this purpose in that book of his De Christo gratis justificante. Having
alleged that testimony of the Apostle Romans 4. 16. It is of faith that it might
be of grace, to the end that the promise might be sure, etc. he adds, Atqui
quonam modo firma, nisi sit gratuita? Fox de Christo gratis. Justif. p. 127.
aut quo modo gratuita, si quoquam modo ex operibus? i. e. But how is the
promise sure, except it be free? or in what manner or respect free, if in any
manner or respect it be of works? Thus he excludes works in all respects
either of causality or conditionality from justification. Again, Duo sunt
promissionum genera, plurimum inter Idem ibid. p. 221.
se diversa: alterum ad legem spectans certis adnexum conditionibus, alterum
Evangelii proprium sine omni legis condition gratuitum, i. e. There are two
kinds of promises [made in Scripture] much differing either from other: the one
legal, tied to certain conditions; the other Evangelicall or proper to the
Gospel, free and without all conditions of the Law, not tied to any conditions
as the legal promises are.

Unto him I annex Dr. Fulk, in that Sermon of his which Mr. Fox translated out
of English into Latin, and annexed to the end of that Tractate of his own
beforementioned. Isaac not Ismael (says he) had the inheritance: Quia nimirum
unica ad hanc Dr. Fulkii concio. p. 13.
haereditatem perveniendi via patet, per solam promissionem, solam
misericordiam, solam fidem. Ismael vero juxta carnem natus est, Isaac per
promissionem. Haereditas autem sola nititur promissione; promissio vero nulla
meritorum pactione, sed sola Dei misericordia perficitur, i. e. Because there
is opened one only way to the inheritance, viz. by promise alone, mercy alone,
faith alone. But Ismael was born after the flesh, Isaac by promise. But the
inheritance is grounded upon promise only, and the promise is accomplished
without any paction [or condition of works] by the sole mercy of God. And a
little after, Certissimos se haeredes sciant ii, qui ad Isaaci exemplum ita se
comparant, Id. ibid. p. 19.
ut nullo alio ad eam titulo adnitantur, nisi sola Dei promissione; quique non
nisi gratia solum ad eam adspirant: qui denique fide eam sola amplectuntur; non
meritis, non operum studiis, viam ad eam affectant, i. e. Let them know
themselves to be most certain heirs, who after the pattern of Isaac, do bend to
it upon no other title but the alone promise of God: and who aspire to it by
grace alone: and lastly, who embrace it by faith only, and affect not the way
to it, by merits or any endeavors of their own works. And anon after,
Quemadmodum legale justitiae foedus Id. ibid. p. 22.
exquisitam omnibus modis innocentiam ita flagitat, ut nullam veniae spem
largiatur delinquenti: ita Evangelica altera illa icta nobiscum pactio
misericordiae, justitiam nobis gratuitam exhibet, nullamque exigit operum
adjunctam conditionem, i. e. Even as the legal covenant of justice so requires
of us an innocence in all respects exquisite, that it gives no hope of pardon
to the offender: So that other Gospel Covenant of mercy made with us, holds
forth to us a free righteousness, and requires no additory condition of works.
And in the next page he affirms the promise or covenant of the Gospel to be
gratuitam omnibus nullisque impeditam Id. p. 23.
conditionibus, free to all men, or from all, and entangled with no conditions.

In the third place I annex Mr. Calvin that great light shining from the hand
of Christ upon all the reformed Churches. Inde justificare dicitur fides (says
he) quod oblatam in Evangelio justitiam recipit and amplectitur; Quod autem per
Evangelium dicitur offerri, eo excluditur omnis operum consideratio, i. e.
Faith is hence said to justify because it receives and embraces the
righteousness offered in the Gospel. But in that it is said to be offered in
the Gospel, hereby all consideration of works is excluded: and so works in all
considerations either of causality or conditionality totally rejected. And
having proved this from the difference which the Apostle puts between the
Law and the Gospel, Romans 10. 3, and deinceps, he adds, Videsne ut legis and
Evangelii discrimen hoc faciat, Calv. Just. lib. 3. cap. 11.. 17.
quod illa operibus justitiam tribuat, hoc citra operum subsidium gratuitam
largiatur? i. e. Ye see what difference he makes between the Law and the
Gospel, that the Law attributes righteousness to works, the Gospel gives it
free without the assistance of works. An excellent place (says he) and that
which will extricate us from many difficulties, if we understand, came quae
datur nobis per Evangelium justitiam legis conditionibus solutam esse, i. e.
that the righteousness which is given us by the Gospel is cleared from the
conditions of the Law. And then speaking of the opposition that the Apostle
makes between the Law and the Promise, Gal. 3. 18. It cannot be denied (says
he) that the Law has also its Promises, and therefore there must be something
in the Promises of the Gospel distinct from those of the Law, else could there
be no such opposition; and concludes that the difference is this, that the
Gospel promises are free, ac sola Dei misericordia suffultae, quum legis
promissiones ab operum condition pendeant, i. e. and leaning upon the sole
mercy of God, when the promises of the Law depend upon the condition of works.

Likewise in the next Section from that of Gal. 3. 2. Hab. 2. 4. we are not
justified by the Law, because the just shall live by faith, he adds, that
this argument cannot stand, unless it be consented unto in calculum fidei non
venire opera, sed prorsus Idem ibid.. 18.
separanda esse, i. e. that works have nothing to do, in the borders of faith
to justify, but must be wholly separated from it, and proceeds, that the Law
and faith are here opposed. Therefore because works are required to the
righteousness of the one, ergo sequitur ad hujus justitiam non requiri, it
follows therefore that they are not required to the righteousness of the
other; and further in the same place, Herein the Gospel differs from the Law,
quod operibus non alligat justitiam, sed in sola dei misericordia collocat,
that it binds not righteousness to works, but places it in the sole mercy of
God. And, Fides sine operum adminiculo etc. Faith without any proppage of works
rests wholly upon mercy. And that wherewith he concludes this Section; That
the righteousness by which we are justified is not ushered into our possession
by works, nec operando nos eam consequi, sed vacuos accedere ut eam recipiamus,
i. e. not that we attain it by working, but come with our hands empty of all
works to be filled with it.

With those agrees Ph. Melanchthon, Evangelium offert remissionem per
imputationem justitiae and vitam aeternam sine condition legis aut operum
nostrorum, i. e. the Gospel offers remission by the imputation of
righteousness, and eternal life without condition of the Law or our works.
Again, Vulgo imaginantur homines Evangelium esse promissionem conditionalem: at
ab hac imaginatione abducendi* sunt, i. e. Men must be drawn off from that
vulgar imagination that the Gospel is a conditional promise.

And upon Romans 4. Credens est salvus sola fide sine operibus; Neque nostra
obedientia aut causa est aut conditio propter quam accepti sumus coram Deo, i.
e. He that believes is saved by faith only, without works; Neither is our
obedience either a cause or a condition for which we are accepted before God.

So Zanchius in Hos. 2. 21. Notandum est hanc esse simplicem and Evangelicam
sine omni condition promissionem: Hic nihil exigit Deus sed simpliciter
promittit quod velit ipse, etc. This is a simple and Evangelicall promise
[which is] without all condition; where God requires nothing but simply
promises what he pleases.

As for Luther it is superfluous to cite him being every where so full both in
the positing and confirming of this doctrine; let but his Sermon upon Tit. 3.
5. be read; he shall be there found calling it devilish doctrine, and the
teachers thereof Hypocrites, who teach salvation to be far off (and not already
attained) and to be sought for by works: concluding, Quicunque salutem non ex
mera gratia per fidem ante omnia opera, etc. whosoever receives not salvation
out of mere grace, by faith, before all works, he shall never be saved.

I had a purpose to have annexed the Testimonies of some more of the Chieftains
against Antichrist, but there is no need. Mr. Baxter for his part is not a
Zizca, warreth not by other men's eyes, sees and knows against whom he
levelleth, is not ignorant that all, especially the more ancient and
unsophisticated worthies of all the Churches, speak the same things and in the
same tone with these against the Papists. Neither was it my purpose to deal at
all in this passage with Mr. Baxter, but to show the vanity of some
Pharisaicall, Cabalisticall, Sophistical, but little Scripturall and
Theological Rabbis, who with Anti-evangelicall spirits, (partly to set up
again a Babell or Babylon of works, as a mount against Antinomianism, as they
term the liberty and purity of the Gospel; and partly in a prostrate devotion
wherewith they sacrifice to every Barbarism and Aphorism of exotic arts, to
which they must submit though it be to the denying of the whole word of God,
for fear they should not be reckoned Scholars:) are ready to gallop after Mr.
Baxters Sophistical Lectures into the very Lateran of Rome, not knowing whence
they run nor whither, whose company they leave, and whose they follow; such
levity and giddiness has taken their head-pieces; that as having gotten a
professed Protestant Divine to lead them into the worst sink of Popery, they
run with head and shoulders, thronging who shall be foremost: so no doubt, if
under the profession or misprision of a Jesuit Paul himself should descend to
preach again and maintain the Doctrine of the Gospel in all its verity, power
and purity, (and not in a dialecticall phrase) they would throw it back in his
face, as Jesuiticall and devilish. For without such lightness and emptiness
it were impossible for them to be so suddenly and easily whirled into an
applause of an assertion so grossly and palpably Popish and Damning, by a
peevish veneration of the learning and holiness of the Penman thereof. As if
among the Jewish Scribes and Pharisees, and Popish Monks and Jesuits, there
were not to be found in depth of Learning, and strictness of Legal
righteousness many to whom this man may possibly serve, and but serve as a
shadow.

But it suffices here to have manifested that the Doctrine of Mr. Baxter is
totally the same (in this particular) with the doctrine of the Jesuits. Or if
in any respect we shall find it in what remains to be examined, not wholly the
same; I doubt not but in every such difference which we shall meet with, to
demonstrate that it is far worse then theirs. Or if it be not so, let him
produce any one knowing man within any of the Protestant Churches (except he
will make the Concision of Socinians and Arminians the true Protestants) that
has ever taught or held this doctrine.

CHAP. III.
The first Argument for Justification by Works, drawn from Scriptures examined.
The Scriptures [cited] prepared to Mr. Baxters hand by the Papists; and the
Protestants answer to all the Arguments drawn from those Scriptures by the
Papists, by him concealed; and the abhorrency of those Scriptures from the
conclusion, which they are brought to prove, demonstrated.

HAving in part supplied what Mr. Baxter would have buried here in silence,
some of the Scriptures and Arguments from Scriptures which are brought by the
Protestants to remove works from having concurrence with faith in the business
of justifying; let us now examine the Scriptures which he quoteth to prove
their cooperation with faith to justify. Here (as I said) we meet not with
words but figures; partly therefore because he maintains the same assertion
with the Papists, partly because the Scriptures which he quoteth are all such
as the Papists have urged before him against us, so that he has taken them up
at the second hand, as they were collected to his hand by the Friars and
Jesuits, himself not expressing how he would argue from those Scriptures; I
conceive it is his desire that we should understand he means so to argue as his
Masters have done before him. My labor therefore here will be the less,
because the labor of so many before me has been so full to manifest how alien
and improper these Scriptures are to desend what these men would have defended
by them. For why should I say again what so many worthies have said, until Mr.
Baxter shall make it his task to prove some infirmity and insufficiency in
that which they have spoken?

All that Mr. Baxter here says he does almost wholely transcribe out of
Bellarmine, giving us a compendium of what Bellarmine has at large, and so Mr.
Baxter here is but Bellarmine abridged. Let us lay them together, and 1 They
jumpe in one common conclusion,

That the bare act of believing, says Mr. Baxter, faith alone, says
Bellarmine, These. 60.
is not the only condition of Justification; but many other duties, etc. One of
these duties according to Bellarmine first, and after Explicat. p. 234.
him according to Mr. Baxter here, is Repentance. In this alone they differ
that Mr. Baxter puts Repentance as the first, and Bellarmine puts it as the
fourth in order after Faith, and concurring with it in the pardon of sin, and
salvation. The Scriptures which Mr. Baxter alleges for repentance are some
from Bellarmine, some from Bellarmines fellows.

To this place I referred those Scriptures which Mr. Baxter quoted, These. 14.
pa. 90. beginning with Mark. 1. 15. to prove repentance a collateral with
faith. All which are here quoted over again saving these three, Act. 20. 21.
Revel. 2. 5. and ver. 16. all which three Scriptures speak no less home to his
purpose, then if he should thus argue: Kederminster is in Worcestershire, ergo,
it supports Paul's Church at London. Act. 20. 21. The Apostle having affirmed
himself to have dealt faithfully in preaching all that was profitable to them,
to evince it, gathers into two heads the sum of all his doctrine which he had
testified among them, viz. Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ: what is there in this to prove repentance a concomitant with
faith to justify? is every profitable doctrine effectual to justify? A man's
food and garments are both profitable to him, shall I therefore concude either
that his garments do nourish him, or his meat clothe him? Revel. 2. 5, Christ
admonishes the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, To repent and do his first
works, else will he come and remove his candlestick out of its place, except he
repent: what is this to justification? will he say that the removing of the
candlestick out of its place, was either the justifying of the unjustifyed, or
unjustifying of him that was before justified? And Revel. 2. 16. Christ calls
upon the Angel of the Church at Pergamos, Repent, or else I will come to thee
quickly, and will fight against them [viz. the Balaamites and Nicholaitans
mentioned in the two former verses] with the sword of my mouth. Surely Mr.
Baxter must fly from the latter and rational meaning, and follow the precepts
of Origin in fishing after the Spirit, or an Allegorical sense of these words,
to make them speak any thing for his justification by repentance. All the rest
Scriptures quoted in the 14. Thesis, we have again in a bunch here pa. 235. in
the explication of his 60. Thesis to prove the same thing.

And here why does he deal worse then Bellarmine, in attributing justification
which he makes to consist in pardon and salvation, to repentance, without
manifesting, as Bellarmine does, what he means by repentance? This is but to
strive about words and leave the matter in darkness. As for the other
particular Scriptures here quoted, if I should particularly examine them, we
should find not a few of them (as the three former) coming no nearer to the
question in hand then Tybris does to Thames. As for all such of them as have
the least show or sound of speaking for him, he has them in part from
Bellarmine whom he here follows, and in part from other Jesuits and Friars
that controversally handle the Popish justification against us. I refer
therefore the reader to inform himself from the many answers of the many
Protestant Theologists which they have extant against Bellarmine and the rest
of that generation; from whom, if truth and soberness be dear to him, it is
almost unpossible but that he must receive satisfaction.

Yet something shall I speak in general of these quoted Scriptures. As many of
them as do hold forth the promise of life upon condition of repentance to
sinners, or to sinners if they repent (all the rest quotations being altogether
besides the purpose:) [These all] speak of a legal or of an Evangelicall
repentance. Of a legal repentance consisting merely in a feeling of,
humiliation and contrition for, hatred against, departing from sin; and
applying of the endeavors to all moral virtue and obedience. This is a merely
moral repentance derivable from the strength of natural conscience
illuminated by the Law and common knowledge of Gods will and nature. In this
sense is the word taken in most of the Scriptures quoted from the old
Testament, and some also possibly of those that are quoted out of the new. But
then the life by these Scriptures promised is not the life of justification, or
of spiritual and supernatural blessedness: but that which the administration
under the Law is wont to call life, viz.

1 The fruition of the land of Canaan, which prefigured the life and rest both
of grace and glory. And

2 Of the blessings of health, honor, peace, plenty, safety, and other
temporal benefits promised to the obedient in the Land of Canaan.

This is clear to him that will see, from the 18 of Ezekiel. where so often
mention is made of life and death, Turn and live, if ye turn not ye shall die:
what is here meant by this life and death, may be understood from that proverb
cursedly used by the Jews whereof mention is made in the beginning of the
Chapter; The fathers have eaten sour grapes and the childrens teeth are set on
edge: the fathers have sinned, and death is inflicted upon the children for
their fathers fault. This gave occasion for the delivery of all the doctrine
comprehended within this Chapter, in which God thoroughly vindicateth his
justice from inflicting death upon the children, righteous children, for their
wicked parents offenses; showing how justly they dyed which dyed, and lived
which lived, in reference to their own not their fathers sin and
righteousness: what then was this death here denounced, or the setting of the
teeth on edge, but the plague, famine, sword, which had been upon them in the
Land, and their captivity and exile now upon them in Babylon out of the Land of
their inheritance? these temporal evils are the death here affirmed to be
inflicted, and denounced to be continued upon them. The life promised upon
condition of their repentance, and turning from their evil ways, was their
restoration to the land, and blessings of the land of Canaan again. The same
is evident from the words of Moses, in Deuteronomy, where Moses having in the
name of God, pronounced the many blessings and whole confluence of secular
happiness to the obedient, and to them that after much transgression and many
curses for their transgressions should repent and turn; and denounced curses
upon curses, a whole deluge of judgments, and temporary afflictions one on the
neck of another against as many as should dis^bey the Commandments, etc. cap.
28. and cap. 29. he does cap. 30 15, 19. Call heaven and earth to witness that
he had done his duty in setting before them life and death, good and evil,
blessing and cursing, inplying the life and death here mentioned consisted
chiefly in outward prosperity and adversity, stroaking and striking. That these
were the apples and the rods to allure and terrify them yet in their minority
and under a paedagogie, until faith should come and the Sun of tighteousnesse
shine in its splendour, that they might walk by faith, and not by feeling, act
from love, and not from fear, from the Spirit of adoption, and not of bondage:
so that this shadie life promised to a legal repentance, is nothing to the
life of justification, but so far beneath it, that it is in no capacity to be
used as a proof about it. These therefore serve not at all to drive on Mr.
Baxters conclusion.

In the second place, Those Scriptures which he quotes that offer life upon
condition of Evangelicall repentance do not make for him any more then the
former. For Gospel repentance, is taken either in a large or strict sense, in
the more large sense it is the same with conversion or regeneration, and often
times equipollent and the same thing with faith, (though some little consider
it to be so.) And this is as often as repentance is put for the one and whole
thing required on our part to put us into the actual and sensible possession
of the grace and life of the Gospel, as Mat. 3. 2. Mark. 6. 12. Repent, for
the Kingdom of God is at hand. The sum of their preaching was Repent, so Luke
13. 3, 5. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. and 24. 47. and many
other of the Scriptures which he quoteth. In all these places repentance
contains primarily the change of our relation, and but secondarily of our
qualifications and manners. It is a quidam motus, in which acti agimus, being
moved by Gods Spirit we move; the terminus a quo in this motion is self, our
self-righteousnesse and self-confidences, from which we turn no less then from
our polluted self, sinful self, and sinful ways. The terminus ad quem is
God, the grace of God inviting us. The medinm per quod is the Lord Christ
through whom we have access to the Father for remission first; and then for
sanctification also. And as the scope of the Gospel requires us to understand
in such Scriptures repentance in this sense, so neither do the two Greek words,
rendered in Latin Resipisc^ntia, in English Repentance, refuse this sense. For
what is that change of the mind, of the judgment, wisdom and will, when it is
taken for a Theological virtue, but a change of these in reference to
happiness? A renouncing of and departing from natures groaping and erring
directions, by our own works and righteousness to seek for blessedness; and a
cleaving to the directions of the Gospel pointing out Christ as the alone way
to it? For instance, Paul while yet impenitent and unconverted, walked by the
light of his natural conscience, as it was informed and awaked by the Law, and
by this rule walked as a strict Pharisee; touching the righteousness which is
in the Law blameless, Phil. 3. 5, 6. and looking (as Mr. Baxter does) upon the
doctrine of free grace, and righteousness freely imputed, as upon a licentious
doctrine, was carried with full sails of zeal totally to destroy it: I verily
thought with my self (says he) that I ought to do many things against the Name
of Jesus, etc. which thing I also did, etc. Act. 26. 9, 10. Now when the Lord
Christ met him in the midst of his raging madness, so working upon his heart
that he now believed in Christ whom he had erewhile persecuted, received him
and rested on him for righteousness, whom he had erewhile blasphemed: What
will ye call this obedience to the faith, this closing of his heart with Christ
in stead of further dashing against him? was it not his conversion, his
repentance? or is the promise of life (I mean the life of justification) made
to any other repentance besides this? In this sense therefore repentance is not
a quid distinctum, a thing distinct from, but one and the same with justifying
faith; or if it be objected that it is somewhat larger then justifying faith: I
shall not contend but acknowledge that it comprehends whole faith, both qua
justificat, and qua sanctificat, to justification and to sanctification. Yet
this hinders not but that these two phrases, repentance to life or remission of
sins, and faith to life and the remission of sins, are in the language of the
holy Ghost one and the same.

Where repentance is taken in a stricter sense, and some of the Scripture,
which he quotes seem to promise remission of sins or life to it; we must
necessarily understand of every such Scriptures that it speaks of the
repentance which is actuated in our first conversion and calling, or after it.
That which is in our first conversion or calling, when it is taken in a strict
sense, is not as in the former sense put as the whole thing required on our
parts, but seems in words a coordinate with faith to interest us in the
righteousness and life which are by Christ. Such are these Scriptures, Repent
and believe the Gospel: repentance toward God and faith toward the Lord Jesus
Christ, Mark. ^. 15. Act. 20. 21. and many other. But in these, repentance and
faith together make up no more then in other Scriptures, either faith alone or
repentance alone in their large sense import: and so repentance is taken for
self-denial, self-abhorring, self-subduing, and faith for embracing Christ:
both these are repentance or faith in their larger sense. To no other end does
repentance cast and empty out self but to be filled with Christ, nor does faith
receive Christ until self be let out and evacuated that it may receive him.
See we it in Paul, his casting away his Phi. 3. 8, 9.
own righteosnesse as dung and loss, and putting on of Christ, to win and wear
him for righteousness, were two concurrent acts either of one faith or one
repentance, (for we may use after the holy Ghost, either term indifferently)
and repentance here is no distinct thing from faith, nor faith from repentance,
and in naming these two the holy Ghost names not two gifts of grace, but two
acts of the same gift of grace in us; so that hitherto the Scriptures which Mr.
Baxter quotes to prove that repentance as a really distinct thing from faith
justifyeth, do wholly fail him. For (as our Divines well say against the
Papists) though these two acts must needs cooperate together, viz. the casting
out of self and the receiving of Christ; yet it is the latter alone that does
properly and instrumentally justify by receiving the justifyer and his
righteousness; the former act does but disponere materiam (as one says not
too catachrestically) does but put a man as it were in a justifiable posture
and capacity, does but obi^em tollere, pluck out and cast away the bar that
might fasten the door against Christ's entrance; and this it does not as a
distinct virtue from faith, but as a subservient act of faith to its receiving
of Christ.

Lastly, those of the forequoted Scriptures which speak of repentance in a
strict sense advantageous to life after conversion, and that which the Papists
and Mr. Baxter call the first justification, (as 2 Cor. 7. 10. and some other)
[these] speak of repentance indeed really distinct from faith, being an effect
or fruit of faith. But this repentance is in no other sense called repentance
to life, then as by it the Saints sometimes recover the sense and comfort of
their justification, that had for a while laid fainting in them; or as it is
empowered from above to repair, confirm and increase the life of sanctification
in them. And this is besides the question in hand, [whether repentance
justifyeth.] I shall therefore pretermit to speak futher of it. And thus have
we one file of his Scripture quotations examined, and do find that all which
he would thence deduce to confirm a collateral officiating of repentance [as
a thing really distinct from faith] together with faith to justification;
stands him in no stead at all.

The second duty which he names as an equal condition with faith, of our
justification, is praying for pardon, and forgiving Page 230.
others. In this though he follow Bellarmine, yet he holds not himself to
Bellarmines words, but having overtaken him, runs beyond him. Bellarmine thus
speaks, having mentioned before two things that justify, Thirdly, (says he)
Spes obtinendae veniae, est etiam dispositio ad justitiam et remissionem
peccatorum, i. e. Hope of forgiveness is also a disposition to righteousness
and the remission of sins. Mr. Baxter outruns him and says, that praying for
pardon, and forgiving of others too, are conditions of pardon; but suppose that
I do hope and pray for pardon, and forgive others too, shall I then be
forgiven? Mr. Baxter will not promise that, but if I do that, ( caeteris
paribus) then forsooth I may hope well: but what is this sensus compositus, or
caeteris paribus? viz. if I do this and all that else is to be done, i. e. all
the duties which either Law or Gospel commands me. But I demand, if all this
be done, am I then justified? Neither will he grant me this: I am then
conditionally justified, as I was before I did any thing; yea more, I am now a
probationer for justification, and upon my been se gesserit, my good behavior,
I am justified for an hour possibly until I be unjustifyed again: but if I do
all and never cease to do all either while I am living, etc. or when I am dead;
there may be possibly a day, (when there be no more days) when I may (if all
things faie well) be justified. But further that all may faie well, will he
tell me what the caeteris paribus, the rest conditions are, that I may perform
them all and not miss in number? Thus far possibly he will condescend, to make
known some of them, and to give me some generals of the rest, and make known
the materia prima in which the substantial forms lurk, yea the genera and the
species that are such subalternatim, but the species specialissimas and infimas
together with their individuals, he either will not or cannot particularize the
seed of Mr. Baxter in this kind is more numerous then the seed of Abraham, more
then the stars of heaven, then the sands of the sea for multitude; yet if one
be wanting, I am as far from justification as if I had nothing: So blessed a
man will Mr. Baxters conditions make me. But let me on the contrary part demand
of Mr. Baxter, Suppose a person truly in the Covenant of grace, vitally in
Christ, if he have never a one of these additory conditions actually moving in
him, is not his justification and glory as certain as another that has all
the conditions? Mr. Baxter dares not deny the supposition to be possible; for
then shall he exclude all dying Infants from the kingdom of heaven, which in
another book of his it is said he flatly denies) the consequent therefore
cannot be denied, that justification before God is as sure without as with
these conditions; and so no condition at all to be granted of our
justification, save that which may assure and declare it to our selves. What
misspent time will it be then to bawl about two or three of many decads and
centuries, yea myriads of conditions, by disputing whether they be conditions;
when if we know not and have not all the rest it shall go as well with those
that have none of them, as with them that have all to one? I had almost said,
when these all brought as conditions (in Mr. Baxters sense) to Gods tribunal
will without doubt condition him that brings them, to condemnation.

But because Mr. Baxter and his disciples may be angry if we hear not what so
great a Master says, for our own safety we will attend to hear what Scriptures
he alleges.

The first he brings from the prayer of Solomon, 1 King. 8. 30, 39. Hear (Lord)
thy servants when they shall pray toward or in this place, and forgive them,
and give to every man according to his ways. What will hence follow? either,
ergo whosoever prays in or toward Solomon's Temple in Jerusalem shall be
forgiven, so far as forgiveness consists in giving to every man according to
his ways; or shall be forgiven as to the famine and pestilence, etc. ver. 38.
mentioned, so as he pray caeteris paribus though he be never forgiven as to
hell fire: or, ergo there was a time when prayer for pardon was a condition of
forgiveness, viz. when the Temple stood at Jerusalem, if prayer were made in
it or toward it; but now since the desolation of the Temple this condition for
the space of 1600. years, has been out of force. Let him conclude better for
himself from these premises if he can; I can conclude no better thence to the
maintenance of his assertion. And it is worthy of consideration to take notice
how extremely the Apostles logic and Mr. Baxters logic do differ. From the
like promise of salvation made in Scriptures to them that pray for it, the
Apostle concludes that we are justified and saved by faith; thus, Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall Romans 10. 13, 14.
be saved. How then shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed?
His argumentation runs thus, Whosoever do [rightly] call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved: but believers only call [rightly] upon the name of the
Lord: ergo, believers only shall be saved. He argues here from the effect to
the cause, from acceptable prayer, to faith from whence it flows; concluding,
that salvation is promised to prayer, not as it is an act performed in its
self, but as it is a fruit of faith, ascribing all the furtherance unto
salvation by prayer, to faith that breaths it out, and all the efficacy which
faith has to salvation, to the Lord [ i. e. the grace of God, or Christ the
Mediatour] believed in. So making faith to be that which, in the virtue of its
object, saves; and not prayer either in its act, or in respect of the
spiritual disposition of the heart to pray.

And with the Apostles argument from prayer to faith, I might also argue to
manifest that the Scriptures which Mr. Baxter quoteth to prove that forgiving
of others is a collateral condition with faith to justification or
forgiveness, have no force in them to prove such a conclusion. viz. Mat. 6.
12, 14, 15. Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtours, for if we forgive
men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also forgive you; but if ye
forgive not men their trspasses, neither will your heavenly father forgive your
trespasses. Mat. 18. 35. So likewise shall my heavenly father do to you also,
if ye from your hearts forgive not every man to his brother their trespasses.
The like also in Mar. 11. 25, 26. When ye stand praying forgive, etc. as in the
former Scriptures Luke 6. 35. Forgive and ye shall be forgiven. Isa. 5. 15. And
the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and if he has committed sins they
shall be forgiven him. Joh. 14. 13, 14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name I
will do it, etc. 1 John 5. 15. Whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the
petitions that we desired of him. The rest have nothing of sound, much less of
substance to the purpose for which they are quoted.

How much these Scriptures together with those of the former bunch that were
intended by Mr. Baxter for the foysting in of Repentance, and of the next
bundle that he would have to force in all the works of love and obedience into
the office of justification, may prevail with some simple and ignorant persons,
I know not. For these not being able to compare Scripture with Scripture, and
spiritual things with spiritual, nor to search into the pith and bottom of
Scriptures, are carried (as the Apostle says) with every wind and sound of
doctrine, whither their seducers will. But I do not comprehend what Mr. Baxters
design is, who having compiled this work chiefly, if not only, for the reading
of the Learned, should fardle up together these Scriptures to deceive such: for
the very quotations will send them not only to the Scriptures, but also to the
Commentators upon these several Scriptures, where they must needs find him and
the Jesuits so wresting from them the same doctrine, and Mr. Baxter so fully
answered in their answer to the Jesuits that his Readers will not be able to
decide which is the verier Jesuit, he, or those whom he follows. I had a
thought therefore to transmit the Reader to the Commentators.

But to manifest to the simple how little there is in substance in these quoted
Scriptures, making for Mr. Baxter, I shall interpose these few things.

1 That the Scriptures are all of Gods inspiration, concenting together in o^e
harmony, no where dashing either against other, no more then God their Author
dasheth against himself: so that we must necessarily conclude that neither all,
nor any one of these Scriptures does in its proper and genuine sense,
contradict those before alleged Scriptures of justification by faith, and not
by works; by faith, without works; by the righteousness of faith, and not by
our own righteousness; by the law of faith, in opposition to the law of works,
etc. as before. If then these Scriptures should bring in justification and
remission but in part by our own works and righteousness, Scripture would here
be set in commotion against Scripture, and God against God.

2 Mr. Baxter does here make this work of forgiving and praying for
forgiveness, as also in the next place all love, obedience, and the works
thereof not simply conditions of justification and forgiveness, (which in some
sense far from Mr. Baxters, some of our Theologists admit) but collaterally and
in the same relation with faith; and this is the highest top of Papal
presumption, not the worst of Jesuits speak more derogatorily to the depressing
of Gods grace, or more proudly to the exalting of man's works, worth and
righteousness.

3 From this doctrine of his it would follow that praying and forgiving others
must be such a condition of justification, that where it is there is
justification, where it is not there is not justification, the positing or not
positing of the one including the sum of the other: for so it is with faith;
He that believes shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned, Mark.
16. 16. so Joh. 3. 36. Will Mr. Baxter say so of forgiving others, and praying
for forgiveness? are all that do it justified? dares he to say it? No
otherwise, but with his caeteris paribus, and sensu composito, if he does this
and all things else which a Christian should do. And thus I might also make
every civil and indifferent Action the condition of justification. A man's
sleeping by night, and working by day, his eating when he is hungry, and
drinking when he is thirsty, his improving of his ground^ before he sowes them,
and sowing them when improved, and reaping them when the crop is come to
maturity; all these and the like may be as well called conditions of
justification, for these also caeteris paribus, when all things else are done
which a Christian should do, do stand as full in strength to justification as
those works which Mr. Baxter particularizeth; yea this caeteris paribus, makes
sin, guilt, ungodliness, perdition, etc. more properly conditions of
justification, then any of those which Mr. Baxter names; for without the
actual being of those none can be justified in Christ before God: For Christ
Came not to call the righteous but sinners to Repentance, Mat. 9. 13. He has
shut up all under guilt, under sin, that the promise of righteousness by the
faith of Jesus Christ might be upon all that believe, Romans 3. 19, 22, 23, 24.
He justifyeth the ungodly, Romans 4. 5. And saves that which was lost, Mat. 18.
11. Are these duties to be performed coordinately with faith that we may be
justified? surely rather then those which Mr. Baxter names, for these still go
before, but those of Mr. Baxter, (as far as they relate to it) do follow
justification.

4 The scope of these Scriptures is to urge upon all that draw near to God in
prayer, to purge out all hatred and purposes of revenge against their brethren
from their hearts, and the argument by which this duty is pressed, is, that
else it (as also any other reigning sin allowed within the heart) will make
both their persons and prayers an abomination to the Lord. God will not hear,
will not forgive such as bring, while they bring such a devil in their hearts
before him; they shall depart without any more answer of peace to their souls,
then they are disposed to give to their brethren against whom they are
provoked. From these Scriptures therefore we may gather how they are qualifyed
which are forgiven and justified, not by what qualifications and works they
have obtained justification. That whosoever has tasted of the pardoning grace
of God, the same by beholding in Christ the glory of Gods grace as in a glass
is transformed into the same image of grace, love, mercy, goodness, pity, etc.
toward his brethren, as himself has found in God, and sees shining forth upon
him from the face of God through Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 18. That in whomsoever this
mercy and goodness of God appears not, whatsoever he boasts of faith, and
devoutnesse in prayer, yet it is certain that he is empty of justifying faith,
and of the justification which is by faith: and so we have here some
description of the justified and unjustifyed, not a precept of duties by which
the unjustifyed may attain to be justified.

5 The three last quotations of Mr. Baxter, do subvert utterly all that he
built by the former quotations: For these Scriptures affirming it to be not
indefinitely prayer, but the prayer of faith which saves and obtains
forgiveness; that not the asking simply, but the asking of the faithful in
Christ's Name is prevalent; that not every one, but we know that whatsoever we
ask we have our petitions granted; do manifest that whatsoever virtue is in
prayer it flows from faith, prayer it self is a dead work unless faith
enliven it, and all our works of mercy and forgiving, dead works, until faith
becomes the living root from which they derive life, or rather has breathed
out the life which it has sucked from Christ our life into them. That it is
Christ's name and mediation that makes all accepted with God, and that not to
all, but to those peculiar ones of Christ that are in union and conjunction
with Christ, it being a privilege peculiar to true believers that is here
mentioned under the word we, we have it (says the Apostle) the world has no
part in it. Esaus forgiving, Saul's confession of sin, and Simon Magus his
prayer for forgiveness, may (as in Mr. Baxters last quotation Act. 8. 22.)
perhaps, be so far heard, and forgiveness obtained from the Lord, as to the
exempting of them from some temporal vengeance, but not to interest them in
the justification of the Gospel: If the cries and works of any of these dogs
bring them in to partake of the childrens bread, it is but in man's judgment
alone; before God it was their faith and cleaving to Christ, yea being in
Christ by faith, that of dogs made them children, and partakers of the Gospel
privileges. So these Scriptures in no wise prescribe (as I said) the duties by
or for which we are, but delineate the Acts and qualifications of those that
are justified by Christ.

So much in general to the sum of these Scriptures; as for the meaning of
the several Scriptures, and how Mr. Baxter argues from them as the Papists;
how the Sophisters (for so our men fitly term the Papists) endeavor from them
to prove justification by works, and the Protestants answer and confute them; I
leave to the Reader to fetch from the Commentators themselves, whom they shall
find to speak fully, as Mr. Baxter knows but concealeth, not daring to
enter the Lists with them.

The third duty which he brings as coofficiating with Page 236.
faith to justification, is a complexion of duties, the whole swarm, the vast
mountain of duties, all that men and Angels can devise to be duty: yet that he
might declare how he can measure and contain so huge an Ocean in his fist, he
crusheth them so together as that they may be held in the concave of two
Eg-shels, love and sincere obedience, and their works. Fain would he have
followed Bellarmine as his sh^ddow at every turn; but he finds his genius
somewhat differing from Bellarmines: The Cardinal was for prolixity, Mr.
Baxter is for brevity. Bellarmine puts love in the fourth place as operating to
justification with faith, and thence proceeds to more. But Mr. Baxter follows
him here to love, and weary to go after him any further in particulars, shakes
hands in love with him and parts from him with good leave in respect of his
method, but in his matter to hold with him throughout the work.

The first Scripture which he quotes is the first which Bellarmine alleges;
thus,

B. Luke 7. 47. (though I knew in Pinks interpretation of that.)

It seems Pink has given the right interpretation of that Text which all the
Protestants give. But Bellarmine interprets it otherwise, and must not Christ
mean as Bellarmine will have him? The words of the Text are these, Wherefore I
say unto thee, her sins which are many are forgiven, for she loved much: But to
whom little is forgiven, the same loves little. What does Mr. Baxter hence
conclude? the same with Bellarmine, her much love was the ground of the
forgiveness of her many sins, and so her love went before her justification
and forgiveness, which followed as the fruit or consequent thereof. Bellarmine
and his fellowrs put authority and holiness upon this interpretation, else
would not Mr. Baxter who makes right reason the foundation and rule of his
Religion, forswear his wit and reason to follow it. For it is evident from the
Text to all that are not sworn enemies to the truth, that the Lord Jesus
reasons here from the effect to the cause, and not from the cause to the
effect: from the woman's great love, that many sins were forgiven her causing
this love; not from the greatness of her love as from the cause why so many
sins were forgiven her. So runs the Text, Which will love most, he to whom the
creditor has forgiven 500. pence, or he Ve. 41, etc.
to whom he forgave 50? The answer was, I suppose he to whom most was forgiven.
Thou have well said (says the Lord) so it is with this woman, she loves much
because much was forgiven her; Who sees not here the forgiveness to be the
cause of the love, not the love of the forgiveness? Or will Bellarmine which
affirms this woman to be Mary Magdalen, or Mr. Baxter after him, say that
while she was yet a Harlot and had seven Devils in her, that she loved Christ
much? how good was it to be possessed of a whole legion of such white Devils
that breathed into the soul possessed, such strong love of Christ? But why then
said Christ to her Thy faith has saved thee, ver. 50. did her faith only save
her, but her love justify her? This is one piece of Mr. Baxters new Divinity,
and with him I leave it. Let him learn modesty and truth from Soarez himself a
Prelate among the Papists: Oportet advertere in hoc quod dicitur quoniam
dilexit multum: non prius dilexisse multum, and magnam dilectionem causam
fuisse tantae remissionis; sed vice versa, quoniam remissa sunt ei peccata
multa, ideo dilexisse multum: Soarez in locum.

He adds Mat. 5. 44. Luke 6. 27, 45. Love your enemies, etc. That ye may be
the children of your heavenly Father, etc. What will Mr. Baxter hence conclude,
but that our love, etc. is the cause or ground of our Adoption? That we love
God first, and then he us afterward? That not his grace but our righteousness
makes us his Children and him our father? But contrariwise Christ here
exhorts the children to be like the father; directs his words to the already
Adopted, so to put on the image and resemble the nature and operations of their
heavenly Father, that they may be, i. e. declare themselves to be the children
of the heavenly Father. Like that of Joh. 13. 35. By this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples if ye love, etc. And that of 1 John 3. 10. In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil, he that loves
not, is not of God, etc. So love on our part does not make but manifest us to
be the children of God.

But remarkable is his next quotation Joh. 15. 12, 17. This is my
commandment, that ye love one another, ergo love justifyeth; as good as if I
should argue, Christ commanded Peter to angle and take a fish: ergo Peter's
angling and catching a fish justified him. As if whatsoever Christ commanded,
he commanded to justification. And as full to his purpose is 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye
has not seen nor ear heard, etc. what the Lord has laid up for them that love
him: ergo, my love was the condition of Gods laying up for me: as if God had
not laid up for me before I loved him. How agrees this with that which after he
annexeth, Mat. 25. Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the beginning
of the world? and Romans 8. 28. All things shall work together for good to them
that love God; [who are they?] such as are called according to his purpose, if
called then justified, and who denies the riches of Gods grace dispensing all
things for the good of his justified ones that love him? But what is this to
loves justifying? And rare logic from the next two Scriptures, Grace be with
them that love the Lord Jesus, Ephesians. 6. 24. And he that loves him not, let him
be Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16. 22. Ergo, love to Christ justifyeth in rank
and life with faith: when I make my love the ground or condition of Gods grace,
and cease to make the grace of Christ the foundation of my love to Christ, then
will I expect that Mr. Baxter will justify me, until then I shall be in his
account Anathema maranatha.

Again, God has promised the Crown, the Kingdom to them that love him, Jam. 1.
12. and 2. 5. Ergo, Justification is a Crown and Kingdom, and love will then
justify when it brings us to the Crown and Kingdom, until then we are
unjustifyed. He that loves me shall be loved of my Father, Joh. 14. 21. Ergo,
our love to Christ begets love in the Father, and ergo, the love of the Father
is our justification; and what else Mr. Baxter will, for he concludes,
quidlibet e quolibet. I love them that love me, and they that seek me early
shall find me, Prove. 8. 17. Ergo, God does not love us until we love him, nor
seek us till we seek him, and so God is moved by us, not we by him, and perhaps
justified (for of this he speaks) by us before we are justified by him. That
I may cause them that love me to inherit substance: and I will fill their
treasures, ver. 21. Ergo; our justification is in our chests and purses, and
our love prevails upon God and Christ to fill them up to the brim with this
golden justification.

I know not whether I may lawfully follow him in his non sequiturs and playing
with the sacred Oracles of God; surely neither Lucian, nor Corn: Agrippa with
his Ass, could ever treat of holy things more ludibriously, or expose the
sacred word of God to more scorn then this man does: were it out of weakness
that he does it, he were to be pitied: But who knows not if Mr. Baxter
knows not what validity or invalidity there is in every Argument to prove?
Where was conscience then in quoting so many Scriptures which are no more
proper to prove that to which they are applied, then they are to demonstrate a
world in the Moon? he knows the most of them have neither sound nor show that
way, and those that have some show have but a show, and being thoroughly urged
to his present purpose would neither prove what he would have here proved, but
contrariwise crush in pieces some of his former assertions, which are the
pillars of the whole structure made in this book, and falling will necessitate
the ruin of the whole fabric. All this he saw, therefore stopped at the
quotation, without alleging or applying the Scriptures quoted. If the man
were no more happy in in his Philosophy then in his Theology, he should have
very little thanks from Rome. And it is to be doubted his esteem will be the
less there for his pretending to be a Scripturist, and over-turning, or at
least shaming with his fingering of Scriptures, the specious frontispice which
he had erected by his Sophistry. Unless possibly this may advantage him that
he shows the same genius and spirit in arguing from Scriptures, with those
holy Fathers and Friars; for so profoundly do we find them arguing, Thou art
Peter and upon this rock, etc. Mat. 16. Ergo, the Pope is Christ vicar and
vicegerent, etc. Master, or Lord, Here are two swords, Luke 22. 38. Ergo, the
Pope has both swords of Ecclesiastical and Civil power committed to him; God
made two lights, the greater to rule the day, the lesser the night, G^n. 1.
Ergo, the Popes power is so much more excellent then Kings and Emperors, as the
glory of the Sun surpasses that of the Moon. I beat down my body and keep it
in subjection, 1 Cor. 9. Ergo, we must do penance, and whip and scourge our
backs when there is occasion. Every man's work shall be tried by fire, 1 Cor. 3.
Ergo, there is a purgatory of fire to be passed thorough after men are dead.
With hundreds more of the same kind and worth, wherein it seems Mr. Baxter here
would imitate them to ingratiate himself into their favor.

As for the residue of Mr. Baxters quotations in this place, they are for the
most part, if not all, urged in another place, to prove works the condition of
our glorification and future salvation, and until then I forbear to answer
them. But lest any in the interim should stand doubting at any of the Scritures
h^re quoted promising either love, or life, or grace, or glory, to men thus and
thus qualifyed, and conceive that such qualifications are the ground and
condition together with faith to in right us in that which is promised; I think
it fit to premonish by the way (what all Protestant writers have ^maintained
and cleared against the Papists) that the ground of our right in such
selicities promised, is not the qualifications or works of the person, but the
new relation of the person so qualifyed, his union with Christ, justification
and adoption before God. Such promises not being made to all, but to the Saints
in Christ so doing; I shall clear it up to you by a similitude. Isaac promises
his son Esau his blessing, but bids him go a hunting and bring him venison, and
then in eating it, he will bless him: what was that which enrighted Esau to
the blessing, that was the ground or condition upon which Isaac would bless
him? the venison caught and dressed? nothing less; for if a 1000. others
should have presented him with a 1000. pieces of venison at several times, all
dressed and fitted to his appetite, the blessing should have been reserved
entire for Esau, and they all have been sent away empty; as appears by his
dealing with Jacob presenting his made venison, how agreeing so ever the dish
was to the palate of the old Patriark, yet he will examine thoroughly who it is,
whether his very son Esau that brings it, before he gives the blessing: It was
not then the venison, but the sonrship, yea primo-geniture of Esau that was the
ground and condition of Isaacs promise to bless him. So is it also to his
justified and adopted ones in Christ, that the Lord says, Ask and ye shall
have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you, Run and ye
shall obtain, Overcome and ye shall be crowned, Love and I will love you, Be
merciful and I will be merciful to you, Humble your selves and I will lift
you up; and a thousand more such promises of grace, as far as they hold forth
spiritual and saving blessings, they are the Childrens bread, dispensations of
God within his own family; no stranger has part in it, or right to it. Let the
world, those that are not beloved, ask, seek, knock, run, fight, etc. the Lord
may possibly out of the goodness of his providence, infiniteness of his
wisdom and bounty of his nature, reward with corporal and temporal good
things, their carnal and temporal endeavors, but until by the spirit of
adoption they are through faith united to Christ, they have no right by the new
Covenant to make claim to the spiritual and saving blessings promised; neither
are they any otherwise to be ratifyed to any but as they were beloved of God in
Christ before there were any such qualifications and motions in them, as Mr.
Baxter calls conditions; as has been before declared.

Yea suppose that Esau could not have brought the venison to his Father, had
been hindered or drawn aside from seeking it, or seeking could not find it, or
finding could not have taken and brought it; should the promise and purpose of
Isaac to bless him, for this cause have failed, He performed not the
condition, he shall therefore be bereaved of the blessing? Nothing less: for
the general and fundamental ground and condition, the relation of a son, of
the firstborn son, stood still fixed; unto which the good will of the Father,
and the blessing in the Fathers purpose was entailed. In like manner, though a
child of God fail in some of the works and qualifications which Mr. Baxter calls
conditions of the new Covenant, yet this makes not the promise of the Covenant,
or the beneficence of the Covenanter promising, to be void, because these are
grounded, (so far as they are grounded out of God) upon Christ, our union unto
Christ, and new relation to God in Christ. All which I doubt not shall be made
manifest in its own place; only what has been said I thought fit to be said by
the way, for the prevention of doubts and perplexities that might engage the
weak reader, before we come thither.

I should here have put an end to what I had to say to his first Argument drawn
from Scriptures, having spoken to all that in this place are quoted, saving
those which he brings again elsewhere, for which place I have put off my
examination of them: But that p. 310. he comes with a new supply. Lest
therefore I should make another work of it there, or minister occasion to any
of saying that where his Argument is most fortifyed, there I shun and shrink
from answering, I shall examine here also what force such of those Scriptures
as have not been here quoted and examined, have to prove justification by
works; and so much the rather because he tells us there, that the assertion is
evident from these following Scriptures.

B. Mat. 12. 37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned. Justification and Condemnation seem here by our Saviors
testimony to depend upon the sinful and blameless use of our tongues, Ergo,
upon works.

We may grant all in our Saviors sense without advantaging Mr. Baxters cause
or endammaging our own. For the Lord Christ here directs his words to those
Legal, Jewish, Pharisaicall Justiciaries who stuck fast to the righteousness
of the Law for justification, and in zeal thereof blasphemed (as in the
precedent part of the Chapter upon which this depends is to be seen) Christ
and his Gospel. This blasphemy Christ here reproves and smites with a weapon
fetched out of their own Armory: Even your own law forbids such evil words and
blasphemies, holding forth Justification and Condemnation not only upon
condition of good and evil works but words also, so that there is nothing
spoken of the justification of the New but of the Old Covenant only. A
reprehension and commination pat to them to whom it was denounced, the threat
of the Law to them that refused the Gospel, and were and would be under the
Law. But this is nothing to the justification of the new Covenant, that
follows the rule of the Gospel.

The next Scripture not contained and examined in the former sardle of
quotations is,

B. 1 John 1. 9 If we confess our sins, God is faithful to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from our iniquities. Here confession another work seems
to be a condition of forgiveness and justification.

1 If we look strictly to the words, Mr. Baxter must hence argue only, that our
confession is a condition of Gods faithfulness, as if God either cannot or
will not be faithful except we confess. But let us give Mr. Baxter the
largest advantage that he can claim in the meaning of the words, that God is
positively and not hypothetically or conditionally faithful; and that of his
faithfulness he will forgive and cleanse, if we confess. In this sense then
whereas the Apostle speaks affirmatively not negatively, (if we confess he
will forgive; not, if we confess not, he will not forgive) I do

2 Demand whether confession be so a condition of forgiveness that whosoever
confesses shall be forgiven. This Mr. Baxter will not affirm, without his
caeteris paribus, whereof the Text speaks not a word, expressly or implicitly
for him, and if he conclude negatively he concludes not from the Text but his
own fancy.

Obj. But if you deny forgiveness upon confession made, you deny what the Text
affirms and so fight against the word it self, denying what it clearly
affirms.

Answ. True, if we deny it to them to whom the Text grants and promises it:
But the Apostle speaks here not to the unjustifyed and unforgiven, but to the
Sants forgiven and justified already, and the Emphasis of the proposition or
promise is in the word we, if we that are in Christ confess, God will hold
faithful in keeping Covenant with us, and forgive. So that this is a
consolation to the Saints against all their daily infirmities. They have a
privilege above all the world besides, If they sin they have an advocate with
the Father, etc. through whom when they confess and bewail their sins, the
grace of God will by his Spirit testify and seal to their consciences the
forgiveness of them.

3 To descend without the Text to Mr. Baxters conditio sine qua non, there must
be more then a grain of salt to make his assertion savory, that without
confession there is no forgiveness. For if by it he mean that of the Apostle,
Confession with the mouth, he shall exclude many thousands from justification
whom the Scripture excludes not.

4 I grant to Mr. Baxter that some of our Divines have affirmed (though I fear
somewhat rawly and inconsiderately) that confession is a condition sine qua
non, of forgiveness, yet far from Mr. Baxters sense; viz. with these three
limitations whereof Mr. Baxter will not endure the test.

1 Of the forgiveness which is by the new Covenant, or as it is declared and
sealed up to our consciences; Not of the forgiveness which was laid up in the
hands as laid up in the hands of Christ, and ours in him before we believed or
confessed.

2 Such a condition as is not in the same relation with faith, as Mr. Baxter
makes it: the very naming whereof they detest as absolutely contradicting the
nature and authority of the Gospel.

3 Such a condition as explodes the caeteris paribus and sensu composito of Mr.
Baxter so that though they speak somewhat of Mr. Baxters words, yet they are at
a defiance against his sense and meaning. How and in what sense they will have
it a condition, is no place here to treat. It has been a digression to say any
thing of it, because it is utterly besides the Text to which alone here I was
to speak.

B. Act. 8. 22. Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.

This Scripture I passed by in the former heap of his quotations, as possibly a
mistake in the quotation; but finding it here again, and afterward in a third
place, I see the man means as he quoteth, and cannot enough marvel what he can
fish from this Scripture to prove any thing of man's works a condition of
justification. If the word [If] here make or argue a condition, it must be on
Gods not on man's part, that man must repent and pray upon condition that God
will forgive, else not, if forgiveness be not the causa sine qua non of
repentance and prayer. But this is nonsense to have God upon terms, if he will
have any duty from us. He must therefore mean on the other side, God will
forgive upon condition of prayer and repentance. But how he will persuade this
Scripture to say it, is past my capacity to comprehend. Here is no promise
(himself grants there is but an half-promise) of forgiving on Gods part, [
Append. page 79.] and nothing mentioned as a condition on man's part. But
contrariwise duties of natural righteousness commanded or counseled to a
natural man, upon such cold encouragement as the Scripture affords to the
carnal devotions of carnal men carnally performed; If perhaps the thought of
thy heart may be forgiven. If Mr. Baxters Assertions be but so sound as his
Arguments, neither will serve for good Bellmettall.

B. Act. 3. 19, Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
etc. How far repentance is a condition has been discoursed of, and discussed
already.

B. Act. 22. 16. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the
name of the Lord. Is then Baptism a condition so necessary that without it
there is no washing away of sin? And must the Popish Tenent be found writren in
Mr. Baxters Calender with red letters, Sacramenta opere operato conferunt
gratiam? or does Baptism prove ineffectuall to all that do not, cannot, call
upon the name of the Lord? Then whether Mr. Baxter be more against himself or
against the Protestant Churches, who can decide? More modestly speaks even
Bellarmine, which makes the desire of receiving the Sacraments a condition of
justification, expelling from forgiveness them that desire them not; this man
rigorously and cruelly shakes into condemnation those that do not, because they
have not opportunity to receive them though their desire be unfeigned: or if he
does not so, this Scripture proves not Baptism to be the condition sine qua
non. As for calling upon the name of the Lord, I have before spoken to.

B. 1 Pet. 4. 18. If the righteous be scarce saved, where shall the wicked and
ungodly appear? I should be in a Labyrinth of doubts how he would argue hence
for himself, were it not that elsewhere he explaineth himself in his book,
thus, If the righteous be scarce saved by all their strivings, how shall they
be saved that strive not at all? We deny not the duty of striving in holy
things, yea of striving for salvation; though in Mr. Baxters sense we deny it.
Yet the meaning of this Text as appears by its dependence upon the verse
precedent, is, If the corruptions and unbelief of heart be so great in the very
Saints and believers, that they must pass through the purifying fire of Gods
judgments more and more to perfect them before they be made vessels of honor
in the Kingdom of glory; or that they need the scourge of Gods correction to
whip them back to Christ, that they perish not by following their own thoughts:
What then shall become of the wicked, which are wholly full of corruption and
unbeleef, without any spark of faith, and whom the Lord has given up to a
spirit of slumber, like Bastards without all Chastisements hindering, to roll
themselves into ruin?

B. Romans 6. 16. His servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death,
or of obedience unto righteousness. The Apostle here speaks of the
righteousness (not of Justification but) of Sanctification, except we will
say, he here digresseth from that which he makes the subject of this whole
Chapter. But whether he means the righteousness of justification or of
sanctification, yet the obedience he here speaks of is that which cap. 1.
ver. 5. he declares himself to have received commission and Apostleship to
preach, viz. obedience to the faith, the su^me whereof is faith in Christ Jesus.

What he would infer from his two last quotations, 1 Pet. 1. 2. 22. Let him
that can understand, declare and make answer to it. I yield that his
profoundnesse condemns my shallowness. I dare not contradict him in what he
would, because I have not the wit to imagine what he would say. It seems he had
determined such a number of quotations, and took at adventure those that came
next to his view to make up that precise number. Any other Scriptures besides
these being (as to my apprehension) no less pat and proper to his purpose then
these.

CHAP. IV.
The vanity and ridiculousnesse of Mr. Baxters second and third Arguments
discovered: The former that, Because faith is the more principal, and works
the less prinpall condition of our Justification; and that all other duties
are in some respect or other, reducible to faith, therefore we may be said to be
justified by other works and duties, yet to be justified by faith alone. The
second drawn from a wide and irregular definition of faith that it contains
all works in its belly, therefore whosoever is justified by those works, is
justified by faith only.

A second Argument he draws from an anticipation of an objection, which he
prevents by turning the edge of it against the objectors and applying it to the
strengthening of his own assertion. The objection that he sees in readiness
against him, is, that this doctrine of justification by duties and works,
wholly overthrows that highest and most fundamental Gospel doctrine of
justification by faith alone. This he denies, and affirms These. 62. p. 238.
that although we be justified by a thousand duties besides,

B. Yet faith may be called the only condition of the New Covenant, i. e. of
justification. True, if Mr. Baxter give the denomination, but the question is
not, what things may be called, but what they are. A woe is pronounced to them
that call or put light for darkness, and darkness for light, good for evil,
and evil for good, etc. I shall no further press the unaptnesse of the
phrase, Mr. Bavter, declaring in that which follows, his meaning to be, that
faith may be the only condition notwithstanding; which he proves thus,

B. 1 Because it is the principal condition, and the other but the less
principal. And as the whole country has often its name from the chief City; so
may the conditions of this Covenant from faith.

2 Because all the rest are reducible to it; either being presupposed as
necessary antecedents as means, or contained in it as its parts, properties or
modifications, or else employed as its immediate products or necescessary
subservient means or consequents.

I speak first to the latter of these two arguments, because he speaks first in
the explication to the confirmation of it. It is almost as wise an
argumentation as I knew once used by some homebred, course-spun sons of a
Country farmer, who having heard that their father upon a day was sworn
Constable at the Court, made merry at home, concluding from their fathers
Constableship that they were all Constables and must rule the Parish, because
they were his sons and dwelt in house with him: or as that of the Athenian boy
that boasted himself to be the ruler of Athens, thus proving it, that he ruled
his mother, and his mother swayed his father, and his father being Lord Mayor
that year swayed Athens. Yea more of reason, at least less of reasonlesnesse
is there in both these arguings, then in that of Mr. Baxter; theirs concluded
only the sons to to partake necessarily of their fathers office: this man makes
all that are in any respect of kindred, yea of any relation to faith for such
their relation to partake of the office of faith to justify. For so he
reasons, all the rest are reducible to faith as Antecedents [going before it]
means [to obtain it] or parts, or properties, or necessary adjuncts and
modifications, or products [effects] or consequents. What then? Ergo, these all
in regard of their alliance or affinity to faith, justify and bear a part with
faith in its office of justifying. And yet when these justify as much as
faith, we must understand that faith justifyeth alone: Because what all these
allies of faith do, that faith it self may be said to do. This is indeed Logic
to prevail with his Kederminsterians, or rather such of them as know no
difference between Logic and Garlic. It is as if I should dispute thus, God
made choice of David before all and any other of the sons of Abraham to be King
and to rule over Israel; therefore all the progenitors of David as well Tamar,
and Ruth, and R^hab, as Judah, Pharez, and Booz, yea more specially Jesse the
father of David, and all the brethren of David, yea all the sons and generation
of David to Joseph the Carpenter; (let me dilate my self more boldly) all the
tribe of Judah, which were flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; nay all
Israel which were allies to him, and met with him in one common father Jacob;
these all partaked of David's kingship, and were partners with him in the office
of ruling, because they all were one way or other reducible to David as going
hefore him, or following him, etc. and yet when all these were Kings with
David, nevertheless David was King alone. Or thus, The eye only of all the
members of the body is appointed to the office of seeing, nevertheless the
head that holds and gives influence to it, the eyelids that cover it, the
veins that convey nutriment to it, the cheeks, nose, lips, and teeth that are
contiguous to it, the hands and feet that are guided by it, etc. all these and
many more do partake of the office of seeing together with the eye, and when
all these do see as well as the eye, yet the eye does see alone, because all
the rest are reducible in some way of alliance to the eye. If Mr. Baxters
dispute be not one and the same with this in its grounds, then is all my reason
gone out of my head into my cap. And at such arguing, Agelastus that laughed
only once (when he saw his horse eat Thistles) would be tickled into a second
laughter.

And no more weight is there in his former reason, Because faith is the
principal condition and the other less principal. And as a whole County,
etc. Here

1 I would demand in what respect according to Mr. Baxter, Mr. Baxter can make
faith the more principal, and the rest qualifications and duties the less
principal conditions. Not in respect of their nature, for if one be, all are
spiritual and Divine. Nor in respect of priority in time, for if not all yet
many of the rest are of the same age and birth with faith. Nor in respect of
durance, for many of them survive faith as justifying. Nor in its
instrumentality to justification, for he denies any such thing to be in faith.
Nor in office, for in it he confounds all together. Nor in the amplitude of its
object, for herein love as in other things requires the preeminency. Nor in
order of operation, for he makes many of them Antecedents to faith. Nor in the
perfection of its effect, for he affirms the rest to perfect what faith has
but begun. In what respect then is faith the more principal? Mr. Baxter shows
not, because according to his principles, it is beyond my principles to
conceive that he can show. Yet he says it because it serves his turn here to
say it; degrading faith at one place, and enthroning it in another at his
pleasure, for his own ends.

2 But if it be the principal condition, etc. what will follow hence for Mr.
Baxters advantage? This he makes to follow, That as the whole Country has often
its name from the chief city, so may the rest duties from faith: why does he
not speak plain? it may be, says he; but is it so? where does the Scripture
give this name to faith it self? much less to other duties in faith employed?
Neither is the question about the name but the offices of all these. It is rare
that the Country takes its name from the chief City; yet this is not in
question, but whether the whole Country partake of the privileges and charter
of the chief City. This may indeed be, where potentates that have the absolute
Lordship of both, grant to both the same privileges. Yet then the privileges
and dignities of the chief City are not its alone being common to the whole
Country with it.

3 But to the very thing in hand without painting and dawbing; When the Lord
has rejected Mizpah, Shiloh, Dan, Bethel, and all other the Cities and Country
of Israel saving Jerusalem alone there to vouchsafe his presence and to be
sought unto; it is then a rejection of God, to set up Gods name and worship
elsewhere saving at, and equalize any other place with Jerusalem the
Metropolis. Hence is that complaint of God, Israel has forsaken Hos. 8. 14.
his maker and builds temples. So when God has consecrated faith alone and
qualifyed it for the receiving of Christ to justification, having rejected all
our own righteousness and works from being privileged together with it to
this office and work; it is no less then a forsaking of God and of Christ to
perform the most holy duties or to produce the most Celestial qualifications
in the least part to justify us.

4 All that Mr. Baxter dares to conclude hence is, that works and duties may
be, not that they are, conditions of justification. But how from these reasons
he will bring about that these all are the conditions, or condition, and yet
faith the alone condition, if he had so many eyes as Argus, to guide him, and
so many hands as Briareus to work with by that guidance, he shall be never able
to effect.

Yet in the explication pa. 239. Mr. Baxter to charm his overly reader into a
delusion, pretends a proof of this Thesis by two similitudes, which I forbear
to transcribe because they are not worthy of so much labor. For

First, Similies do illustrate not prove. He should first have proved, and then
illustrated.

Secondly, They are not adequate or fitted to the question, speak only to a
part of, and not to the whole Thesis, conclude at the best only that faith may
in some case imply many other duties, but in no wise that when faith is said to
justify, other duties are employed under the word faith as justifying together
with it; much less that all other duties justify, yet faith alone justifyeth.
If he would reason by them home to his position, he must reason to this Tenor.

In the former, suppose a King or State give to me by commission the government
of such an eminent City or Castle, but with this proviso and upon these
articles, that I disband the Army by which before I laid siege to it, remove
from me all my Regiments, quit my self of all my Soldiers, and so enter into
the possession and government, and all the honor and profits thereof, by my
self alone and one Counselor to serve and assist me in the managing of the
said government: If now by virtue of this Commission I enter, not having
disbanded the said Army, but carry it in with me, some under a pretense of
guarding my person, others as my individual adherents from whom I cannot be
separated, others to retain the Citizens within the bounds of due loyalty to
me, and the rest under a pretext of propagating the dominion of that power that
has so invested me with the government: No man will doubt but I enter as a
Traitor, not as a loyal Trustee to the power which has deputed me. Who will
not laugh at it as a sophistical or rather ridiculous plea, when he hears me
maintaining that I entered with that one Counselor alone, for all the rest are
employed in him, some as his right, some as his left hand, some his parents,
some his children, some his friends, some his servants, etc. and so I have but
him alone in having so many thousands with him? So the new Covenant gives me
Christ with justification and blessedness in him, with this Commission and
proviso, that I disband my own strength and righteousness, the whole Army of
my works by which before I laid siege to it, to make all mine by my own
winning, and to enter into possession with faith alone apprehending all from
the hand of free grace. Shall I not be a Traitor if I carry the whole Army of
works to take and hold possession for me, though I* make never so golden a
pretext of faith only, to which all these are reducible.

The same is the tenor of the redemption of the galley slave, if you will not
run from the Scripture in stead of following it in making comparisons. But unto
it I shall have a more proper place to speak afterward, when we come to Mr.
Baxters great adored Argument of receiving Christ as our Lord as well as
Savior; or if there be not occasion offered there, in the interim the slaves
future service is not a condition but a consequent of his present redemption.

But let us see now whether Mr. Baxter with this paint of that which he calls
right Reason, do fight against God or Man, does resist the placits of men, or
else the holy Ghost himself. He required before that all might be tried by
Scriptures. Let us now bring his doctrine to the touchstone. I shall not
repeat all or any of the Scriptures before alleged, or that might be further
alleged against him. One arrow out of that holy quiver, one Scripture out of
the whole body of Gospel doctrine shall suffice to smite to the heart, to
death it self, all that he goes about here with fine flourishes of wit to
establish. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. thus speaks the holy Ghost, By grace are ye saved
through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: Not of
works, lest any man should boast: For ye are Gods workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus to good works, which God has before ordained that we should walk
in them.

That the word Saved is an equipollent here with Justified, if there should be
any that will deny, yet Mr. Baxter will and must affirm, unless he will beat
in pieces one of the chief pillars of the fabric erected in this book, and
overthrow what he has built. In this truth he must join with us, though in
other he estrange himself from us. The same Act of God being called justifying
as it discharges us from the state of our misery as considered to be a state
of sin: and saving as it delivers us from it under the consideration of it as
a state of condemnation and vengeance. Mr. Baxter will grant, cannot but grant
this. And then there will naturally drop from this Scrtpture these following
positions.

1 That the justification or salvation of the Covenant of grace is by faith.

2 That it is not of works, but by faith in opposition to works.

3 That the very works which flow from our union to Christ, and to which we are
new created in Christ Jesus, even those which Mr. Baxter calls the
righteousness of the Gospel, are excluded from bearing any part with faith in
our justification.

4 That the not justification by works does in no wise hinder the believers
performing of them, for they are created in Christ Jesus, their hearts are new
wrought by the Spirit to a holy delight in them.

5 That God has not ordained them to justify, but for the new created and
justified in Christ to walk in them.

6 That to teach otherwise of works, the very works of Sanctification, is to
depresse Gods grace, and to extol man's boasting and vainglory.

7 Even these gospel works and righteousness are excluded from having any
part in justifying not only as collaterals with the satisfaction of Christ, but
also as collaterals with faith, i. e. from bearing a part either in causality
or conditionality with faith to justify.

I challenge Mr. Baxter and all his Legal and Anti-evangelicall disciples here
to deny any one of these positions to spring naturally from this Text. And if
the the holy Ghost here speak all this, then by it all that Mr. Baxter speaks
throughout this whole Tractate for justification by works is by the breath of
Gods mouth blown to the curse, as in many things I shall by Gods help show
afterward.

At the present what he speaks of works comprehended in faith to
justification is here shaken off as a Sophistical, fantastical,
Antiscripturall dream, the holy Ghost here by the positing of faith, in
express words rejecting works, Gospel works, all that Mr. Baxter makes a part
with faith in that which he calls Evangelicall righteousness, from all and any
copartnership with faith in saving or justifying; so excludes all, as that he
denies that justification by grace can any more stand, if the best Gospel
works of the best Saints are put in any cooperation with faith in the promoting
of it.

All the rest that he has in the explication pa. 240. and thence to pa. 243.
is wholly besides the question, which is not whether works and duties be
reducible to faith, or in what respect every particular qualification and duty
stands to it. But whether reduced or not reduced, it does by Gods appointment
help with says to justify us before God. This we have found to be an usual
feat of Mr. Baxter, where his assertions are confident and peremptory, but his
proofs of them light and shadie, to devise in such case some witty passage
wherewith to divert the considerations of his reader, from the shame and
nakedness of his foregoing Arguments. And this most probably was his drift and
craft here, having given us but words in stead of Arguments to prove that works
are comprehended and implied in faith, in all such Scriptures as attribute
justification to faith only; that the emptiness and nothingnesse of his
argumentation to make this good may not appear to the reader, he tols him a way
to attend to a subtle and plausible dispute, of the relation that every good
endowment and work has particularly to faith. In which discourse of his we
will not examine how many things are true and how many false; for if they were
all true they are nothing to the thing in question; viz. whether in the
several relations that Mr. Baxter makes them to stand to faith, or in any
other they help with faith to justification, and that so, as that when all
these with faith cojustifie, we may be yet said to be justified by faith alone.
When he has spoken all by mere affirming without confirming, he thus indeed at
last concludes, pa. 243.

B. So then when you invite a man to your house, it is not necessary to bid him
come in at the door; or bring his head, or arms, or legs, or clothes with him
(though these are necessary) because all these are necessarily employed: Even so
when we are said to be justified by faith only; or when it is promised that he
which believes shall be saved, all these forementioned duties are employed and
included. How ecliptic is falsehood, but sincerity open and full? No man
invites another to his house but to some end, either to taste of some dainties,
or hear some good tidings, or see some excellent work, or for some other end.
He should have named the end, and we would grant him all; thus, that as much as
the door, head, legs, arms, clothes of the invited, do partake with the mouth
in the act of tasting, or with the eye in seeing, or the ear in hearing: so
much when we are invited to Christ, do other duties and works partake with
faith in receiving him to justification.

A third argument (if indeed it be not one and the same in substance, and
differ only in words from the former) he draws from a wide, wild, vast,
confused and incircumscriptive definition of faith, begotten of his own brain,
and now first as an overgrown monster born into the world, and baptized by the
father of it with the name of justifying faith. This definition he gives,
These. 70. pa. 279. I put this in the third place, not because Mr. Baxter does
so, (for he has many things between the former and this) but because of its
cognation, if not identity with the former.

No doubt he saw the former argument more to shame then help his cause,
therefore in likelihood he brings it here again in another mode and form, if
so paradventure it may relieve him. Thus then runs his definition.

B. Faith in the larg^st sense as it comprehends all the condition of the new
Covenant, may be thus defined: It is when a sinner by the word and spirit of
Christ, being thoroughly convinced of the righteousness of the Law, the truth
of its threatening, the evil of his own sin, and the greatness of his misery
hereupon, and withal of the nature and offices, sufficiency and excellency of
Jesus Christ, the satisfaction he has made, his willingness to save, and his
free offer to all that will accept him for their Lord and Savior, does
hereupon believe the truth of his Gospel, and accept of Christ as his only
Lord and Savior, to bring them to God their chief good, and to present them
pardoned and just before him, and to bestow upon them a more glorious
inheritance, and do accordingly rest on him as their Savior, and sincerely
(though imperfectly) obey him as their Lord, forgiving others, loving his
people, bearing what sufferings are imposed, diligently using his means and
ordinances, and confessing and bewailing their sins against him, and praying
for pardon, and all this sincerely, and to the end. Sponte Cretizantem quis
neget esse Cretem? Never more dubiousnesse in the most dubious Oracles of
Apollo Delphicus, then in this definition, if indeed it be a definition,
because Mr. Baxter so calls it. He so speaks all, that by all he might
astonish some and deceive others, yet if he be questioned, his words bind him
to nothing, but that he may go off and on at his pleasure. The subtilissimus
Doctor could not more warily have provided himself with evasions so sure that
if all the world together should endeavor it, none can catch him.

1 If we demand of him whether he speak of faith quae Justificat, and qua
Justificat, which Justifyeth, and as it Justifyeth? he leaves us here at a
loss, and will no^ tell us.

2 In saying, Faith as it comprehends all the condition, etc. and by all the
condition understanding all the duties which the Law requires, if he be
demanded whether there be a faith which comprehends all these? or if so,
whether as parts of it self or things reducible to it? or if the latter, why
are all these, or how, more comprehended in faith, then faith and all other of
the rest (in his sensu composito) comprehended in any one of the rest? or if in
the former sense, whether it be a faith of Gods making, or of Mr. Baxters
making, made in the defining, and defined in the making? To no one of these our
doubts that he leaves upon us by his ambiguity of speaking, has he one word to
resolve us; so that where to find an answer to him he leaves us uncertain.

3 If we should ask him [where he says in the beginning of of the definition,
It is when a sinner, etc.] whether he means that the quando is the genus of
faith? or whether it be a regular definition of an act or habit to posit when
it is, and not what it is? and if so, why does he not define it by a certain
rather then by an indefinite time, by Anno Mundi, or Anno Domini, or Imperii,
or Regni, etc. that from the Chronicle we may seek and find it? Or if by his
quando we can find out the time, how shall we find and know the thing? Be it
that we can hit the time when all that follows is done, and so upon Mr.
Baxters authority conclude that then faith is, yet do we not remain so
uncertain as at first, what it is, that we may make use of it to justification?
he speaks nothing to certify us; that from what he says, we might take the
occasion to consent with him or dissent from him.

4 If we would know from him of all those things at whose being, positure and
acting, he tells us faith is, whether they include faith constitutively, or else
but declaratively, whether faith consists of these, as the whole of its parts,
or the genus of its species, or the compound of its simples; or else whether
all these do but declare and evidence the truth of faith in a man? If
declaratively alone, how then do those things which only declare faith, any
more then declare and evidence Justification by faith? and how then holds his
conclusion hence, that we are justified before God by these, because so
justified by faith? Or if constitutively as many several parts and
ingredients, they make up (as it were the body of) faith; how then does the
holy Ghost oppose faith and works, even to the excluding either of other,
(about the point of justifying) as in other Scriptures, so in that before
mentioned Text, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. Is there a conflict of flesh and spirit,
Jacob and Esau, Christ and Eaxter, in one and the same body and bowels of
faith, either to destroy the other [as to Justification?] or if faith be made
up of works, and the holy Ghost does so frequently in Scripture reject, yea
accurse works from the justification of the new Covenant, how is not faith it
self which is nothing else but a body and bundle of works, accursed from
justification also? In none of these ambiguities that he has left in his
Thesis, does he speak one word to sa^isfie us.

Lastly, where he says that faith is, when all these duties are done,
sincerely to the end, if we demand him whether he mean tha^ when there is an
end of doing them, or of the man that does them, that then faith has its being
and not till then, and so all other duties act in justifying while we live, and
faith after all when we are dead? or whether he means that as long as these
duties are done, faith is; but when they ar^ not done, or when they cease to
act, faith is not, but loses its being: Fuit Ilium and ingens gloria
Teuerorum; I had once a faith and a ravishing joy in believing, either while I
was under sufferings for Christ's sake, but now my sufferings are ended, and I
am no more persecuted, my faith is expired; or while I waited on all the
ordinances of Christ: but now my sick bed, or prison, or banishment, intercepts
me from many of Christ's ordinances, My faith is lost? which of these ways, or
in what third sense he will be understood, let him that can conjecture; but in
respect of any thing that we have under his hand in the Thesis, he is yet free
to choose his meaning; so that in all that he says here, he has armed himself
against all exceptions, by saying it so that we shall not know his meaning.
Only thus far we may speak with Augustine, Si non vis intelligidebes negligi.
What is not an understandable Argument, we shall contemn as no Argument.

But his illustration and proof may possibly follow in his Explication. Thither
also we will follow him to examine which one of all these things delivered here
so ambiguously, he does there plainly illustrate or prove, it runne^ thus, pa.
281.

B. This is the condition of the New Covenant at large: That all this is
sometime called faith, as taking its name from the primary, principal, vital
part, is plain hence. Of the condition enough has been said before, we look
for proof. That all this is sometime called [I mean in Gods not Mr. Baxters
Scriptures] faith, we also will say it is plain, if he make it plain by his.
Hence, viz.

B. 1. In that faith is often called [obeying of the Gospell] but the Gospel
commands all this, Romans 10. 16. 1 Pet 1. 22. and 4. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Gal. 3.
1. and 5. 7. Heb. 5. 9. 1 In all these Scriptures obeying of the Gospel is one
and the same thing which in other Scriptures is called the obedience of faith,
i. e. obedience to that Gospel doctrine which requires to rest upon Christ
alone by faith for righteousness and life without any intermixture to attain
the same, called obedience to the Gospel, to distinguish between the Gospel
and Legal way of justification. This Mr. Baxter knows well, therefore he
gives us the quotation without the words of these Texts, most of them being
such, as if there were nothing else said in the whole Word, even these are
enough to subvert as pernicious his assertion.

2 The thing in question is not whether the Gospel command these duties, but
whether it commands us to do them that we may be justified by such deeds? and
whether because the Gospel commands them, it does therefore call them faith?
or that all which is to be done in obedience to the Gospel, is straightway to
take up either the Nature or Name of faith?

3 How does he contradict himself here, in what he had said before, Thesis 31.
pa. 154. where he affirmed the Commandments of the Gospel (in relation to
these duties) to be the establishment of the Moral Law, and the perfect
obedience in the Law commanded; and that this is but an adjunct of the new
Covenant [or Gospell] and not a proper part thereof? Will he say then that all
the works which the Moral Law commands are faith? or by the Gospel
Metamorphosed from works into faith?

B. The fufilling of the conditions of the new Covenant, is often called faith,
etc.

But these forementioned are parts of the condition of the new Covevenant;
Ergo, they are employed and included in faith, Gal. 3. 12, 23, 25.

A wretched Argument lame in every foot, in which one principle is begged to
maintain another. Neither of the premises nor yet the conclusion, having any
soundness either as they are considered a part, or all together. Or if he
could have proved either proposition from Scripture, would he have suffered
them to pass under his bare affirmation alone? The Scripture annexed prove
only an opposition between faith and works, the Gospel and the Law; but are as
far as heaven from earth, from proving either of the premises. Neither does the
conclusion infer what it should from the premises, i. e. what is contained in
them. I should in particulars show the deformed nakedness of the Syllogism, if
it did not enough show it self without my help. How rotten must the cause needs
be, which puts so profound a man to such miserable shifts, and absurd arguings,
to defend it where there is no opposer?

What follows in the same S^ction, is all one as if he had said, not so, but
so, etc. because I have over and over told you so, and what I have told you
must needs be true.

The other things in the explication are not to this question.

Lest any should except that I wrong Mr. Baxter in calling these two latter,
his second and third Arguments [to prove justification by works] when he does
not so call them, though he does so use them: I have prosecuted the matter of
them wholly as considered in it self, without any further reference to the
conclusion, then as himself in express words applies them to it.

CHAP. V.
The fourth and great Argument of Mr. Baxter examined, and the inference, that
because Christ as Lord as well as Savior is the object of justifying faith, as
justifying, therefore we are justified by works as well as by faith, is
confuted. And withal proved that Christ as our Lord dying for us, and not as
Lord and a Lawgiver is the object of faith as justifying. Mr. Baxters Reasons
to prove the contrary, answered.

HIS fourth Argument is drawn from the Object of Faith, and the due
qualification of the same Object. It runs thus, as by his disputes compacted
and compared together, appears.

B. If Christ be the object of justifying faith, as such, not only in his
Priestly office, as our Redeemer and Savior, but also in his Kingly office our
Lord and Ruler, then other works and duties of obedience are as much required
as faith in justifying us before God.

But Christ is the object of justifying faith as such, not only in his Priestly
but also in his Kingly office, as our Lord as well as our Redeemer and Savior;
Ergo, other works and duties of obedience have so much to do injustifying as
faith. [He says affiance, which whether i^ at all differs from faith, and
whether he means not the same with faith, we shall see afterward, if it be
necessary.]

The Assumption he lays down and goes about to prove These. 66. and in its
explication beginning pa. 255. The consequent of the proposition he has and
endeavors to confirm in and under These. 72, 73.

This one of all his Arguments has the Dominicall letter on it; it is the
wood, the rest are but the hay and stabble of his building; his sacra anchora,
if this hold not, the man with his vessel, and all the trash-treasure therein
must perish upon the Rocks. All the rest of his Arguments are but bubbles in
comparison of this bottle-glasse. Therefore he attributes much to this,
gloryeth in it, and only does not fall down and worship it. It was hinted
before here and there in all his discourse, but here he manageth it with all
his strength and art.

I shall speak first to the Assumption, because he first puts and endeavors to
prove it. And here now appears what his end was in laying a third opinion of
the righteousness of Christ to justification, besides the active and passive
righteousness: viz. a righteousness meritorious for us, and not imputed to us;
after he had been 10. years for the passive righteousness only, as he notifies
to us, pa. 54, 55. The ground it seems of altering his judgment is, because
that opinion would not subserve to his justification by works; which he has so
pertinaciously determined to set up, that whatsoever of sacred or humane
Authority he meets with opposite to it he shoulders it out of the way; and
whatsoever occurres out of any sink and puddle making for it, he takes up as a
treasure. But the Meritoriousnesse of Christ's Legislative and Kingly office to
satisfy for our sins, being laid as a groundwork, he thought (it seems) would
tend much to the exalting of the works done by the Commandment of King Jesus,
to justification: therefore he took it up from Grotius, and made use of it as a
paved way to Justification by works, which here almost from the same grounds he
urges. And so we see that from the very beginning to the end of this Tractate,
all that he has, conspireth and aspireth to this end [justification by works,]
and to elude all that the Gospel has against it.

But let us come to examine his Assumption to this Argument and what he brings
for it.

B. These. 66. Christ is not in any one part or work of his office alone, the
object of justifying faith, as such; but Christ in his entire office
considered, is this object. viz. as he is Redeemer, Lord, and Savior. In a
good sense we might grant him both all this and all the substance of all the
Arguments which he brings to prove it. For none of the Protestant Churches
have* denied, but maintain,

1 That all the offices of Christ are needful and cooperating to, and in the
work of Mediatourship; that Christ not only as our high Priest, but also as
our King and Prophet made satisfaction for us, and makes his satisfaction
effectual to us.

2 That the object of justifying faith is Christ in all his offices King,
Priest, and Prophet.

3. That these offices of Christ are not to be severed by us, because counited
and coworking in him. He lays not down, nor puts from him any one of his
offices when he either justifyeth, sanctifies or illuminateth, etc. but does
all and every of them, as Lord, Savior and Teacher.

Yet when all this is granted to him, his cause is never the stronger, nor ours
at all the weaker. Nay he declares himself guilty of the fault wherewith he
charge the innocent, viz. of separating Christ's offices, holding him forth to
us as redeeming us only as our high Priest, governing and giving Laws to his
Church only by his Kingly office, enlightening us in the truth only as our
Prophet: when contrariwise we teach that Jesus Christ, i. e. the Anointed of
God, in all his offices, and anointings, is made unto us of God wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption; not wisdom in one only of his
offices, righteousness in another, etc. but all in all, as the Scripture
witnesses, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Nevertheless we deny not but some acts and benefits
of Christ are to be attributed more properly and peculiarly to one then another
office of Christ, yet so that the cooperation of the other offices therein is
nor wholly to be denied.

But this we deny, that there is any other fountain opened for the washing away
of our sins but the blood of Christ only; or any other satisfaction made to the
justice of God but by the sacrifice of Christ alone; yet so as this blood and
sacrifice as they are primarily our high Priests, so are they our Kings and
Prophets also, howbeit the blood and sacrifice of one Christ alone. And herein
we follow the Scriptures leading thread which affirm not only the Priest to
have dyed for us, but our Prophet or Shepherd also: I am the good Shepherd,
and give and lay down my life for the sheep, Joh. 10 11, 15. He came not to be
ministered unto but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many, Mat.
20. 28. viz. to seal the doctrine with his blood which he had taught with his
lips, and to make the way through the veil of his flesh, thorough his blood,
which he had taught to be the only way into the Holiest to the Father. And as
the Shepherd so the Lord and King also; It was the LORD, that was betraye^* 1
Cor. 11. 23. crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 8: killed, Act. 3. 15. and rais^^ again, 1
Cor. 6. 14. Even the Lord of glory and Prince of life. Therefore it is that the
holy Ghost calls it the Lords death, 1 Cor. 11. 2^. The Lords body, and the
Lords blood, 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29. And needful was it that Christ as Lord and
King with all his power should thus grapple with sin, death and hell, on our
behalf; how else should he have vanquished them, and having spoiled these
Principalities and powers, made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them?
Col. 2. 15. And without this victory his death had been to us vain, our enemies
had remained unconquered, and our selves unransomed. The strong man had not
been driven out by a stronger then he, Luke 11. 21, 22. Thus we neither divide
nor separate the offices of Christ one from another, but conjoyn them all in
the death and passion of Christ, by which alone we believe and teach that the
Lord, Priest and Prophet, Christ Jesus has made satisfaction for our sins.

But we utterly deny that which Mr. Baxter drives at, that Christ as our Lord,
that is, as a Lawgiver, and [to speak in Mr. Baxters words, These. 31.] as he
does establish the moral Law commanding perfect obedience, and forbidding
every sin, as exactly as under the Covenant of works; is the object of
justifying faith, as justifying. This was that great and principal article
which Luther with so much vehemence defended against the Papists, viz. that
Christ is Luth. in Gal. Cap. 2. 20: and alibi.
no Moses, no Exactor, no giver of Laws [in reference to justification] but a
giver of grace, a Savior, etc. pronouncing it an accursed ^and hellish
doctrine which the Papists taught, that he justifyeth as a Lawgiver, that they
which so paint him out, make him not a Christ but a Fiend or Devil.

The state of the question then is betwixt him and us, not whether Christ as
Lord as well as Savior; but whether by the sacrifice of himself for us, or
else by giving Laws and Commanding all duties of obedience to us also; be the
object of justifying faith, as justifying, i. e. whether our faith by obeying
Christ in the works of righteousness as well as by cleaving to Christ
crucified do justify? We maintain that the death of Christ, or Christ dying
for us, is alone offered to our faith for justification: he contrariwise, that
Christ as commanding the duties of obedience is the object of faith as
justifying.

Our Assertion that Christ suffering for us is the alone object of justifying
faith, as such; may be confirmed by many Arguments.

One Argument may be drawn from the offerings and sacrifices of the old
Testament, and the sacraments both of the old and new Testament. Such as these
have exhibited, or do still exhibit Christ to us for redemption or
justification, such is our faith still to receive him. But these all have
exhibited and do exhibit Christ, not as a Lawgiver, but as an offering or
sacrifice for our sins: therefore under this notion our faith is to receive him
to justification. So all the sacrifices, circumcision, paschal Lamb, etc. under
the old Testament, directed the faith of men to Christ's sacrifice to the blood
and wounds of Christ for purging, etc. Or if any will say (as he may truly say)
that circumcision typified also the renovation of the heart by the Spirit of
Christ, himself may answer himself that this was to sanctification, and not to
justification.

2 The whole stream of the Gospel leads our faith to Christ crucified or dying
for justification. As the serpent was lifted up in the wilderness, so shall
the Son of man be lifted up, [viz. upon the crosse] that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3. 14, 15. I determined
to know (i. e. to preach among you for your knowledge) nothing else but Christ,
and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. If I be lifted up I will draw all men to me,
(signifying what death he should die.) Joh. 12. 32, 33. He that eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, etc. Joh. 6. 47, - 58. Whom God has set forth as a
propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 4. 25. Being justified by his
blood, Romans 5. 9. The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. The
Lamb of God [sacrificed] that takes away the sins of the World, Joh. 1. 29.
Having made peace through the blood of his Cross. Col. 1. 20. And reconciled
us in the body of his flesh through death, Ver. 21, 22. Having redemption
through his blood even the sorgivenesse of sin, Col 1. 14. He has purchased
his Church with his blood, Act. 20. 28. Having boldness to enter into the
Holiest by the blood of Jesus, by the new and living way, which he has
consecrated through the veil of his flesh, Heb. 10. 19, 20. He was wounded for
our sins and bruised for our iniquities, and by his stripes we are healed, Isa.
53. 5. God forbid that I should glory in any thing but in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 14. I might even weary the Reader with allegations
of Scriptures every way as pertinently and properly making Christ dying for us
the object of faith as justifying. And I challenge Mr. Baxter and all his
admirers, to produce one Scripture proving Christ as a Lawgiver to be the
object of our faith to justification. If they cannot do it, let it be
acknowledged as an audacious and daring presumption in Mr. Baxter, from his own
authority, without and against the Word, to lay it down here as a position and
principle of Religion.

3 If the death and sufferings alone of Christ (and not his giving of Laws and
commanding duties of righteousness) be the sole and entire satisfaction which
he has given to the justice of God for us, then Christ in his death, and not
at all in his Laws and Commands of such duties, is to be made the object of our
faith for justification. But the former is true: therefore the latter also.

Both the consequent and consequence of the Proposition must needs be granted
by all Protestants (though not by Remonstrants and Socinians) which hold the
imputation of the obedience of Christ to us by which he has satisfied Gods
justice; that he for us and we in and by him have done our law: that his
satisfying obedience is by imputation so fully made ours to justification as if
we had done it our selves; which is the doctrine of all Protestant Churches.
But Mr. Baxter hates this phrase of imputation of Christ's obedience, will not,
cannot admit it; for then he destroys and pronounces all at the best to be
erroneous whatsoever he has spowted out for sacred doctrine; he grants the
imputation of nothing else but our own faith and works to justification; so
that after his principles the consequence is not so clear. Let us see therefore
whether also after and upon his own grounds, it may stand firm and undeniable.

1 Then, Mr. Baxter These. 18. affirms our Legal righteousness (as he calls
it) i. e. that righteousness by which the Law is satisfied for our breaches of
it, to be in Christ; and in calling this Legal righteousness ours, and the
satisfaction therein made ours, he does imply that the satisfaction of Christ
is the thing that being made ours is that which justifyeth us. This he speaks
out yet more plainly, pa. 218. telling us that Christ's satisfaction must be
made ours, else we cannot be justified: that so far as by imputation no more is
understood then the bestowing of Christ's satisfaction on us, so that we shall
have the justice and benefits thereof as truly as if we had satisfied our
selves; in this sense he grants the imputation of Christ's satisfactory
righteousness; and thus according to his principles, that act, or those acts
of Christ by which he made satisfaction for us, or rather Christ in these acts
is to be made the object of our faith as justifying. According to this rule pa.
54. he makes the Active righteousness of Christ (considered as such) part of
the satisfaction together with the Passive: and to lay a ground for that which
he here infers, pa. 57, he affirms that among other parts of Christ's
righteousness or Active obedience, his assuming of the humane nature, his
establishing and sealing the Covenant, his working miracles, his sending his
Disciples to convert and save the world, his overcoming death and rising again,
etc. (which were all works most proper to his kingly office) to have been
meritorious and satisfactory. And all this to lay a foundation for what here
and These. 72. he builds, viz. Christ as a Lawgiver as well as a Redeemer is
the object of justifying faith as such, and that obedience to his Laws as well
as faith in his sufferings, has to do in our justification.

We find then Mr. Baxter making Christ in his Legislative righteousness upon
this ground alone to be the object of justifying faith, as therein he in part
satisfied for our disobedience. Therefore hoc nomine and in this respect must
the consequence of the proposition stand firm with him, viz. If only the death
and sufferings of Christ and not at all his Legislative righteousness, be the
sole and entire satisfaction, etc. then Christ in his death only and not, etc.
is to be made the object of faith as justifying. For in that righteousness
alone by which Christ satisfied, is faith to apprehend him to justification, by
his own rules.

The Assumption then remains alone needful to be proved, viz. that Christ's
death and suffering alone is the entire satisfaction. This is clear to them
which will not wilfully retain beams in their eyes, from these Scriptures which
affirm the life of Christ sacrificed for us to be the Ransom, Mat. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6. The Price by which we are purchased and redeemed from thraldom. 1
Cor. 6. 20. and 7. 23. The propitiation for our sins through faith in his
blood. Romans 3. 25. 1 John 4. 10. i. e. that one and only act of Christ by which
our sins are expiated, the justice of God satisfied, and his wrath appeased,
so that we find him now a God propitious and gracious to us.

But if we will hear the Scriptures speaking at large and articulately
confirming this position, that the satisfaction made by Christ is begun,
continued and perfected merely and wholly in and by Christ's sufferings, in
steed of many Testimonies which the Scripture affords, I shall pitch upon two
disputes only of the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews. The former in cap
9. beginning at the 11 and 12 verses. That Christ being become an high Priest,
etc. by his own blood entered once into the Holy place, having obtained for us
eternal Redemption. I need not explain the words for the edification of any
that has but read the Scriptures, and taken but overly into his consideration,
how that which was yearly under the Law figured in the act of the high Priest
the type, was at length effectually accomplished by Christ the Antitype. Again,
ver. 13, 14. If the blood of Bulls, etc. sanctified to the purifying of the
Flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, which by the eternal Spirit
offered himself to God, without spot, purge your conscience from dead works?
etc. An undeniable virtue and efficacy in the blood of Christ alone, without
any further acts of Christ himself to purge the conscience, e. i. to absolve
and justify, is here affirmed. And further ver. 15. He is the M^diatour of the
new Covenant, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions
under the first Testament, they which are called may receive the promise of the
eternal inheritance, i. e. the eternal inheritance promised, by means of
Christ's death, and not by his Legislative righteousness. And ver. 26* Christ
now once at the end of the world has appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself. What sin? All sin according to that of John, The blood of Christ
purges from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. And if from all sin, what sin is there left
for Christ's giving of Laws to put away? or what of justification left out for
it to perfect? or of full satisfaction not made, for it, to complete? Lastly,
ver. 28. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. How did he bear
them, but as the Apostle says, He has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
being made a curse for us? Gal. 3. 13. and in bearing them on our behalf he
satisfied justice on our behalf. And this is affirmed to be by offering himself
for us, not by giving Laws to us, or injoyning duties upon us.

His second dispute is chap. 10. where the Apostle having mentioned the
feebleness of the sacrifices offered by the Law, to take away sin, brings in
Christ offering himself to accomplish what these could not, and declaring his
ready obedience to fulfill that will of God written in the volume of Gods book
to offer himself a sacrifice for sin, with a Lo, I come: by this will of God
(says he) we are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all, ver. 5, -- 10. He says not, we have our consecration to be holy, by
the commands of Christ, etc. but by the offering of his body. And that by
sanctification is to be here understood purification and justification; I think
it will not be denied: However ver. 12. it is added, that he having once
offered sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down at the right hand of God, his
sitting down and resting argues his work the work of our redemption and
justification perfected in every degree and number. His rest is as Gods rest
was from the beginning, then the work of Creation, now of Redemption being made
absolutely perfect, the rest followed; and where had this work its beginning,
progress and perfection? In his once offering of sacrifice for sins for ever.
Nothing here of Christ's Law-giving and rule from the bottom to the top of the
work of Redemption or Justification. The sacrifice alone satisfied, so far all
things of man are here excluded, as that nothing else of Christ is required. As
it is more fully yet expressed ver. 14. For by one offering he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified. His perfecting Mr. Baxter will not deny to
be his making of perfect satisfaction for them, and this is done by one
offering of Christ. Will Mr. Baxter be so audacious as to oppose the holy Ghost
with his Nay, telling that there must be somewhat else besides this offering,
viz. Christ's Law-giving as part of the satisfaction made for us. Lastly, to put
all out of doubt, and besides the bounds of cavilling, what the Apostle should
mean here by sanctifying and perfecting, this also is unfolded in plain words,
ver. 17, 18. viz. The taking away of their sins and iniquities: And where the
remission of these is, there is no more offering, etc. satisfaction is made to
the full and no need of any addition for the perfecting thereof.

I acknowledge there are many things required to condition Christ that he might
be an effectual offerer and offering, else could not the redemption and
justification which are by him have been completed; or the satisfaction made
for us been perfect. Yea that after the work of satisfaction, as formerly of
Creation finished, and a total resting from any further addition to it, yet
the Father works and the Son works hitherto in the business of governing
and preserving of what is so created and repaired: yet this does not at all
hinder but that full satisfaction is made by the alone offering of Christ.

And here once more I call upon Mr. Baxter and all his adherents to bring forth
any one testimony of Scripture, to prove that either Christ's Law-giving or any
other act of Christ, besides this one of offering himself a sacrifice for sin,
is by the Scripture in whole or in part affirmed satisfactory to God for our
justification. Let them not as Mr. Baxter before does from pa. 54. to pa. 61.
bring their peradventures, and may* bees, and possibles, and verisimilies, (for
are the conjectures and results of a working and self-conceited brain, to be
laid as a foundation whereon to build an Article of our faith?) But let them
bring the oracle of the Word testifying either that Christ has done, or God
has required of him or accepted from him such and such works in part of
satisfaction. Else our ears will be deaf to hear man's prattle, being attentive
in such matters only to the voice of the holy Ghost.

This shall suffice for the opening and confirming of ou^ Tenet, until it
shall be further opposed. Now let us hear what Mr. Baxter has to say against
us, or for the proof of his Assumption.

B. Pa. 255. That Christ as a Savior only, or in respect of his Priestly
office only, is not the object of justifying faith; But that faith does as
really and immediately receive him as King, and in so doing justify; this I
prove thus, If he mean otherwise then I have before declared to be the judgment
of Protestants, and (as he terms them) godly and learned Divines, of singular
esteem in the Church of God, pa. 53. and one of them to be of more authority
then many writers and readers, Appen. pa. 12. he feigneth an Adversary, and
beats the wind. But against our Assertion as I have explained it; or for his
Assertion setting up the commands of duty by Christ together with the sacrifice
of Christ's death, to be the object of faith as justifying, if he say any thing
we are to examine it. As for the rest which he speaks besides the purpose, we
shall look on it and neglect it.

B. 1. The Gospel does not reveal Christ's offices as separated: but as they
are revealed, so they must be believed.

This makes not against us, but against himself. We make Christ in his offering
himself for us our Melchisedek, King, Priest and Prophet; he divides in
restraining the Kingly office only to giving of Laws, etc. and not at all
acting mediatorily in his death.

B. 2. Neither does it offer Christ in his Pristly office only as separated
form his Kingly: though it may sometimes press the acceptance of him in one
respect; and sometimes in another: but as he is offered, so he must be received.

We grant him all, but what hence will result to his use?

B. 3. Scripture no where tyeth justification to the receipt of him as our
Priest only; therefore we must not do so.

Scripture every where affirms Gods justice to be satisfied by the blood of
Christ, and sends our faith to that fountain alone for purging; therefore we
must do so.

B. 4. How commonly does Scripture join his offices together, calling him our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?

Has Mr. Baxter in a dream met with any bugbear that does otherwise?

B. 5. If we receive him not as King, we receive him not as entire Savior; for
he saves us, not only by dying for us, but also by reducing us really into
communion with God, and guiding us by his Laws, and protecting and perfecting
us by his government, and subduing our enemies. 1 The husband is in some sense
said sometimes to save the wife, and the wife to save the husband; and the
Ministers to save themselves and others, 1 Cor. 7. 16. 1 Timothy 4. 16. Must
therefore the husband, or wife, or Minister be made the object of saving or
justifying faith as such?

^ The question is not here how many acts of Christ, of men, of our selves, are
isntrumental to our salvation, but what act of Christ has satisfied for our
sins, by the application whereof we are constituted actually righteous, are
pardoned and justified before God? This we maintain to be Christ's offering
himself to God for us, and let Mr. Baxter disapprove it.

3 We deny not that Christ has other operations by which to perfect and
sustain the justified to eternal life; yea to prevent our faith, infusing it,
and directing it to himself crucified, and satisfying for us; and to follow it
by supporting it and holding us fixed by faith to himself thus satisfying for
us, and to stabish his Kingdom within us in peace, righteousness and joy in
the holy Ghost; yea that in these Christ must be made the object of our faith
for our confirmation, dependence and comfort: But as justifying and fetching
from him the matter of justification, or rather the righteousness by which we
are justified, it must know nothing else but Christ and him crucified; as
before has been proved, and we wait to hear from Mr. Baxter or any of his
disciples, one Scripture to confute it.

B. 6. His Kingly office is a true part of his entire office of Mediatourship:
Now the sincerity of acts in Moral respects lies in their true suitableness
to the nature of their objects: As God is not truly loved except he be loved
entirely; so neither is Christ truly received, except you receive him
entirely. It is a lame, partial faith, and no true faith, that takes Christ
only in the notion of a deliverer from guilt and punishment without any
accepting of him as our Lord and Governor, though I believe that the hope of
being pardoned and saved is the first thing that moves men to receive Christ,
yet do they being so moved, receive him as their Lord also, or else they do
not receive him sincerely. Sound without substance, no more to his purpose then
if he had said nothing. What one Protestant ever held it a sincere faith that
apprehends Christ to justification, and not for illumination, and
sanctification also? will it then follow that illumination and sanctification
are justification? or that faith as these ways acting does justify? Then also
my hand in feeding clothes me, and in clothing feeds me.

B. 7. The exalting of his Kingly office is as principal an end of his dying
and becoming Mediator, as is the saving of us, and exalting of his Priestly
office; see the 2. Psalm, and Romans 14. 9. To this end he both dyed, rose
again, and revived that he might be the Lord both of the dead and the living;
and therefore the receiving of him as Priest alone, is not like to be the
condition of our justification. An invincible argument! he that will not be
swayed by it, let him continue in his wits still. As if whatsoever thing God
had an end to exalt by Christ's death must be the object of faith as justifying.
God intended by it to exalt his elect; are the elect therefore the object of
justifying faith? Besides we say not that the receiving of Christ as Priest
alone justifyeth.

B. So that if Christ put both into the condition, we must not separate what he
has joined. Himself (as I have showed) separateth: we join them together in
Christ's passion, and in the rest of his acts and benefits.

B. But the main ground of their error who think otherwise, is this, They
think acceptance of the mercy offered, does make it ours immediately in a
natural way, as the accepting of a thing from men, and so as if he that
accepts pardon should have it, and he that accepts sanctity should have it,
etc. But Christ (as I have showed) establishes his office and authority,
before he bestows his mercies, and though accepting be the proper condition,
yet does it not confer the title to us as it is an accepting primarily, but as
it is the Covenants condition: If we we should take possession when we have no
title in Law, God would quickly challenge us for our bold usurpation, and deal
with us as with him that intruded without the wedding garment. There is more
ado then come in, and sit down, and take what we have a mind to: God has put
all his Sons offices into the condition, to be received and submitted to:
Either all or none must be accepted. And if all be in the condition, then the
receiving of all must needs justify upon the grounds that I have laid down
before. It is not a new thing to see heresy usurping the chair to condemn
truth of error. The reasoning here is wholly carnal and natural, besides the
rule of the Gospel. When he calls faith a natural way of receiving the mercy
offered by Christ, and our own worth and works (implyedly) the spiritual way,
how does he put light for darkness, and darkness for light, giving to the
truly spiritual, cause of renewing that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, etc. Can Heaven and
Hell be more opposite either to other then the Apostles doctrine to Mr.
Baxters? The Apostle calls the way of faith alone, the Spirit, and the way of
works superadded to faith for justification, the flesh, Gal. 3. 3. Is it Flesh
or Spirit in Mr. Baxter that makes him a contradictor of the holy Ghost
speaking by the Apostle. The way of faith is the way of grace, supernatural,
Flesh and blood cannot reveal it unto us, but our Father which is in heaven.
But the way of works is beneath grace, dictated by nature it self, therefore
natural, but so that all the force of nature cannot effectuallize it to
justification.

It is a slander that he puts upon the Orthodox whom he hates, therefore
represents them as Noddies, and Simpletons, pretending that they teach faith to
be nothing but an accepting of pardon, and accepting of holiness, [ etc.] Nay
we make neither pardon, nor holiness, nor the [ etc.] but Christ Jesus the
object of our faith, adhere and cleave to him for all, yet not confounding his
benefits, or the means by which he applies them, but wait by faith at the
several sluices by which he conferreth his several benefits, to receive the
washing away of our guilt by the effusion of his blood, and holiness or
sanctification by the effusion of his Spirit and not contrariwise holiness by
his blood, and pardon by the effusion of his Spirit. So we repair by faith to
Christ for all, because in him as in the spring is all; yet so as that in
coming to him alone that has all, we come to the Sun of righteousness for
light, to the fountain for life, and to the Spirit of sanctification which
flows from him for holiness. He cries against separation, and makes it (as I
have showed) for union, and makes confusions. Where does he mention any office
or operation of faith to sanctification? or use of sanctification but to
justification? or what is faith with him but a compound of all endowments,
works, and duties? And thus he confounds faith and works, Christ's
righteousness, and man's righteousness, moral honesty, and Gospel
sanctification, of all together making up one linsy-woolsy justification or
righteousness to justification, which the Spirit of God never revealed, but the
spirit of Mr. Baxter has hatched.

What he speaks of Christ stablishing his office, either is above my
understanding, or else is not at all to his purpose. And what of accepting as
under the notion of accepting, or as under the notion of a condition, has been
enough spoken to in what was before said about the instrumentality of faith.

All that follows is wholly averse from, and adverse to the doctrine of the
Gospel, Jewish and Popish. For what means he by our title in Law, and the
wedding garment, but the whole furniture of works and duties done in obedience
to a supposed legislative authority of Christ? Without these and before these
to take possession, i. e. to dare to adhere to Christ for justification is
usurpation, and an incurring of Gods vengeance for usurping: Thus beating off
from Christ sinners, chief sinners for whom Christ has dyed. How does the
spirit of the rejected Jews work upon this man? when they heard of
righteousness and Act. 22. 21, 22, 23.
salvation offered to the Gentiles, a common and profane people that were not
holy, how did they stretch their throats, and rend their clothes in a zeal
against this indignity? So this man hearing of the justificition of Publicans
and sinners, has his eye evil because God is good: tears himself with anger,
crying, usurpation, vengeance, hellfire; why? because they had not put on the
filthy rags of man's righteousness, which he calls the wedding garment, and
thereby gotten title to Christ before they were so bold as to believe in him,
and girded on their own gaol-clothes first, and then have put on Christ upon
them, that their own righteousness might have been nearest the heart, and
Christ's righteousness at a further distance, as having no efficacy but from
our own righteousness effectuallizing it. Unto all this I shall use only that
oracle of the Lord Christ, The Publicans and harlots enter into the Kingdom of
God before these Pharisaicall justiciaries, and whited sepulchers. Let Christ
alone be my wedding garment, I leave all that unrighteous righteousness which
Mr. Baxter would wrest out from the Kingly office, entire to Mr. Baxter to
complete his righteousness to justification. I know no other title to the
justification of the new Covenant, which the chief sinners must look after
before they possess it, but the grant of grace in the new Covenant, and their
closure by faith with Christ, in whom God presents himself to justify and
reconcile them to himself. One voice of my Bridegroom, crying, Whosoever
thirsts, i. e. is dry and empty of all good in himself, let him come to me,
and whosoever will, let him drink of the well of the water of life freely, Rev.
22. 17. is of more force with me then ten thousand contradicting voices such as
this of Mr. Baxter, There is more ado then come in, and sit down, and take
what we have a mind to: If this man had the imaginary place of Peter to be
Porter of heaven, how quickly would he forfeit his place by repelling those
whom alone Christ will have admitted, and admitting those that Christ will have
repelled? Christ admits believers, not doers, this man rejects all believers
that are not doers before they are believers.

The rest that he says here is sacrificed to his Goddess the Lady Condition.
A deity that the Scriptures never knew; nor yet all the whole University of
Athens. They erected an Altar indeed to the unknown God, Act. 17. 23. see the
depth of Mr. Baxter, he has found the Antipodas which the old Mathematicians
wrote of, but could never find: the deity which the learned Athenians
worshipped, but worshipped they knew not what. This Goddess Condition by some
help of the Socinians and Arminians has M. Baxter brought to light, and
invested her with more glittering ornaments then they had wit to do; only he
has not yet built a Temple, and there enthroned her, for all men to fall down
with him and worship her. Yet of this Almighty power he proclaims her that she
binds the hands of God and Men: the one cannot give, the other cannot receive
without her mediation. Neither the eternal Father, nor the eternal Son can
show the least mercy to a poor sinner, nor the sinner partake of one crumb of
mercy from the Father by the Son, unless this great Lady Condition say Amen to
it; so high and so to vast a bigness has the Man already stretched her. Yet
is he still adding, and in this place he is nayling in the offices of Christ
into her bulk. But because this Colossus is only from his own brain, and
nothing of Gods Word brought to own one piece of it, let us leave him admiring
if not adoring his fabric or figment, and refer our selves to answer when he
brings any thing from Gods Word.

We have seen by this time the invalidity of the Assumption of Mr. Baxters
Argument, and of all the Reasons which he brings to prove it; either to give
proppage to his own assertion, or any way to shake and weaken ours.

I am to examine also the consequent and consequence of his Proposition. And
here I deny both that other works and duties are required with faith to
justification, and all consequency hereof from this supposition that Christ in
all his offices is the object of faith as justifying. This Mr. Baxter lays
down first in and under his 72. Thesis, page 266. and deinceps. His Thesis runs
thus,

B. As the accepting of Christ for Lord, (which is the hearts subjection) is as
essential a part of justifying faith, as the accepting of him for our Savior:
So consequently sincere obedience (which is the effect of the former) has as
much to do in justifying us before God, as affiance (which is the fruit of the
latter.) The Antecedent of this Position is nothing else but the reassuming of
his former Assumption with a short explication and a short obscuration added to
it. His obscuration in this, that he names justifying without the adjection
there used [as such] we will understand him here meaning what there he speaks,
else we run from the question. His explication, that here he unfolds what he
meant there by accepting Christ for Lord, viz. the hearts subjection, [to
Christ's Legislative power, or his commanding of woeks and obedience.] In this
sense we deny still that the accepting of Christ for Lord is an essential part
of justifying faith, as such. And all that which he seems further to bring for
the confirmation thereof, pa. 287, and 288. is but the saying over again of
what he had said before, and a little prattle of Physical and moral
Philosophy, which is as fit to explain to us the mystery of Christ, faith and
justification; as a net is to hold fast the wind: and yet if all his reasoning
thence were granted, his cause is as naked and weak with it as without it. The
rest is nothing but words, his own words, his bare affirmations, wherewith we
have been so much wearied, that the very thought of them is offensive. We
expect Gods word, let him bring it, or hold his peace.

The consequent of this Thesis, which is also the consequent of the proposition
of the Argument which we are here examining; he puts here more fraudulently
then I rendered it there, viz. that sincere Obedience does as much justify as
affiance, that, as the fruit of our accepting Christ for Lord and Lawgiver, as
much as this, which is a fruit of accepting Christ for our Savior. How
slippery is falsehood, and how full of evasions? Let him speak positively and
plainly, has such obedience any thing to do in justifying us? I should not lie
if I should say, I have conquered so many Armies, taken so many Towns in, and
brought so much gold from the West Indies, as Mr. Baxter: yet though I speak no
lie, I cannot be excused from speaking vanity in saying it; for neither of us
have done it. But let us see whether there be more positivenesse in his poofs
then in his affirmations. In his 288. page thus he speaks to it.

B. That obedience is as near a fruit of faith as affiance, is evident; if you
take it for the obedience of the soul, in acts that are no more remote from the
heart then affiance is: and so is the obedience of our actions external, in
its formal respect (as obedience): though not in its material, because the
imperate acts are not all so near the fountain as the elicite. If by this
profound reasoning there be any that will not be persuaded to be a Christian of
Mr. Baxters painting, let him continue to be not only almost but altogether a
Christian of Christ's making, and he shall never sustain damage thereby to his
conscience or salvation. The question is not here how near or how remote a
fruit of faith, obedience is, but whether the nearest or most distant fruits
thereof, considered (as Mr. Baxter does) as our acts or deeds; nor yet whether
these acts as close to, and remote from the heart, nor whether imperate or
elicit acts, but whether such acts are at all appointed of God to
justification? We deny it, and Mr. Baxter brings nothing to prove it.

Yet not to suffer the less exercised and informed Reader to depart
unsatisfyed, nor to roll up in darkness and silence any truth of the Gospel,
proper here to be cleared; I shall manifest in what respect Mr. Baxters
assertion may be here warily granted. Christ as Savior, and satisfier, i. e.
by the sacrifice of his death, has made a way for sinners to God, yea made
himself the way, and is in respect thereof made to us of God, righteousness.
This he did principally (not only) as our high Priest, the other offices were
not excluded. This was not the whole work that he was sent to do. He must bring
into the way also that he has made, all that are to be saved in it and by it,
Joh. 10. 16. And having brought them he must also enable them to bring forth
fruit to God by being their sanctifier, Joh. 15. 5. Romans 7. 4. 6. in these
works he acts principally as our Prophet and King. To bring us into communion
with him, and into that way which he has made through himself to
righteousness and blessedness, as our Prophet he teaches, and as our King
commands, but as Priest, Prophet and King effectuallizeth his teaching and
commands by his Spirit: In this respect his commands to us of coming by faith
into union with him, of adhering to him, and reposing our selves wholly upon
him for righteousness and life, we grant that Christ as our King commanding,
as far as we look to the thing commanded, viz. faith in his blood alone for
justification, is an eminent instrument of our justification; and as he
effectuallizeth the merits of his death to us may not be unproperly made the
object of our faith as justifying. But in his other forementioned operations
upon us by his Word and Spirit, not only to teach and command, but also by his
infinite power to enliven us to bring forth fruits of so great a salvation, and
to walk worthy of it in all holiness and righteousness, and exactness to
fulfill all duties and works of Christian obedience; In this he is to be made
indeed the object of justifying faith, or (which is the same) of sanctifying
faith, yet not at it justifyeth, but as it sanctifyeth. We should not a little
maim both the office of faith, and the benefits which we have by Christ, if we
should restrain them all to justification. Nay Christ is made unto us as well
sanctification as righteousness; and faith adhereth as fast to Christ for the
one as the other: else is it not a legitimate but bastard faith. Nevertheless
Christ is not in the same respect the object of faith as sanctifying, and of
the same as justifying.

Because this is Mr. Baxters supereminent Argument, in which himself seems most
to trust, and by which so many learned Ministers do even profess themselves
staggered and astonished: I shall omit nothing unexamined that he speaks in
the affirming or confirming of it, lest any should take occasion to say that
the strongest part thereof is not, because it could not be, answered. Therefore
have I left out nothing of what he has said to the other Proposition; though
many things were unworthy of Animadversion. To the consequent of this
Proposition, he speaks more in his next two Theses, viz. 73. and 74. what is
inserted in these two Aphorisms, more fit to be examined under another notion;
I shall here forbear to transcribe, leaving it for its proper place. What is to
the present purpose, he thus expresses,

B. These. 73. pa. 289. Faith only does not justify, in opposition to the works
of the Gospel, but those works do also justify.

These. 74. Both faith and works justify in the same kind of causality, viz. as
Causae sine quibus non, or mediate and improper causes; or (as Dr. Twisse)
causae dispositivae, etc. The like may be said of Love, and of others in the
same station.

These are but mere affirmations, and contain no reasons to confirm, only in
the latter Thesis, seemingly at least, is produced the authority of that
Antinomian Dr. Twisse: but with so fine a conveyance as that he may be kept in
or left out at pleasure if Mr. Baxter be dealt with to make good his allegation
of him. He knows the name and authority of Dr. Twisse to be great and amiable,
as an eminent servant of Christ, and patron of his truth. He concludes
therefore that his assertions will be swallowed with the more facility having
such an authority to sweeten and fortify them. Therefore so interserteth his
Testimony, that his Reader may suppose Dr. Twisse to affirm works to be causas
dispositivas of justification. I neither have read all that Dr. Twisse has
written, neither do I so far trust my memory, as to deny it flatly and
peremptorily. Yet by knowing Dr. Twisse aright, I am as confident that
Bellarmine has taught the righteousness of justification to be merely by
imputation, and our justification only by faith, as that Dr. Twisse has any
way affirmed works in this or any other respect to prevent or operate to our
justification. If he did, why does not Mr. Baxter quote the place, as elsewhere
he does very diligently when the Testimony of the Author makes for him? or why
in the end of his Appendix, where he sucks out of Dr. Twisse and others, all
that he thinks may make for his advantage, does he not cite this so pregnant a
Testimony? But he has left to himself an evasion, that when he has beguiled
whom he can with such an authority, being found at last, he can answer his
meaning is, the term or phrase, (viz. causa dispositiva) upon some other, not
to this Argument, is that which Dr. Twisse uses. I find him indeed calling
works causas sine quibus non; or dispositivas salutis, of our salvation or
glorification, never of our justification: And so far is he from attributing
under this term what Mr. Baxter attributes, that he seriously abandoneth it.
So he expresses himself, Vind. Lib. 1. Par. 2. Sect. 2. Proxime finem. Vix
majus p^ceatum est quam justificationem quaerere ex operibus: and almost in the
next words, Nullum opus Deo gratiu^ and acceptius est, quam sibi and justitiae
suae in negotiosalutis renunt iare, et in Christo unice confidere. But come we
now to that which he speaks for confirmation, the first part consists in
prefacing. His own conscience telling him that it is a Pharisaicall, Popish
principle which he hear positeth, he forelayes his Proeme to the proof thereof
thus;

B. I know this is the doctrine that will have the loudest outcries raised
against it: and will make some cry out, Heresy, Popery, Socinianism, and what
not? For mine own part the searcher of hearts knows, that not singularity,
affection of novelty, nor any goodwill to Popery, provokes me to entertain it;
but that I have earnestly sought the Lords direction upon my knees, before I
durst adventure on it, and that I resisted the light of this conclusion as long
as I was able; but a man cannot force his own understanding, if the evidence of
truth force it not, though he may force his pen or tongue to silence or
dissembling. That which I shall do further is to give you some proofs, etc.

First, here a word to such Ministers as being more the disciples of men then
of Christ, and better versed in Sophistry then Divinity, do only not deify Mr.
Baxter, maintaining all his doctrine in this book to be the doctrine of all the
Protestant Churches. Why do they anger the man in charging him with so low a
spirit, that he has nothing but what is common with him and the most eminent
lights in the Church? will not he be offended at it? does he not here in some
kind pronounce himself a dissenter? and that what he here asserteth is that
which the Protestant Churches detest as heresy? does not himself even before
experience what acceptance his book would have, as it were proclaim himself in
this point departed from us into the Tents of Papists and Socinians?

As to Mr. Baxter, 1. We have before granted to him that he gives no cause of
suspicion that affection of singularity and novelty has drawn him into this
opinion. For he is not herein singular, nor is his doctrine new, but such as
the Phari^ees in Christ's time, and the false Apostles in the Apostles times,
and the worst of Heretics from thence unto our days have unanimously pestered
the Church with. Yet in this I appeal to Mr. Baxter whether some affection of
repute by being a deviser of a new way and new Arguments for the confirmation
of this old Popish, Socinian doctrine has not possessed him?

2. Whether the searcher of all hearts witness for him that no good will to
Popery in general provoked him to trouble the Church with his doctrine, I will
not judge: But if good will to this part of Popery that consists in
justification by works, (unto which if all the rest garbage of Popery be
compared, it is insufficient to counterpoise it in mischief) did not provoke,
let him show what has provoked him to it. Is it in hatred to the Papists that
he has labored so stoutly to maintain their Kingdom? Is not this the pillar
of all Popery? and if this be demolished, what is there of all their heresies
but will fall after?

3. As to his sincerity in this business in following conscientiously his
judgment; I know, I find in my self, the heart is deceitful above all things
and desperately evil, who can find it out? I search only my own not another
heart, that is out of my orb, and beyond my fathom. But I should give the more
credence to Mr. Baxter speaking of his own sincerity in this business, did I
not see him forsaking the fountain, and digging to himself cisterns, deriving
from every puddle of Papists, Arminians, Socinians and Atheists, both his
tenants, and all fallacious Sophistry to maintain them, leaving the pure word
of God, and tossing it either from him, or for himself at his pleasure.

4. As for his prayer if presented to God after his own principles as an Act
helping to justify him, and no further, through the mediation of Christ, then
as the same mediation take efficacy (as to him) from his own works and worth;
no marvel if the justice of God flung it back as dirt in his face, and left
him to that de luding spirit which works by those false Apostles whom he had
studied so many years, having spent but a few days upon the Scriptures as
himself confesses. So the Pharisee after his praying departed from the
presence of God, unjustifyed, unregarded. Such devout Protestations may
possibly take impression upon the weak and ignorant: But Satan in the vizzard
of an Angel of light, and Satan in his own ghastly visage, is to them that are
strong in the faith, the same Satan and alike shunned. Besides when men rest
not satisfied with the sacred truth of the Word, but will as it were rake the
very dung of Gods enemies for quaintifies of knowledge which the Word has not;
if they are blacked no marvel, for their delight is to dwell with Colliers.
And God has threatened to send them strong delusions that they should believe a
lie, etc. 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. Yielding them up to wax worse, deceiving
others, being themselves deceived or self-deceivers, 2 Timothy 3. 13.

He promises some proofs of what he says, and one argument he puts in this
explication, thus,

B. If faith justify as it is the fulfilling of the condition of the new
Covenant, and obedience be also part of the condition; then obedience must
justify in the same way as faith: But both parts of the Antecedent are before
proved. An Herculean Argument, as soon may a man wrest the Club out of Hercules
his hand, as make void the conclusion which is inserred by this Argument. If my
eye discerns colors upon condition it look diligently upon them, and my hand
does enrich me upon condition that it stretches forth it self to receive a
Princes beneficence, and my heel be put into the same condition with my eye and
my hand, then my heel does discern colors in the same way with my eye, and
enrich me in the same way with my hand: But both parts of the Antecedent are as
firmly proved before, as the both parts of Mr. Baxters antecedent. Ergo the
conclusion is as very a blank as Mr. Baxters.

If Mr. Baxters often saying of the same thing does prove the thing to be true,
then this cannot be denied to be a truth. For who can number the times that he
has kissed and spit in the mouth of this Ashteroth Condition, setting it up
cheek-mate with Christ himself in justifying us. For These. 56. he yoaks
together Christ and faith in the same way of causality to justification, and
here and every where faith and obedience or works, so that Christ, faith and
works are collaterals in justifying, how? as they meet together in this one
Great Colossus condition, or causa sine qua non. Christ is the condition, (even
in his satisfaction) and faith is the condition, and works is the condition: so
that Condition (it seems by him) justifyeth more then works, or faith, or
Christ: for neither works alone, nor faith alone, nor Christ, alone does
justify. But this mouth-almighty Condition, when like Bell and the Dragon, she
has eaten up and swallowed into her bowels, Christ, faith, and works; does of,
and by her self alone justify, such a Justifyer, and such a Justification. I
should speak more seriously, if Mr. Baxter had ministered to me more serious
matter whereof to treat. Chafe is wont to be exposed to the wind when the
Wheat as more substantial is allotted to a more substantial handling.

The rest of his Arguments which he brings in other Theses, I shall examine by
themselves.

CHAP. VI.
The fifth Argument answered, and the dispute of St. James Cap. 2. opened, and
the Reasons drawn thence to prove justification by works, refuted.

THe former was Mr. Baxters great Argument, the fifth in number is like to it,
yet not so much hugged and honored by him as the former, because that was his
own, born of his own brain: This he takes up as fully formed by the Papists to
his hand and use, so that he is not to have the entire honor of it, but every
petty Monk and Sacrificer will challenge his part therein. This is indeed their
great and sole Argument against the Protestants. The rest they bring is
unworthy the hearing. This therefore Mr. Baxter here, that the Popish cause may
stand and ours fall, Atlas-like, puts his shoulder and whole strength under to
support.

B. These. 75. pa. 292. The plain expression of St. James should terrify us
from an interpretation contradictory to the Text, and except apparent violence
be used with his Chap. 2. 21, 24, 25. etc. it cannot be doubted but that a man
is justified by works and not by faith only. Eusebius, Hierom.


I mean not here to seek an evasion by pleading that this Epistle in the
primitive times of the Church, before the controversy about justification by
faith, or by works and faith was in agitation, was questioned by some and
denied by others to be of divine authority. Or that Erasmus, Luther, Musculus,
Cajetan a Cardinal of the Romish
some great Divines of these latter times have not received it into the Canon;
or that among those that embrace it as Canonical, it is much disputed what
James is the Author of it? For (besides the Syriac interpreter that weakly
attributes it to James the brother of John who in the cradle of the Church was
slain with the sword by Herod, Act. 12. 1, etc.) some name James the son of
Alpheus the Brother of Christ, and one of the 12 Apostles: others, James
surnamed Oblias, or the Just, (of whom J^sephus writes, the Author of it; and
adhuc sub judice lis est: Or that the matter, method and (if I may so speak)
spirit of this Epistle, sounds not in one harmony with the rest parts or books
of the new Testament, but rather after the writings of the books under the old
Covenant, or after such as stuck still to the old Covenant, as Philo Judaeus
and others: (all which Mr. Baxter better knows to have been by many objected,
then I know how satisfactorily to answer it) By these and other reasons some
have expunged it from the Catalogue of Scriptures which are of divine
inspiration, and have reduced it into the kind and number of writings that are
usually termed Ecclesiastical; in a good sense, not disagreeing any where from
the Canon, yet not of that dignity as to be accepted as a part of the Canon it
self.

I shall leave these things to be disputed by others, and examine the
testimonies which Mr. Baxter hence alleges what and how far it makes for him,
as the authority of the holy Ghost himself.

Here it is remarkable that Mr. Baxter who follows the Jesuits every foot and
inch in the interpreting of this and all other Scriptures from which he would
with them set up justification by works, like a man made all of zeal, perks up
to terrify us from an interpretation contradictory to the text, and from using
apparent violence to it; implying that all the Protestant Churches and Saints
which have stood in the defense of the faith of Christ against the Papists, now
almost 200. years, have dealt thus sacrilegiously in robbing this Text of its
due sense: And the Friars and Jesuits alone (good men) have stood up as the
fast friends of Christ, to maintain this truth of Christ, and the spirit and
meaning of this Scripture, against the violation of the sacrilegious hands of
these heretical Protestants: And that himself is now at last stirred up by the
Spirit that has wrought so powerfully upon the Jesuits, to vindicate and set
forth the true meaning of this Text, with the same fidelity and sincerity which
they his Masters have used before him. Therefore to excite all men to gaze on
his ingenuity and sincerity, and to admire him as the one alone man among
Protestants raised up to undeceive all the Churches that have so long strayed
from the holy mother Church, he thus like wisdom it self utters his voice.

B. Page 297. I dare not teach the holy Ghost to speak; nor force the
Scripture; nor raise an exposition so far from the plain importance of the
words without apparent necessity: but here is not the least necessity: there
being not the least inconvenience that I know of, in affirming justification by
works, in the fore explained sense (i. e. in the sense which Mr. Baxters sense
and reason without any help of Scripture has devised.) Men seldom are bold
with Scripture in forcing it, but they are first bold with conscience in
forcing it, as one M. Baxter, who with onespell, has forced all the large and
divine disputes of Paul about justification into a cherristone, and hurld it at
the feet of his St. Sense, there to do homage, or to be trampled into the
dirt.) After this his protestation of his integrity, zeal and tenderness of
conscience in interpreting Scriptures, and the impression which he feels or
feigns in his soul which the heretic Protestants have made by not expounding
this Scripture in the same words which the Jesuits do: Let us see with what
tenderness and fear himself in the next words speaks of it.

B If it were but some one phrase dissonant from the ordinary language of
Scripture, I should not doubt but it must be reduced to the rest. But when it
is the very scope of a Chapter, in plain and frequent expressions, no whit
dissonant from any other Scripture; I think he that may so wrest it, as to make
it unsay what it says, may as well make him a Creed of his own, let the
Scriptuee say what it will to the contrary. What is this but with the Papists
to make the Scripture a nose of wax? If St. James speak it so over and over,
that justification is by works, and not by faith only, I will see more cause
before I deny it; or say he means a working faith. He that in all this can see
one least spark of that professed sincerity which he protests in himself and
requires in others worthier then himself, let him make it out: I can see
nothing else but fraud, doubleness and falsehood.

1 When he says that it is the very scope of a Chapter, and not only some one
phrase that here holds forth justification by works before God, it is the same
which he has from Bellarmine, Bell. lib. 1. de justif. cap. 15.
Scopus Jacobi (says he) fuit demonstrare fidem veram atque Catholicam ad
salutem sine operibus non sufficere, etc. i. e. The scope of James [in his
Chapter] was to show that a true and Catholic faith is not sufficient without
works to salvation; and with as much truth and fidelity does this man speak it,
as did the other from whom he learned it. This being no more the scope of this
Chapter or of James in it, then to deny the salvation which is by Christ, and
to set on men to seek it by the Law.

2 That this phrase of justification by works [in Mr. Baxters sense] is no whit
dissonant from any other Scripture, whether he means difference in sound, or
difference in substance, is as very a paradox, as if he had said that
contradictories are not dissona^t. For if this doctrine after Mr. Baxters sense
must stand as true doctrine, and for the Gospel of Christ, then must we cast
away almost if not altogether all the other Scriptures of the new Testament as
heretical; and limit our selves to this alone, and to Mr. Baxters gloss in it
to learn true righteousness and the way to life. For how vain, empty and
audacious his annihilating of Paul's doctrine about justification with one
breath is, we shall see in its proper place; and find that he destroys the
genuine scope and meaning of that Apostle in many of his Epistles to sacrifice
all* to his imaginary scope of James in some few words here delivered.

3 When he tells us of wresting and making a Creed, etc. he proclaims to the
World that all the Protestant Churches which have constantly defended
justification by faith without works, i. e. by Christ Jesus apprehended by
faith without concurrence of works, etc. have wrested and violated the
Scripture, set up a Creed of their own in despite of the Scriptures speaking
to the contrary. For what he cunningly and seemingly fastens upon one Mr.
Pemble, he lays to the charge of all the Protestant Churches, there being not
one of them that has not at all times held and spoken the same things with Mr.
Pemble. And so pronounces the faith of Christ to have been no where sound, but
within the confines of Rome; and that the Protestant Churches are all
heretical and apostates, have rejected the faith of Christ, and sought
righteousness and salvation by a Creed of their own making.

4 Nevertheless his sincerity in the very next words after his such stout
pleading for the Papists, falls foul with them for making the Scripture a nose
of wax: to delude the simple with an opinion that he has no confederacy with
them. Yet

5 Holds them fast by the hand telling us that he will join with them and
follow James in their sense and interpretation to seek justification by works
and not by faith only.

But let us come to the text it self and see whether St. James will be brought
to dance after St. Bellarmine and Mr. Baxter with all their piping and
charming, and in this, the sincerity of these two great champions in the
interpreting of this Scripture will appear.

First for the scope of the Words, who can better express it then the Author?
This himself declares to be the subversion of the false confidences of shadie
believers, who being destitute of true faith gloried in the mere shadow and
profession of it, as if it should justify and save them, though it never
wrought to their Sanctification, but left them to every good work reprobate.
Against this pernicious delusion he bends the whole drift of his dispute, and
proves such a faith to be vain, dead, devilish; and on the contrary, that the
faith which justifyeth is lively and operative in good works. This will be
manifested in examining the several passages of the dispute, specially to him
that will take the labor of reading but some of the many hundreds of our
Divines that have answered the Arguments of the Papists hence deduced; either
in their Commentaries upon this Epistle, or in handling this Controversy
against them. And herein some of the learned among the Papists are more plyant
to obey and less stubborn to resist the truth then Mr. Baxter. The scope of
the Apostle (says Cajetan) is to show, quod non fide sterili sed foecunda
justific^mur; i. e. that we are justified not by a barren but fruitful faith.
Thus do we find James himself sta^ing the question, ver. 14. What does it
profit, though a man say he has faith and has not works, shall his faith save
him? It is against the saying and false professing of faith, that has no force
or life to bring forth good works, and not against faith ind^ed which works
by love that the Apostle here argues, denying to it any efficacy to
Justification: this is the thing which we shall find him prosecuting
throughout his whole disputation: and on the contrary part affirming faith
which is living and active to good works to be also alive and effectual to
justify. This will more properly offer it self to be made out in the next
place. Let us then come to examine Mr. Baxters dispute from the authority of
James; Page 293.

Br. In opening this I shall first show the clearness of that in James for the
point in question. etc. This he goes about to do by dashing in pieces all
whatsoever has been said by all or any of the Protestant Churches or Writers
against the Papists in expounding this Text, thus.

B. The ordinary expositions of St. James are these two. 1. That he speaks of
Justification before men, and not before God. 2. That he speaks of works, as
justifying our Faith, and not as justifying our persons: (or as Mr. Pembles
phrase is) The Apostle when he says works justify, must be understood by a
Metonymy, that a working faith justifies. That the former exposition is false
may appear thus. This is his showing the clearness of that in St. James, viz.
to anathematize all that any of the faithful servants and Martyrs of the Lord
Jesus within the Protestant Churches have spoken in the Exposition thereof* that
it may be embraced by all after the Catholic that is Romish interpretation.
Two things we except against in this his clarifying passage. 1. That being
very good both at confounding and dividing, as he sees either to make for his
turn, he does here by dividing seek to pervert, as erewhile by confounding we
found him to obscure the truth. Why does he make two opinions, two expositions
here of that which is but one? Has he learned of Ma^chiavel so to deal in
spiritualls, as he prescribes in Politics, Divide and impera? Why else should
he set at division those that are united? Or make them to fight one against
another, who speak the same things? Or set in opposition John against Calvin,
and Calvin against John? Or David against Pareus, and Pareus against David? And
so other thousands, when every of these gives both these expositions which he
mentions, in one. Possibly as to some particulars in this question he may
meet with some particular Writer urging the one only, but he knows that most,
and those not the meanest, make use of both, as shall be showed. 2. We except
against him that in alleging the^e expositions, he does subtlely hide the
grounds upon which the Protestants do fix these their expositions. And thus he
exposes them to the vulgar at least, as groundless dreams, shifting evasions,
whereof no reason can be given on our part: That all the reason lies* on the
Papists part, with whom therefore he has joined. Is this Christian, or
Jes^iticall dealing? Would it not be expected from him that professes
himself a Protestant and zealous Presbyter^ ^n* when ^e divides himself
utterly from them, all them, of whose side he professes himself to be, at
least to set down their opinions and grounds thereof, and to confute those
grounds; and not (as he does) deny and fight against the conclusion without
speaking a word to the premises.

What he therefore fraudulently omits I shall here supply, rendering the
expositions as our Divines give it and the grounds of it, and not as Mr. Baxter
corrupts it. We have found him acknowledging, that if it be but some one phrase
dissonant from the ordinary language of Scripture, that one must be reduced to
the rest, and not all the rest to that one. pa. 297. So stands the case here.
The ordinary language, yea drift of the New Testament, is to hold forth
Justification by faith without works (as we have seen before) and every one
that will but consideratively read as other the Evangelists, so chiefly the
Gospel written by John the Apostle, the Acts of the Apostles, the Epistles to
the Romans, to the Galatians, to the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and
Hebrews, especially and above the rest, and withal from the rest it must needs
appear. This one passage in one Epistle has a sound of differing and but a
sound Must al be reduced to this or this to all? According to the rule
therefore allowed by Mr. Baxter himself, our Divines give an interpretation to
this one passage, that may declare it, (though it has a seeming,) yet not to
have a reality of dissent from the rest. Because if this be Canonical and from
the H. G the H. G. cannot contradict himself.

In expounding this dispute of James, therefore the Protestants take notice of
a two fold homonymy of words, one in the word Faith, the other in the word
Justifying, both which Paul and James use, but use them the one in one, and the
other in another sense, so that though they seem somewhat to differ in words,
yet in sense they speak the same thing.

1. They say as when Paul speaks of Faith to justification, by Faith he means
a true and lively Faith, which fetches power from the merits of Christ to
Justify, and from the spirit of Christ to Sanctify: so James here battereth
under the name of Faith, a bare profession and boasting of Faith, which some
Hypocrites leaned on to Justify them, being wholly destitute of Faith indeed
that is alive, and effectual to draw from Christ matter both to Justification
and Sanctification. 2. They say that as Paul takes the word Justifying for
remission and absolution before God, so James takes it (as often as he requires
here works to Justify) for the declaration of the truth of our Faith, and
Justification before men.

Yet let not this their distinction (if it may fitly be so termed) and
exposition be taken up unless it has sufficient grounds from the Text to
bear it up. I shall begin first with the latter, because Mr. Baxter there
begins. That Justification by works is by James understood the declaring us to
man, to have true Faith and to be Justified by it, they bring these reasons to
prove. 1 James himself even in express words affirming it ver. 18 Show me thy
Faith without thy works, and I will show thee my Faith by my works, where he
tells us that by Justifying, he means the showing or declaring our Faith, and
Justification (not to God) but one to another. And thus he denies Faith which
is not Showed by works, to Justify i. e. to Show or declare us to men
Justified 2. ver. 21, where he says, was not Abraham our Father justified by
works, when he had offered Isaac his Son upon the Altar? does he speak of
Gods Justifying Genesis 15. 6.
him, or declaring him to be justified, unto men? Not the former, for God had
justified him by Faith many years before, and there was no di^uption
(according to Mr Baxters doctrine) in the intervall, by any apostasy made by
Abraham, that of justified he became unjustified; and needed here to be
justified an^w. How then was he justified by offering his Son? Can there be
any other way not repugnant to reason devised, but this; that God here by
proving and bearing him up in so searching a proof and Temptation, to show so
matchless an act of obedience, did declare to the world that his Faith was in
sincerity, his fear and love unfeigned, so that all must be restrained from
charging him with self respects and Hypocrisy, in all the professions that he
made toward God; Or what less is to be drawn from those word^ from Heaven Gen:
22 12. upon this act of Abraham's obedience, Now I know that thou fear God
seeing thou have not witheld thy Son, thy only Son from me? Did not God know
what was, what himself had wrought in Abraham's heart before this trial of him?
does he need outward actions to manifest to him what is in the heart within? M.
B. so much cleavs to the^ that make all things which God does to flow from his
prescience that he will not ungod God so much as to deny that he knew as
perfectly before as after trial: Why says he then, now I know, but to
intimate that now he had given a strong evidence both to the present and future
generations to know that God knew, and thereby to convince men of all ages that
they also must know the truth of Abraham's Faith, fear, and justification? 3.
The same might be said of Rahabs justification by works, in receiving the
Messengers, and letting them forth another way. ver. 25. Did such a work as
this justify her before God? or obtain to her remission of sins, and deliver
her from everlasting vengeance? when there cannot be the least probable
conjecture that she had then any Faith in Christ, or had ever heard of a
Christ to come? Then let us disclaim that Fabulam de Christo (as one of the
Popes termed the Gospel) Righteousness is by works without Faith, without
Christ, and Stapletons gloss ^apleton, Anrid. p. 82 83.
upon Paul's Iustificamur fide, i. e. non absque side, we are justified by Faith
i. e. not without Faith, because Faith is necessary to justification, though
not without works sufficient to it; must be rejected as too Evangelicall. And
then also how shall Mr: Baxters Thesis not fall which makes works collateralls
with Faith in Christ to justification? works can do it without Christ. But if
all this entrench upon Blasphemy, then was she justified by works to men, to
the Israelites, who by this Act toward them had so far evidenced her fidelity
to them and their cause, that thereupon she was taken into Covenant with them,
delivered from the ruin which befell Jericho, and after as it were adopted or
naturallized into the Commonwealth of Israel. Ye have one part of the
exposition and the grounds of it, which Mr: Baxter concealed, that the unwary
reader might despise it as groundless. Mr: Baxter opposes it, tell^ us it is
false, and it may appear thus.

B. p. 294. The Worlds Justification frees us but from the worlds Accusation,
to which it is opposed: And therefore it is but either a Justification from
Man's Laws; or else a particular Justification of us in respect of some
particular Facts; or else an usurped Judgment and sustification: for they are
not constituted our Judges by God: and therefore we may say with Paul, it is a
small thing with me to be judged of you or of man's judgment. And so a small
thing to be justified by men from the accusations of the Law of God.

But the justification in James, is of greater moment as appears in the Text.
For 1. It is such as salvation depends on. ver. 14.

2. It is such as follows only a saving Faith. But the world may as well
justify us when we have no faith at all.

I therefore affirm, 1. That the world is no lawful judge of our righteousness
before God, etc. 2. Nor a competent capable judge and cannot pass any certain
true sentence, etc. 3. If they could, yet works are no certain Medium, or
evidence, whereby the world can know us to be righteous. For there is no
outward work which an hypocrite may not perform: and inward works they cannot
discern, etc. So that if it be not certain that the Text speaks of
justification before God, I scarce know what to be certain of.

It were more tolerable and excusable for me to leave the grounds of one single
man giving his private interpretation of this Scripture, despised unexamined,
and unanswered; than for him so to deal with all the Churches of Christ: But I
will not be a follower of him that follows not Christ in lowliness, and his
Precept in self-denial.

His dispute here is two fold; 1 to prove that James speaks not, of the
declaration of our justification before men. 2. To prove that he speaks of our
justification before God, when he mentions justification by works.

To the former all that he says is Sophistical and Fallacious. For if we
grant that by the World he means the whole generation of men both good and
evil (which yet can hardly be drawn from his dispute, which to make our
assertion odious would make it out as relating only to the wicked of the world,
that these must be the alone Judges,) Notwithstanding his whole Argumentation
is a mere (...) a waving the question with a false assumption that by
Justification before men, we meant a raising of a Tribunal upon earth, in
opposition to Gods in heaven, there to set up men to be judges, and to pass
sentence of justification and remission of sins one upon another, according
to the evidence of every ones works. The falsehood whereof he proves by the
illegality of such a judicature, and incompetency of the judges, and evidence
for it. And what is this but a Devil of his own raising and laying again? For
what one rational man in any of the Reformed Churches ever dreamed of such a
justification? All that we understand heerby is but a declaration and
discovery of the tree by its fruits, of the state of a man before God, that he
has justified or not justified him, according as we see the fruits of
justification, i. e. the works of sanctification following or not following the
profession of faith. And all this not by a judicial sentence given for or
against any, nor by the judgment of infallible faith or knowledge; but in the
judgment of charity alone, which hops all things, believes all things,
thinks no evil, (except by strong evidence it be drawn to it) 1. Co. 13. 5.
7.

In fighting against this doctrine Mr. Baxter fights against Christ, against
the Holy Ghost the Author of it, not only here, but elsewhere also. By their
fruits ye shall know them, says our Savior, Mat. 7. 16. By this shall all men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, Io 13. 35. that the
World may know that thou have loved them, Io: 17. 28. He that is of God hears
us, he that is not of God hears us not, hereby know we the Spirit of Truth
and the Spirit of Error, 1. Io 4. 6. Let your light so shine forth before
others that they seeing your good works may glorify your Father which is in
Heaven, Ma: 5. 16. I magnify my office if by any means I may provoke my
brethren etc. and save some of them. To. 11. 14. By your orderly carriage.
etc. the unbeleever shall be convinced, fall down worship God, and report that
God is in you of a truth, 1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. That he that is of the contrary
part may be ashamed, having nothing evil to say of you, Tit. 2. 8. Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak evil of you,
they may by your good works which they see, glorify God, 1 Pet. 2. 12. Because
by this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme,
2. Sam. 12. 14. God has begun, and will perfect in you the good work, as it
is meet for me to judge of you, because, etc. Phil. 1. 6* 7. I am persuaded of
you things that accompany salvation, because of your works and labors of love,
etc. Heb. 6. 9, 10. We give thanks to God for you, etc. since we heard of your
Faith in Christ Jesus, and love to all the Saints, for the hope which is laid
up for you in Heaven, Col. 1. 3, 4 5, To the Saints which are at Rome, Corinth,
etc. and hundreds of the like Scriptures which testify the declaration, such a
declaration of the Faith, Saintship, Justification and salvation of others, by
the evidence of their works, that we ought, that it is a sin in men by the
judgment of Charity not to acquiesce therein: And on the contrary part,
testifying the want of such an evidence to be an occasion given to all men to
reject our Faith and justification in the profession thereof as spurious and
vain. Against all these Mr. Baxter excepreth, pronouncing that man's judgment
herein is illegal* incompetent, and the evidence insufficient, therefore to
make use of any judgment or discerning in this kind, is usurpative. Does he
herein fight against men, or against God? Suppose that the event in any thing
prove contrary to our judgment, yet is there not sin in such judgment, while
we follow Christ's Rule, and to be deceived by Charity rightly ordered, if it
may be called a deceivednesse, yet is it no sinful deceivednesse. What he
produces from the Apostle, Unto me it is a small thing to be judged of you, or
of man's judgment, etc. 1 Cor. 4. 3. is nothing subservient to his turn: For
the Apostle there speaks of their unjust Censures of him, besides and against
Christ's Rule, the Rule of Charity, (from which while they erred, their
judgment was not to be regarded) and in relation to the future judgment which
follows not man's, but Christ's own knowledge of us. Thus have we found one
part of his arguing vain and wide from the scope, in going about to prove that
James his Justification by works is not to be taken for the declaring of us to
men to be truly justified.

His second dispute is to prove that this Justification by Works is to be
understood of our justifying by works at Gods Tribunal. His Reasons to prove
it are partly in his words before transcribed, partly in a new supply thereunto
added. The first Reason in the former is,

B. 1. It is such as Salvation depends on. ver. 14. Brevis esse laboro,
Obscurus fio. No man's immoderate prolixity and tediousness has ever so much
troubled me, as this man's pretended affectation of conciseness and brevity. By
it, when he speaks nothing, he gets the advantage to be thought of fools,
that he speaks great and mystical things. Were it not that I regard such as
are too apt to run after his whistle though they know not his tune, I should
rather kick at such Delphicke mystericall passages of his, than take them up to
look on them. If James here take not justifying and saving for the same thing,
then (to use Mr. Baxters words) I am not certain what to be certain off. So
that when he says it is such a justification as salvation depends on, it is
one as if he had said it is such a justification as justification depends
on, or such a salvation as salvation depends on. The Apostle there speaks of
a dead and barren Faith, of a profession not a being of Faith, and by an
interrogation bearing the force of a strong Negation, by saying, Can Faith, [or
the saying that he has Faith,] save him? he means, and says, it cannot save
him: and that is the same with him* as if he had said, it cannot justify him.
Here we have indeed an idle dream of Faith that cannot save. But a
Justification that cannot justify, or cannot save, or can justify and not
save, is as far from James as near to Mr. Baxter.

B. 2. It is such as follows only a saving faith. But the world may as well
justify us when we have no Faith at all. That the justification of the New
Covenant in which God evidenceth by faith to us that we are justified in
Christ, or the justification which consists in the evidencing by works to men
the truth both of our Faith and Gospel Justification, so far that in charity
they are to regard us as truly believing, and truly justified; do both follow
either saving faith, or that which in charity to them that profess it, men are
to account a saving faith: none denies. But it will not hence follow, that
works justify us at Gods Judgment seat, because they follow faith that
declares and evidenceth us to our selves to be so justified. He comes with a
new supply pa. 296.

B. Once more: 1. Was Abrahaem justified before men for a secret Action? 2. Or
such an Action as the killing of his only Son would have been? 1. Had the
Action been kept secret from men, it could not have justified him before God or
men. Not before God, for no actions as actions are the ground of his justifying
us (as has bin already abundantly proved.) Nor before men: for this action
could not have declared the truth of his faith to them that never heard of the
man or his Action. But God having ordained him to be a Father of the
Faithful, and pattern of all believers to the worlds end, and to confer
Blessedness with Abraham, upon all that walk in the steps of the Faith of our
Father Abraham. To. 4. 9. 12. has recorded this Action of his, to justify and
magnify the truth of his Faith to all that in all ages shall believe, and to
incite them by his pattern by the like eminent obedience to justify their
Faith also to others.

2. We are not to enquire what the evil world will judge of such an Action, but
whether Abraham, or rather the spirit of God working in and by Abraham, did not
give in this Action a sufficient demonstration to convince the evil world
(much more the saints chosen out of the world) of the truth of his Faith. Which
conviction if the evil world will carnally neglect or cursedly oppose, it
shall leave them the more inexcusable in the day of Judgment.

B. Was not he the Justifier beer which was the imputer of Righteousness? but
God was the imputer of Righteousness* ver. 23. Therefore God was the Justifier.
So I leave that Interpretation to sleep. This is one of his extravagancies. He
has all this while disputed of Justification by works: what he cannot prove of
works, now he proves of Faith. James says, Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness. Was it imputed to him of God, for a partial
or for a perfect righteousness? If but unto righteousness in part, let him
prove it, or stand guilty before God for perverting his word. If in the whole,
then is there no place left for works to challenge a part. Or let him produce
from James the like sentence of works imputed to Abraham to Righteousness; else
he puts the handle of his Argument into our hands to retort it upon him.
Abraham's Faith was imputed to him [by the testimony of Iames] to righteousness;
Ergo [by the testimony of Iames] works were not so imputed to him.

So [his Epiphonem] I leave that interpretation to sleep, is the only sound
thing that he has spoken to this question. For he has said nothing that has
any power to awaken much less to rowze it: So that it may sleep, and that
securely and in safety, because they are but false Alarms that he sounds
against it.

The second interpretation (as Mr. Br. terms it) or as it is indeed the second
homonymy or different sense of words, wherein our Divines affirm James and Paul
to speak in sound one, but in meaning disagreeing either from other, is in the
word [Faith] as has been said. Paul when he attributes justification to Faith
without works, means a living faith fruitful in good works. James where he
denies Faith without works to justify, means a dead faith, a mere profession
of faith that has neither life nor being, much less fruitfulness in good
works. That James takes the word Faith in this sense appears by these Reasons
from the Text it self.

1. From the scope of his dispute which we shall find to be (as I said) to beat
down the presumption of carnal professors, who reposed the hope of salvation
wholly upon a bare profession of faith, though the faith whereof they boasted
had no virtue to sanctification and obedience; and to prove that alone to be a
justifying Faith which is alive to good works. This even Cajetan himself one of
the pillars Cajetan in Jacob.
of the Romish Church, gives as the scope of the Text, as I have showed; and
he further expresses himself thus: Adverte hic prudens Lector, quod Iacobus
non sentit Fidem sine operibus mortuum esse etc. Quoniam constat nos per fidem
justificari, etiam sine operibus, sed sentit fidem sine operibus, i. e.
renuentem operari, vel non paratam operari esse mortuum, esse vanam, and non
justificare. That is, Let the prudent Reader here note, that James means not
that faith is dead without works [to accompany and help it in justifying us]
for it is evident that faith justifies, even without works: but his meaning
is, that faith without works, that is, that refuses or is not in a readiness
to good works, is dead, vain, and justifies not. Thus he makes the scope of
James here to prove that an idle and fruitless faith is not a saving or
justifying faith. So that we find it easier in this argument to find the truth
from the very Papists than from Mr. Br.

2. From the 14. ver. where James putting the question of faith without works,
says not indefinitely, can faith, but annexeth the article to it, (...), can
this faith save? Is there power in such a faith to save, which has no power to
sanctify? In like manner as here, ver. 20. What in our Translation is rendered
faith [absolutely] is there also in the Original put with the restriction of
the same article [ that] faith which is without works is dead.

3. From the attributes that he gives to the faith to which he denies
justification, viz. a dead faith, ver. 17. 20. 26. A faith of Devils, ver. 19.
But a dead and Devilish faith are not a true Gospel faith, but at the best a
figment and counterfeit thereof.

4. From the similitude by which he illustrateth his disputation: If a man in a
pretense of charity, speaks comfortable words to his hungry and naked brother,
Alas poor soul be clothed, be filled, but ministers nothing to him for his
refreshing; will any call that flourish of words true charity? Is it any more
then a paint thereof? So also of him that says he has faith, but evidenceth
it not by its fruits etc. The verbal faith does no more profit to
justification, than the verbal charity to sanctification. If one of these in
the mind of the Author be true charity, then according to the mind of the
Author also, the other is true Faith,

5. From the object of that Faith which James excludes from Justification, Mr.
Baxter acknowledges that the object of justifying Faith is Christ, These.
66.-68. and their explication. But let him show that James does here expressly
or impliedly, in any one passage of his dispute, make Christ the object of that
Faith which he excludes from justification: or any other object than the Faith
of a mere Heathen or Hypocrite may pitch upon, viz. general truths, that there
is a God etc. else let him grant from his own principles that it is not true
Faith but an unprofitable Historical Faith (as some term it) which is here
excluded.

Thus have our writers in answer to the Papists Cavills, expressed the mind of
James in this place, or rather from him self declared what himself expresses
to be his mind and this they express (not as Mr. Baxter perverts them) by
some one, but by both of these interpretations viz. of the word [justifying]
and the word [Faith] manifesting out of James himself, that as often as in this
dispute he attributes justification to works, he speaks of justification i e.
the declaration or manifestation thereof to men. As when verse. 21 Abraham, and
ver. 25. Rahab and ver. 24. A man indefinitely, are said to be justified by
works, he means they are so manifested and declared by their works to us. This
is a usual phrase not only in Scripture, but in our common expressions and our
common talk. I will justify what I have spoken or done; i. e. I will declare
it, make it appear to be all good, true, and just: I will justify him from all
that is laid to his charge, i. e. I will declare and prove him just and free
from all that he is charged with. Again where he denies justification to that
dead faith that works not by love: that by faith he means a false profession
and counterfeit of, and not the true justifying faith: and who among us ever
said, that to say, I have faith, (never expressing the power and fruits of it)
can justify a man? So there is nothing to be found in James crossing the
Protestant, yea Evangelicall and Apostolical conclusion, that we are justified
[in our consciences before God] by faith alone without works, i. e. by a living
and working, not a dead faith: yet without works can we not be declared and
manifested just unto men.

That which Mr. Br. has spoken against the former part of this interpretation,
viz. justification before men, we have found to be either less or worse than
nothing. To the other, viz. the denying of justification to faith that is a
counterfeit, a false profession of faith, he says nothing; and why? because
he has not what to say. Therefore he stifles it in darkness, will not have his
Reader hear of it, for then actum est, he must run to S. Francis, or some other
Saint, S. James leaves him in the mire. It is no less ludicrous than
fallacious that he turns the state of the question another way, and danceth
round about it, never coming to that which our Divines answer. 1. Having
devised page 294. that we say James speaks of works as justifying our faith,
not our persons, he does pa. 296. go about to prove that works justify the
person, not the faith only. And who ever denied this position? Do not we all
say that the holy life declares the truth of faith, and therein justifies (as
to men) the professor of it from all hypocrisy in making such a profession? 2.
page 297. he falls foul with the Ghost of sweet Mr. Pemble, for saying that by
Faith and works James understands a working Faith. And after a sharp chiding,
without examining his Reasons (the matter whereof I have before examined) at
length p. 298. fetching breath, he offers him peace and friendship, upon
condition that he will arise from the grave and say what Mr. Baxter says. But
despairing of that, and concluding, if he should rise again from the dead, he
would still say with the Protestant Churches and Writers, that Fides solum
justificat non autem fides sola: Faith alone justifies, but not that Faith
which is alone [without works.] because that alone faith is not a true Faith;
he 3. Makes a transition to fall out with all Protestant Churches, for
attributing too much to Faith, in making it isntrumental to Justification:
that when Believers are said to receive Christ, Io. 1. 12. and to receive
abundance of Grace, and of the gift of Righteousness, Romans 5. 17. we will not
say they receive this Christ, this gift of his Righteousness to Justification,
without any receiving instrument, but make Faith the instrument by which we
receive the same. p. 299. A most pernicious Doctrine to Mr. Baxters Cause. If
it stand Mr. Baxters Justification by works in the same relation with Faith as
its Concause, must needs fall and tumble down to hell, for works will not be
bowed into any instrumentality to cooperate with Faith in receiving Christ and
his righteousness. When contrariwise, if we would say as he does, and which we
must take his word without any further demonstration, to be true, then in
despite of Paul and the Holy Ghost, our justification should be parted between
faith and works, and Mr. Brs. new Gospel stand, the Gospel of Grace being
wholly taken out of the way as unprofitable.

But in all that he says, he diligently keeps off from speaking a word to
what our Divines say in proving from James himself, that he means not true
faith when he denies to the counterfeit or profession of it any efficacy to
justify; and let the conscientious Reader judge whether he does this in zeal
for Christ or against him? Let none except that possibly he never read any of
them that have thus expounded James. What one of them has he then read? Nay I
rather question what one of them has he not read? or with what one thing is he
unacquainted that any of them has written? He is a stranger to Mr. Br. that
will accuse him of little reading. Even Mr. Pemble himself whose words he can
almost if not altogether rehearse without book, gives it as the common
interpretation of Protestant Writers, so that he cannot be ignorant of it. Yet
he says nothing to it, and says all to what none denies. Is this sincerity
in handling the chief point of man's salvation? Such as he begged from God
upon his knees? or the use of that which he injoyns upon us* tenderness in the
interpretation of Scriptures? But we must leave him in his own way because he
is resolute therein. Since he will not answer us, let us answer him, in these
things which in stead of an answer to us, he would fish from the Text for
himself.

Br. page 299. 1. When it is said we are justified by works, the word [by]
implies more than an idle concomitancy, if they only stood by, while Faith
does all, it could not be said we are justified by works. We grant it does
much, yea almost all, in the justification whereof James there speaks, viz.
before men. And this is that which he speaks. ver. 21. 22. 23. of Abraham's
justification by works, fulfilling that Scripture which says, Abraham believed
God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. How did his justification by
works fulfill the Scripture which affirmed him to be justified by faith? but as
this great work and fruit of his faith declared and manifested to men the truth
of that Scripture, and the truth of his faith by which he was so many years
before justified.

B. p. 300. 2. When the Apostle says, [by works and not by faith onely] he
plainly makes them concomitant in the procurement, or in that kind of
causality which they have: especially seeing he says not as he is commonly
interpreted, [Not by Faith which is alone] but [By Faith only.] (...). All is
granted as before, of the justification before men. The profession of Faith, or
to say we have Faith is not sufficient without declaring it by works so to
justify us. Therefore says the Apostle, Show me (if thou can) thy Faith
without thy works, and I will show thee my Faith by my works, verse. 18.

B. 3. Therefore he says that [Faith is dead being alone] because it is dead
to the use and purpose of justifying: for in it self it has a life according
to its quality still. This appears from his comparison in the former verse. 16
that this is the death he speaks of. And so works make Faith alive as to the
attainment of its end of Justification. We grant that the hypocritical
profession of Faith which James reproves, is as all other sin, alive to
condemn the unbelievers and unjustified, but dead to the use of justifying us
in our consciences before God, or outwardly before men. But that the addition
of works to such a dead Faith can make it alive to justify a man before God,
we deny, neither does James affirm; though there may be some force that way to
his justification before men, who are subject to failings in their judgment.

In the fourth place he finds something to say for, and something against the
Analysis of Piscator and Mr. Pemble. When he would depresse it at the utmost,
he can only say that they seem to fail in the Explication of the 22. verse
about the (...), Faiths working with Abraham's works, and perfecting by works.
In this I leave the Reader to peruse Mr. Baxter, and them whom he opposes,
from thence to judge which party lays the surer ground of their
interpretation. As to the question in hand, the working of both together to
justify and declare his faith perfect or sincere to men, does nothing
strengthen his assertion, or weaken ours.

The rest that he has in this Section are mere words without proofs: as also
his Answer given to some Objections made on our part, and the same so curt,
that the best examination of them is to leave them unexamined, until he bring
something to prove them. Yet what of all that he says here has, or seems to
have force to some other end, I may possibly in its proper place call it into
Examination.

CHAP. VII.
Argument. Mr. Baxters sixth Argument to prove justification by works, drawn
from the Identity of the Conditions of justification and salvation examined. To
which are added the Rules which Protestant Writers give for the Right
understanding of such Scriptures as promise eternal life to men of such works
and qualifications: and an enquiry into the force of those Scriptures out of
which Mr: Baxter seeks to evince that eternal life runs upon condition of
works.

A Sixth Argument he draws from the Identity of Justification and Salvation,
in relation to the Condition of their procurement and attainment. He lays it
thus. p. 310*

B. These. 78. Our full Justification, and our everlasting Salvation have the
same conditions on our part. But sincere obedience is without all Doubt, a
condition of our s^lvation: Therefore also of our Justification. We except here
against the Terms or Phrases used in the proposition, and that 1. against that
which by way of distinction, he names our [FULL] Justification, implying
thereby that there is an empty, or at least partial, maimed, and not full
Justification before God; as by what he has often said before, and by his own
expressing himself, and his meaning in the Explication of his Thesis he makes
evident. The Protestants utterly deny this 1. and 2. partial, and full,
unperfect and perfect Justification, acknowledging one only Justification of
the New Covenant, which (as an act of God) is simul and semel, perfect, admits
of no degrees or increases, though as to a man's own apprehension and comfort
it has its increases and decreases. And whatever Mr. Baxter has hitherto
brought to prove on his part, we have found no less vain than is that which
he seeks to prove. The Scripture is altogether ignorant of such a two fold
Justification, so that we leave it as Mr. Baxters, not Gods Justification.

2. Against that which by the like way of distinction, he calls our
everlasting salvation, implying thereby a temporary salvation which is by
Christ, in respect whereof the saved may be unsaved again, and so the
salvation which they have by Christ become transitory, not everlasting. Both
these we deny and detest as Popish, Socinian, and Arminian doctrines; what
audaciousnesse is it in Mr. Baxter to name them, and not to prove them? to
beguile his credulous Reader (not acquainted at all with Controversies) with an
opinion that these things are known and granted by Protestants, who detest the
hearing of them, and with unresistable arguments of Scripture oppugn the
Authors of them: We shake off as prodigies in the Gospel Doctrine of
Justification and Salvation, the Attributes which he gives in that sense in
which he gives them. It is a bad Cause that seeks the support of Sophistry
and fallaciousness to support it. Truth loves to be attended with simplicity
and plainness, Let Mr. Baxter say why he puts these two distinguishing
Attributes here; the thing in question requires them not. But his rotten Cause
will receive no appearance of support by this Argument without them.

Again as to the rest of his Argument, why does he assume and conclude
otherwise than he proposed? The Proposition speaks of a Full Justification, and
an Everlasting Salvation, but the assumption of a Salvation only, and the
conclusion of a Justification only, without their Attributes of
Everlastingnesse and Fulness, Does he not know the falaciousnesse of such
Arguings? why then does he use it? Is it because he is wholly made of it, and
cannot shun it? or because his Cause is such that it cannot stand without it?
that to use plain dealing will discover the deformity of it? or for the
congruity which such a kind of Argumentation has with the cause,
fallaciousnesse with falsehood? Let him either propose what he assumeth and
concludes, or else assume and conclude as he proposes. And then he must argue
one of the two ways, either first thus:

Our Full Justification and our Everlasting Salvation have the same Conditions
on our part. But sincere obedience is without all doubt a condition of our
Everlasting Salvation. Therefore also of our full Justification. Here the
arguing is regular, but it is about immaginary things, such as neither the word
nor the Churches of Christ are acquainted with. We deny that in Mr. Baxters
sense there is any Full Justification as opposite to a maimed, true
Justification, or any Everlasting Salvation in his sense, as opposite to a true
spiritual salvation, that is temporary and transitory. So that his Arguing is
the same as if he should argue from Jupiters thunder to Jupiters lightning, or
from Bellerophons horse to Bellerophons saddle: when all these were Fictions,
had their being only in immagination, not in reality.

Or secondly thus: Our Justification and our salvation have the same conditions
on our part. But sincere obedience is without doubt a condition of our
salvation: Therefore also of our justification.

Here I distinguish the word salvation, that it is taken in Scriptures (when
by it is meant the everlasting salvation of the whole man by Christ,) sometimes
for the state of grace which we attain here, sometimes for the state of glory
above. In the former sense we find it, 2. Cor. 6. 2. Now is the day of
salvation, Luke 19. 9. This day salvation is come to this house: So Acts 28.
28. Romans 11. 11. Heb. 6 9. and in other places. In which sense we are said to
be saved when we effectually receive the word of Christ, and Christ Jesus to
whom that word directs for Salvation. 1 Cor. 1 18. To us that are saved,
Ephesians. 2. 5, 8. By Grace ye are saved. So 1 Cor. 15. 2. 2 Cor. 2. 15. 2 Timothy 1.
9 Tit. 3. 5. and elsewhere. In all which i^ is said, we are [not that we
shalbe] saved: that Christ has, [not that he will] save us. And the same is
further confirmed in the word life, where Believers are said to have life, 1
Io. 5 12. Everlasting eternal life, Io. 3. 36 and 5. 24. and 6. 6, 47, 54. to
be passed from death to life, Jo. 5. 24. All which proves a life, eternal
life, and everlasting salvation, in this world that cannot be lost, but shall
have its coronation in glory above. In this sense we grant the Proposition. so
far as we have before granted any condition of justification. But we utterly
deny the assumption. And what Mr. Br. says, sincere obedience is without all
doubt a condition of Salvation, we affirm to be all the doubt, the whole thing
in question. If it be granted of salvation in this sense, it must be granted of
justification also. Because justification and salvation in this sense are not 2
things but one and the same. It being called justification as we are freed and
delivered from the state of misery considered as a state of sin: and salvation,
as we are delivered from the same misery considered as a state of wrath and
condemnation. To say therefore that our justification and salvation have the
same condition, is all one as to say our justification and our justification;
or our salvation and our salvation have the same conditions: and we might as
well assume and conclude hence, Obedience is a condition of our salvation, Ergo
of our salvation also, as of our salvation Ergo of our justification also.

In the latter sense, if Mr. Baxter take salvation for our future glorification
then we utterly deny the consequent of the proposition. It is false that he
says, justification and salvation have the same conditions. For what is a
consequent of justification is an antecedent of salvation. And obedience [in
Mr. Baxters sence] cannot be a condition without the position whereof God does
not justify, because it follows justification and goes not before it. And in
this sense I have often spoken before to the minor, and shall have occasion to
speak again. But let us see how he goes about to prove his major proposition.

B. Explic. p. 311. The Antecedent is manifest in that Scripture makes faith a
condition of both Justification and Salvation: and so it does obedience also as
is before explained. How far any thing of this is true, there has been given
an Examination before, to his Explanations before.

B Therefore are we justified that we may be saved. We grant more in aright
sense, viz* that in being Justified, we are saved. But what of this?

B. It would be as derogatory to Christ's righteousness, if we be saved by
works, as if we be justified by works. Therefore we reject both. And let Mr.
Baxter look to himself for maintaining both.

B. Neither is there any way to the former, but by the latter. The greater is
his sin that teaches such a way to justification as bars up the way to
salvation, making it impervious and unpassable to Gods people. B. That which a
man is justified by he is saved by.

This is Christ's mediation, or Christ the mediator, for there is salvation in
no other, nor any other name given us under Heaven by which we may be saved,
Act. 4. 12. By the righteousness of [this] One, Grace came upon all to
justification of life. So we are saved by Christ, and not by Condititions.

B. Though Glorification be an adding of a greater happiness then we lost;
and so justification is not enough thereto: yet on our part they have the same
Conditions. This must be, because he will have it to be the result of all his
dispute. But he only says it, but proves it not. All that he lays as the
foundation of this Conclusion (excepting that which in other words is the
conclusion it self) does not infer it. For it being granted what he says (but
shows not) that the Scripture says it, that we are therefore justified that
we may be saved, that there is no other way to Salvation but by justification;
and that it be as derogatory to Christ's righteousness, to be saved as to be
justified by works; will it follow for all this, that justification and
salvation have the same conditions on our part? The reasoning is one and the
same in reason, as if I should thus argue: Having 1. slandered the Scriptures,
and said, they say what I say, I should further proceed. Therefore are we
created that we may be saved; neither is there any way to salvation but by
creation: It would be as derogatory to the grace of God to be created by our
own working, as to be saved by our own working: Therefore though Glorification
be adding of a greater happiness than we had by Creation, and so Creation is
not enough thereto, yet on our part they have the same conditions. The reasoning
after the Principles of true Protestants would not in its conclusion (though in
its premises) seem altogether absurd. Because they affirm the absolute will and
good pleasure of God, without any conditions on man's part (in Mr. Baxters sense
of Conditions) to be the alone cause both of his creating and saving us. But
after Mr. Baxters Principles it would be both absurd and odious; for so our
good works must be the condition of our Creation, because they are so of our
salvation, that we must be created by ou^ sincere obedience, because by it we
are saved* and that our sincere obedience must go before our Creation, because
they so do before our salvation, and so when we have perseveringly obeyed
without a being, we shall at length be created and have a being. They that are
taken with such Arguments, I doubt are in the number of them that are made to
be taken, 2 Pet. 2. 12. And who can hold that which will away?

Mr. Baxter saw the wall gaping and ready to fall before he had finished it,
therefore hastens to plaster and dawb it, thus.

B. Yet here I say still [our full Justification] because as I have showed [ i.
e. said] our first possession of it is upon our mere Faith, or contract with
Christ. But I think our glorification will be acknowledged to have the same
conditions with our final justification at the bar of Christ: and why not to
our entire continued justification upon earth? These are but words comparing
that which is real, with that which is but imaginary. We still deny such a
full and final justification at the bar of Christ completing that which was
but unperfect, conditional and reversible here upon earth. All that he has
said to prove it has been examined and found insufficient. We look for proof
indeed, and meet with nothing but words. They that are once possessed of it by
faith, are fully and finally possessed of it.

His peremptory and bold conclusion is now come (even upon his own grounds) to
[I think;] and why had he not kept his thoughts to himself until he had known
reason enough for rational men to have concluded with him: yet upon this
thought he adds, and why not to our entire continued justification upon
earth? To which we need say no more in answer but this, because we must not
build any Article of our Faith upon the thoughts of men, but upon the word of
God.

To the objection which he supposes some may make, and to which he answers
before it be made against him, I say no more, but let him answer our real not
imagined objections; and such we shall so long defend until by the light of
the word we find them unworthy of defense. The Scripture which he brings to
prove the persever^nce of Faith to be the condition of our persevering
justification runs thus, Heb. 3. 14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we
hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast to the end. Here perseverance is
made a declaration and evidence of the truth of our Faith, and of our
participation of or Communion with Christ at present, not a condition either of
our justification or the perseverance thereof. By this it shall be evidenced that
ye are truly in Christ, and just^fied by him, if ye persevere, for th^se that
fall away were but seemingly, never truly in Christ. They that are his in
truth, continue so to the end. Like that v 6. We are the house of Christ, if we
hold fast our confidence to the end, compared with 1 Jo. 2. 19. They went out
from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would
without doubt have continued with us; but they went out that they might be made
manifest that they were not all of us. So the perseverance; or not persevering
of these would manifest who had been, and who had not been truly pertakers of
Christ, and the house of his habitation, not the condition of their persevering
justification, for then should it be for a time at least the condition of the
perseverance of their justification who were never truly pertakers of Christ,
and consequently in Mr. Brs. phrase, had never a beginning of justification.

Hitherto of what Mr. Baxter has said to confirm the Proposition. Hence he
descends to prove the Assumption, That Obedience is an undoubted condition of
our salvation. That we may not here beat the wind, we do first understand his
obedience to be the obedience of good works, else is it the same with Faith,
as I have showed, and that of Faith in Scripture sense, and not in Mr. Baxters
large unscripturall, and uncircumscriptive definition. So much also many of the
Scripture testimonies which he alleges here and elsewhere (which I shall
reduce to this place) declare. Yea himself in many places before has set to
his hand that it is his meaning.

2. We understand him here by Salvation to mean that which he a little before
calls glorification, and not simply the salvation which is one and the same
with Justification.

But 3. We except against him, that whereas without ceasing he beats our ears
even into deafness with that Roman* Rampant, Exotic word [CONDITION,] scarce
uttering a sentence which he does not bless or curse with it: though he know
the holy Scripture has upon this Argument not the least mention of it, that
we might thence learn; that it is but borrowed from the Papists, and improved
much by the Arminians, with whose common language through his familiarity with
both parties, he is more acquainted than we can be who have no trafficque with
them: yet he will not fully make known to us the meaning of the word, whether
the signification thereof be boundless, or within what limits it is bounded?
whether it comprehends under it all the necessary Antecdents of glorification,
or no? if so, whether it comprehends not under it as well much disobedience as
obedience, and works of the Devil as of God, as the Cansas sine quibus non, we
shall obtain salvation by Christ? Or whether by Conditions we must understand
only Duties? and if so, whether those alone which go before, or else also
those that accompany and follow justification and glorification? And withal,
whether those duties as moral or as spiritual? because his Divinity being
most drawn from natural Philosophers and Theologers, mounts not above
Morality, tells us nothing of spiritual things that the Gospel wholly treats
of, shuns the very word [Spiriall] as a rock on which all the pride of man
might suffer shipwreck, and the grace of God in Christ be alone exalted.
Besides how far th^se conditions are to be stretched, whether only so far as
that only their absence does hinder, but their presence does not put or infer
justification and salvation as the effects, (in which sense we are wont to
take the Causa sine qua non,) or else so far that both their absence does
hinder, and their performance produce these effects? In these and many other
things whereof I shall be forced to speak in its proper place, Mr. Baxter will
not impart his meaning to us, that he may take his liberty to traverse his
ground, and under the name of Condition, ascend and descend, run sometimes in a
wheel, and sometimes in a race, play all in sight, and least in sight, at his
pleasure, reserving still to himself this advantage, to help himself with his
Conditions, widening and straitening them, making them the same with, or more
than his Causa sine qua non, (having kept the power in his own hand) as it
shall be most inservient to his ends. In the mean while we are permitted only
to hear the humming and bombing, but not to see the buz, whether it be a
Hornet or a Beetle.

What he will not himself directly tell us, we must therefore take leave to
gather from his writing as well as we can. In his Explication of this Thesis,
even in that part thereof which I have before transcribed, being to prove that
justification and salvation have the same Condition, he tells us often that we
are both justified and saved by works. Here to follow his own exposition, he
teaches, pa. 300 that the word [ By] implies more than an idle (presence and)
concomitancy, if they only stand by while the work is in doing, it could not
be said, we are justified by works. That it speaks out works to have their
agency and operation in procurement, or in that kind of causality which they
have. And this is the same which under the 17. 18. and 19. Theses he had before
delivered, of a twofold Righteousness, Christ's Righteousness, and our
Righteousness, ours as absolutely necessary as his to salvation, both [in their
kind] effectually procuring it. So in that which follows in the explication,
where, to be the condition of our salvation, and to have a hand in, or give
right to justification, are put by him as the same thing, or as equipollent
phrases. So that under the word condition, he involves all the Papists
efficiency, and as much as (after their and his defining and modifying of
Merits) is comprehended in their doctrine of Merits.

In this sense therefore we deny Works or Obedience to be a condition of
salvation. 1. Because thousands are saved without works, viz. all that have
been or shall be saved being never in a capacity to work. 2. Because the New
Covenant in promising salvation makes it to follow grace and faith, not works,
yea grace and faith in opposition to works, as has been before showed, cap.
15. of justification and salvation together. And that not by the virtue of that
dung and rags and filth of man's righteousness, wherewith Mr. Br. fills the
belly of his faith in the largest sense, These. 70. but by the virtue of Christ
its object which it receives, Jo. 1. 12. and of the a^undance of the grace and
righteousness which it receives from Christ in receiving him, To. 5. 19. 3.
Because it is by inheritance, as by our union unto Christ we are made and
adopted to be with him, children and joint heirs, Act. 26. 18. To. 8. 16. 17.
Gal. 3. 18. Ephesians. 1. 11. 14. Gal. 3. 29. and 4. 30. 31. Tit. 3. 7. and
elsewhere, and that of Grace freely, therefore without works. For then should
it be of debt, and no more of Grace, To. 4. 4. and 11. 6. 4. Because if it be
at all by works then wholly by works, Christ is excluded, will not profit, will
be all or nothing, do all, without works, and give no place or partnership to
works with him in the business of salvation, if we bring any thing of works to
save us, he leaves us wholly to our works to save or damn us. If ye be
circumcised, Christ shall not profit you, ye are debtors to the whole Law, i.
e. If ye bring works in part to save you, ye must trust wholly to works to
save you, Christ is become of none effect to you, Gal. 5. 2. 3. 4. 5. Neither
can they be a condition in that way of causality to which Mr. Br. professes
himself to tie it, viz as the Causa sine qua non. For 1. the property of that
kind of causality or conditionality not extended beyond it self, can only by
its absence, deny the effect (as in this case the want of obedience and good
works can only deny them which refuse or neglect them, to be saved or have
right to salvation) but by i^s presence cannot Ponere (as the say) i. e.
conclude or evince the effect, that he which does them shall live in them or be
saved by them, no nor yet that they shall be saved. For if they can, it is by
some other, and not by this kind of causality which Mr. Baxter attributes to
them. 2 Neither does it (as himself describes its opperation in its causality
to salvation) remove the impediments of salvation which are in general sin,
in particular chiefly unbeleefe. If good works can remove these it may save.
But it can neither remove the guilt of that which is past by way of purging it
or satisfying for it; neither is it made isntrumental to put us into the
possession of Christ's satisfaction and purging, for it precedes not but follows
it (whatsoever Mr. Br. has said to the contrary.) Nor can it stop the flux of
sin and unbeleefe, but that it breaks out upon every of our good works to make
them in themselves evil and damnable, and does no further or otherwise remove,
than by denying unbelief so far as we do believe, and the neglect of duties
as far as we have diligence and zeal to perform them. But this cannot be
called rightly the removing of the hindrances of our salvation: therefore it
cannot be the Causa sine qua non of our salvation. 6. Because salvation is the
gift of Gods free grace, To. 6. 23. Jo. 10. 28. 2. Ti. 4. 8. But it is a
payment of justice and not a gift of Grace, which is made the wages of works.
Did thou not agree with me for a penny? Take what thine is [by contract and
condition of the bargain] and go thy way, Mat. 20. 13. 14. Whereas contrariwise
the free gift has no other foundation or condition but Gods free love and good
pleasure. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, To. 9. 15. So that it is
not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy,
verse 16. Many other Arguments have our Divines against the Papists about this
question, which I entreat the Reader to fetch from them for his fuller
satisfaction. Now let us see what Mr. Baxter brings to prove, that obedience
and good works are the condition of our salvation.

Yet by the way let us note, that the Argument it self which here Bell. de
ju(...) 4. (...)
he seeks to confirm, is the Papists, and great is Belarmines striving to
maintain it as his great prop of justification and salvation by works. Si
promissio vitae aeternae est conditionata, (faith he) ut C(...) probavimus,
certe necessarium est implere conditionem, si quis salvus fieri velit, ^^e if
the promise of eternal life be conditional (...) I have proved in the first
Chapter, certainly he must nec(...) fill the condition that will^e^ saved. This
Condition of which he speaks is the same with Mr. Baxters, viz. the Condition
of works.

Neither shall it be impertinent here to take into consideration some rules of
our Divines for the right understanding of the mind of the holy Ghost in
promising eternal life, unto persons of such and such qualifications, or that
perform such and such duties, before we descend to examine the particular
promises and testimonies which Mr. Br. alleges. These are principally such
as follow.

1. That they belong (so far as to be effectuallized) to none else but such
as are vitally within the covenant of Grace, under the protection of the blood
of the Lamb in spiritual union with Christ. Jesus the mediator of the new
Covenant according to that of the Apostle. All the promises of God in him are
yea, and in him Amen, [never effectuallized to them that are not in him] 2 Co.
1. 20. To Abraham and his seed were the promises made, he says not his seeds
as of many, but of one, and to thy seed which was Christ. viz. in him alone,
and to them alone to be confirmed which are in Christ. Gal 3. 16. Therefore the
blessedness which Matthew in sound of words seems to hold forth more generally
Ma. 5 3. etc. Luke as the Expositor of him, or rather of the mind of Christ in
those promises, contracts to the right objects or persons to whom they were to
be made good, thus Jesus lifted his eyes upon his disciples and said, Blessed
be [YEE] poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God. Blessed are YE that hunger,
YE that weep etc. implying that the blessedness was to come upon them, not by
the virtue of these Acts and qualifications mentioned, but upon this ground
alone that they were his Disciples, by him Gospellized and received into
Covenant, this is that which Augustine so much presses in such promises to
look to the Root which is Christ, and that the reward is not from their works,
because they are holy, but because they are holy or Saints which wrought them,
and that they are thence saints from whence righteous, not from the works but
from the Faith of the workers.

2. That in such promises the qualifications or works of the persons to whom
they are directed are mentioned not as the ground or foundation of the
blessedness promised, but to show the method and order which God observes in
bringing them to the possession thereof. Because he is holy, pure, spiritual,
therefore he powrs into them his purifying, sanctifying, and adopting spirit to
conform them to his own will and nature, before he brings them into the full
and real fruition of himself. So he promises all the heaven of felicities to
the meek, the righteous, the saints, to them that love him, that fear him, that
obey him; not thereby insinuating that he found them, but that he has made, or
will make them such, as many as he will crown at last with glory. Heerin the
power of that father of Spirits excels and exceeds the power of the
fathers of our bodies. He new creates their hearts new forms their wills, puts
into them a new spirit, thereby making them as Peter says, partakers of the
Divine Nature, and to enjoy the kingdom of God within them here, before they
be translated to it above.

3. Nevertheless the foundation of all these promises is not such acts and
qualifications in us, but the relation of sons, in which we stand before God.
Such God beheld us in Christ before we were born, such he has made us that
truly believe by the grace of the new Covenant, having begotten us to himself
of incorruptible seed, 1. Pet. 1. 23. we are born of God, and have received the
spirit of adoption by which we cry Abba, Father: So that our salvation
depends not upon the virtues and good works which are mentioned in the
promises, but upon this our relation of sons: if sons then heirs, etc. To. 8.
15. as a special friend of Mr. Br. who walks by the same rule and the same
spirit with him has acknowledged, heerin consenting with our Divines and
stoutly maintayning their Assertion, at least because it seemed to give some
fulture to his cause. And I suppose Mr. Br. will not here leave him whom in all
the rest he follows.

4. Yet what the Lord gives to and has prepared of endless glory for his
children as his children, he does oft-times hold forth and promise to them as a
reward of such gifts of grace in them, and of works which they have done, or
sufferings that they have undergone for his sake. Not but that it was provided
for them and promised to them, before all such works and sufferings as they
were children: but for some other honorable ends, which I shall in part
mention, having first instanced some promises of this kind. Before the birth of
Isaac long, had the Lord of free grace promised to Abraham all blessedness
corporal and spiritual, present and future, that his seed should be as the
dust of the earth, as the stars of heaven numberless, that he should be
blessed, and in him all nations of the earth be blessed: that the land of
Canaan the type and the eternal land of Promise the Antitype should be his and
his seeds for ever. Ge. 12 2. 3. and 13. 15. 16. and 15. 1-6. and 17. 1-8. Yet
afterward cha. 22. when Abraham had showed that notable fruit of his faith,
fear, and love to God, in offering his son Isaac in obedience to Gods command,
God called from heaven to him by an Angel, and said. By my self have I sworn,
because thou have done this thing, and have not with held thy son, thy only
son, That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply
thy seed as the stars in heaven, and as the sand etc. and in thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou have obeyed my voice, Ge. 22.
15-18. We see here that promised as a reward of this act of obedience of
Abraham, which God had by promise made sure to him before ever he offered his
son, or had the son to offer. To this I might annex the harmony of Scriptures,
that testifying the kingdom of glory to be prepared for them that shall enjoy
it, from the beginning of the world; purchased for them by Christ's death, Mat.
25. 34. Heb. 9. 15. That they were begotten to it by the seed of God begetting
Christ in them, 1. Pet. 1 3. 4 and are inrighted to it by their adoption: yet
notwithstanding God calls it the Reward of the inheritance, and promises it to
them for their works and faithful service in the Lord: Nor implying thereby
that the works done put them into a worthiness or capacity to receive it, (For
if a thousand times more were done and suffered by them that are not in Christ,
that are not adopted Children it should be nothing to salvation) but for other
very glorious and spiritual ends, among which may be numbered these that follow.

1. To declare the operation of the Spirit of Adoption upon the Saints, that
having the promise made, and the hop^ of this eternal inheritance begotten in
them freely by Grace in Christ, and the same witnessed and assured to them of
mere mercy; it does not permit them to turn the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ
into lasciviousness, but stit and encourage them to all doings and sufferings
for Christ by the intuition of the reward: having their eyes-fixed upon the
reward before them, they are animated by it to do all things, knowing that
their labor is not vain in the Lord; to all sufferings concluding, that all
are not worthy to be compared to the glory to be revealed to them; to rejoice
in all, having an eye to the recompense of the reward. And so all their
obedience is in a way of love and thankfulness for the right which is freely
given them to the Kingdom, not thereby to inright themselves to it.

2. To declare Gods acceptance as well of the works as the persons of his
adopted ones, and thereby to hearten them to well doing, when in every act and
service of love which they perform, in every suffering that they bear for his
sake, he still as it were meets them, not only with his apples and flaggons,
but also with his Crown and Kingdom, for this and for that service renewing
still the promise of it: This sets an edge upon their Love, and sublimates
their Spirits to more and greater undertakings. What? does my Heavenly Father
take notice of and accept so graciously these weak services, renew the
Covenant, and as it were bring down Heaven and himself into me, upon such
slender performances, so that I walk and work, and do and suffer not only in
the hope, but even in the view and possession of blessedness! what is there so
high or low, great or small, to which I should not stretch or stoop to please
so good a Father? shall I receive so great a salvation so frequently set afresh
before mine eye, and new ratified to me; without doing or rendering any thing
for it?

3. To manifest to the evil world that God in the midst of the riches of his
grace is also infinitely righteous, a Lover and Rewarder of purity, piety,
holiness, righteousness, and all the works thereof. For to these his promises
of life are extended, and into these he leads his children, new creating
them to the performance thereof, having ordained them to walk therein. So that
hereby the mouth of the enemies of Christ, and blasphemers are stopped from
crying out against the inequality of Gods ways, or charging Christ to be
unjustly a friend of Publicans and sinners. Seeing that although he loves them
even while they are such, and pittieth them because they are such, yet he loves
them not as such, much less glorifieth them as such: But first purges them
with his own blood, and sanctifies them by his own Spirit, and leads them
forth in his own strength into all obedience both of doing and suffering,
encouraging them by his precious promises in all the way of their Pilgrimage,
and telling them that no least portion of all their labors or patience in the
Lord shall pass unregarded or unrewarded; and in the end of all their journey
crowns them and their obedience with the eternal glory promised. Yet so as
that all the glory which was promised to them in that which some of the Fathers
and the Schoolmen call the Via the Way, and that is actually conferred upon
them in Patria, in the Country, in Heaven, was theirs by grace in Christ
before the foundation of the World was laid, much more before they did either
good or evil: and theirs in themselves and to their own apprehensibleness if
not apprehension, at their first union unto Christ, and adoption into Gods
Family through Christ: so that if we look to the foundation thereof in God, it
is his free Grace and Love unto us in Christ. or in our selves it is our union
unto Christ, and relation of Sonship toward God in Christ. Yet so as usually
works intervene, and the promises of God both to the works and workers, as for
many other, so for the reasons and ends here expressed, often renewed

Now let us attend Mr. Br. to hear from him what Scriptures or reasons he
brings to prove his Assumption.

B. Heb. 5. 9. Christ is the Author of eternal salvation to them that obey
him. This Scripture makes against him not for him. 1. If Christ be the
author, then is not our obedience the ground of it, but we should be authors
thereof to our selves, at least he should be in part author of it by his, and
we in part by our obedience, and so the honor thereof should be parted between
Christ and our selves. But this Mr. Br. would have to be set up as his
doctrine, 2. Therefore when he is said to be such to them that obey him, it is
the same as if it were said, to them that hurling away as dung their own
righteousness, do believe in, and receive him alone to salvation. For so to
obey Christ, to obey the Gospel, and that which Christ calls the hearing and
keeping of My word, My commandments, My sayings, [in so many places as that it
is hard ^o number them] are equipollent terms, and hold forth the obedience to
the doctrine of faith, in opposition to the obedience which the Law or old
Covenant prescribes to salvation, a seeking of salvation by the righteousness
of Christ, and no more by our own righteousness. 3. If it were otherwise, yet
the persons that shall be saved by Christ are here described only, and not a
condition by which they are to be saved, prescribed.

B. To. 2. 7. 8. 9. 10. He alleges not the words, and may be ashamed to
quote the place to prove the salvation which is by the Gospel, to follow the
tenor of works; knowing that the Apostle there goes about to convince the
Jews that the Law cannot save them, by showing upon what terms salvation
runs under the Legal or old Covenant.

B. Rev. 22 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and may enter in by the gates into the City. The
doing of Christ's commandments here, is the same which Heb. 5. 9. is called the
obeying of Christ, and the meaning of both is there explained. Faith which
Christ's commandment calls for, gives right to the tree of life, and to all the
privileges of the new Jerusalem.

B. Ja. 1. 22. 23. 24. 25. What he would infer from the three former of these
verses, he says not, and I dream not. Any other three verses in the whole
Bible might have been quoted as pertinent to his purpose as these, as far as my
dull brain can comprehend. To the 25. if by the Law of Liberty he understands
the Law of the Old Covenant, or of the Decalogue, and by blessed everlasting
salvation, (as he erewhile termed it) then he prescribes salvation hence to
be sought by the Law, and not by Christ, by the covenant of works, not of
grace, and so the salvation of man shall stand or fall upon these terms, as he
does or does not forget to do all that is commanded in the Law: and Christ
must not be at all looked after, here is no mention at all of him: and thus to
argue is worse than Popish, even Jewish. But if he understand by the Law of
Liberty the Gospel, then has it the same sense with the former Scriptures,
teaches us to seek salvation in a Gospel way, as a free gift from free grace
as children of liberty whom the son has made free, and not as children of
bondage by works. He that does th^s shall be blessed in this his deed. Some of
our Expositors I know expound it another way, yet not with, but against Mr.
Baxter. B. Ma. 5. 1. to the 13.

To this enough has been said a little before in this Chapter.

B. Especially Mat. 5. 19. 20. The former verse runs thus: Whosoever therefore
shall break one of the least of these Co^mandments and teach men so to do, the
same shall be least in the Kingdom of Heaven: But whosoever shall do and teach
them the same shall be great in the Kingdom of Heaven. Christ here speaks of
Teachers under the Gospel. And the sense (as may be gathered from the precedent
verses) is this: Whosoever under a pretense of the liberty of the Gospel, shall
take to himself, or instill into others a licentiousness, to break the
Commandments of the Law, or to neglect any of that holiness and righteousness
which is the matter of the Law, that man shall be an instrument of little, yea of
no use in the Gospel Church: But whosoever shall so learn and teach Christ as in
and thrrough him, to take into his own and press upon other men's affections,
and practice all the duties of holiness and righteousness which the Law
requires, in a Gospel way, this man shall be an instrument of great good in
the Gospel Church, as one that has learned, and teaches Christ to salvation
and to sanctific^tion also. If this in its substance be not the meaning of this
Scripture, I know not the meaning of any one Text of Scripture.

The latter which is the 20. verse is read in these words. Exc^pt your
Righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. True, Theirs was their own
Righteousness, the Righteousness of works which could never satisfy for or
expiate their unrighteousness. Except we trample this as dung (in respect of
confidence in it) to put on Christ for righteousness, who has both satisfied,
and expiated, we shall never enter into the spiritual Privileges of the
Kingdom of Grace, much less into the joys of the Kingdom of glory. What is
there in either of these verses to promote Mr. Baxters salvation by Works?

B. Mat. 7. 13. Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate and broad
is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat*
But strait is the gate and narrow the way that leads to life and few there be
that find it. And will Mr. Br. take up the broad and vulgar way of expounding
this broad and that narrow gate and way? That by the broad way and wide gate,
are to be understood the way of profaneness, Atheism, Lust, Luxury, Carnal
security, etc. and by the strait Gate and narrow way, strictness of life and
conversation? unless he ride in this common Rode, there is nothing to be found
that will square with his purpose. But that this interpretation is wide from
the scope of Christ, will appear 1. by comparing Luke with Matthew; who Luke 13
24 thus renders the words of Christ, Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, for
many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Whence it appears that
both these Gates and Ways are such as men seek to enter into life by. And was
there ever that man so mad, so void of the natural light of reason and
conscience, that did strive to enter into life by Profaneness, Lust,
Atheism, and impure living? Does not the Apostle tell us, that the most
stupefied among the Heathen do so far know the judgment of God, as to know
these things to be worthy of death? Romans 1. verse* ult. ^. When it is said of
the narrow way and gate, few there be that find it* if it should be understood
of the strictness of Moral holiness and righteousness, it might well be
said, few there are that enter by it, but to say, few there be that find it,
is not agreeable to reason. For who is there that finds it not? The very Light
of nature teaches all men this natural way to life by the strictnes and
perfection of their natural and moral righteousness. And this is the greatest
beam in their eye blinding them that they cannot see the straight and
effectual way indeed.

What then is the strait gate and narrow way to life, whereof Christ here
speaks? Let Christ himself interpret himself; I am the way I am the door, by
me if any man enter, none can come to the Father but by me, Jo. 10. 9. and 14.
6. The way into the holiest, i. e. into heaven consecrated or new made for us
through the vail of Christ's flesh, says the Apostle, Heb. 10. 19. 20. or let
Mr. Br show that the Gospel owneth any other way to life. This is the way that
few find, when Peter had seen and spoken but of a glimpse and glance of it.
Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona, says our Savior, for flesh and blood has
not revealed it to thee, but my Father which is in heaven, M^. 16. None can
enter into it except the Father draw him. Jo 6. 44. Except he be taught and
have learned of the Father, ver. 45. And great striving must there be against
ou^ own wisdom, before we can be brought to leave the way that nature has
taught to find and enter into this way which the Father reveals. What then
(say ye) is the broad way and wide gate by which men seek to enter into life?
I answer M. Brs. way, the way of our own righteousness and strict carriage. It
is broad and wide because all learn it from nature corrupted, which tel^s us it
was the way if we had kept it, but cannot tell us that it is now blocked up to
sinners, so that many, so many as seek for life by their own righteousness and
works, do by this supposed way of life pass to destruction. Not but that the
way of vice is a broad way also* bu^ our Saviou^ speaks not here of it, but of
the broad way by which men seek life but find destruction. To this effect is
that of our Savior, ^he Publicans and harlots enter into the kingdom of
heaven before the strict* living Pharisees Ma 21. 31 By what way did these
vicious livers enter but by Christ into the Kingdom? else if strictness of life
had been the way to it, the Pharisees had entered before them. This is the
interpretation of this Gospel text after the tenor of the Gospel, and so Mr.
Br. suo se jugulavit gladio, has brought a sword to cut the throat of his own
cause.

B. Ma. 7. 21. Not every one that faith Lord, Lord, shall enter etc. but he
that does the will of my Father, etc. This is the will and work of the Fathers
willing and commanding [as to life] that we believe on him wh^m he has sent,
Jo. 6. 29.

B. Ma 7. 22. 23. Many shall say in that day, Lord we have prophesi^d, etc. to
whom it shall be answered, I know you not, depart from me, ye workers of
iniquities. Hypocrites that come with their mouths full of Works and merits to
plead for Heaven shall all be shaken off, and the ground of their exclusion is
this, I know you not, ye were not built upon me, had no union with me, no
settled dwelling and recumbency upon me, therefore he shakes off both them and
their works, as workers and works of iniquity.

B. To. 8. 4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us which
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. The righteousness of the Law is
perfect. And they walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, which (as the
same Apostle says) worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh, i. e. (as in the following verses he
expounds) in legal privileges, or works of their own Righteousness, Phi. 3.
3. In these the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled. They have a perfect
righteousness even Christ made Righteousness to them which the Law weak through
the flesh could not produce in them.

B. To. 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die: but if ye through
the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live. Who they are
chiefly that in reference to life and death, do live after the flesh, and
after the spirit, the same Apostle teaches not only in the forequoted Text,
Phi. 3. 3. but also Gal. 3 3. Are ye so foolish? having begun in the spirit,
are ye now made perfect by the flesh? In which words I challenge Mr. Baxter,
yea the whole p^ck of Jesuits, if they dare to deny that by beginning in the
spirit the Apostle means their trusting wholly on Christ for justification and
salvation, and by being made perfect by the flesh their seeking to perfect it
by works; viz Circumcision, and with it the moral duties which the Law
commands. If in this place ^e will take the flesh and spirit in a larger
sense, yet compare we this 13 with the 1. verse of the Chapter, and it will
appear here is nothing for his turn. Ver. 1. he says, There is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus. But who are they? Such as walk not after the
flesh but after the spirit. Let now Mr. Baxter put what sense he will upon
flesh and spirit in the 13. verse, it must bear the same sense as in the 1.
verse. And then if any demand why they that live after the flesh must die? the
answer is in readiness, Because they are not in Christ Jesus: or why they that
mortify etc* by the spirit, shall live? Every one can answer, because they are
in Christ Jesus. So that in these there is no condemnation, to the other
nothing but condemnation. Because he that has the son has life, he that has
not the son has not life. 1 Jo. 5. 2.


Here according to promise I annex what I left unanswered cap. 16. of the third
bunch of Scriptures quoted by Mr. Baxter, p 236. referring them to this place
to be examined as speaking more soundingly to glorification than to
justification by works. I shall begin as I there left* at

B. pa. 236. lin. 21. Mat. 10. 37. He that loves Father or Mother more then
me is unworthy of me, so of Son or Daughter. When he means the same with
Bellarmine (as he has enough manifested under his 26. Thesis) let him speak
out the same with Bellarmine; viz. That none shall receive salvation by Christ,
but those that by works merit it, and make themselves worthy of it. Let him so
express himself and he shall not want an express answer. At present while he
will lurk in the dark, we will leave him in the dark.

B. Lu. 13. 24. has been before examined. Phi. 2. 12. Work out your salvation
with fear and trembling. Whether we look to that which precedes, or that which
follows this Text, we shall find its testimony to be to Mr. Baxters cause,
what a College Brush, alias called a hatchet, to a Freshmans Gown, cutting it
in pieces because it will not be cleansed. If to that which goes before, we
are bidden v. 5-11. to follow the example of Christ (as far as he was in a
capacity to give him self a pattern to us in this kind) in self denial, who
being in the form of God, and equal with God, took to himself the form of a
servant, made himself of no reputation, abased himself to the death, to the
Cross, to the Curs: and so became exalted on high above all names etc. So must
we deny and abase our selves in our relation as Christ did himself in his*
lay all the false glitter and glory of our works and righteousness in the dust,
as he did his true glory: watching with a holy fear and trembling over our
backsliding heart that is apt as soon as any show of righteousness and goodness
appears in our selves and works, to depart from Christ, and to rest in it as
our sanctuary: in this case is it that the Apostle requires this continual
working and heaving out self from our selves, that Christ may be our All. And
that with much fear, and trembling watchfulness over our deceitful hearts,
that are apt still to decline from his righteousness, and to close with our own,
if there be not continual working and warring against its fleshly working in
this kind. If we look to that which follows, all confidence in our own
strength is prohibited, and all dependence and relying upon Gods grace and
power is commanded, that we stand always in a trembling fear of falling and
sinking through our miserable weakness and proneness to Apostasy, and
therefore keep firm and continual hold-fast in the grace and power of God
extended to us in Christ for our supportation; because it is God alone that
works in us both to will and to do, of his good pleasure* and not of any
worth or works of ours moving him. ver. 13. Such a working out of our
salvation, that consists in working away all our own works, and
righteousness, as insufficient yea as destructive to it, and in working up our
selves by the power of God into Christ; into the shelter of Gods grace for
salvation, we grant to Mr. Baxter. But this will not please him. Yet because
the Apostle (as by the context is evident) teaches this and no other working
for salvation here, we must leave him so displeased as they are wont to be that
by their own plea destroy their own cause, and minister matter out of their
own mouth to be judged.

B. To. 2. 7. 10. has been before answered.

B. 1. Co. 9. 24. so run that ye may obtain* and 2. Tim. 2. 5. If a man strive
for mast^ries, he is not crowned except he strive lawfully.

What this running and striving [or fighting is] the same Apostle teaches us
by his example. 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8. I have fought the good fight (says he) I have
finished my course* what means he by these? the next words declare, I have
kept the Faith: henceforth etc.

B. 2. Tim. 2. 12. If we suffer, we shall also reign [with him] If we deny him,
he also will deny us. This is, if in despite of all sufferings or persecutions,
we stand fast in the Faith, and adhere firm to Christ, we shall reign with
him; But if for fear of persecution we deny him and fall from the Faith he
also will deny us, that ever we had any true union and communion with him by
faith.

B. 1. Tim. 6. 18. 19. Charge them that are rich etc. not to trust in uncertain
riches etc. that they do good, be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate, laying up for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. The Apostle here forbids
the rich to trust in, or to make their uncertain riches a foundation of
happiness to themselves, and contrariwise admonishes them that this trashy
felicity should not hinder them from laying a good foundation of their
everlasting bliss in heaven. He says not (as Mr. Br. abusively wresteth his
words, in his Append. p. 95.) that they should lay their good works as a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.
For so should he have contradicted himself, 1. Co. 3. 1^ 11. According to the
grace of God given me, I have laid the foundation etc. For other foundation can
no man lay, than that is laid, Jesus Christ. So this exhortation is the same in
substance with that of our Savior, Lay not up for your selves treasure upon
earth, where moth* and rust does corrupt etc. but lay up for your selves
treasure in heaven where neither moth etc.

B. Lu. 11. 28. Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Amen,
For the word of God makes Christ our All, and in us all, Col. 3. 11. Search the
Scriptures (or the word of God) says the same our Savior, for in them ye
think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me, [not of
works to have wrought out eternal life for you] yet ye will not come to me,
[but to works and your own righteousness] that ye may have life, Io. 5. 39. 40.

B. Mat. 25. 41. 42. Go ye cursed into hell fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels: for I was hungry and ye fed me not thirsty etc. Righteous
judgment. For what other cause should the cursed be sentenced to the curse,
but for their unbeleefe and evil deeds, which brought and deserved the curse?
Would he have them to be damned for their faith and good works? The rest
Scriptures have been urged and examined before.

Now of all these Scriptures, let Mr. Br. name but two that were not prepared
to his hand, either by Bellarmine, or some other Papists in their disputes
against the Protestants? or show any reason, why he mentions most of them,
having no show of subserviency to his purpose, unless he thinks them hallowed
by their fingering?

If there be expected a larger and fuller Answer to the Arguments which the
Papists draw from any of these Scriptures, I transmit to some of the many
hundreds of our Divines that have answered them.

CHAP. VIII.
Arg. Mr. Baxters 7. Argument for Justification by Works examined, drawn from
the Tenor of the last days Judgment which he says shall pass according to
works. And these questions discussed, whether, upon whom, and in what respects
the last sentence shall so pass according to Works.

A Seventh Argument which he brings to prove Justification by works is drawn
from the issues upon which our future Judgment shall pass in the last day.
That (says he) shall be according to works: Therefore is this also. But let
him be heard speaking his own words.

B. Thesis 80. page 317. It is most clear in the Scripture, and b^yond all
dispute, that our Actual, most proper, complete Justification at the great
Judgment will be according to our works, and according to what we have done in
the Flesh, whether good or evil: which can be no therwise than as it was the
Condition of that Justification. And so Christ at that great Assize will not
give his bare will of Purpose as the Reason of his proceedings, but as he
governed by a Law, so he will judge by a Law; and will then give the reason of
his public sentence from men's keeping or breaking of the conditions of his
Covenant, that so the mouths of all may be stopped, and the equity of his
Judgment may be made manifest to all; and that he may there set forth his
hatred to the sins, and not only to the persons of the condemned; and his love
to the obedience, and not only to the persons of the justified.

This also he has from Bellarmine and the other Jesuits and Papists. Neither
is there any one besides his fourth Argument which he has not transcribed from
them: and even that also is by them somewhat hammered to his use. Nay, from the
very beginning to the end of this his Tractate all is theirs as to the matter
thereof: only the translating of it into English, and reducing it to his own
method and order he can call his; but the substance of all is theirs [as to
Justification by works,] and from them in common with the Socinians and
Arminians, [as to Justification by Faith, as an Act or Work.] This I could
easily make evident by affixing but marginall quotations of those Popish and
Arminian Authors to this Work, whom in every particle he follows, as
having spoken the same things before him; if I had now that which once I had,
that which might be called a Library. By how much the more I admire some that
make their concourse and confluence to him from all parts as to an Oracle, to
learn from him that which at home by their own fire, Eckins, Hosius, Vega,
etc. or the more ancient Schoolmen before them, or Be^^armin^ with the Jesuits
and Arminians, since them, would have taught them more at large; or which
besides other hundreds of our Divines, one Chamier in his 3 Tome of his
Panstratia, would have given them to understand at large, together with a large
and full confutation of all [as to the Papists:] Yet see with what confidence
Mr. Baxter speaks. It is most clear and beyond all dispute, etc. What is so
clear? that our proper, complete, and actual justification, etc. This is
clear by Scripture. Yet neither has he alleged or can allege any one
Scripture that tells us of or teaches any such justification. The Papists tell
us indeed of a twofold Justification, but both in this life. They say Christ's
judgment or sentence; or our account and reckoning, not our justification,
shall thus pass in the last day. The Arminians indeed say as Mr. Baxter, and
he has learned to speak as confidently as they, proving as little as they.
Now what boldness is it to call that, from a pretended clear testimony of
Scripture, our Actual, most Proper, complete Justification, which the
Scripture does in no place call or bid us to call Justification in any sense or
conconsideration? we would grant to Mr. Baxter the use of his own Phrase and
use it with him, if he would understand by the Justification in the day of
Judgment, only either the publication and open declaration of the
justification before given and received; or the conferring on Believers the
Glorious and eternal fruits above of their justification here; or their
exemption from the sentence of vengeance which shall be then pronounced, against
and from condemnation, which shall be then executed upon the unbelieving world:
(in which sense it is sometimes indeed in Scripture called our Redemption, and
the day of Redemption to the Saints, which to the world will be an evil day, a
day of judgment.) But this will not satisfy him, and the Scripture grants no
more: so that we cannot please him without displeasing God.

Again when he says our most Proper Justification will be at the great
Judgment according to our works, and according to what we have done in the
flesh, whether it be good or evil. Does he mean first, that the measure of
our justification will be according to the measure of our works, great works, and
a great and full justification; a little Treasury of works, and a little
corner of justification? This agrees not with his own phrase in tearming it a
complete justificacation. Nor will it cohere with the definition that he gives
to this justification, These. 39. making it to consist in Gods acquitting from
the Accusation, and condemnation of the Law. This Act of God or of Christ does
not recipere magis and minus, he that has more works cannot be said to be
more, or he that has less to be less acquitted: but i^ at all acquitted, then
completely acquitted; acquitting, and not acquitting being contradictories that
admit of no medium, but the one or other must stand in all its force.

Or 2. does he mean that the being or not being of justification does follow
the being or not being of our Works, no works and no justification, but if
works then justification? will it not hence necessarily follow both that many
which have died in Christ shall be condemned? viz. all that after their union
to Christ by the Spirit, departed out of this life before they had time and
opportunity to do such works as Mr. Baxter after instanceth and many that never
believed in Christ, never were in Christ shall be justified by Christ in the
last day viz. such as have lived and died such as the Apostle Paul was before
his conversion: touching the Righteousness which is by the Law blameless,
Phil. 3. 6. and that of sincerity in opposition to hypocrisy and vain glory,
walking in all good Conscience before God? As for faith in Christ he does not
here touch upon, and Acts 23. 1
whether any of his reasons which he brings to confirm his Thesis will infer
it, we shall see in examining them.

3. When he says that Christ at that great Assize will not give his bare will
of Purpose as the reason of his proceedings, etc. Let him say whether his
intent in this passage were not to cast an Odium upon the Protestants, as if
they so taught: And except he can produce any one man that has so taught, and
has not still asserted that the damnation of the damned shall be for their
sins, and the glorification of the glorified a free gift of God for the
satisfaction which Christ has made for them with reference to their being in
Christ: Let him confess that he has slandered them.

4. In the rest that is contained in this Thesis we find nothing but
contradictions, his unsaying and gainsaying of what he had before said. A
little before, page 294, 295. to destroy that interpretation of James which our
Divines bring, that when he speaks of justification by works, he means the
declaring to men by works the truth of their Faith and Justification; the man
is angry and cries out An usurped Judgment and Justification, I affirm, The
World is no lawful Judge of our Righteousness before God; neither are they
competent or capable Judges of our Righteousness or unrighteousness; neither
are works a certain Medium or evidence whereby the world can know us to be
righteous, for the outward part an hypocrite may perform, and the inward part,
Principles and ends of the work they cannot discern. Why was it that he was
so hot there against the possibility of manifesting to men the truth of our
Righteousness? It was against his Cause there to own it. Here contrariwise,
Justification in the last day must pass by works to declare to the World not
only the righteousness and obedience of the justified, but also the equity of
the Justifier, and to stop every month from speaking against either. And now
the world is no longer an usurping, but a lawful Judge, not an insufficient,
but a competent and capable Judge, not only of man's righteousness, but of
Christ's equity in judgment, and works are become a certain Medium and
evidence to manifest both to the world. How comes this sudden change? he^r it
tends to the promoting of his cause to affirm it. And this alters the Case
quoth Ploydon. How rightly did Mr. Baxter describe his own acting in this
business, p. 291. I resisted (says he) the Light of this Conclusion as long
as I was able. It is the light of the Conclusion, not of the Premises that
swayeth him. First he pitcheth upon this Conclusion, Works justify, there was
light in this Conclusion, it fell out of the Lant-horne of the Jesuits
sophistry into his bosom, and by that light he is swayed, and having taken up
the conclusion in such light of its own from them, now he digs downward for
day, and takes up that which erewhile he shook off as darkness, for light to
illustrate and prove it. So his light conclusion is first formed, and afterward
he seeks for Crutches and reasons what come first to hand to support it,
sacrificing here more to have than to reason lest his idol should fall before
he returns with his props to sustain it. And what if upon new thoughts we
shall find all that is here said all so, unsaid again? Let us pass to his
explication, peradventure we may stumble at such a stone before we come off
from it.

B. Explication.
Here I have these things to prove: 1 that the Justifying sentence shall pass
according to works as well as Faith: 2. That the Reason is, because they are
parts of the condition.

For the first see Mat: 25. 21. 23. well done good and faithful servant, thou
have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things,
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. And most plain is that from the mouth of
the judge himself describing the order of the process of that day Mat. 25. 34
35. Come ye blessed inherit the Kingdom etc: [for I was hungry etc. So 1 Pet
1. 17. who without respect of persons judges according to every man's work. So
2. Co 5. 10. we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, acording to that he ha^h
done whether good or bad. So Rev. 20. 12. 13. They were judged every man
according to his works, Heb. 13. 17. Phil 4 17. Mat. 12. 36 etc. but this is
evident already.

The Scriptures that he brings to prove that the justifying sentence shall
pass according to works, as well as Faith are first here put and therefore
first to be examined. And against his reasoning from them I except. 1. [as well
as Faith] is here foysted in being wanting in the position. And why here
supplied but to beguile the simple with a good opinion of his assertion as if
he attributed something to Faith also in Christ's and Paul's sense. When
contrariwise he teaches that Faith has nothing to do in this business, but
in the notion of our Act, our righteousness or work, so that with him to be
justified by Faith is to be justified by our own work. 2. That there is no
one of these Scriptures but is alleged by Bellarmin and his fellows against
the Protestants, and by them fully answered and manifested to make nothing for
justification or salvation by works, scripture after scripture, no one of them
pretermitted. When Mr. Baxter now stands up in Bellarmins place against us, is
it sufficient for him to tell us what Bellarmin has said against the truth (as
if we could not without him know it) and to leave unanswered yea unmentioned
the hundreds of our side that have retorted upon him his own arguments to the
subverting of his own cause, that by these Scriptures he would have
maintained? If he would have another answer; ought he not to have excepted
against the validety of those that have been already given? Is he worthy to
hear more from us that has stopped his ears against all that so many
worthies have said already, scorning to take notice thereof? Nay when he will
only allege the Scriptures, and not take the labor to tell us what or how he
will conclude from them he leaves us not in a capacity to declare so much as
our consent with him or dissent from him. Yet for the use of the weaker sort of
readers that have not ability to make recourse to those learned works where
these controversies are handled, or to understand them in that language in
which most of them are written; I shall speak something in general to all these
Scriptures.

First of that of Mat. 25. 21. 23. or rather taking the whole parable together,
beginning at ver. 14. and ending at v. 30. granting it on both sides to be the
same Parable which Luke records chap. 19. beginning at the 12. and ending at
the 27. verse, (which very few have questioned, no one has had cause to deny)
then it suits not at all with Mr. Baxters purpose, or his Judgment days
justification. For the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Lords coming and reckoning
with his Servants, and retribution of their service is to be taken for Christ's
coming to preach first in his own person, and then to set up and stablish the
Gospel by the Ministry of his Apostles. The servants to be reckoned with are
principally the Teachers of the Jews; the Talents used, or abused, are the
mysteries of the Gospel revealed, though veyled under the Law. The matter of
the Account is what each by his serious studies and labors had cleared up to
himself and others of this Gospel and saving knowledge of Christ before his
coming for the advancement and advantage of Christ at his coming. They which
had spent their labors this way, received at Christ's coming a double measure
of the spirit of illumination in the knowledge of Christ and salvation by him,
and were entrusted with a fu^ler measure of this sacred Treasure to be the
dispencers thereof to the world. But he which ^ad wrapped his Talent in a N^pkin
and hid it in the earth, left the Doctrine of Christ (scattered throughout the
old Testament) under a veil as he found it, without searching into it, and
clearing it up to others; was l^ft in the state of infidelity, rejected, and
bound over hand and foot by his unbelief to perdition. And his Citizens which
sent word after him, we will not have this man to rule over us, we will have a
Christ, such a one as we have framed to our selves in our own immaginations,
but not this Christ; have their doom not only denounced, but executed also upon
them, bring them hither and sl^y them before me. Who are these but the great
Body and Nation of the Jews, that professed themselves Citizens and the only
Saints of God, but for their refusal of Christ, were slain and destroyed by
the sword of the Romans? And so the parable comprehends in it a Prophecy of the
success of the Kingdom of Grace, now in the way of erecting in its power; as
to the Jews: So says Luke in that 19. Chapter, verse 11. He added and spoke a
parable because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the
Kingdom of God should immediately appear, by this Parable foretelling them that
the Citizens, the Children of the Kingdom, the Jews for their rejection of
Christ should be cast out into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing
of teeth: i. e. into blindness of mind and stubbornness of heart,
accompanied with all calamity and misery, as we see them undergoing until this
day. This I acknowledge to be but my own private opinion* yet such as I could
easily manifest from the Text it self (if occasion were) to be very probable,
if not certainly the mind of Christ. Yet let it stand or fall, sub calculo
melioris Indicii.

But if we are to understand all of Christ's last Coming to judgment, it
ministers nothing to advantage Mr. Baxters Cause, but enough to ruinate it: For
first the faithful Servants that shall be so richly rewarded, are such as
wrought with a free spirit, and the reward which they received was a free gift,
they challenged it not in St. Conditions name, and Christ confers it freely as
their munificent Lord. That he mentions their service argues not either
dignity or desert in their service, but the riches of his grace that having
justified their persons, he had in regard their service also. The unprofitable
servant cast into utter darkness, is Mr. Baxters legal man, serving with a
mercenary and slavish spirit, expects nothing from Christ but in the way of
justice, looks upon him as upon an Austere man, a strait Lawgiver, and a
rigorous exactor of the fulfilling of his Laws; I knew thee that thou art an
hard man reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering where thou have not
strawed, and I was afraid, (says he) and so did nothing because of his fear
of so strict a Lord, at least nothing to purpose, nothing to the advancing of
the Kingdom of Christ in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost
within himself or others.

The second Scripture, Mat. 25. 34. 35. is most plain (says Mr. Baxter) in
which the mouth of the Judge himself describes the order of the process of
that day; Come ye blessed inherit etc. For I was hungry etc. The Judges mouth
describes, but why does Mr. Baxters mouth refuse to speak out the description
which the Judge makes of the process of that day? If he began at ver. 31.
when Christ is set in his throne to call all Nations before him, to judgment,
he declares the manner of the process, 1. by separating the sheep from the
goats, 2. by setting the sheep at his right hand. What the sheep were himself
declares, Jo. 10. such as hear his voice, his Gospel voice and are Gospellized
and spirituallized by it. What he means by his right hand, the Apostle
declares, 1 Thessalonians 4 16 17. The dead in Christ shall rise first, and shall be
caught up in the clouds to meet with the Lord in the air: What to do? not only
to be with the Lord, but also, as the same Apostle says, to sit with him in
judgment* and to judge the world, 1. Co. 6. 2. This is the right hand of
Christ, to which the saints perhaps shall be advanced, even before the dead
out of Christ shall be raised. To this at last is annexed what Mr. Br.
alleges, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the beginning of the world Who sees not here the grounds of their
glorification to be, that they were Christ's sheep? the heirs of God, and his
elect vessels? That they are to be convened before Christ, not as prisoners to
be judged, but to be owned as his justified ones, and to receive the glorious
fruits of their justification and adoption, a Kingdom by inheritance; yea to
sit as partners and Commissioners with Christ in judging the world? what the
Lord Jesus adds, for I was hungry etc and ye thus and thus ministered unto
me; will Mr. Baxter because of the word for, conclude these offices to be the
cause of their justification? then let him also conclude, that the cause of
Gods showing mercy to Paul was his ignorance and unbelief. This will as well
follow from those words of Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13. I obtained mercy, because I did
it ignorantly in unbelief. To his condition the proper place is to speak
afterward.

So the 1 Pet. 1. 17. who without respect of Persons judges according to every
man's work, holds forth thus much to us, that God cannot be deluded or
corrupted, as often times earthly Judges are, either to pervert justice for
favor or carnal ends, or to take appearances for substance, but jugeth all
both persons and actions according to what they are, not what they seem.

In like mnner, 2 Cor. 5. 10. the Apostle appeals (as may appear by the 11.
and 12. verses compared with this) from the standers and censures of the false
Apostles to the judgment Seat of God. They had (it seems) questioned among the
Corinthians, the sincerity of both the Apostle and his Ministry: He refers all
to Christ the Judge. Before him we must all appear (says he) and he will
reveal who are the sincere, and which the hypocritical Professors and
Preachers of Christ, they or I to take vengeance of the one, and to own the
other.

He maimeth that testimony of Rev. 20. 12, 13. that the force thereof may not be
understood by his Reader. Let him supply what he has cut off, the Book of life
by which they which are in Christ are to be judged, which is there mentioned
as well as the other books by which the world is to be judged, and then the
judgments which the Saints are to pass through will appear to be a judgment of
Grace, not of strict justice; and to consist in their admission to the Kingdom
after the tenor of Grace, not of Works. The other three Scriptures he sees
to have so little even of show in them for his use, that he deigns not the
labor to allege the words; and let him not expect that I should still do it
for him.

Thus far we grant that the sentence of Judgment (though not the justifying
sentence) shall pass in the last day according to works. 1. The whole world
that has not heard of Christ, much less believed on him, shall be judged
according to their works, to life or death, according as their works have been
perfect or unperfect: yea to a measure of vengeance answering to the measure of
their sins, some to many, some to fewer stripes.

2. The whole bulk of professed Christians also shall [in this respect] be
judged according to their works: viz. that as their professions of and actings
in Christ, were either in truth or in hypocrisy, merely formal, or else
Vital and real, so shall they be either exempted from, or adjudged unto
vengeance. And so the secrets of all hearts shall be then disclosed, the Sheep
and Goats, Saints and Hypocrites shall then be fully separated one from the
other, which until that time shall never be wholly done, nor be known to all
whose works were vital, and whose dead works.

3. That the very Saints as compared one with another, shall be judged
according to their works, i. e. shall be adjudged to glory in several measures
above, according to the several measures of their services and sufferings
here, is the opinion of many, eminent for learning and godliness; neither do
their Reasons yet wholly sway me who dissent from them, and will have neither
right hand nor left hand, nor sun, nor stars, nor great, nor small, but all
equal in one degree of glory. It is no proper place here to dispute it, but I
see no reason to conclude that he which distributeth his gifts of grace here
in different measures, may not so also there distribute the degrees of glory.
Seeing both are by the purchase of his death, and whether by the former he puts
us in a greater or lesser capableness of the later, is in question.

But in any other sense, how (as he says) the sentence of justification shall
pass according to works, and that as he infers from 2. Co. 5. 10. according
to works, whether good or evil, I cannot conjecture. 1. Not according to works
as they are a condition, (which is the next thing he undertakes to prove) for
evil works cannot be the condition of our justification, either negatively
that if we have done evil, we neither are nor shall be justified; then all must
be damned: nor positively, that whosoever has done evil, shall be justified;
then all shall be saved. Nor 2. shall it pass so as that according to our good
works we shall be justified, and according to our evil works we shall be
condemned; then every man, at least every true Christian, should be both saved
and damned. 3 Nor that we shall be much justified if we have all good works, and
little justified if we have done some evil works also, for that is the last
judgment, where every man shall have a full discharge or no discharge. I must
leave this as one of Mr. Baxters Mysteries, it must die with him (as to my
understanding,) unless he vouchsafe his interpretation.

As for the thing it self, I utterly deny that they which are in Christ shall
be so judged or justified according to their works as other men, that they
shall stand as prisoners with the world at the bar of Christ, to be judged for
life and death as the other, according to their works. What that the Lord
Christ should then discover the nakedness, and lay open in the sight of men and
devils all the sin and shame of his beloved members? That he should cast in
their faces all the filth of all their original and actual pollution even
when they are upon the threshold of heaven? Let it be Mr. Baxters doctrine, my
ears are abhorrent from the sound thereof. It is against the stream of Gospel
doctrine, which tells us that Christ has born their sin and curs, and done
their law, therefore they are not to be called to such a reckoning. That their
iniquities are forgiven and sins covered, To. 4. 7. That the Lord will no more
remember them Heb. 10. 17. That they are not under the Law, but under Grace,
To. 6. 14. Therefore exempted from the accusations of the Law at the Bar of
Justice, where the world is to be tried, and to receive no other judgment, but
what flows from the throne of grace. That there is no condemnation to them;
that the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus has freed them
from the law of ^in and death, To. 8. 1. 2. So that the Law has no m^re power
of judgment over the^, than the laws of our Land to try an Angel of Heaven for
life and death. That none can lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect,
because God justifies them, and who is he that is the judge and condemner?
even Christ which is their Savior, To. 8. 33. 34. That they are the sheep that
shall be first separated and set at the right hand of Christ, before he enters
upon the judging of the world, and so freed from judgment by the mercy of God
in separating them, as Augustine well observes. Aug. de Consens. Evang. lib.
2. cap. 30.
That they shall not come into condemnation, but are passed from death to life,
Jo. 5. 24. That what to the world is the day of judgment, to these is the day
of Redemption, Lu. 21. 28. They shall not come into judgment to answer for any
one of their sins, as is well observed by Reverend Mr. Fox, the author of that
which we call the De Christo gratis Justif. p. 336.
Book of Martyrs, for (says he) Sublata offensa, tollitur simul Judicii
obligatio. i. e. The sin being taken away [ viz. by the Lamb of God, as appears
Io. 1. 29.] all obligation of judgment is taken away with it.

As for the works and righteousness, which these Scriptures declare shall be
mentioned to believers in that their Jubilizing day, this speaks out the
infinite freeness and riches of Gods grace in covering their nakedness. and
setting forth only the beauty and ornaments which he has put upon them: but in
no wise any sufficient ground or reason upon which they might expect so great a
salvation. Suppose a noble and indulgent Father has a prodigal and rebellious
son, that for many years has grieved the spirit of his Father with his impure
carriage, and exorbitant outrages, to whom notwithstanding his Fathers heart is
no less indeared than was David's to Absalom, therefore never has a thought of
disinheriting him, but reserves his whole heritage, together with a boundles
treas^re entire for him; in the mean while wooing and even melting him with
loving kindness into love and duty ^ at length the son repents, becomes
ashamed of his base carriage toward so good a Father, returns to him, waits on
him, ministers to him in his weakness and sickness: and his Father by his last
Will and Testament gives him all, naming him therein his good and beloved son
that has done him great service, ministered to him much comfort in the time of
his necessity. Will any hence gather, that the attendance of such a son on such
a Father at last, is a sufficient ground and reason for the Fathers settling on
him so vast an estate? Could not the Father have hired a stranger for a few
Crowns to have done him as much service? Does not the mentioning of the sons
good deeds which he would seem to reward with so rich munificence, speak out
only the remarkable goodness of the Father, that has buried in oblivion all
the disobedience and mischiefs which his son has committed, and will have his
good parts alone to be mentioned? or if another that was not his son had done a
thousand times more in his service should he have been entitled for it to the
inheritance? So also in this case to attribute to the works of believers the
reason or ground of their glorification because the Grace of Christ mentions
them, is to lay the honor of Christ's Grace in the dust. They that shall be
glorified, even when Christ of his infinite Grace extolleth their service done
to him, shall depresse themselves, that the entire praise may be his: Lord
when did we thus and thus minister to thee? what ever did we of any worth that
thou should own it as a service to thee? what thou imputest is no otherwise
our observance but in thy acceptance.

It is therefore denied that the justifying sentence (as Mr Baxter terms it)
shall pass in the last day either for or according to works, otherwise than
has been before granted. And if we shall not at last be glorified according
to and for our works, but that Mr. Brs. proofs in this particular fail; Then
is his labor lost in going about to prove the second particular that the
reason hereof is because they are parts of the condition. It must first appear
that it is, before we trouble our selves to know in what respect it is so. So
that we will not contend about the second particular with him, to deny what he
concludes, that works concur in the same concausality with Faith to our
glorification, 1. Not to evidence the truth of our Faith, nor secondly as the
righteousnesss which the Law requires, not thirdly as a mere sign by which
God does discern our Faith, nor fourthly as a mere sign to satisfy the
justified person himself, nor fifthly to satisfy the condemned world of the
sincerity of our Faith. All this we grant, and further add in the sixth place
nor as a condition (in Mr Baxters) sense of our glorification. And because none
of these or other ways, therefore not at all.

The Scriptures which he brings pa. 322. n. 5. that seem to hold forth the
promise of glorification for our works, are of the same nature with those
examined in the former Chapter alleged by him and all (as those) gathered by
the Papists to his hand, and either do conclude no more than what a little
before we have in this Chapter granted, or pertain to some of those ends of
such promises of life which God makes to our obedience, specified in the
former chap. I shall therefore here pretermit to speak to them, because Mr
Baxter alleges them to another end here, viz to prove that the mention of
these works to judgment is more than to signify their sincerity to the
condemned world, as in the end of that Section he expresses himself. And this
we deny not. So that it were impertinent to examine the premises where the
conclusion is granted.

CHAP. IX.
Whether according to Mr. Baxter, Do and live be the voice of the Gospel as
well as of the Law? The question stated, and resolved whether, and in what
respects Believers must act or work from life, not for life.

IN the eighth place (as natural motions are strongest when they come nearest
to their period and center, so) at the conclusion of his Aphorisms, page 3. 4.
and so onward to the end, he multiplies Argument upon Argument, or rather
twisteth many arguments together in one, under the notion of Queries; The
substance of all may be gathered together into this one Syllogism.

That Doctrine which by necessary consequence draws after it many intolerable
absurdities, mischiefs, and soul-damning evils, must needs be a fals^ doctrine.

But so does the Doctrine of justification by Faith, or by Christ
instrumentally received by Faith, without the addition of works, in a
concausality with F^^^h or Christ.

Ergo, It is a false doctrine.

The Proposition is granted him. The Assumption he goes about to clear and
make good, by enumerating the particular absurdities and mischiefs that are
consequentiall to this Doctrine. And this he does by way of interrogations
bearing the force of strong Affirmations. I shall examine them in order. The
first query he puts in these words.

B. Does it not needlessly constrain men to wrest most plain and frequent
expressions of Scripture? A simple negation would here best suit with so
untoward and audatious a question? Neither shall I say any more to it, but
admonish the Reader to take notice, that he does in these words frame an
enditement against Christ, his Apostles, and all that bear the name of
Protestants, for sacrilege in wresting the holy Scriptures. And that, 1.
Though he does not (and why? but because he cannot) bring any one Scripture
which they have so wrested. 2. And thereby affirms plain enough to the
capacity of every understanding reader, that the Papists and Arminians alone
have purely and truly interpreted the Scriptures as to the point of
justification, whom himself therefore follows as their obedient disciple.
And 3. shows us no reason thereof, but leaves us to conjecture what his meaning
is, viz that the Scripture is no farther Canonical, than after the
interpretation and sense which the holy Mother Church allows it.

Nay we retort the argument upon him. Justification by works constraines the
assertors thereof not only to wrest many Scriptures, but also to destroy and
nullify the whole Gospel and Salvation of Christ. Therefore it is false
doctrine.

This first query was but a warning piece, but who can stand to bear the force
of the second? The man as if he had newly come forth of Vulcans shop, is all
fiery, spits out nothing but lightening and thunderbolts, blowing into the
bottom of Hell all that stand in his way. How formidably he lays about him,
they that dare to come so near may find partly in this second querie it self,
but principally in his Appendix page 76. etc. and in the highest strength of
his wrath, page 83. and onward to the end of page 98. First his querie here
runs in these words:

B. pa. 324, and 325. 2 Qu: Does it not uphold that dangerous pillar of the
Antinomian doctrine, that we must not work or perform our duties for life and
salvation, but only from life and Salvation: That we must not make the
attaining of Justification or salvation an end of our endeavors, but obey in
thankfulness only because we are saved and Justified? A a^ctrine which I
have else where confuted. And if it were reduced to practice by all that hold
it, (as I hope it is not) would undoubtedly damn them, for he that seeks not,
and strives not to enter, shall never enter. Now if good works, or sincere
obedience to Christ our Lord, be no part of the condition of our full
justification and salvation, who will use them to that end? For how it can
procure justification as a means and not by way of condition, I cannot
conceive. In what part of the world Mr. Baxters [elsewhere] lies in which his
confutation of this doctrine is to be found I know not, I am not inquisitive to
know. I have enough in this and desire not to fish in any more of his foul
waters.

But in pronouncing this doctrine of working and performing duties not for
life, bu^ from life and salvation, not to the end that we may be justified by
them, but in thankfulness for our justification by Christ without works, to
be an Antinomian and damning doctrine if reduced to practice; he p^rremptorily
pronounces not only all Protestant Churches and saints, but also Paul
himself an Antinomian and damned. For 1. that Paul and all the Apostles of
Christ do teach and urge upon all the Saints of Christ all diligence in good
works and duties, and fruitfulness in obedience, in thankfulness for their
Justification Mr. Baxter will not, cannot deny, for if he should, he cannot be
ignorant that he shall be forthwith overwhelmed with testimonies of Scriptures
against him that himself must acknowledge unwrested. Yea he must quench not
only the light of the Gospel, but also of reason and nature it self (which
possibly are more authentic with him than Gospel) to deny that we are to be
really as well as verbally thankful to God for his least, much more for his
greatest benefits such as are our Justification and salvation.

But that the Apostle also teaches that we are not to perform good works and
duties that we may be justified and saved by them, is evident. To him that
works (says he) i. e. seeks it by works, the reward is reckoned not of
grace but of debt, shall be conferred on him if due in strict Justice, he must
expect nothing from grace. But to him that works not [seeks not the
attainment thereof by works] his Faith is imputed to him for righteousness. To.
4. 4. 5. to which he adds the testimony of David, pronouncing the man blessed
to whom God imputes righteousness without works. ver. 6, 7, 8 By Grace are
ye saved through Faith, not of works, least any man should boast Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
we knowing that a man is justified by the works of the Law, have believed in
Christ Jesus that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ for by the works
of the Law none can be justified. Gal. 3 16. Not by works of righteousness
which we have done but of his mercy he has saved us, Tit. 3. 5. That no man is
justified by the Law it is evident, for the just shall live by Faith. The
strength of the reasoning is in the opposition of the Righteousness by which
the Gospel to that by which the Law justifies. By Faith, therefore not by our
sinceerest and exactest study of the righteousness which the Law prescribes.
Gal. 2. 11. with many other testimonies, before frequently alleged. Lo here
the Apostle teaching the same doctrine which Mr. Baxter damneth, a working not
for Iustficacation by his works, but from justification and in thankfulness
for it. Yea he reduces it to practice also. [ We knowing that there is no
justification by workes] have believed in Christ Jesus that we may be
justified. Gal. 2. 16. I count all things doung that I may winn Christ and be
found in him, not having my own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that
which is through Phil. 3. 8, 9
the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness of God by Faith. Behold we here in
these Scriptures the Apostle teaching and reducing to practice every particle
of the doctrine which Mr. Baxter here d^mneth. What follows? According to
Mr. Baxter Paul is an Antinomian, and damned. Let me also be so damned with
Paul the Antinomian, rather then justified in the way of Mr. Baxters
justification. Mr. Baxter cannot evade here by any sophistical interpretation
of Paul's sense and meaning in these scriptures. For they which have delivered
this doctrine of Paul in Paul's words, or in words equivalent profess
themselves to hold it also in Paul's sense and meaning. So that Mr. Baxter in
interpreting Paul's, interprets their meaning also: so that it is evident that
his wrath here is against the very doctrine of Paul, though his pretense be to
blow up them only which speak after him. But Mr. Baxter has a greater
authority than Paul can boast of for himself, to pronounce them all
Antinomians and damned with Paul that follow Paul's doctrine, viz. the
determination of the Holy council of Trent which has thus concluded, Si quis
dixerit etc. If any shall say that a man is justified by Faith alone without
works, let him be accursed. Who dares now to equillize Paul's Tent to the Popes
Throne and so many Cardinals and Bishops palaces?

As to the matter it self, it is all sophistical and fallatious that Mr.
Baxter here delivers. Let him bring that Antinomian to light that has ever
taught that we must not labor and strive for justification and salvation,
against whom his Argument may hold good that he must needs be damned, because
he that seeks not and striveth not to enter shall never enter. Some indeed
by expressing themselves too briefly have given occasion to Mr. Baxter and such
as he is, to catch a phrase or sentence from them that may smell of some
absurdity as considered in it self and by its self: such as is that which he
here mentions, we must work from life, and not for life. But if the scope of
the Authors in such phrases be gathered, from that which went before, and that
which follows, it will appear clearly they meant, we are not to work and
perform duties to this end that we may be justified and saved by such works
as works and duties, but to perform them in love and thankfulness to him that
justifies us freely of mere grace, without works, through the Redemption which
is by Christ Jesus. And this is the Question between Mr. Baxter and the
Papists on the one part, and the Antinomians, i e. the Protestants on the other
part, whether we must perform good works and duties to be justified and saved
by them and for them so performed, yea by them or for them as they are our
inherent righteousness, our perfect, possible, and meritorious Righteousness?
All which he affirms, and the Protestants with one consenting voice deny: as
has been before, and may after, before we part from Mr. Br. be more fully
manifested.

What he concludes with as a notable absurdity and inconvenience that will
befall his doctrine of works, if we will not say what he says: [viz. If good
works be no part of the Condition of our full justification and salvation, who
will use them to that end? For how it can procure justification as a means, and
not be the condition thereof, I cannot conceive.] Besides his fallacy before
noted in arguing from justification and salvation simply and indefinitely
taken, to a full justification and salvation of his own devising, and so
controvertibly again from this latter to that former: it concerns him to look
to the inconvenience and danger, which uses and practices, not to us which
use not good works to that end. And now is his time to consider, that his full
justification, when he thinks to possess it, do not evaporate into no
justification, no salvation.

Now to make way for the examination of what he has more largely to this
purpose in his Answer to the tenth and eleventh Questions in his Appendix, and
to show how he there fights with his own phantasm, feigns an Adversary and
then quells him, falls out with his own shadow, never coming near that which
he has made to be the Question between him and the Protestant Churches, but
when the Adversary is Eastward, he rides out in indignation Westward, beating
every bush and wounding every bough that he meets with, proclayming it an
Adversary, and so returns at last with as much gallantry, as ever did William
the Conqueror: it shall be expedient (for the disabusing of such as are apt in
this kind to be abused) to premise something for the right stating of the
Question here controverted.

First then the doings, duties, and works, about which the Question is
conversant, are of two kinds, Legal or Evangelicall, such as have their
foundation in that law which is of Natural and Moral, or such as are founded on
precepts and doctrines of Gospel Positive right. By the former I mean such
works and duties as the natural conscience (specially if helped by the written
Law) can apprehend to be, and urge upon man as duty though there had never been
a Christ or Gospel to add further light. By the later I mean such duties, as
are only in general comprehended in the Law, [whatsoever the Lord shall at any
time declare to be his will, and impose upon thee as thy duty, thou shall
observe and do] but cannot possibly be known in special to be duties, without
a new revelation from heaven, such as the Gospel is. The former duties are
natural, founded in Nature it self: the later supernatural, because without
a supernatural manifestation they cannot be known, and without a supernatural
power infused they cannot be effectually performed. All this Mr. Br. himself
grants in this his Treatise, saving the very last clause, which also because
I find him not any where flatly denying, I shall forbear to prove, taking it
as granted with the rest.

2. That this natural righteousness and obedience was the Condition of the Old
Covenant, as to life, and so remains still to them that* remayn under the Old
Coveant, but so as that no man living can be saved by it since Adams fall, but
that whosoever is saved, the same is saved after the tenor of the New
Covenant, i. e. the Covenant of Grace or the Gospel. This also Mr. Baxter has
frequently taught and granted.

3. That the duties of the New Covenant are of two sorts, either more or less
principal; the more principal is faith, or receiving and embracing the Lord
Christ, together with the justification and salvation that are by him. The
less principal duties (which are also pure Gospel duties) are such as are
subservient to faith, or to the receiving of Christ alone to justification,
quickening, illumination, sanctification, etc. or to the reteyning of him and
fuller closing with him to all these and all other Evangelical ends for which
he is given to us by the Father. These 3. Positions are so frequently granted
by Mr. Baxter in this his Book, that I forbear to quote the places.

4. That justification and salvation, as the Scripture terms them a reward, (if
indeed it does ever so term justification, as properly and strictly taken) may
be considered first as benefits already conferred and in our possession, in
part or in the whole, or else as rewards hereafter to be conferred; the ground
and foundation whereof was laid in our first conversion and union to Christ by
faith, together with the earnest and pledge of the spirit given to us by God to
assure us of our full possession of all the fruits thereof in the future. And 2.
if future, the Gospel proposes these as rewards of his free grace and
benignity, or else as rewards of d^bt, due to our service, and for the service
done to him. Neither in this can Mr. Baxter oppose or dissent.

5. Then to come home and close to the Question, it remains to be expressed how
far all these duties are to be done for life, I mean how far all or any kind of
these are to be performed for the attayning of justification and salvation as
a reward, and how far only in love and thankfulness for the reward alr^ady
made ours in possession or in hope.

1. We grant, that the^ which are wholly under the Old Covenant, having never
the Gospel revealed unto them, are bound to seek justification and salvation by
the works of the Law or natural righteousness still: but they shall never
attain what they so seek, because they are impotent to fulfill the condition
Yet their unableness is no prejudice to Gods authority and obligation upon
them. It is otherwis^ with them that live under the Gospel, and have the
Covenant of Grace in Christ revealed to them, but have not yet so ^ffectually
received Christ by faith as to be^ justified and declared righteous within
their own souls: These are indeed to seek for justification and s^lvation, yet
not by the works of the Law, or legal, natural, and merely moral
righteousness, for this were to reject the new Covenant or Gospel, with the
justification which is by Christ, and to hold themselves fast under the old
Covenant in an incapacity to be justified and saved: The best works of natural
righteousness which they can perform, being but dead works of dead men, like
the stinch of Carrion, offensive to the pure nosthrills of God, who will
therefore condemn, not justify for them.

2. They that are in Christ and have obtained justification and inchoat
salvation by him, i. e. have their conscience absolved and saved from sin and
obligation to vengeance, by faith in his blood, are to perform those works of
natural righteousness, not for life, but from life, not to procure thereby the
life of justification, (for they have it already in Christ, and to seek it more
completely to be perfected by such works is as has been before showed, to be
so foolish as having begun in the spirit, [to seeke] to be perfected by the
flesh) but in duty and thankfulness for so full and free a pardon and Gal. 3. 3.
absolution, which all our doings, all our sufferings are insufficienr to
answer; Nevertheless the intuition of so great a redemption already attained
and in our possession, together with the promise of so glorious an inheritance
for the future life, already confirmed to us by the seal of the spirit in the
blood of Christ, are of such infinite value that we are to walk still in the
splendour and glory of it, so that our spirits should be sublimated above earth
and self, to dwell, and to spend our selves, and be spent in the bosom of
that Grace, from which we have received so much, and expect yet so much more
of ravishing and never ending felicity. What neither eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor the heart of man in a natural way conceived, of the riches of the
incomprehensible bounty and free grace of God, being once revealed to us, and
made ours in possession, or in hope, ought so to spiritualize us, so to swallow
us up into the spirit that we should no longer walk after the flesh, but after
the spirit, to delight in the Law of God, in all the holiness and righteousness
which the Law teaches, after the inner man. He that seeks not so to do, has
hugd in his arms a dream of Christ, not Christ himself, has had him possibly
in his fancy, never in his heart and conscience. He that has effectually met
with God in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, and there tasted the
love of God, or rather God which is love, has suffered a Metamorphosis, and is
changed all into love, has so beheld God shining in Christ, as in a glass,
that he is transformed into the same image, is or would be w^olly configured
to the likeness of God.

Yea, we grant more, that the truly justified and adopted ones of the Lord, may
perform these works of natural righteousness which the Law commands, with
respect to and expectation of the future glory which shall be revealed to them
and conferred on them for Christ's sake, as a reward of such their imperfect
service; yet not a reward of debt purchased by and due to their works, but of
free gift and grace from their indulgent father, who of his infinite love and
bounty is wont to recompense the mites of his dear childrens labors, with the
talents of his grace and bounty, not because they are worthy, but because he is
gracious, yea Grace and Love it self, To. 4 4. 5. Go ye into my vineyard, and
whatsoever is right [or meet] ye shall receive, Mat. 20. 7. It must be a
boundless reward what such a father shall think right and meet to bestow upon
his dear children. Their reward shall be proportioned, not to the pittance of
their poor service, but to the riches of their fathers bounty, and
uncircumscriptiveness of his treasure. The respect of such infinite treasure in
their fathers hand, and the riches of his love to bestow it in largest
dimensions upon them, with a gracious respect to their dutifulness, and
service, should serve as a strong motive and attractive to them to be still
doing for him. When I was yet in my blood, he loved and cleansed me, Ezekiel. 16.
6,-9. When dead, he quickened me, Ephesians. 2. 1. When without strength to work, when
a sinner, when ungodly, when an enemy, he gave his son to die for me, and
reconciled me to himself: What will he now do for me so quickened,
reconciled, washed, and justified, having attained strength, if I employ that
strength in his service? To. 5. 6-10. Now we are the sons of God, but it does
not yet appear what we shall be, only we know that when he appears we shall
be like him, having therefore this hope, we ought to purify our selves as he
is pure. 1. Jo. 2. 25. 3. Thus are the saints to draw encouragement to
obedience, from the consideration of the reward, or rather from the infinite
love and bounty of the rewarder.

3. That they which are out of Christ, (yet under the means of Grace, and
Ministry of the Gospel) must perform all pure Gospel duties (which the Law
requires only in general and implicitly, but the Gospel specifieth
expressly) to the several ends to which the wisdom of God has severally
related them; some to justification, some to sanctification by Christ Jesus. It
is their duty to hear, learn, study, and meditate, upon the doctrine of Grace,
and mystery of Christ, duly to prize and value it, to desire, gasp, cry, and
pray for the effectuallizing of it to themselves, to embrace and receive
Christ, to repent of their long estrangedness from him, to deny themselves, and
cast away all opinion of and confidence in their own righteousness, that
Christ alone may be embraced, and the dung being cast out, they may be
replenished with that which is indeed the Treasure: and all this that they may
be justified and saved, not by and for these duties so performed, but by and
for Christ to whom they seek and strive in all these duties to come into union*
All this the Gospel both tacitly implies and expressly teaches: and the Law
also in general and inclusively commands as has been said, Thus the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. Here
still Christ is al to justification, and salvation and Faith the alone
instrument to receive him. All the other actings are but subservient to Faith
in this its isntrumental service to make way for it. As when a treasure is
offered by a munificent benefactor to a poor beggar, the grace of the
benefactor and pretiousnesse of the treasure is that which inricheth him, and
the hand the alone instrument to receive it; yet must the eye guide him, the
understanding prompt him, the will move him, the feet carry him, and other
actings of the mind and body be subservient to him, that the hand may
rerceive that which inricheth him. At length when all is done, such a beggar
has more apparent grounds of boasting that he has been, and done somewhat to
his own enriching, than the best of us that we have been or done any thing to
our own Justification. For though the Benefactor has poured upon him freely of
his own mercy, not for, or upon condition of his crying, running to him,
emptying his hand of what was in it before, and stretching it forth to be
filled with the treasure proffered him: yet the benefactor gave him neither a
heart to desire nor wisdom to value, nor light to guide him, nor feet to carry
him, nor a hand to receive the treasure conferred. It is otherwise in our
Justification by Christ. God freely gives it in Christ, and all the power,
will, actings, and instruments by which we come into the possession of it*
Neither when we affirm all these to be our duty while yet unjustified, do we
thereby affirm that all must be done before we can be justified. The grace of
God often prevents our operation in most of these, justifying us by Faith, before
we have time to put our selves upon many of these operations. In this sense I
know none that denies an obligation upon sinners to act and work for their
justification and salvation.

4 They that are justified ought to be still active and industrious in all the
duties of the Gospel tending to their confirmation in the Faith, stablishment
in Christ, illumination in the mysteries of the Gospel, denial of themselves,
and seeking to be wholly swallowed up into the Lord Jesus, that they may be
daily more filled and ravished with fuller assurance and comfort of their
justjfication and salvation by him. This we find the Apostle making his task,
Phill. 3. 8 9 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. And hereunto tend the many memento's
scattered by the holy Ghost in the Gospel, watch, pray, take heed, beware,
stand fast, hold fast, Run, fight, strive, continue etc. All which tend to the
laying not of such our labors, but Christ Jesus about whom these our labors
are to be exercised as the foundation of happiness more and more fixedly
within our s^ules. Whatsoever Gospel du^ies and labors God has ordained for
the faster settling of us upon the Rock of Righteousness, the emp^ying ou^selvs
of our nothingnesse, and making Christ (...)all, those all are to be done by
the saints not only from life, but also for life to be had and confirmed to
them not in these duties, but in Christ more and more formed and perfected in
them to righteousness and salvation by these their religious endeavors.

These four Conclusions I know none of the Protestant (or as Mr. Baxter terms
them Antinomian) Teachers denying. Whatsoever therefore he brings not
thwarting and opposing some of these Assertions, he does but Oleum and operam
ludere, spend time and wit to prove that which none denies, and to oppose that
which none teaches and patronizeth. These things therefore thus premised, it
is easy to answer all that he will seem to himself to have laid impregnably
for justification by works in his Appendix.

To begin with page 76. of that his Appendix, and passing over that bold
peremptory Pharisaicall and popish Assertion, that Do this and live, is the
language both of the Law and the Gospel, together with the explication and
feigned sense of [ Do and live] as it is the voice of the Gospel, p. 77.
(there being nothing for, but all against this doctrine throughout the whole
Gospel, as has been already fully proved) all that he brings for the
confirmation of it in the sense in which he will be understood, is ineffectuall
to this end. All his posiions page 78, 79, 80. may in the sense before
mentioned, be granted him, viz. 1. That a wicked man or unbeliever may and must
labor to obtain the first life of Grace. 2. That a man may act for the
increase of this spiritual life when he has it. 3. That we may and must act
for the life of Reconciliation, Justification, and Adoption. 4. That we may act
for the assurance of both our Justification and Sanctification. 5. That we may
act for Eternal Salvation.

All these things are wholly besides the question, and no more either powerful
or proper to prove that [Do and live] (in the sense which he affirms and all
Protestans deny) to be the voice and Tenor or scope of the Gospel, than if he
had said nothing at all. He might expect the beguiling of the simple, but not
of any knowing and considerative person with this dispute of his totally alien
from the matter about which he disputes. For himself knows, that they which
use this Phrase, [ We must work from life, not for life] do in this expression.
1. Speak only of those that are already alive in Law again, i. e. justified
and absolved from all their sins through faith in Christ's blood, and so
delivered from the Curse and death of the Law: 2. That they mean principally,
if not only the the life of Justification, reconciliation, and Adoption, that
they which in respect of this life, are already alive before God of mere
Grace, uniting them to Christ which is their Life, ought not to seek the same
life by works, as if it were not already attained; for this were to reject
Grace and Christ as insufficient to Life, and to fly to works as either alone
sufficient, or without which Grace and Christ are not sufficient to it. 3. That
if at any time by and under this expression they comprize besides the life of
Justification, etc. here, the life of glory hereafter also; in excluding our
acting and working for it, they exclude them only as our acts and works, i. e.
as acts and works either of Gods worship, or of righteousness and charity
toward our neighbor commanded by the Law of Nature, by the righteousness
thereof to live: Not those Gospel duties of Gods ordination to be subservient
to our union unto and receiving of Christ to be our alone righteousness by
which to live. This way themselves do, and teach all, both believers and
unbelievers to act for life. The sum of their doctrine about Justification and
salvation breathing out it self in calling all from all iniquity to the
fountain of Christ's blood for cleansing, and from all confidence in the
righteousness of their own works to put on him alone for their alone
righteousness at Gods Tribunal. Whatsoever acting and working there is in
selfe-searching, selfe-denyall, selfe-renouncing, whatsoever in the study,
knowing, desiring, seeking, coming to Christ, that they may receive and
retain him to be their sole and whole life and righteousness.

All this they do, and teach to be done and that for life. This way (say
they) the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it (yea
hold it also) by force. Nevertheless even these Actings they disclaim also as
by their righteousness interessing to Christ and life in him; and will no
otherwise act by these for life, but as they are ordinately subservient to
Faith and to living by Faith, i. e. by Christ whom Faith apprehends. Even
Faith it self [as an act or work justifying] they explode, leaving it to the
Papists, Socinians, Arminians, and among these to Mr. Baxter which here page
80. of his Appendix, as elsewhere teaches it.

So the question is not, when God of the freeness and riches of his Grace, does
offer unto us Christ with Righteousness, and life in him as a free gift;
whether we ought to act and work for the receiving and holding of it, or not?
But whether we ought to work ordinately as God prescribes, or inordinately as
Man's mad God Reason fancieth. We only deny that when such a gift is so offered
we ought to run with fist, foot, sword, and club, to force it out of Gods hand
as our due, (as they do which after the doctrine of Mr. Baxter and his Masters
invade God with their works, to claim it as due to their righteousness;) But
we teach men tolie prostrate in the sense of their own vileness, gasping after
it and receiving it as a free gift of Mercy; granting man in the very first
acting of his will toward Christ, and Gods acting upon him to draw him to
Christ, the relation of more then a natural patient, (not pronouncing him a
stock or stone as our Adversaries object to us) even of obedientiall subjection
(as they term it in the Schools) and ever after of a free Agent to fetch life
and motion from Christ by the spirit.

Thus far and no further do we grant [doe and live] to be the voice of the
Gospel, viz. as there is a doing in receiving Christ and adhering to him; and
as the will in receiving Christ, is as well an Agent as a Patient. Mr. Baxters
sense we reject, and have spoken to his reasons here brought to confirm it.
And whatsoever he has said elsewhere, has been before examined.

As to the Scriptures which he quoteth to confirm his 5. Position, p. 80. and
his glorying that they prove we may act for salvation, p. 81. which as
generally posited by him no man ever denied: there is no need of answering,
that which they are brought to prove being granted. At length in the same pa.
81. of his App. he frames an objection made against his doctrine thus:

B. Object. But is it not the most excellent and Gospel-like frame of spirit,
to do all out of mere Love to God, and from thankfulness for life obtained
by Christ and given us? To this Objection he gives a three fold Answer.

Bax. Answ. 1. If it come not from love to God it is not sinc^re. But is it
sincere if it come from love to God? Is there not as well a natural love as a
natural fear of God in the hearts of all both good and bad? Or was there ever
any that hated God as God and good? Or that served him from hatred to him? If
such a Natural or Moral Love (for I find not Mr. Baxter ascending any where
higher,) suffice to make the obedience of men sincere, and because sincere, a
perfect and sufficient righteousness to justification and salvation; Then all
will more fitly cohere than the golden crown with the golden pantofle: a
universal conditioning righteousness, with a universal conditional
salvation. All shall be saved (except the Antinomian Paulites, or Protestants)
if Mr. Baxters Gospel stand: if he miss, none else but they.

B. 2. Yet does not the Gospel any where set our love to God and to our own
souls in opposition; nor teach us to love God and not our selves: but
contrarily joyneth them both together, and commands them both. The love of
our selves and desire of our own preservation, would never have been planted so
deeply in our nature, by the God of Nature, if it had been unlawful. I
conclude therefore, that to love God and not our selves, and so to do all
without respect to our own good, is no Gospel frame of spirit.

As home to the matter as his doctrine of Justification to the truth. Where was
conscience when will and wit alone show themselves to beguile his Readers with
mere opinions and imaginary suspicions? Who ever opposed the ordinate love of
God to the ordinate and subordinate love of our selves? When he has degraded
us from being men, yea into a state beneath Beasts and bruits, telling the
world that we do not appetere bonum, desire and move unto any thing that is
good, yea our chief good, thenceforth he thinks the world in stead of hearing
will trample us, as other stocks and stones that have no sensitive appetite.
Our doctrine is of another frame. We oppose the love of God which is from the
spirit of Adoption, (not from Nature) to the servile fear which is from the
spirit of Bondage: following heerin the light and testimony of the Holy Ghost,
To. 8. 15. 1. Jo. 4. 18. And this I doubt not, to be also the meaning of the
Apostle, Gal. 5. 6. where he makes the all on our part to justification,
consist in Faith, which works by love, i. e. in faith which carries out the
believer to work, no more in slavish fear and by a mercenary spirit, but in the
freedom and spirit of Love.

And whosoever will but unwind the Clew of Paul's disputation in the whole 4.
Chapter, especially from verse 21. and so forward to this 6. verse of Chap. 5.
shall I think have the suffrage of his own Reason for this interpretation. For
the Apostle having disputed of the bondage discending from Hagar to Ismael and
his Children, from Mount Sinai to those that held themselves under the Covenant
of Works [Doe and live] there given; and withal of the Freedom discending from
Sarah to Isaac and his seed, viz. the seed of Christ then included in and
typified by Isaac, i. e. from the New and spiritual Jerusalem to all true
Christians, concludes of all such We are not the Children of the bond woman,
but of the free: and in 5. Chap. verse 1. exhorting them to stand fast in the
liberty, wherewith Christ has made them free; And forbidding, and in the next
3 verses showing the danger of returning again under the servile yoke of the
Covenant of works [Do and live] whereas by Faith and not by works, the hope of
Righteousness is to be expected, he concludes in the sixth verse, that neither
circumsition nor uncircumsition, ( i. e. neither works, nor any external
privileges of the workers) avail any thing (to life and righteousness) but
Faith which works by love; what is that but Faith which works by a new
principle of filial love and not from that old principle of servile fear the
proper adjunct of the Covenant of works? This is to be the Children of the
free not the bond woman, by the Faith of Christ alone to seek for
righteousness, yet to be still working from a principle of love not of fear
to bring forth fruits of sanctification to him that has freely justified us.
This man says the Apostle has entered into his rest as God has entered into
his rest. Heb. 4. 10. As God having consummated the work of Creation, rested
and ceased from his work, because all was perfect and needed no addition; and
Christ having offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever, sat down at the right
hand of God, ceasing from further sufferings, because our redemption is fully
perfected and nothing more needed to be added: Heb: 10. 12. 14. So every
beeleever in respect of the rest of Grace, having received by Faith the
righteousness which is by this one sacrifice of Christ for the purging of all
his sins, sits down for ever at rest in the fruition and firm tenure
thereof, ceasing from his own works to perfect his justification because it
is already completed and nothing needs to be added to it. All his workings
henceforth is to manage so great a salvation to the glory of the Author, as God
works hitherto and Christ works, for the governing and disposing to their
proper ends the Creatures made, and elect men redeemed.

Mr. Baxter contrariwise teaches men so to love themselves as with love to
destroy themselves, and so to seek for life as to be sure to lose it;
forbidding them to enter into their Rest of Grace, and calling them back to the
yoke of bondage again, not suffering them to cease from their own works, nor
to do that work of God, Jo 6. 29. nor to act in the Sp. of love, but of fear
and bondage. Is not he one of those hard Taskmasters from whose cruelty Christ
calls his Disciples, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
[with the yoakes and burdens which your legal Teachers impose on you,] and I
will give you rest? etc. These will never permit you to have rest to your
souls, Mat. 11. 28, 29.

I conclude therefore, that Mr. Baxters Conclusion of this his second Answer to
the Objection, is as patt to the purpose as an Oyster-shell to a hungry
appetite: and the love to our selves which he teaches, to tend only to
selfe-ruining.

B. 3. Thankfulness for what we have received (either in possession, title,
or promise,) must be a singular spur to duty. But I pray you tell me, Have you
received all the life and mercy you do expect? Are you in Heaven already? Have
you all the Grace that you need or desire in degree? If not, why may you not
labou^ for what you have not as well as be thankful for what you have? Or
have you as full a certainty of ^^ hereafter as you desire? If not, why may you
not labor for it? All this is also totally besides the Question, which is not
whether we may, but how we are to labor, whether with that most excellent and
Gospel-frame of spirit consisting in love and thankfulness, or mercenarily by
works? and whether in the way of Faith which the Gospel, or of natural
Righteousness which the Law teaches? Many shall seek to enter and shall not
be able, faith the Master. We through the spirit wait for the hope of
Righteousness by Faith, says the Apostle: Not so, but by and for our Works,
not at all by Faith, but as it is an act or work, says Mr. Baxter, let him
show his light and Authority to be greater than Paul's, before he look that
we should run after him.

I shall put one question to him arising from the last of his Interrogatories,
which will be harder for him to resolve than a thousand such as he has here
will be to us. When he tells us we must labor for the full certainty of Heaven
hereafter; is there any such certaintainty in this world attainable according
to his principle of but ^ conditional justification and salvation until the
day of Judgement^ or how is it to be obtained? Let him make it out to us. If he
does it, I shall conclude, that he can also turn Heaven into Earth, and Earth
into Heaven, and nothing to be unpossible to him: if not, let his Reader judge
whether his endeavor be to delude, or else to teach.

In the next Chapter or Section, if we attend only to the sound and roar of
words, Mr. Baxter appears more formidable from page 83. to the 98. of his
Appendix, in which he presents us with thirteen Considerations, to show the
vanity, and intolerable damnable wickedness of this [supposed] doctrine, which
he opposes. But the whole sloud of his wit, wrath, and eloquence, here poured
out together, runs into the dead Sea, by a desert and desolate way in which it
meets with no mortal crearure to wet or hurt it. For who is there of all
mankind that has said we ought not to act for life in the sense which this
man suborneth, or otherwise than I have before often expressed? Much less is
there any professed Christian that has asserted (as he insinuates) That we
must not come to Christ that we may have life, nor strive to enter in at the
strait gate, nor lay violant hands on the Kingdom of Heaven, nor lay up for
our selves a Treasure in Heaven, nor seek the Kingdom of God and the
Righteousness the reof, nor press on for the attainment of the Resurrection?
etc. Let him be named by Mr. Baxter, that he may be brought forth and stoned
which thus blasphemeth, I shall not hinder it. That which they teach is that
Works are not to be performed to this end, that as works or doing as opposed
to believing, by, and for their own, or our own Righteousness in doing them,
they should put us into the possession of the life of justification and
blessedness.

If Mr. Baxter have any thing to say against this assertion, or against that
which I before laid as the state of the question, it will be taken into
examination: till then I shall leave him to fight with his own shadow, having
no loose time to spend in gazing upon the activity of such a Combatant.

CHAP. X.
Arg. The Author of the Book entitled, The Marrow of Modern Divinity,
vindicated from the Aspersions wherewith Mr. Baxter defameth him and his
Doctrine.

Here because I am to follow, and my task is, not to leave Mr. Baxter until
I have examined all that he says to prove Justification by works; I am
necessitated to fall into that which will be judged a Digression.

After he has enacted by a Law, that to say, we must not work for life, is
a Blasphemy, or at least an intolerable error, and to hold it practically a
necessarily damning Doctrine, that whosoever does it must be everlastingly
damned for it. (All which we acknowledge to be in some sense true after the
sound of the words, though after the meaning of the Author they can never be
saved which practically hold the contrary, as possibly I shall afterward
show.) Now he proceeds to indite and arraigne to condemnation one Author, as
guilty of this damning Doctrine, viz. The Author of the Book called, The
Marrow of Modern Divinity, and many his Accessaries, viz. all those Divines
that have annexed their approbatory subscriptions to the usefullnesse of it; so
find we the man expressing himself, Aphorism. page 330.

B. When such a Book as that styled the Marrow of Modern Divinity, can have so
many applauding epistles of such Divines* when the doctrine of it is that we
must not Act for justification and Salvation; but only in thankfulness for
it. This he speaks only in general, we shall find his particulars
following. To this therefore I answer only in general;

1 That it were to be desired that Mr Baxter had inured no more dishonor upon
thos^ Divines to whom he dedicates his book by such his dedication; than those
forementioned Divines have attracted to themselves by their applauding epistles.

2 And that those Divines, with Mr. Baxter himself, could mention so many
sound parts in his book, both in the matter and ends of the Author; as he
has picked out imaginary errors in the other.

3 As to the doctrine of that book which he so accuses, I shall there examine
in particulars where Mr. Baxter particularly draws it into accusation and
judgment.

Only by the way let me thus far excuse my self.

1 I never knew who was the Author of that work.

2. Neither have I read it otherwise than here and there a fragment as I found
it lying in my friends houses; so that I could no otherwise judge of it but ex
ungue Leonem, what the whole was but by that which my slender judgment told me
the part which I read was, not only orthodox but singularly useful.

3 That I never knew there was a second part of it, much less saw it until Mr
Baxter by his quotation thereof so told me. But that since I have gotten both
parts, yet by means of other employments have not had time any further to read
it but where Mr. Baxter accuses it of error.

4. That if I knew the Author to be yet living, I should have wholly left the
defense of himself to himself. It was not so much the animosity as the
ingenuity of Scaliger which caused him when he heard that one had busied
himself about the correcting of the errors in his writings, to cry out, Ego
meos corrigam errores, I my self will be the corrector of my own errors. The
same task may this Author justly challenge to himself (if living) to be
himself the defender of his own writings. Perhaps he is doing it, perhaps he
has done it, I shall therefore in my uncertainty what is done, only with such
brevity seek to disabuse the doubting readers of both, that I shall in no wise
prevent the Authors fuller vindicating of his own or rather Gods cause in his
hand. Let us then attend to Mr Baxters accusations, particularized, Append.
page 100. and so onward. It was questioned as may be seen page 99. why he
excepted against the Book called the Marrow of Modern Divinity? he answers
there, because it is guilty of this heinous doctrine. This he begins now page
100 to show in particulars, alleging first the words of that book thus:

B M. M. page 174. (he means 179) Qu. Would you not have believers to eschew
evil and do good, for fear of Hell or for hope of Heaven? Answ. No indeed, I
would not have any believer to do the one or the other, for so far as they
do so, their obedience is but slavish etc. To which end he alleges. Lu. 1.
74. 75. Having thus alleged the Author, he thus endeavors to accuse and
confute him:

B But that speaks of freedom from fear of our enemies, such as Christ forbids
Lu. 12. 5. where yet he commands the fearing of God, and consequently even
that fear of enemies is forbidden, as they stand in opposition to God, and not
as his instruments in subordination. Or if it be even a fear of God that is
there meant; yet it cannot be all fear of him and his displeasure: So far as
we are in danger of sin and suffering, we must fear it: and so far as our
assurance is still unperfect: a jealousy of our own hearts and a dreadful
Reverence of God also are necessary. But not the legal terrors of the former
bondage such as arise from the apprebension of sin unpardoned, and of God as
being our enemy. Who ever heard any doctrine more unanswerably proved to be
heinous? If any man question by what Arguments, he can easily answer himself,
by this that Mr. Baxter trying and finding himself unable to do it, at length
grants it to be sound and good. Thus are they driven oft-times to wound
themselves who draw the Sword against the Truth. The Author of that book
proves that believers or the redeemed of Christ are no longer to serve for
fear of H^ll by the testimony of the H. G. Lu. 1. 74. 75. That we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness etc. Mr. Baxter to evade the force of this
Scripture, first contendeth that by enemies are here to be understood not
spiritual but mortal enemies, wicked men and their persecutions. Now may not
a blind man perceive this to be a shifting not an answer of this Scripture?

1. The ground of this not fearing is here laid to be our delivera^ce cut of
their hands, whom else we should fear. And will Mr* Baxter say that Christ
came to deliver his elect from the persecutions of men, and not from sin,
death, hell, which were our most formidable enemies? This were to make Christ's
kingdom to be of this world, and to join with the carnal Jews that expected
such a carnal Christ and c^rnall kingdom that might be eminent in the world.

2. Or has he actually purchased to us such a deliverance? does not experience
declare the contrary?

3. Or must we so long suspend our serving of God in Righteousness and
Holiness until we be actually delivered from all fear and danger of men's
persecutions? For so runs the Text as well in the original as in our
translation, that the deliverance is laid as the ground of the service, and
that put in our possession, before this can be put in execution, at least
without fear.

4. Is not deliverance here the same thing with the salvation mentioned ver.
77, which John was to preach? but that was salvation, and so is this
deliverance, by the remission of sins; and consequently we must serve (who are
in Christ,) without fear of vengeance and Hell.

He sees that with this evasion he cannot decline the edge of this Scripture;
therefore takes up the right interpretation of it at last, thus: Or if it be
even a fear of God that is there meant etc. Why had he not spoken full to the
point in question and said the fear of Hell? This minsing will nothing help
him. All that he says against it in this sense, is but such as is wont to
proceed from the extravagancy of an astonished and self confounded man. For who
ever said that a believer must cast off all fear of God and not be possessed
still with a filial fear to displease him? Or that as far as he is in danger
of sin and suffering he must not fear it, to shun it? Or that so far as our
assurance is still unperfect [or perfect] a jealousy of our own hearts and a
dreadful Reverence of God are [not] necessary? But what is all this to the
serving of God for fear of Hell? How does he daub with untempered mortar? At
length he determines the question. But not the legal terrors of our former
bondage, such as arise from the apprehension of sin unpardoned, and of Gods
being, our enemy. I need to say no more, but where then is the fear of Hell
in a believer? does it arise from the apprehension of the pardon of his sin,
and of God reconciled to him in Christ? what can be said more weakly to
confute, or more strongly to confirm that which he calls a heinous doctrine? Is
Mr. Baxter an adversary or an accessory to him whom he pronou^ceth the Author
of this wicked, intolerable, damnable doctrine? Himself speaks more to confirm
it than the person whom he opposes. But how according to his principles, the
terrors of our former bondage as he describes it, are in this life removed,
neither can I see, nor he make out without contradicting himself.

B. In the 180. page, He denies the plain sense of the Text, Mat. 10. 28.
Enough Magisterially if it were true what he objecteth, to say only and not to
demonstrate the truth of what he objecteth. But if false, who perceives not
the censorious spirit of the Objector? That it is false appears evidently:
for how does he deny the plain sense which denies no sense at all of the
Text, but only declares what he thinks to be the more principal scope of
Christ in that Text, than other? And in this the context will evince that he
speaks the truth.

B. In the 155. page, He makes this the difference between the two Covenants:
One says, Do this and live, the other says, Live and do this: the one
says, Do this for life, the other says, Do this from life.

But I have provedfully that the Gospel says also, Do this for life.

1. Now he manifests wherein the haynousnes of the doctrine of this Book, and
the intolerable damnable wickedness of the Author consists: viz. in his
blindness that he did not foresee what Antichristian doctrine Mr. Baxter would
afterward divulge to the world, and say he had fully proved it: but for lack
of this foreknowledge, does here deliver the contrary truth of Christ
prepossessing the minds of men therewith against Mr. Baxters future impostures.

But 2. Let him not say he has fully proved, but let him fully prove that
doing and works as the Scriptures do oppose the same to faith and receiving of
Christ, (in which sense this Author speaks) are enjoined by the Gospel to
justification of life, or the life of justification, and then let him expect
that his Gospel shall stand, and the Gospel of Christ lie prostrate at his feet.

3. Because Mr. Baxter will never be able to prove this, the true Disciples of
Christ will still hold this as one principle difference between the two
Covenants, that the one requires us to seek life after the tenor of Justice,
the other after the tenor of Grace. The one bids us to seek it by Works, the
other by Faith. The one presupposes the original righteousness given us in
Adam, bidding us by it to follow after happiness, the other offers Christ
unto us as the fountain of life both of Justification and Sanctification,
calling upon us to receive or believe in him for both, that both may be ours
when Christ is ours. He is our life, and when Christ our life (not works our
life) shall appear, we also shall appear with him in glory. This is all that
this Author means in this passage, as himself makes evident. If in this he
be an Heretic, let me live and die with him in his Heresy. To prevent
mistake, I mean here the Covenant of works in Mr. Baxters sense throughout
this his Treatise, viz. the first Covenant made with Adam.

B. So in his second part page 190. his great note to know the voice of the Law
by, is this, That when in Scripture there is any Moral work commanded to be
done, either for the eschewing of punishment, or upon promise of any reward
temporal or eternal, or else when any promise is made with the condition of
any work to be done which is commanded in the Law, there is to be understood
the voice of the Law.

A notorious and dangerous mistake, which would make almost all the New
Testament, and the very Sermons of Christ himself, to be nothing but the Law
of works. I have fully proved before, that Moral duties as part of our sincere
obedience to Christ, are part of the condition of our salvation, and for it to
be performed. And even Faith is a Moral duty. It is pity that any Christian
should no better know the Law from the Gospel, especially one that pretends
to discover it to others.

About the matter here delivered by this Author, enough has been spoken
before, in examining what Mr. Baxter has said in many parts of his Aphorisms
contrary to it. Touching the proof of the contrary Assertion, Mr. Baxter has
said no more than, nor so much as Bellarmine had said before him, and left
prepared to his hand. He should therefore more properly have said, Not I, but
Bellarmine has fully proved, and therefore fully because Mr. Baxter so
affirms. As to the Assertor of it, why does he pitch upon this Author alone,
when Calvin, Fulk, Mr. Fox, (as I have before Chap. 15. alleged and quoted
them) Dr. Amesius, Medul. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 22. Se. 19. In a word all
Protestant Divines from Luther till this present time, have in substance, and
most of them that have occasion to pitch upon the same Subject, have even
totidem verbis, delivered the same doctrine, (as to mercenary, or rewards of
debt) having learned the same from the Apostle, why does he single out this one
as a singular man? Let him with Bellarmine, Stapleton, Maldonat, and the rest
of that hair, roar out against all the Reformed Churches, A notorious and
dangerous mistake etc. A herd of Heretics and ignorant Animalls; It is pity
that any Christian should no better know the Law from the Gospel, especially
such as pretend to discover it to others.

As to his Moral duties, and even Faith as a Moral duty to be performed for
salvation; he speaks like such moral men as nature now blinded and corrupted
forms, whose principle it is, Naturam ut optimam ducem sequi, to follow
Nature and natural instinct, or Reason as their best guide, knowing not
spiritual things, because the Natural man cannot receive them. If he savoured
so much the Gospel as Philosophy, why does not the phrase which Christ and his
Apostles use [ of the spirit and spiritual things] so much delight him as that
of the Philosophers [ Moral and Moralities?] As much was Christ's offering
himself a sacrifice and giving satisfaction to the Justice of God a Moral
duty, and so not meritoricus for us, because due to God from him by the Law for
himself: as Faith in Christ and other purely Gospel duties subservient unto
Faith. For both these duties on Christ's and on our part are comprehended under
this one general of the Law of nature: Whatsoever I shall command thee thou
shall do. I shall leave the justification and salvation by Moral Faith and
Moral duties to Mr. Baxter and with the Apostle, through the Spirit wait for
the hope of Righteousness by Faith. Gal. 5. 5

B. So in the next page. 191. he intelerably abuses the Sripture in affirming
that of 2. These. 2. 12., to be the voice of the Law, and so making Paul a
Legal preacher. Is then every teacher, (after Mr. Baxters Canon) which
declares what the voice, force, curse, and condemnation of the Law is, a Legal
and Anti-Evangelicall preacher? So he affirms Paull to be if he speak out
what the curse and condemnation of the Law is. Then not only Paul, but Christ
also and all his Apostles are Legal not Gospel preachers. For he will not deny
them to have so made out the Law in its force etc. Or when the Apostle in that
quoted Stripture speaks of their Damnation which would not believe the truth
but had pleasure in unrighteousness, does he not leave them under the
damnation of the Law for not embracing the Gospel? does not the Law hereby
take occasion to damn them the more deeply for neglecting and rejecting the
truth? The proper office of the Gospel is not to condemn but to save. Only
when its salvation is contemned it yields back the contemners under the
greater guilt to the Law to power out on them the larger, if not largest
measure of its curse and wrath. Do not think (says our Savior to the Jews
that rejected his Gospel,) that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one
that accuses you, even Moses in whom you trust. Jo. 5. 45.

But whether the inference of making Paul a Legal Preacher, is to be ascribed
to Mr Baxter or to the Author of the Marrow of Modern Divinity is easily
discernible. That Author had only said that one sentence of Paul in a whole
Epistle was the voice of the Law. Mr. Baxter infers that so to say is to
make Paul a Legal Preacher; and consequentially that to preach any thing of
the Law makes a Legal Preacher. Let now Mr. Baxter name one Minister within
this Nation that has taught such rank Antinomisme, as himself here that
professes himself an Antaegonist to destroy it. But we may perceive by this
he will be all things, as well Antinomian as Arminian and Papist to smother the
truth of the Gospel.

B. And as shamefully does he abuse 1 Co. 6. 9. 10. as if the Apostle, when he
bids them not to be deceived, were deceiving them himself in telling them;
that no unrighteous person, fornicators, adulterers, etc. shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. Is this Law? Then let me be a Preacher of the Law. If Paul be
a Legallist then will I be a Legallist too. But these men know not that the
Apostle speaks of those that die such and that these sins exclude men the
Kingdom as they are rebellious against Christ their Lord, and so a violation
of the new Covenant. How extremely is this man in love ( Narcissus like) with
his own beauty, or rather fancy? Every other Visage not begotten of his seed,
and fashioned to his image is an Owl with him. The words of the Author are
these: [The Law saith], know thou not that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. Be not deceived, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 9. And therefore thou
being a sinner and not righteous, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. This
is all that he has against which Mr. Baxter raises his hubub, a shameful
abuse of the Scripture! Let him deny if he can this to be (though less
principally and secondarily the voice of the Gospel, yet) primarily and more
principally the voice of the Law. If not, then surely as he has a Gospel, so
also has he a Law of his own making. Or what other ground is there why such
shall not inherit the Kingdom, but because they are not in Christ? Fer
whosoever is baptized with the blood of Christ to justification, is baptized
also with his spirit to sanctification. And if not in Christ, then under the
Law. If under the Law, then under the curse and condemnation of the Law; and
consequentially under the threat of the Law here denounced. Or what should
hinder the Apostle from denouncing the curse of the Law against them that are
and will be under the Law? Let Mr. Baxter have his will that the Gospel condemns
them for their final unbelief and rebellion against Christ: yet does not the
Law condemn them too for all their unrighteousness, fornications, Adulteries,
etc. If he deny it, we shall find him the Author of a sweet piece of Gospel
Doctrine: That they which are in Christ are under the Curse of the Law, (so
has he before stoutly asserted) but they which are enemies of Christ, are
exempted from it. If he confess it, then the shame returns upon himself which
he lays on this Author.

B. So in part. 1. page 189. he mentions a Preacher that said, he durst not
exhort nor p^rswade sinners to believe their sins were pardoned, until he
saw their lives reformed; for fear they should take more liberty to sin. And
he censureth that Preacher to be ignorant in the Mystery of Faith. [And
putting a false construction upon his words, he descanteth over him and
insulteth against him for delivering an absurdity, in saying that which he said
not] Let him but add what follows, and it will appear there is no footing for
him in these his words, for all the abusive carpings wherewith he seeks to
disgrace him. I think ^sayth the Author) that Preach^r was ignorant of the
Mystery of Faith, for it is of the Nature of sovereigne Waters, which so wash
off the corruption of the Vl^er, that they cool the heat, and stay the
spreading of the insection; and so by degrees heal the same: Neither did he
know that it is the Nature of Cordialls, so to comfort the heart and ^ase it,
as to expel the nox^ous humors, and strengthen Nature against them.

Is it not here evident that the failing which he censureth in that Minister,
is his mistake of the power and Nature of Spiritual and Gospel comforts, that
he dared not to speak a word o^ consolation to a wounded soul, before he
saw and had had p^oofe of his reformation, (though never so much burdened with
the consideration of his sin past, and gasping after Christ and forgiveness
by him) for fear such spiritual comfort would carry him back into carnal
liberty again. Nay, says this Author* The Mystery of Faith, or consolation
which is by faith in Christ Jesus, is like sovereigne Waters and Cordialls,
does not only comfort the wounded soul against the guilt, but also subdue the
power, and stay the spreading of sin, strengthening the soul against the
future prevalency of corruption: so that the due application and reception of
it is the best furtherance, and not at all a hinderance to the reformation of
the Life.

This doctrine may possibly offend Mr. Baxters palate, but I am sure it squares
with the Gospel. All that Mr. Baxter has therefore, page 104. 105. against the
Authors words wrested into a wrong sense expresses Mr. Baxter what he is, but
in no wise weakeneth the estimation of the Author with them that are wise. ^or
he does neither explicitly nor implicitly affirm, that justifiing* Faith is
a believing that our sins are pardoned, as Mr. Baxter untruly suggesteth* and
thence draws matter of sugillation

He names the Mystery or ^aith, which is one and the same as if he had said the
Mystery of Christ, or the Mystery of the Gospel, all which in holy Writ, are
(...)lent ^^rme. And what he affirms of this Mystery of Faith or (...) the
deeper it sincks into the heart the more it purifies (...) strengthens in the
power of godliness. Mr. Baxter^ (...) affixed to this Doctrine shall not hinder
my [Amen] (...)

B. Many other intolerable errour^ I could show you in this book* as his
making the New Covenant to threaten nothing but present afflictions and loss
of our present communion with God, page 208. And that we pray for no other
kind of Pardon. page 206. 210 Contrary to Mar. 16. 16. Heb. 10. 26. 27. 28.
29. 30. 31. Heb. 2. 3. Jo. 15. 2. 6. and many other places. He might more
properly have said, Many other intolerable slanders his candor and conscience
could have i^ured upon this book. For so his next words would have verified
what he had said; [ as his m^king the New Covenant to threaten nothing etc.]
When the Au^hor in the quoted place speaks nothing of the New Covenant, but
of the Law of Christ, by which he there declares himself to mean the Ten
Commandments, as they are now in the hand and disposing of Christ. And this
Law he understands also in relation, not to the whole world, but to them that
are implanted into Christ; his words being directed to Neophytus. To such
(Christ having already borne the penalty of the Law in their stead) temporal
and fatherly chastisements only for their purging and perfecting, are
threatened in case through infirmity they transgress the Law. In this, I
conceive, he alludeth to the privileges of the Covenant made with David as
the Type of Christ, and his seed as the Type of Christ's seed, and so pertaining
(as a Gospel liberty) no less fully to us than to them. If his children
forsake my Law, break my statutes etc. Then will I visit their transgressions
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless my loving kindness
will I not take utterly from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail, my
Covenant will I not break etc. Ps 89. 31-34. And this is M. Brs. own doctrine
when he teaches that there is no deathly violation of the new Covenant besides
final unbelief and rebellion against Christ, in and under These. 32. 33. 34. and
37. But the Author whom Mr. Br. calls here ad parts, speaks not of final
unbeleefe or rebellion incident to the world, but of some particular
transgression of any of the Ten Commandments (as he expresses himself)
through the infirmity incident to the Saints. What fire and fury is there in
this man's wrath, that having made an Adversary, will have him wounded, vel per
me, though through his own heart, ani^amque in vulnere ponit. If it be an
intolerable error in this man, much more in Mr. Baxter, who much more
vehemently and upon slig^^er and slenderer grounds asserts it.

The Scriptures which Mr. Baxter alle^dgeth as contraried by this doctrine,
speak eytherof such rebels* as when the Grace of Christ is offered them,
persist in a final refusal of it, or of such hypocrites as having once
seemingly tasted it, Apostatize utterly from it. And with these this Author
has nothing here to do. Only Mr. Baxter being heavily burdened with
another Monster, which he had a purpose to have disburthened himself of in a
Tractate of Universal Redemption, being prevented by another, must needs now
and then case himself of it, and speak out how hateful to him the doctrine
of the certain perseverance of the Saints in grace is.

The other things which he hints and but hints at as errors in this Author,
might be taken into examination, if Mr. Baxter would allege his words, and
show what he excepts against in them. I see not but the passages are pure and
clear enough in the Book, if he would forbear the casting in of his
saltpeter to corrupt them.

As he says it was not his business to have objected, so neither was it my
business to have defended, had h^e not sought under a pretense of opposing
this Book, to defame many truths of Christ.

CHAP. XI.
Whether according to Mr. Baxter, the Doctrine of Justification by Faith
without works tend to carnal Liberty, and to the driving of Obedience out of
the World.

IN prosecuting his second Quere, Mr. Baxter has lead us a long race. In the
rest he is more straight and short.

A third Quere which bears the force of another Argument to subvert
Justification by Faith without works, he so proposes as containing another
absurdity and evil likely to follow upon this doctrine: His words are as
follows:

B. Aphor. pa. 325. Whether this Doctrine does not tend to drive obedience out
of the world? For if m^n do once believe that it is not so much as a part of
the Condition of their Justification, will i^ not much tend to relax their
diligence? I know that Love and thankfulness should be enough* and so it will
when all our ends are attained in our ultimate end: Then we shall Act for
these ends no more: we shall have nothing to do^, but love, and joy, and
praise, and be^ thank^full* But that is not yet. Sure as God has given us the
affections of Fear, Desire, Hope, and Care* so he would have us use them for
the attainment of our great ends. Therefore he that takes down^ but one of all
our motives to obedience, he helps to destroy obedience it self; seeing we
have need of every Motive that God has left us. I shall examine here first
the Quere it self; then the amplification of it. The Quere or Interrogation
bears the force of a strong Affirmation. That the doctrine of Justification by
Grace without Work^ does tend to drive obedience out of the world, and to relax
men's diligence to good works. It must be therefore a prodigious doctrine that
produces so cursed an effect.

First then I demand whom he censureth as the Authors of so direful an evil,
God or men? If the Holy Ghost has not taught men this doctrine, let the guilt
of this evil be upon such men as have entertained it. But the Holy Ghost has
taught it. To him that works not but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his Faith is imputed to him for righteousness. But he that works,
or brings works to be justified by them, is excluded To. 4. 4. ^. His is the
blessedness to whom God imputes Righteousness without works, ver. 6. Not of
works but of him that calls, To. 9 11. If at works, then not by Grace, if by
Grace then not of works, To. 11. 7. By Grace through Faith not of works, Ephesians.
2. 8. 9. Not our own righteousness but the righteousness which is by the
Faith of Christ, Phil. 3. 9. Not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy. And many more testimonies before in a fitter
place alleged, all in one harmony evincing the Holy Ghost to be the Author
of this Doctrine. So that Mr. Baxter loadeth not man but God with this
reproach, of seeking to drive obedience out of the world.

2. Whether he has not taken up this slander from the Monks and Jesuits?
Whether there be any of them that having written against Justification by
Faith, which has not aspersed it and our Churches that hold it, with this
scandal? Or any one of the Protestant Divines which has defended this Article
of our Faith, but has spoken fully to the vindicating of this Doctrine from
this so injurious a slander? When Mr. Baxter is so much Popish that he takes
up every most frothy Objection of every shaveling of that side to adore it; and
so much an Anti-Protestant that he scorns to mention what on our part has
been regested in way of answer to it: why takes he up his habitation among
Protestants but to corrupt and seduce them?

3. If he mean by the World the unbeleevers of the World, that are strangers
to Christ and the Covenant of Promise, how can it be said properly, this
Doctrine tends to drive out obedience from the World? Can it drive out of the
World that which is not in it? Had he said, it tends to drive out the
Formality, and outside Morality, and base Hypocrisy from the World, we might
have considered of it. But to tell of driving out obedience, that which God
accepts and allows as true Obedience, from such as would never be drawn
to it, implies a kind of contradiction.

4. If he mean Spiritual and Gospel Obedience, the obedience of Faith, which
consists in the denial of our own righteousness, and our own strength,
and cleaving to Christ alone, for Justification and Sanctification; and that
this Doctrine does (not drive it out of the World, but) hinder the World from
pertaking of it: how does the Wisdom of Christ, and the Wisdom of Mr. Baxter
herein dash either against other? God so loved the world (says Christ) that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have life everlasting, Jo. 3. 16. He that believes in me, out of
his belly shall flow Rivers of living water, Jo. 7. 38. If I be lifted up from
the Earth I will draw all men to me, Jo. 12. 32. Come unto me all that are
weary and heavy layden, and I will refresh you, Mat. 11. 28. Go preach the
Gospel to every Creature, he that believes shall be saved, Mark. 16. 15, 16.
This is a faithful saying, etc. that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief. 1 Timothy 1 15. They that receive abundance of Grace,
and the Gift of Righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ: and
hundreds more the like Scriptures, in which the fullness of grace and
righteousness offered to the world to the chief sinners of the world freely
to be given to as many as will receive and believe in Christ; is made an
attractive to obedience, and not (as Mr. Baxter slandereth this Doctrine) a
hinderance to it.

5. If there be any of the world that are so offended at this Doctrine, as to
make it a stone of stumbling to them, and an hinderance to the obedience of
faith; they are the worst people of the world, Jews, or of a Jewish spirit,
Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, who having made clean the outside of the cup
and platter, (though the inside be unpurged from its guilt) think themselves the
alone holy and righteous persons, will not enter into the Kingdom of Grace,
unless their own worth and righteousness shall usher them into it, and the
Publicans and Harlots be barred out ^^ unworthy: rend their clothes and cast
dust in the air like madmen, if mention be made of admitting with them the
unclean Gentiles, Acts 22. 21, 23. If the Prodigal son be entertained,
refuse in great wrath any more to meddle in their Fathers house and service,
Luke 15. 28, - 30. And will not hearken though earnestly entreated: These many
years have I served and never transgressed, and shall now this companion of
harlots be here with me? and these last that came in at evening be made
equal with us that have borne the burden and heat of the day? Mat. 20. 12.
They had their own Farms, Oxen, Wives, Therefore as happy enough at home they
would not come to partake of the Lords F^ast, but left it to the poor, blind,
and la^^, etc. But against such the Lord has sworn that they should not taste
of his supper, Luke 14. and the misery of this doom we see lying heavy upon
that Nation to this day. Is it not enough to Mr. Baxter that he has not
himself taken heed of this Leaven of theirs, but that he must seek to sour
us with it tco, that we might incur the like vengeance?

6. If there be such as turn this Doctrine into licentiousness, that because
good works are not appointed of God to be the condition of their justification,
will therefore relax their diligence, the fault is not in the Doctrine, but in
the corruption of their hearts. They ought to conclude from Grace to duty, and
not to carnal liberty: If they do otherwise, it is not because they have, but
because they have not effectually drank into themselves this Doctrine. Else if
all the means of Grace which carnal men abuse should be guilty of their
abuse, then the death of Christ, and preaching of the Gospel must be
anathematized, because he is laid as a stone at which some will stumble, and as
well for the fall as the rising of many in Israel, and that is to some the
savor of death, as well as to others the savor of life. The children must not
lose their bread, for fear the dogs should catch after it to satisfy their
rapine. The Apostle had delivered a sacred doctrine of Gospel truth* Where
sin abounded, Grace abounded much more, To. 5. 20. He sees easily this
doctrine would be abused by sensuallists, therefore annexeth an Objection,
Shall we continue in sin that Grace may abound? To. 6. 1. This use some might
make of it. Does he therefore recall his doctrine? Nothing less. Better many
wretches to wantonize to their ruin, than one soul for which Christ has
died, lose such a prop of consolation.

7. The truly believing saints cannot so reason or abuse the grace of God, or
relax their obedience; as for other reasons so specially for those alleged by
the Apostle, in the following part of that 6. Chapter to the Romans.

8. We do not by the Preaching of this Doctrine open a door to profaneness,
but following the guidance of the Scripture, make use of it as the strongest
obligation to obedience: as in Answer to the next of Mr. Baxters Queres shall
be manifested.

Lastly, Mr. Baxters Doctrine of justification by Works, is guilty of as many
other crimes, so of this also wherewith he charge ours.

1. By instilling into men a supposition of a possibility and necessity of
attayning such a righteousness of their own, and worthiness of their works, by
the worth and merit whereof, they may deserve Christ and justification by him.
The selfe-righteous Justiciaries will greedily swallow down this bait, and
then little regard the obedience of faith: Will not come in to Christ but upon
their own Terms and Articles. For the whole need not the Physician but the
sick. Proof enough hereof we have in the Scribes and Pharisees, who if they
might not be admitted as the only sons of God, wholly rejected the Kingdom of
God. The very Publicanes and Harlots entering before them. Such pride is there
naturally in man's heart, that if they have any thing of their own, fair
though but in appearance, they think the Gospel of Christ more credited by
their profession of it, than themselves benefited by it.

2. By blunting the edge of men's desires after Christ, If it must be their own
works and righteousness that must mediate their interest in Christ and
justification by him, despair of attainment strikes them dead from further
laboring and moving to this end. For what righteousness, what works, can be
sufficient to such an achievement? So obedience to the Faith is nipt in the
very budde, where there is a sense and conviction of a man's naughtiness and
nothingness.

3. By taking off the spirits of a Christians love, joy, and alacrity, in
believing and serving, when a humble and selfe-denying soul is once choked
with Mr. Baxters Doctrine, that all the benefit which he has or can have by
Christ, is to be only a probationer for justification and life, even to his
dying day; that till then he is but conditionally pardoned and conditionally
adopted; that Gods love to him may be anon turned into hatred, his sins
again imputed, and himself hurried into hell: That his safety still depends
upon his own works and righteousness, no penny, and no Pater noster: that the
grace of God is let to farm for fine and rent; no one promise of the word in
all this his Book being alleged by Mr. Baxter (which I can remember) of any
support which the believer shall receive from God in the state of Grace, but
all, Self do, and self have: This Doctrine either benummeth and freezeth up
all a poor Christians love and delight in serving God, emasculating his
spirits to obedience: or reduces him under a yoke of bondage, making him to
work possibly but in fear, not of love; as under the rod, or rather in the
fire, fearing death and hell all his life time. And whether this be (saving in
Mr. Baxters account) obedience, or disobedience, let them that are spiritual
judge.

4. By turning the very obedience of his Disciples into disobedience and
rebellion. The best works done to be justified by them, and for them, are the
greatest abomination in Gods account, his Grace and Salvation are either
denied or refused when we bring works to appropriate it to us, Romans 4. 4, 5.
what is righteousness in its matter, is sin in its end. Therefore shall we
find still that whosoever are admitted to, those that seek to ingratiate
themselves by their good works though done in Christ's name, are hurled off from
Christ. I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. I know
you not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. More joy for one sinner that
repents, than for ninety nine just persons that need no repentance.

For a more full and satisfactory answer to the Argument contained in this
Quere, I leave the Reader to the perusing of the Protestant Divines that have
written upon this Subject, and abundantly refuted this calumny of the Papists:
what I have here said is rather an addition to them, then a full answer to the
Quere, which I leave to be fetched from them.

What he speaks in the Amplification of this Quere, needs no large
examination. First, he grants, That love and thankfulness should be enough, [to
hold us to obedience and duty] and will be so when all our ends are attained
in our ultimate end: then we shall act for these ends no more, etc. How
untowardly does this passage, and and another passage of the former Quere hang
together? what he pronounces here, that love and thankfulness should be
enough to hold us to duty, without doing for justification and salvation, and
that which here should be, and hereafter shall be our perfection, the same he
affirms there, if practiced, will undoubtedly damn the Practicer. So
according to Mr. Baxter, if a Christian endeavor sincerely to do what he
should, and to come as near in this life as it is possible, to the perfection
which he shall enjoy in the future, he shall undoubtedly be damned for it.
Who then goes about to drive obedience out of the world? he, or they whom he
opposes?

What use is to be made of the affections of fear, desire, hope, and care, to
the attainment of our great ends, has been enough discussed in the examination
of the former Quere, and would be a mere Tautology here to do it again.

Let it be proved once that God has left Justification by works to be a
motive to obedience, it shall be granted to be a help to the destroying of
Obedience, to take down this one Motive. But if contrariwise Justification of
sinners by Works, and Moral Obedience be erected not by God, but by the
Devil, Mr. Baxters neither Sophistry, nor Oratory shall induce us to lean
upon the Devils crutch, both to the forfeiting of our Justification, and
turning our Obedience into sin.

CHAP. XII.
Whether the doctrine of justification by Faith without works be a
soul-cozening doctrine? or harden the people in a soul-cozening Faith? what the
doctrine of Faith which the Protestant Churches hold, is? and how far from
deserving this Calumny? with something about the facility or difficulty to
persuade the multitude to such a Faith.

HIs fourth Quere by which as by another Argument he goes about to make odious
and to destroy justification by Faith without works, runs thus:

B. page 326. Does it not much confirm the world in their soul cozening Faith?
surely that Faith which is by many thought to justify, is it that our people
do all most easily embrace, that is the receiving of Christ for their Savior,
and expecting pardon and salvation by him, but not withal receiving him for
their Lord and King, nor delivering up themselves to be ruled by him. I meet
not with one but is resolved in such a Faith, till it be overthrown by
teaching them better. They would all trust Christ for the saving of their
souls, and that without dissembling, for ought any man can discern: Are all
these men justified? etc. A Chip of the same block with the former, in the use
of it Mr. Baxter as he has learned of them from whom he has received it,
levels against the very heart of Christ and his Gospel. Had he said with
James that to say we have Faith and not to have works, is to cozen our souls,
I should have said with him. But in that he speaks not of a soul-cozening
profession of Faith, but lays so horrid an imputation upon Faith it self,
this gives us cause to examine what Faith he means, that we may be able to
discern whether that Faith, or else Mr. Baxter by defaming it, go about to
cozen our souls, and so embrace the true friend and reject the Cheater.

This cozening Faith, according to Mr. Baxter, must needs be that which
squareth not in its nature and manner of justification with the justifying
Faith. viz. that Gospel Faith which (neither as a deed and work, as a work
of Moral duty, and work of our own righteousness, of our perfect and
meritorious righteousness, does begin and but begin to inright us to Christ
and justification by him, leaving to either virtues and works to perfect it:
but) as an instrument ordained and given us of God, by which we receive Christ
alone offering up himself a sacrifice for us to be cur whole righteousness to
justification, and that without works and in opposition to works.

That this is Paul's doctrine and Paul's justifying Faith, I suppose has been
enough evinced before: and shall (God assisting) be more fully eleared in its
due place, when I come to examine the reasons which Mr. Baxter brings to
prove his doctrine not to be opposite to Paul's, but the same with it.
Therefore in calling this Faith a soul couzening Faith, he proclaims Paul,
(yea Christ himself which revealed to Paul his Gospel) a cheater and couzener:
learning this calumniation from that Jewish and Pharisaicall generation from
which he has derived his Doctrine. Joh. 7. 12. But the testimony of the Holy
Ghost runs contrary to Mr. Baxters pronouncing them that join Works with
Faith as necessary conc^uses with it to Justification, to be the couzeners,
troublers, and subverters of men's souls. Col. 2. 4. Gal. 5. 12. Act. 15. 1. 24.

But to vindicate the Doctrine of the Protestant Churches (and therein also the
doctrine of the Gospel, both being one, and one (...)) from having any thing in
it that may give footing to this (...), that we teach a soule-couzening Faith:
and to manifest that Mr. Baxter does knowingly asperse the Doctrine of Faith,
and them that held it with this slander: I shall collect into a few heads the
doctrine which our Churches teach, yea which Mr. Baxter knows they teach, as
to this Question.

First then they affirm, That God has laid up in one Christ alone all
supplies for poor sinners to relieve them against all their spiritual wants:
of which supplies these 2 are principal ones, righteousness to justification,
and the Spirit to Sanctification. The one delivers from guilt and
condemnation; the other from the domination of sin and impotency to acceptable
obedience. The former stateth the sinner Rectum in Curia* righteous before God
again, having his sin pardoned and no more imputed: the latter spirituallizeth,
quickneth, and new forms him again to the will and image of God in holiness
and righteousness.

2 That whosoever receives one receives both these supplies from Christ, none
puts him on to justification, but puts him on to sanctification also: and so
becomes a new creature as well in reality as in relation: becomes inherently as
well as imputatively righteous by him.

3 That it is one and the same Faith which is isntrumental both to
justification and sanctification, though not by one and the same but by
several and different Acts. As my hand even the same hand is isntrumental
both to feed and cloth me, though not by the same but by different Acts. It is
the will of my benefactor (to hold my self to Mr. Baxters simily) having
ransommed me from Turkish thraldom and appointed me to honorable service in
his house, to leave open to me both his wardrop and his store* house or
promptuary of provisions, with a command that I should partake freely and
richly of both; that by the one I might be fitly habited and adorned, by the
other nourished and strengthened for honorable service to be done to him. In
both these my hand is isntrumental to serve and furnish me, yet by several
Acts. It neither fetches meat from his wardrop nor clothing from his Pantry
and Cellar, but by several Acts from both and either, what in both and either
is laid up for me; yet so as all is my Lords goods, and by my pertaking thereof
I am put into a capacity of doing him faithful and acceptable service. I need
not make the application, every one can do it for himself. The eternal King
having laid down the life of his own son for the ransom of my soul, has
opened to me all his treasuries in one and the same Christ, the treasury of his
blood and merits to purge me from the guilt of sin, and obligation to judgment
and vengeance, so that having put on Christ crucified my Law is done, my sin
forgiven, my nakedness and filthiness covered, and I stand in Christ as
perfectly righteous as if I had never offended: the treasury of his spirit and
spiritual gifts, sufficient to turn my water into wine, to renew my heart, and
to sannctifie me throughout, that henceforth I shall hate sin no less than
hell, and delight in the Law of God after the inner man, taking no less
pleasure in the holiness than in the happiness which are by Christ. The
eternal Father offers both together, and neither without the other. And the
same spirit which draws to one draws to both. The same Faith which apprehends
one apprehends both, is not a justifying except it be also a sanctifying Faith.
Yet by several Acts and from several treasuries in the same Christ, the same
Faith fetches justification from his satisfaction and new inherent
righteousness from the spirit of sanctification.

4 That as justification ought and does declare it self to the person
justified by its proper and immediate fruits, peace of conscience, joy in the
Holy Ghost, prizing Christ above all things, soul contentation in him, living
and dwelling upon him, selling all to enjoy him alone to righteousness and
salvation, counting all things dung and loss in comparison of him, emptying
our selves more and more of our own righteousness, of our owne-selfe
confidence, that he may be made out all at Gods Tribunal; repairing no more
to Abana^, Pharfar, no nor to Jordan it self, but to the one fountain of
Christ's blood, there to Wash daily and be clean; neither in this mountain nor
yet at Jerusalem, but in Christ alone to worship that we may be accepted: So
also sanctification does and ought to show it self to us and others by its
fruits* to our selves by the seeds and habits of love, righteousness,
holiness etc. affecting the heart within: To others by the fruits and works
of the spirit manifested in the practice without, viz. all the Acts of love,
mercy, goodness, sanctity, piety, charity, equity, patience, meekness, etc.
as also in subduing the flesh by the spirit, mortifying every evil affection,
fighting against every sin, that we may show our selves a peculiar people of
the Lord, zealous of every good work.

5 That justification and sanctification by Faith in Christ do evidence either
the other. He that can find himself truly justified may know himself to be
no less truly sanctified by Christ, because he that is in union with Christ so
as to be pertaker of his justifying and saving righteousness, by being so
joined to Christ is become one spirit with him, says the Apostle. The spirit
of sanctification discendeth and gives influence from the head to the whole
body and every member thereof. So on the other side, he that by being one
spirit is sanctified by the same spirit of Christ, may by this evidence know
himself that Christ by the same spirit is made righteousness to him, and is
in the same relation to God with Christ being justified, adopted, etc. a son
and heir with him to all the inheritance. Sanctification (I say) truly
understood is such an evidence, (for none are sanctified but the justified, and
all the justified by Faith, are sanctified) if it be sanctification indeed, it
may be made an evidence of justification.

6 Yet neither all seeming peace and quietness of conscience, or joy in
expectation of salvation, or hope that is made the ground of this joy, and such
other like seeming effects of Justification are always sure evidences to a man
that he is justified; because not always fruits or parts of sanctification, they
may proceed from another and baser principle, viz. from the deceitfulness of
their heart, or self-love, and self-advancing, or from the spirit of slumber
upon the conscience, or from ignorance of Gods way and method of bringing many
Children to glory: Nor are all seeming holiness, honesty, meekness,
temperance, patience, and other like virtues, either in their habit, as they
really affect the heart, or in their act, as they are with an ardent zeal for
God, brought forth into practice; sure evidences of sanctification by Christ:
because these also may proceed from other and baser principles, and not from
the Spirit of Christ, as from the abiding prints of the Law of Nature written
in the heart, or from the power and suggestions of a convinced and awaked
conscience, or from strong impressions made into the soul by a moral and
virtuous education, or other like sub-celestiall, and unspirituall principles.
So that our certain and known union to Christ, and our justification and
sanctification sensibly thence flowing, may be properly and unfailingly made
our sound evidence of the spiritual life and acceptablenesse of our virtues
and works: But these in themselves in no wise certain evidences and
demonstrations to us of our justification and sanctification by Christ.
Sanctification is one thing, and a zealous endeavor to be in all things
conformed to the will of God, is or may be another. The former is only from the
Spirit of Christ, and wrought only in them which are in Christ. The later may
proceed from moral principles, and is incident even to them also that are
aliens from Christ.

7 Nevertheless, even these virtues and good works do so far evidence, that
from the Negation of these, a man is certainly denied to be in Christ, or to
be justified or sanctified by the faith of Christ. I mean that whosoever can
allow himself in the habitual practice of any known sin, or rejection of any
known duty, that man may know himself, and be known of others to be an Alien
from Christ. Because whosoever is in Christ, is a new Creature, all things are
become new; not only in respect of his relation, but of his manners and
conversation also; and in whomsoever the Spirit of Sanctification dwells, it
dwells in a state of reign, not of bondage.

Withal, these virtues and good works, when they are found to flow from our
union to Christ, and the love of God shed abroad in our hearts through Christ:
and upon examination a man can truly say, that he has ceased to hew from any
other Q^arrie, or to dip from any other Fountain than from Christ, that from
his Spirit alone he daily sucketh life, as the branch from the root to bring
forth fruit, and from the sacrifice of Christ's death a sweet odor to make
himself and his fruit acceptable, then they serve as good seconds to prove to
his soul that he is justified and sanctified: But so that his being in Christ
must first prove his fruit to be good, before his fruit can have any power to
evidence him to be in Christ, and the evidence of both his justification and
sanctification consists not so much in the qualifications which he has
attained, or works which he does and has done, as in his continual waiting
upon Chrih, from him alone to receive what he ought to be and to do in all
wel-pleasing before God, and the love of God in Christ enabling to obedience.

8 That although Sanctification and the fruits thereof do each in its own
degree (as aforesaid) more or less evidence our Justification, yet have they
no concausality with Faith to the producing of it. All that are in Christ, are
Saints in Christ, yet their sanctity goes not before their being in Christ, but
is an immediate fruit thereof. The forgiveness of sin and Adoption does in
order go before their doing of acceptable service to God, and unacceptable
service cannot justify.

9 The grace of God which brings salvation [and justification] teaches men
to deny ungodliness, etc. and to live soberly, etc. Calls upon all to stretch
forth their Faith to apprehend to themselves in Christ both the imputed and the
inherent righteousness: so far is it from breathing a soul-cozening or a
soul-corrupting faith. Therefore is the justifying Faith called by the Holy
Ghost a most holy Faith, Jude 20. A [soule] purifying Faith, Act. 15. 9. A
sanctifying Faith, Act. 26. 18. Implying its efficacy as well to sanctify as
to justify, and that there is no true sanctification but that which is
instrumentally obtained, or at least received by Faith.

Lastly, that one chief end of our Justification is, that we bring forth
acceptable fruit to God here inchoate, hereafter in perfect obedience to God,
and conformity with him: And the Justifier does and will attain his end in
justifying; therefore brings none to glory, but such as have all virtues and
good works at least in their root and seed while they are here; and if after
their effectual calling they live to have time and opportunity, do not
unfeig^edly endeavor universally to declare the same in their practice. So
that to dream of any glorified man in heaven, that was not actually a Saint
upon earth, is a dream from hell, not from heaven.

All these things might have been largely proved both from the Scriptures and
our Protestant Writers; but that I esteem them all to be so known to be the
consenting asserteons of all our Churches, and by them so fully confirmed by
the word, that I should but abuse time to take it up in particularizing what is
in this Case so generally written and read.

I have been the more large in expressing the doctrine of the Protestant
Churches upon this Argument, to wipe off the stain which Mr. Br. has learned
of the Papists to lay upon it in this and the former quere, which are wholly
framed to beguile the weaker sort, having nothing in them to stagger the
Judicious. And now I leave it both to the strong and weak to judge, whether the
Accuser of the Brethren [himself] can possibly express more impudence and
falsehood in slandering the Churches of Christ than this man has done? or if he
had not bound himself to speak after the Jesuits and Monks whatsoever they
traducingly say, whether there be any color of reason for him to have laid
upon us these two accusations? To hold my self to that which I am now
examining, what is there in this Faith and Doctrine thereof, which I have
described, deserving to be called a soul-cozening Faith? And when he adds,
That Faith which is by many thought to justify (his meaning is, which all the
Protestant Churches and Divines teach) and which our people do all most easily
embrace, is the receiving of Christ for their Savior, and expecting pardon and
salvation by him, but not withal receiving him for their Lord and King, nor
delivering up themselves to be ruled by him. Let him now name that one Church,
or one Theologist in any one of the Protestant Churches that has so taught,
and divided the receiving of Christ, as Lord and King, from receiving him as
Savior and pardoner, in justifying Faith: or else confess that he has drunk
deeply into the Jesuits prenciples, that all equivocations, frauds, lies,
slanders, and whatsoever is worse than these, are all not only lawful, but
also meritorious, when practiced for the advanc^ment of the Triple Crown, and
the Holy Mother Church of Rome. We do indeed divide works from Faith, and
banish them from having any concausality with it in justifying: But let Mr. Br.
produce one that has divided Christ the King from Christ the Savior, or
denied him in either Title to be the object of justifying Faith: or any one
that has taught that to be a justifying Faith, which expects salvation from
Christ, but will not deliver up the soul to be ruled by him. I challenge Mr. Br.
to vindicate herein his reputation, and to manifest that he follows the
dictates of Natural conscience at least, and not of wilful malice against the
truth, by naming one that has taught any such thing. The Protestant Churches
and Writers are so clear herein, that they do not divide from justifying Faith,
the very Assent that there is a God, that he made the world, that he drowned
it, and repaired it; that Christ was the Son of the Virgin Mary, that he was
born at Bethlehem, circumcised at eight days old, disputed among the Doctors,
turned water into wine, and did many miracles, or whatsoever else the Scriptures
in the least things affirm to be true. All this the justifying Faith assents
to, neither can it not assent to every truth of the word; yet it so assents,
not as justifying. In this act it knows nothing but Christ and him crucified.
Much less do they so divide, as Mr. B. here against knowledge and conscience
objecteth. They so far show themselves abhorrent from it, that they utterly
deny any to come to the Kingdom of glory, but through Christ's Kingdom of grace.

But the Doctrine it self which here he renews about the object of Faith,
Christ as our Lord as well as our Savior, I have examined before in answer to
his fourth Argument. Thither I send the Reader for satisfaction what the
Protestants hold, and upon what grounds, here it is besides the matter to fall
into a new dispute about it.

It shall suffice here only to examine the new Argument which he brings to
prove, that the Doctrine which holds forth justification by Faith, is a
soul-cozening; but that which teaches justification by works, is a soul-saving
doctrine. For this is his meaning in what he disputes here of Christ the
Savior, and Christ the Lord made the object of justifying Faith, as he has
largely explayned himself before: And if he mean not so, all that he here
says is but a hunting after Grasshoppers in the snow to fight with them: For
none is there to be found opposing what he says in the words and phrase he
uses. But himself is a sure Interpreter of himself, and we must take him as
himself has explayned his meaning. And then his Argument is drawn from the
easiness or difficulty of receiving the one or the other Doctrine. It must be
a soul-cozening doctrine, which all are easily persuaded to be cozened with.
Thus we find him expressing himself in that part of the Query which is before
transcribed. Our people (says he) do all most easily embrace it; I meet with
no one but is resolved in such a faith, till it be overthrown by teaching them
better. They would all trust Christ for the saving of their souls, etc. And in
the following part of the Querie.

B. Let any Minister but try his ungodly people, whether they will not all be
persuaded very easily to believe that Christ will pardon and save them, etc.
But whether it be not the hardest thing in the world to persuade them really to
take him for their Lord, and his word for their Law, and to endeavor faithful
obedience accordingly? Surely the easiness of the former, and difficulty of
the later, seems to tell us, that it is a spiritual, excellent, necessary
part of justifying Faith, to accept unfeignedly Christ for our Governor, and
that part which the world among us will most hardly yield to, and therefore
has more need to be preached than the other. Were he a true Israelite in whom
there is no guile, which speaks, all this might be granted him. But because
he has fully declared, that he means by receiving Christ for our Savior,
justification by Faith in Christ the Redeemer, and by receiving him for our
Lord and Governor, justification by works, nothing can be safely granted to
him. The whole sum of his Argumentation amounts to this syllogism:

That doctrine of Justification which the multitude does easily embrace, is a
soul-cozening doctrine: but that which they are not without much difficulty
persuaded to receive, is a soul-saving doctrine.

But the multitude easily embraces Justification by Faith alone, and not
without difficulty Justification by works:

Ergo the former is a soul-cozening, the latter a soul-saving doctrine.

He must acknowledge that he thus argues, or argues nothing, or nothing to
the question. To the Proposition I distinguish first about the meaning of the
terms: And first about the word embracing or receiving, betwixt a vital or
effectual, and a merely historical embracing, betwixt a real receiving, and
an assent of the judgment that the thing is to be received: or more plainly,
believing, and a man's saying he does believe, or his profession of Faith. 2
Between that which is easy or difficult in it self, or to man's natural
ability: and that which God makes easy by the concurrence, or leaves difficult
by the withholding of his grace.

Having thus distinguished, in whatsoever sense he takes the Terms, I deny both
Consequen^^ of the Proposition. For if he mean only an external assent to the
verity and goodness of the doctrine, All men which have reason in their
understandings, and freedom in their wills, do with the like facility choose
that which is made out to them to be good, and refuse that which is made out to
them to be evil. Or if he mean a vital and effectual embracing, the doctrine
of Justification is alike difficult to all that are of the carnal multitude.
It is a spiritual doctrine, and the natural man receives not, cannot receive
spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Again if he mean an easines and difficulty in
it self and to man's natural ability, The true doctrine of Justification is
alike difficult, yea unpossible to all effectually to receive. None can come to
the Son except the Father draw him, Jo. 6. 44. But if he mean a facility and
easines of receiving by means of the concurrence of Gods grace making it easy,
then is it alike easy to all men that are helped alike by Gods grace; and alike
difficult, yea unpossible to all that are left destitute of it. So that the
easines or difficulty of persuading the multitude to entertain this or that
doctrine of Justification, can be no sure rule of concluding either doctrine to
cousen, or to save the soul.

Besides I deny the assumption in the whole and in both its parts. For how can
that which is a supernatural doctrine be easily received by natural men, the
whole stream of whose wisdom and will is against it: such as is Justification
by Faith in the redeemed? or that which is a natural doctrine dictated by
natural reason and conscience, (I mean a doctrine of natural right) be so
excedent in difficulty to receive: such as is Justification by works?

Mr. Br flies here to Experience to apologize for him. Try (says he) the
ungodly people, whether all would not, whether there be a man to be found that
will not easily be persuaded to believe that Christ will pardon and save them:
But whether it be not the hardest thing in the world to persuade them to take
Christ for their Lord, and to yield obedience accordingly, etc. Not to except
here against his words in which he puts a believing that Christ will pardon
and save, for a justifying Faith: (though when he does but dream he has taken
that advantage against another, as we have seen, he insults over him as over a
mock-man or puppet, and can hardly abst^in from tossing him in a blanket:) Nor
against the ill disposing of the parts of the Antithesis, glancing lightly over
that which he would blow off into a vapor, but giving its full weight and
power to that which he will have to stand: I shall take his words in that sense
in which he would be understood by as many as he has a hope to beguile. And
thus to his direction, try whether all do not profess their Faith in Christ the
Savior, that they trust and will trust in his merits alone for salvation and
pardon: I answer, Try the ungodly multitude whether they do not every Mothers
Child profess that they embrace Christ for their Lord, and that they do and
will yield obedience to him to their dying day, as well as God shall give them
grace?

Object. But they say and do not, profess but yield not actually this
obedience.

Answ. So the former also say and do not, profess a full reliance upon and
receiving of Christ for righteousness, but perform it not. For if they so
received Christ, they should have Rivers of living water flowing out of them,
Jo. 7. 38. of carnal should become spiritual, and of unclean, holy.

Nay if experience must be the judge, Mr. Brs Cause falls. I have tried it,
and by trial found it the hardest task to persuade the multitude to receive
Christ Crucified alone, to their justification and salvation. Prove the more
ungodly party, specially in the time of their distress, upon their deathbed,
or otherwise when their Conscience is awaked, and the terrors of God are upon
them: Seek now to persuade them to repose their affrighted souls upon Christ
their Altar, to trust in the Mediation of his blood, how averse are they? they
look upon Christ as a hard and strict man, a Judge, a Lawgiver, distributing
strict justice to every man according to his works. And they alas have no
virtue, or goodness, or holiness, to ingratiat themselves into his favor, but
sin enough to incense the very jealousy of his fury against them, therefore
dare not come to him because they have no worth of their own righteousness and
works that they can plead for themselves. Look to the more whited Pharisees,
the Saints of Mr. Brs forming: how hard is it to persuade them to cast off
their own righteousness that they may be found in Christ alone. They put on
their own rags first, and not Christ at all, but upon them. They thank God
they have served God from their youth up, have not defiled themselves with the
filth and iniquity which they have seen in others, have had such virtues, and
been full of such and such good works, therefore they doubt not but Christ will
recompense them with life and salvation. But he that seeks to spoil or to
persuade them to spoil themselves of the glory and power of such their virtues
and good works to justification, shall find it as hard a task as to wrest the
Club out of the hand of Hercules, as it is in the Proverb. Men after mine own
heart says Mr. Br. Be it so, yet that is nothing to the question, except they
be after Gods heart. And Mr. Brs Argument is hereby dissolved: For it appears
that it is not easy to persuade the multitude to receive Christ alone to
salvation.

But whether his chief scope in this his reasoning, be not to condemn all the
Protestant Churches of levity and impiety, for departing from Rome so easily in
thousands and ten thousands together, in so many Nations, and within so few
years, by the lure of this Libertine and soul-cozening doctrine (as he terms
it) I leave it to his own Conscience to judge. This himself makes evident, that
in the Articles of grace and justification, he holds it a damnable schism in us
so to have divorced our selves from Rome, and applies himself with all his
strength, to make up the breach, and bring us back again.

The rest which Mr. B. has interserted, and which follows in this Quere, is
light and ridiculous, prepared for the gulling of light and ridiculous men,
altogether beneath the weight and depth which is in Mr. Bax. and which he uses
when he deals with men like himself, solid and serious, at least in natural
and moral knowledge, such is that which he has, p. 327.

B. They all trust Christ for the saving of their souls, etc. Are all these
justified? [why not?] there wants a Moral and Theological sincerity; why is
that? but because they take but half of Christ. Not to speak here either of
the prime piece of knowledge here taught, wherein Moral and Theological
sincerity, i. e. Phylosophicall and Metaphysicall sincerity consists, viz. in
taking the whole and not the half of things: Nor secondly, of the man's
fastidious scorn of Scripture-terms, and his hunting after exotic words, to
dimm and stifle the purity and simplicity of the Gospel: I shall come to the
matter it self, and here I demand of himself,

1 Whether they which receive Christ crucified do not receive whole Christ?
Christ which by the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, says
the Apostle, Heb. 9. 14. What was there here wanting of whole Christ? There was
his divine nature, the Eternal Spirit offering, the humane nature himself
offered, and the same in the integrity and purity of its celestial endowments:
Without spot; if this be but half Christ, which is the other half?

2 Or because he understands by whole Christ, Christ in the fruits of all his
offices, (as is most probable) whether he will deny them to receive whole
Christ, which apply not all the several Acts and Fruits of his several
offices to one and the same end, but to several ends to which his wisdom has
appropriated them. Suppose a son of some Luke, that is a Physician, a Minister
of the Gospel, and a Father in his Family. If the said son shall make use of
the Acts and Fruits of all these Offices of his Father, not at all to one end,
but to the several ends to which they are proper; of his Art and Physic to
cure his diseased body, of his Gospeldoctrine to illuminate his understanding,
and heal his wounded soul, and of his provision of victuals to preserve his
life, and nourish his body: and not of physic, word and bread together, for
one and the same the nutriment of his body, shall this man therefore be said
not to own and receive his whole Father, but half of him? Even so the Offices
of Christ are various, and his actings in them tend to various ends, some to
our quickening, some to our enlightening, some to our justification, some to our
sanctification, etc. Do I take but half Christ, because I apply not all the
Actings and Fruits of all his Offices to my Justification only, and none of
them to the other honorable ends to which he has appointed them? who can bear
the absurdity?

3 Whether it be possible for any man (according to the rule and tenor of the
Gospel) by a lively faith to apply to himself the satisfaction of Christ's
death, and yet to remain unpardoned and unjustified? or for such a one to abide
unspiritualliz'd and unsanctfied? If not, then the reason why the multitude which
profes they trust Christ for the saving of their souls (as Mr B. is pleased to
phrase it) do remain unjustified, is because they profess, but have not a
lively faith in his death: and not (as Mr. Br. says) for want of I know not
what Moral, Theological, decompounded, fantastical sincerity consisting in
laying hold on the half of Christ, i. e. either his wounded, and not his whole
parts, or Christ the Mediator, not the Mediator Christ. I can no better
distinguish his meaning, since himself has refused to do it. Of the same nature
is that which he has, page 328.

B. Though some think nothing is preaching Christ, but preaching him as a
pardoning justifying Savior. Indeed among the Turks and Indians that entertain
not the Gospel, it is necessary to preach his pardoning office, yea and the
verity of his Natures and Commission: Therefore when the Apostles preached to
Jews and Pagans, they did first and chiefly teach them the person and offices
of Christ, and the great benefits which they might receive by him. But when
they preach (as James) to be professors of the Christian Faith, they chiefly
urge them to strive to enter, to fight that they may conquer, to run that they
may obtain, to lay violent hands upon the Kingdom, etc. Either all this relates
to Justification, or it is mere babble in the Air, sound without sense or
substance, as much to his purpose as was his that trudged about all the Town
from shop to shop to buy two pennyworth of Circumstance for the cure of his
toothache. For his quere is, whether our Doctrine which teaches Justification
by faith without works, do not confirm men in their soulcozening Faith. If all
does relate to justification, then let him that can find, help me, without help
I cannot find as much as a grain of reason in all or any part of it, such
reason at least as befits Mr. Br. who grounds all his Religion upon reason.

To the first Clause I stand stupefied, not knowing how to preach Christ to
justification, but as Christ the Justifier; to pardon, but as Christ the
pardoner; or to salvation, but as Christ the Savior. Should I preach him as a
condemner to justification, as an unpardoning Judge to salvation? As to his
justifying me as he is a Lawgiver, either there has been wanting something in
Mr. B. dexteriry of teaching, or in my docility to apprehend, I am yet to be
taught this lesson. All that he has said hitherto, has made it but odious and
absurd, and here he says no more to perfect it.

To that which follows, the absurdity of it does enough confute it self. Who
can endure to hear that the Apostles when they preached to Jews and Pagans
did; and we, if we should be sent to preach to the Turks and Indians, must
first preach Christ alone to justification, and so generate in them a soul-ct
zening faith: But when once they become professors of the Christian Faith, then
the Apostles did, and we must teach them better, urging them no longer to cozen
their souls with faith in Christ the Savior, but by their own works to
justify and save themselves. He that delights in such a Gospel, let him be Mr.
B. disciple.

It seems he is angry with James for not helping him erewhile in his great
exigency, that he singles out him from all the Apostles, to father him with
this intolerable doctrine. But whether James give him herein any relief, has
been before examined.

As for the rest of the Apostles, let Paul give the Testimony for himself and
them. There is one Lord and Mediator, Christ Jesus, one Faith, one Baptism,
one Lord and Father of all, Ephe. 4. 5. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Not two Christ's, and two
Faiths, one to cozen at first, and the other to save the soul afterward. If
Paul or an Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel then what you
have heard [from me at first while Pagans] let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8.
Therefore many years after the Romans and Galathians had been professors of the
Christian faith, he seeks to root them fast by faith alone in Christ, and not
to start from their first principles; reducing such as went a whoring after
works to help faith in justifying them, pronouncing them accursed, and
Apostates from Christ, that should so fall off from their first liberty in
Christ.

That all obedience, yea faith in Christ to all obedience, virtue and good
works is to be preached and urged upon them that profess the Christian faith,
is so true, that he is but a maimed preacher of Christ that does it not, but
all to sanctification, not to justification. This is the true Preacher of
Christ that preaches Christ to good works, not works to win Christ, that seeks
to bring us into Marriage-union with Christ, that we may bring forth fruit to
God, Romans 7. 4. Not that we should bring forth bastard-fruit from another, that
we may be married to Christ. But this is not Mr. Brs. business, he speaks of
fruit to justification.

To conclude what I have to say to this Quere, It is his doctrine that teaches
a soul-cozening Faith, a Faith made up of a fardle of works and rags of our own
righteousness, as in his larger definition of justifying Faith he has
described it.

CHAP. XIII.
Mr. Baxters calumny, that this doctrine does harden the Papists in their
Popery, and give occasion to many learned Protestants to turn Papists, answered.

HIS fifth Quere has no show of weight in it, deserving an examination,
savouring more of the Spleen than of the judgment of the Author. Nevertheless,
though it declares only the stomach and indignation of the man against the
truth, rather then any strength in his hand to hurt it: yet because it is
formed for the deceiving of the simple and unwary, upon whom sounds often times
take no less impression than actual strokes; to prevent damage to such I shall
examine whatsoever may seem material in it, as I have the rest.

B. pa. 329. 5. Lastly, Is not this excluding of sincere Obedience from
Justification, the great stumbling block of Papists? and that which has had a
great hand in turning many learned men from the true Protestant Religion to
Popery? That by obedience he means all moral qualifications and works as
they are virtues and works, we have before learned from his own words: so his
meaning is, that the Doctrine of Paul, and the Churches which follow him, viz.
Justification by Faith, and not by works, is guilty of the damnable and
pernicious evils which he here charge upon it. These evils are two.

1 It is the great stumbling block of the Papists.

2 It has carried back many learned men from the Protestant Religion to
Popery. To both these I shall speak in order. 1 Of its hardening the Papists in
Popery.

Is it not the great stumbling block to Papists? says Mr. Br. I answer, 1 Was
not Christ (and that in this very point of justifying the ungodly by an imputed
righteousness, without any inherent righteousness of their own) a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense to the Jews; as which they were so offended,
that to their eternal ruin, they reject the Gospel and salvation of Christ
unto this day? Romans 9. 32, 33. 1 Cor. 1. 23. 1 Pet. 2. 8. What then? must
Christ be anathematized? Nay, but let the truth of Christ stand, and man be the
liar, the transgressor: It is scandalum, acceptum non datum, an offense taken,
not given: And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in [or at]
Christ, Mat. 11. 6. Lu. 7. 23. But if any will be offended, and dash, the Lord
Christ admonishes him of the danger: Whosoever shall fall on this stone shall
be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder, Mat.
21. 44.

2 And as sound a reason is it that our doctrine of Justification hinders the
Papists from turning Protestants, as was that of some Statists that complained
against the Church of Geneva, that they hindered the conversion of Papists in
those parts, by forbidding dancing; and the like grave consideration by some
great Politicians in England, that the forbearing of Bull and Bear-baiting, and
other sports on the Lords day, hardened the Papists of Lancashire in their
Popery. When Religion is made a mere piece of policy, and to have in it at the
best no more than a dress of dreggish formality or morality, no marvail if such
dirty and unspirituall means are made use of to spread it.

3 But how deep does this effect lurk in its cause, so that only this one man's
sagacity can smell it out? That the Papists in the least things will not turn
Protestants, except we in the worst turn Papists. For this Article of
Justification is the greatest of all the questions controverted between us and
the Papists. All the rest not ingredients of, or merely relating to this, may
the Papists continue in (if not of malice or wilfulness) with a possibility of
salvation. They are but wood, hay, and stubble built upon the foundation, the
very builders whereof may be saved, but so as by fire, says the Apostle. But a
Trentified Papist, by the coherent judgment of the best Divines, cannot be
saved, because he holds not the foundation sure and pure, but mixeth man's
works with the grace of God in Christ to Justification. And their judgment is
grounded upon the authority of the Apostle: Ye are fallen from grace, Christ is
become void [or forfeyted] to you, whosoever are justified by works. An ardent
love to Romes shavelings out of doubt possesses Mr. Br. that he does not only
wish himself (as did the Apostle) but would make himself and all us accursed,
that they might be (not saved, but) damned with us. For if they reject all
other their errors, and practically retain but this one, by it they forfeyt all
the salvation of the Gospel.

4 Nay contrariwise, as long as this Article of the Gospel was diligently
preached, and stoutly maintained in the Protestant Churches, and that not with
qui^ks and quidities of humane Art, but by the nervous arguments of Scripture
alone: so long the Kingdom of Antichrist more and more decayed, and they which
were before marked up as slaves to that rival of Christ, brake the fetters,
and came in by thousands and ten thousands, taking the Kingdom by a holy and
violent force. But since the time this Doctrine has been less preached and
patronized, the Reformed Churches have been still in a languishing, and the
Antichristian Kingdom in a growing condition; as Mr. Br. himself, so great a
Reader, and so fully acquainted with the Ecclesiastical Histories, must
necessarily grant. And why has this stop to the promoting of the Gospel befaln
the Churches, but that the Lord Christ does herein declare his offense taken
against us for not making him our all, that he also cease so victoriously,
as in former times to vouchsafe his presence among us?

5 But since Mr. Br. is leapt home to them, and many foot beyond many of the
more moderate sort of them, in the point of justification by works, and so has
removed the slumbling-block, let him speak by experience, how many of them are
come in to him to be his Proselytes, rejecting the Papacy, and other their
Popish errors. Or whereas his Friends the Arminians have in this and many other
of their Tenants so many decads of years closed fully with them, where is the
confluence of Papists to them seen, that shaking off their former opinions and
practices, profess themselves Converts? A Cardinals Hat perhaps has been sent,
or a fat Bishopprick promised to some of the most deserving men among them (in
relation to the Romish Cause) to allure them to further and higher deservings
of this kind. But the holy Mother Church (I warrant you) sticks where she was.
If she should permit but one stone of her Fabric to be loosed, it might cause
a crack in the whole.

This part of the Quere I shall therefore upon these Considerations leave as
reasonless, and examine the next whether there be any more reason in it.

To the 2d. That it has had a great hand in turning many learned men from the
Protestant Religion to Popery.

1 I demand whether there be not a contradiction in the Quere? How were they
ever escaped from the dreggs of Popery, that yet held Justification by works,
which is the very root out of which all other Popish errors almost spring, and
by it self alone is worse than all the rest?

Or how can such persons be said to have turned from the Protestant Religion,
that joined not with the Protestants in the very Foundation. Let all the
Confessions of all the Protestant Churches be read, and but one produced that
has not with all defiance r^j^cted justification by works as a foul
abomination. They must needs be very learned men, that had learned this
mystical Art of turning in Religion from them to whom they were not joined,
unto them from whom they were never severed.

2 If any have so turned, they went out from us, but they were not of us; for
if they had been of us, they would without doubt have continued with us: But
they went out from us, that they might be made manifest that they were not of
us, 1 John 2. 19.

3 Nevertheless they that are truly learned, i. e. which have the mystery of
Christ revealed to them, not by flesh and blood, but by their Father which is
in heaven, that have learned as the truth is in Christ Jesus, that have been
taught of God, and have so heard and learned of the Father, that by his
teaching they come to Christ, being drawn and given to Christ by the effectual
teaching of God: these shall never turn back again; They are built upon the
Rock, and all the gates of Hell shall not prevail against them: It is the will
of the Father, that of all those which are thus given to Christ, he should lose
nothing, but raise it again at the last day, Mat. 16. 18. Ephesians. 4. 21. Jo. 6.
45. 39.

4 By the vanity, levity, changes and whirlings of these learned ones in humane
literature, the Lord is pleased to publish to the world how vain, and of no
power such learning is (while unsa^ctified) to true blessedness. I thank thee O
father, etc. that thou have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and
have revealed them to babes, Mat. 11. 25. I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent, says the Lord.
Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world?
Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20.
Professing themselves wise, they became fools, [because] they became vain in
their imaginations, Romans 1. 21, 22. So vain, that they bring the transcendent
mysteries of divine things to be tried in the scales of humane reason, and that
which the Apostle says is falsely called Science, i. e. philosophical
learning. A due stroke of Gods judgment upon them that will be wise without
Christ, and against him; that while they will dispute, and in their
disputations subject the doctrines of Faith (which can have no other foundation
but the authority of the word) to the rules and principles of secular Arts,
they shall with all their Art and Learning, dispute themselves out of Christ,
out of Happiness.

5 No more has befaln them herein, than God had before threatened should be the
doom of such. Because they received not the love of the truth that they might
be saved: For this Cause God shall send them strong delusions that they should
believe a lie, that they might all be damned who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 10. 12.

6 And most justly, for pride goes before destruction. And what higher degree
of pride, than that an impure worm should swell with such an opinion of his own
righteousness, that he will refuse the life and salvation which are by Christ,
except his own righteousness be valued at so high a rate by the eternal God,
as to constitute him worthy of it? Yet such is the high spirit of these
self-righteous workers, that they will enter heaven, triumphing in their own
strength and righteousness, or else refuse to enter. Magis honorificum est
habere aliquid ex merito (says Bellarmine, speaking of Merit) quam ex sola
donatione; ideo deus ut filios suos magis honoraret, etc. It is more honorable
to have something of merit than of mere gift; Therefore God, that he might the
more honor his Children, has made a way that they should get to themselves
eternal life by their own merits. To the same purpose is that of another of
the same nest, Absit ut justi vitam eternam expectent, ut pauper Tapper. in.
Art. Lovan. Tom 2. art. 9.
Eleemosynam, multo enim gloriosius est, ipsos quasi victores and triumphatores
eam possidere, tanquam palmam suis sudoribus debitam. i. e. Far be it that the
righteous should expect eternal life, as a poor man does an Alms. For it is
much more glorious that they should possess it, as conquerours and triumphers
do the Crown due to their labors. When this arrogant conceit once possesses M.
Brs. learned men to make themselves glorious by their ecclypsing of the glory
of Gods grace, no marvail if we see them not so much turning as turned out
among the dogs and swine. How can ye believe which seek honor one of another,
and not the honor which is of God only, John 5. 44.

7 Yet for one that Mr. Br. can mention, who in hatred of this Doctrine has
made a defection from, I dare to undertake to produce hundreds that by the
sweetness of it, and demonstration of the Spirit in preaching it, have been
drawn to the profession of the Protestant Religion. It is a conclusion of
Luther, lamenting the schisms and Controversies stirred in the Churches about
lighter and lesser things: That if these had been laid aside, and this one
Article of Justification by Faith alone had been by the counited labors of all
the Churches, most of all (though not only) preached and continued to be
preached to this day, says he, the whole Kingdom of the Pope had by this time
laid wholly shivered. How adversatively do the spirits of Luther and Mr. Br.
fight either against the other? Yea of the many learned that Mr. Br. speaks of,
we can find him particularizing but one, his St. Grotius, page 331. thus,

B. This Doctrine was one that helped to turn off Grotius to Cassandrian
Popery. See Grotij votum, 21, 22, 23. 115. Is Grotius so turned off? most
likely is it sure, that Mr. Br. will follow him, and truly we may add [if not]
this doctrine, surely that which is worse has turned off Mr. Br. to Triden^ine
and Jesuitized Popery: See Mr. Brs. Aphorisms, not in four pages only, but
almost in all the passages of that Book and its Appendix: And thus Grotius and
he make up (if not many, yet) a number of learned men turned to Popery.

This shall suffice to have said to the matter of Mr. Brs. Quere; But memorable
and worthy to be written upon the purest crystal waters, where he that can may
read them, are the reasons which Mr. Br. annexeth, for which this Doctrine has
had a great hand in turning many learned men to Popery, viz.

B. pa. 329. When they see the language of the Scripture in the forecited
places, so plain [that no mortal eye can discern it] to the contrary: When
Illyricus, Gallus, Amsdorfius, etc. shall account it a heresy in George Major,
to say that good works are necessary to salvation: And when, if Melchior Adamus
(say true) eo dementiae and impietatis ventum erat ut non dubitarent quidam
haec axiom ata propugnare; Bona opera non sunt necessaria ad salutem: Bona
opera officiunt saluti. Nova obedientia non est necessaria. When even
Melanctons credit is blasted for being too great a friend to good works; though
he ascribe not to them the least part of the work or office of Christ: And when
to this day many Antinomian teachers, who are magnified as the only Preachers
of free grace, do assert and proclaim, That there is no more required to the
perfect irrevocable Justification of the vilest Murderer or Whoremaster, but
to believe that he is justified, or to be persuaded that God loves him. And
again, p. 331. This Doctrine was offensive to Melancton,

Bucer, and other moderate Divines of our own. What of all this? and what is
the issue at last? Therefore these learned men with great learning and wisdom,
took the advantage Cum ratione in sanire, like a pampred horse, with a fly in
his tail, to catch the snaffle in the teeth, and in great indignation to runn
mad to Rome. Who else but Mr. Brs. learned men could have expressed so much
grace and wit? And it seems they were all fellow-students in the same School,
else could not their good wits have jumpt together upon so pretty a slight. And
it seems Mr. Br. by his exagitation of the damnable doctrines of the
Antinomians in our days, does tacitly invite the learned to join with him in
prosecuting the same learned device.

As to the matter of these several particulars, somewhat, yet not much is
needful to be said. 1 To that of George Major, etc. Mr. Br. here discovers
fully (what elsewhere in this his Tractate he does not totally hide) his enmity
and swelling against the first reformation of the Churches by Luther and
others, that he accounts it a schismatic defection, not a due reformation.
He spares the names of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, etc. lest his spitting in
their faces, should make his own odious to all knowing Christians: But the
Doctrine which he reprehendeth under the names of Illyricus, Gallus,
Amsdorfius, etc. he knows to be the frme which those former Divines, which all
the Protestant Churches have taught and propugned. Concerning Gallus, either
what he was, or what he did, I can give no account. Illyricus is reported by
some to have been somewhat hot and heady in prosecuting all that he undertook;
but that at any time he entered the lists with George Major, I find not. This I
find, that they both lived and conversed together at Jenes in the same
University, and were both adversaries to Strigelius a famous Divine, unto whom
between them they procured great persecution: But Amsdorfius was one of those
eminent instruments of Christ in the reformation, who bare the burden and heat
of the day, was a Colleague with Luther in the University of Wittenberg at the
first dawning forth of the Gospel, his yoke fellow in the labor^ and in the
sufferings of the Gospel, both in prosperous and difficult times one and the
same; Holding fast the same principles which were laid in his heart while a
young man, even to his old age, and death, which God prolonged until the 88.
year of his age. I know not any one professed Protestant that has aspersed him
for any thing that in all that time of so long a life, he either committed or
omitted, as unworthy of a learned and faithful Minister of Christ, until the
candor of M. Br. has now done it. Truth it is, that George Major in his time,
about a hundred years sithence, when Luther was dead (not daring so to do while
he was living) set forth some propositions and disputations of the necessity of
good works to salvation; and finding himself quickly encountered, he after more
fully explained himself, or rather endeavored to make his Doctrine the more
smooth to be swallowed, by allaying it thus: That we are justified by faith
only, but not saved without works. So that good works are necessary though not
to justification, yet to salvation. At this his Doctrine, as all the Churches
and their Ministers were much offended, so were there many that confuted it;
among others Strigelius, Wigandus, and this Amsdorfius, who wrote against him
his Bona opera officiunt saluti: Good works are hindrances of salvation. A
proposition I acknowledge not well sounding in words; but the substance of
Treatises is not to be judged always from their Titles; This work of Mr. B. has
a golden Title, Aphorisms of Justification: until a man has read the Book, he
would have supposed from the Title, they had bin Aphorisms to maintain, not to
destroy Justification by free grace. So on the other side the Paradoxical sound
of Amsdorfius his titular position, does in no wise deny his Treatise thereon
to be orthodox, except Mr. Br. can produce any thing thence to prove that he
affirms good works in themselves to be so, and not only in the sense wherein
George Major affirms them necessary to salvation. Or why this Assereion stiffly
maintained by George Major, should not be counted a heresy in him as well as
in the Papists, or the Pharisees before them, I see no other reason but this,
that then Mr. Br. having more worthily deserved than he, will be thought fit to
be honored with the Title of Doctor in the same profession.

2 To that of Melchior Adamus, I say no more, but that the Testimony of an
Adversary without proofs is unworthy, or at least incompetent to bow our
belief to it. What wresting and curtilating there is of their sentences, whom
in this case such men would defame, is obvious to every man's notice. He should
in stead of his Individuum vagum, his quidam, have named some singular persons,
and at least have quoted some of their writings, in which they have propugned
such assertions, that we might have searched and found whether it were so, if
he would have been believed. Otherwise, if these things were only for
disputations-sake handled in the Schools, this argues not the propugners to be
of that judgment.

3 What he says of Melancton and Bucer, whether it be true or false, is of the
like moment. Be it that some crazie brains, or corroding sonns of Momus (with
whom the world too much at all times abounds) envied because they could not
match, and sought to defame, because they envied the excellent parts of these
two Worthies, was either of them so wise and learned, as to run headlong from
Christ to Rome, upon it? Nay, this is a piece of learning which Mr. B. and his
Grotius have of very late years learned and taught. The true servants of Christ
in former times were so little scholasticall, that they were ignorant in this
Art. Yet whether Melancton after the death of Luther gave not some occasion to
the Protestant Churches to mourn till this day for the yet remaining fruits of
his timorousness, or (as Mr. Br. will have us call it) moderation, I leave to
the wise who are acquainted with the passage of those times, to judge. But I
never understood any such thing imputed to Bucer, or that he has left any
other but a sweet savor behind him. Nor any thing that can so dim the worth of
Melancton, that his name should not be in continual veneration among the
Saints: For who can say he is without his infirmities? But in the point of
Justification by Faith only, he was sound till death.

4 But what he says of the Antimonian Teachers what they preach at present,
and yet are magnified for the only preachers of Free Grace, is that which
startles Mr. Br. and makes him run many furlongs beyond Grotius. If his have
had not put him out of breath, he might have told us what places of England are
haunted with these Spirits, that we might have shunned them. Why should a man
of such animosity that scorns to look upon Colier, Hobson, Spriggs, and such
like fellows, be so troubled about these unconsiderate animals which he here
mentions: what the former three are I do not know; yet by what I have heard
of them, I should think them not so inconsiderate as these, to affirm
justifying faith to consist in a man's believing that he is justified, or in a
persuasion that God loves him? But that there are either more than one
fountain opened for the purging away of sin, or any other propitiation for
our sins set forth by God. Besides Christ alone, or any other means to
effectuallize it to the chief sinners besid^s faith in his blood, or that the
justification which is by Faith, i^ (according to the tenor of the Gospel)
revocable, I am so far an Antinomian of Mr. B. defining, to deny, and cannot
find him so learned a Papist or Pharisee to prove it.

There is nothing else which I see in this Quere which he has not in substance
said, and so has been examined before, or else will more properly offer it
self to examination in that which remains to be examined. And this shall
suffice to have said to that one and yet five-fold Argument comprehended in his
five Quere's.

CHAP. XIV.
Mr. Baxters last Argument drawn from the Testimony of many approved Authors
Examined and Answered.

HIs last Argument is drawn from the testimony and authority of many eminent
Divines in the Protestant Churches, which he says have taught and published
this doctrine before him. This Argument is principally urged not in the
Aphorisms, but the Appendix. And although Mr. Br. tell us, App. p. 111. that he
alleges them (not to confirm his doctrine, but) to show that he is not
singular, but has the concurrent judgments of others therein: And App. p. 167.
and 188. that he does it to satisfy them which charge him with singularity,
not as an appeal to man: Yet it is too evident that his purpose herein is to
abuse the less knowing and considering part of his Readers with this more then
with the most of his other Arguments. Great names he knows do make deep
impressions upon the fancies of men that have much of affection, but little of
judgment. And that these look not so much to the matter as to the men. Could
they think Mr. Br. has here said no more then these and these confessedly
pious and learned Worthies have said before him, they will take him for a
blasphemer that shall say against him. Therefore he musters together so many
choice vessels and precious servants of Christ, trusting to the either
imbecility or credulity of his vulgar Readers, that either they cannot or will
not examine and compare these and Mr. B. together, and then Mr. Br shall be
taken to be of the same spirit with Dr. Preston, Dr. Twisse, Calvin, Pareus,
Perkins, and the other renowned Divines whom he alleges, and then also it
must be all truth that he has said, after such men, and whosoever shall oppose
him must be brought forth to be stoned.

But where is the man's sincerity that will be justified by the moral sincerity
of his obedience and works? Was it not wholly banished from him, when he cited
these men as concurring in judgment with him, when he knows them all to detest
his assertions against which we except, more then death it self, and that many
of them have jeoparded, and some of them laid down their lives and blood to
give testimony to the contrary Assertions? Or will Mr. B. name any one of these
at whose judgment his doctrine shall stand or fall, as true or erroneous? Why
does he thus abuse the simple, thereby discovering his impudent fallaciousness
to the intelligent, with whom elsewhere he seeks chiefly to ingratiat himself?
But come we to the Testimonies which he alleges.

Bax. 1 Mr. Wallis, Faith is an accepting of Christ offered, rather then a
believing of a Proposition affirmed? App. p. 111. Who has denied this? Or what
is this to Justification by works? It may possibly be something to the Question
not considerately there proposed; but nothing at all listing with that
conclusion, to which all the rest which he delivers are but preparatives.

Next to Mr. Wallis he alleges Dr. Preston, at the end of the same page. The
six first Positions wherein he affirms him to speak the same thing with
himself, I see no sound reason why any should except against. But if Mr. B. or
Dr. Preston, or Paul, or an Angel from heaven shall deduce erratick and
erroneous Conclusions from those Premises, they are not to be heard, but
resisted at the face. None of the worst Heretics but agree in some principles
with the most Orthodox, yet this nothing hinders but that the assertions in
which they dissent may be altogether pernicious.

How far and how unanimously all the Protestant Churches maintain the seventh
point wherein Mr. B. affirms this pious and learned Doctor to agree with him,
has been before fully expressed, in the examination of the fourth Argument. So
that it is useless here to run over so many passages of the Author, from p.
112. to p. 117. of the Appendix, to declare that this one man says what all
the rest say and hold with him, viz. That justifying Faith is an accepting of
Christ as Lord and Savior. But what is this to the substance of the question
to which Mr. B. answers?

Where it is objected to Mr. Br Qu. 14. that he so lays this position, that
he may thereby lay a groundwork for Justification by works? Does Dr. Preston
to this end make Christ as Lord the object of Justifying Faith? or any where
affirm him to be offered as a Lawgiver or Commander of moral works and
duties, to our justifying? Much less does he affirm that such works have any
thing to do with Faith in justifying.

A notable skill has Mr. Br in confounding when he should divide and
distinguish, and in distinguishing when there is no need; as either may serve
to his purpose. He knows that Dr. Preston when he treats of the New Covenant,
comprehends under it the whole doctrine and all the Promises of Grace made Yea
and Amen in Christ; as the same Christ is given to us not only to
Justification, but also to regeneration, illumination, sanctification, and
whatsoever the Grace of the Eternal Father has made him to us. And when he
treats of Faith, he handles it as the instrument by which not only
Justification, but also all the other benefits of Christ may be made ours, in
receiving Christ the treasury and spring of all appropriated to us. Therefore
in describing the New Covenant he describes it in general as the womb of all
the blessings which are attainable by Christ, and not of Justification and
Salvation alone. And in describing Faith he describes it as the instrument by
which we apprehend and appropriate to our selves, not only Christ as
righteousness and salvation, but also as wisdom and sanctification, yea all
that tends to the perfecting of a poor sinner, to our selves. Therefore is it
that he speaks more largely of the Covenant, and treats more fully of it then
needed, if he had been to speak of it only to Justification and Blessedness:
and that he speaks of Faith more largely, and mentions other acts of it then
are required to this one end: And necessarily must he so do, else should he
have maimed both the Covenant of Grace, and the Faith of Christ. Here
whatsoever Dr. Preston speaks of the Covenant and Faith in general, of which
some part belongs to the interessing of us to sanctification and other
blessings which are by Christ, Mr. Br to beguile his Reader, confounds and
confineth to Justification, as being spoken of it alone. When contrariwise the
Doctor does enough clearly express the distinct benefits of the Covenant, and
the distinct acts of Faith receiving the distinct benefits; in the very words
which he alleges out of him, App. p. 117. Thou shall receive the gift of
Righteousness wrought by him, for an absolution for thy sins, and for a
reconciliation with me: [This is our Justification] And thereupon thou shall
grow up in love and obedience toward me [This is our sanctification.]

But suppose he should have affirmed that Faith, as it cleaves to Christ, not
only for the sprinkling of his blood for Justification, but withal for the
effusion of his spirit to sanctification, and the shedding forth of his beams
for illumination, and the stretching forth of his Almighty arm for
supportation, etc. does in all these acts justify: as some Divines do seem to
speak, though (without prejudice to their reputation) not enough advisedly: yet
both he and they are so far from making either the most spiritual knowledge and
wisdom, which are the immediate fruits of illumination; or love, righteousness,
and holiness, and their acts or works which are the immediate fruits of
sanctification, to be in any respect useful to justification; that they
utterly deny, peace, joy, and hope, the immediate fruits of Justification, to
be any way effectual and useful in this business. But I find not Dr. Preston
any where laying that groundwork, much less erecting such a building on it.

To the five last points if Mr. Br hold them in that which I have expressed to
be Dr. Prestons sense, yea which himself expresses to be his own sense, I have
nothing to say against him. The tenth only excepted, to which I must be also
mute, because neither does Mr. Br alledg what the Doctor says, and I have not
that Treatise of his to inform me.

But all this is but a playing with holy things, he might as well have said Dr.
Preston consents with him in confessing there is a God, a Christ, a
Justification, a man, a sinner to be justified, as have said most of what he
has here said. We expected he should have produced testimonies of other
Divines speaking in common with him, what he speaks in common with the Papists,
in opposition to the doctrine of the Protestants.

In his Appendix, p. 167. and thenceforth to the end of the Book, he brings a
new supply of Testimonies, which he intituleth

Bax. Sayings of excellent Divines; added to satisfy you who charge me with
singularity. I shall examine so many of them as have any show of agreement with
Mr. Br in those things wherein he fights against the doctrine of the Protestant
Churches.

Bax. 1 He alleges Dr. Twisse his discovery of Dr. Jacksons vanity, p. 528.
What one of our Church will maintain that any one obteins actual Redemption
by Christ without Faith? esspecially considering that redemption by the blood
of Christ, and forgiveness of sins are all one. Ephesians. 1. 17. Col. 1. 14. How
prettily would he here instill into the thought of his Reader, that Dr. Twisse
is a man of levity, here a subverter of Antinomianism, whereof in his
Aphorisms, p. 173. he complained him to be a Pillarer? that here he subverteth
Justification from eternity, whereof elsewhere he is an assertor? Nay here he
speaks of the Justification which is by virtue of the New Covenant, of the
obteining of it actually to our selves. This neither Papist nor Protestant,
neither Dr. Twisse no^ Mr. Br ever affirmed to be without Faith.

Bax. 2. Bishop Hooper cited by Dr. Jackson. Christ only received our
infirmities and original disease, and not the contempt of him and his Law.
Expounded by Dr. Twisse against Dr. Jackson, p. 584.

His meaning in my judgment is only this, that Christ has made satisfaction
for the imperfection of our faith and holiness, although we continue therein
until death: But he has not made satisfaction for the contempts and hatred of
his word, etc. in case men do continue therein unto death.

Here is nothing of that which Mr. B. hunts after, that Christ has satisfied
for no offense, no infirmity committed against the New Covenant, but this alone
is the sum of it, that they shall have no benefit by Christ, no one sin
committed against the Law or Gospel pardoned to them, who live and dye
impenitent and unbelievers. According to that of our Savior, Jo. 8. 24.
Therefore I said unto you ye shall dye in your sins, for if ye believe not that
I am he, ye shall dye in your sins.

B. 3 Alstedius Distinct Theol. cap. 17. p. 73. The Condition of the Covenant
of Grace, is partly Faith, partly Evangelicall obedience, or holiness of life
proceeding from Faith in Christ. 1 In how different a sense from Mr. B. the
Protestants take the word Condition has been before expressed. 2 But in that
sense in which they [that use it] take it, it is one thing to be the condition
of the New Covenant, another to be the condition of Justification, which is but
one of many benefits of the Covenant of Grace. Had Alsteed in the Explication
of himself affirmed holiness of life a condition of justification, we should
have had it at the full from Mr. B.

About the second thing wherein he alleges this man's testimony, I know no man
questioning Mr. B. Neither is his next Testimony alleged from Sadeel, any
thing of all the things wherein Mr. B. joyneth with the papists against the
Protestants, therefore I spare the labor to transeribe it.

B. 4 Rivet in disputat. de satisfactione. God was not bound to accept the
satisfaction performed by another though sufficient, etc. Therefore there was a
necessity that a Covenant should intercede, and God himself propound a Mediator.

That there must an agreement intercede on his part who was satisfied, without
which the satisfaction had been in vain.

Idem. ibid. These. 4, 5, 6.

The act which in satisfaction God performs, is of a supreme judge, relaxing
his own Law and transferring ^he penalty of it upon another: so that in this
relaxation Gods supreme dominion may be observed, etc. And by the transferring
the penal^y from the sinner, and exacting it of the surety; the relation of a
party offended, as such, is rem^ved from God, etc. J^. 4 12.

God did relax his Law as being positive, and so relaxable, it is abrogate,
etc. The rest is off from the Qu^stion.

To what purpose he here produces the Testimony of this famous Doctor, except
it be to declare his consent with himself and Grotius, that the Law is not
abrogated but relaxed only, by means of Christ's mediation; I know not. If so
Rivet has nothing for him, but much directly against him. 1 He affirms what no
rational man ever denied, that the Grace of God is free and not bound. How
else should it be Grace? 2 Yea it is free not only from Co-action, but from
absolute necessity also. Only the purpose of God being presupposed, that he
would so save by grace as that no one title of his justice should fall, it was
necessary there should be the interceding of a Covenant and a Mediator. But is
this to any other purpose then what he concludes with, viz. [to fill up the
vacant pages, p. 188.] 3 That there must also an agreement or Covenant to this
end pass between the Father and ^he Son; is ours not his doctrine. 4 The
relaxation of the Law in passing this Covenant between the Father and the Son,
is the common doctrine of all protestants, as also that this is an act of
Supreme dominion of God that is under no Law. But when this Covenant is
ratified, so that Christ becomes the undertaker, and God the accepter of
satisfaction in relation to them for whom the satisfaction is made, so that the
penalty of the Law as to their sins, is transferred upon Christ: whether the
Law be not so abrogate to them, that they are no longer under the Curse of it,
is the thing in question. And here Dr. Rivet gives his verdit for us against
Mr. B. That to these the Law is abrogate, and God no more stands in the
relation of a party offended against them. What more proper sword-man could he
have brought forth to have hewn in pieces his own Cause?

B. 5 Dr. Twiss, vindic. great. and against Cotton, and consid: of Til. Syn.
Dort. etc. What does he mean by citing the Testimony of this Doctor so
frequently, and catching fragments from him, whom he knows in the whole bulk of
his works to destroy what himself would set up? yea though he complains against
him for erecting the main pillar of Antinomianism, will he at length become his
Disciple and build pillars with him. Dr. Twisse does enough wash his hands from
Mr. Br doctrine, even in these passages here cited from him, as I could fully
manifest. But because I see the task would be tedious to examine particularly
every particular testimony which he cites: The same persons speaking in
several of the quoted places the same thing, and many speaking no more then
one at once has said before: I shall therefore abridge my self, in showing in
general the dissenting judgment of those writers from him, however he would
deceive his Reader with a credulous opinion that they consent with him. This
will be done with an easy labor: when contrariwise to speak singularly to
every singular testimony, would not yield forth fruit worthy the labor.

First then all the Testimonies of Dr. Twisse, Append. p. 172, 173. That of
Junius, p. 173. of Pareus, Piscator, Aretius, p. 174. Dr. Willet, p. 179, 180.
Mr. Burges of Justification, p. 187. are here compiled to tell them that are no
friends to the doctrine of grace, (though it alone must befriend them if they
will be saved) that all these Divines consent with him in his doctrine, first
of a universal conditional redemption or justification purchased by Christ,
without any more effectual satisfaction made to the justice of God for them
that shall be saved, then for them that shall be damned: and secondly that
moral obedience and good works are Concauses or Collateral conditions with
faith to justification.

To manifest how faithful he is in these his allegations, I shall briefly
express what the judgment of all Protestants is about these points, that the
advised Reader may judge whether these dissent from the rest and prepared the
way for Mr. Br to prosecute his Assertions.

1 They grant that the promulgation of righteousness and life is to be made
universally and conditionally to all. God knows who are his, but the Heralds
of his grace know not. Therefore by the command of Christ they are to testify
this word of life to all without exception, promising upon condition of
believing, in the name and by the word of Christ, righteousness and salvation.
In mean time they meintein, Christ has satisfied only for those that the
Father has given him, so effectually as that by virtue of Christ's purchase
they shall receive power from above to believe unto salvation.

2 They are wont often to use the word salvation (as the Scripture also does) for
glorification hereafter: and so take it as a distinct thing from justification:
and involve into the condition of salvation more then into the condition of
Justification.

3 By the word Condition they understand often all the necessary antecedents, and
sometimes also the necessary consequents either of justification or salvation.
But so as they term such Antecedents the conditions, without which going before
those ends cannot be attained, and those Consequents the conditions without
which following we cannot attain the certain knowledge that we are justified
and inrighted to glory.

4 That as often as they speak of conditions of justification, they mean the
justification of the New Covenant, not the justification immanent in God, or
that which Mr. B. calls Christ's own justification as the public person, Aph.
p. 195.

5 They utterly deny moral obedience and good works to be in any other sense a
condition of justification, but as it is a consequent thereof to evidence it.
Mr. B. indeed, as if he had not enough injured Mr. Burges, by making him in
some kind a Patron of his Whimsies, in prefixing his name to this his Book,
Dedicating it to him as above others an eminent Fautor of such doctrines; would
willingly here also draw him quasi obtorto collo, to be the Founder of this his
Jesuiticall error, as he makes him out, App. p. 187, 188. But I have before
showed that the preaching of repentance and the preaching of Faith for the
remission of sins, are in Gospel language one and the same thing. If Mr. Burges
mean otherwise (but so as law confident of the contrary) I should put no
difference in the authority of Mr. Br and Mr. Burgess in this assertion. The
same force he uses to draw Dr. Willet to be of his part, p. 180, 181. where
indeed in one clause the Doctor seems to me to have verified that proverb,
Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus: yet without giving thereby any advantage to
Mr. B. yea he speaks directly opposite to him.

6 They deny all causality of good works to salvation.

7 Much more a concausality in the same kind with Faith, and the satisfaction
of Christ.

8 Most of all, that they in any rational sense merit it.

9 Or that as they make up the inherent righteousness of man to be a
Collateral with the sacrifice of, or righteousness which is by Christ, to
Salvation; so that we are saved by works, for works, as by Christ and for
Christ. All this dirt they leave to Mr. B. to lick off from the nails of the
Jesuits, bidding defiance against it as a Cursed doctrine. What they understand
then of works as a condition of Salvation, is in this comprised; that to
salvation already attained, they have the relation of an adjunct consequent,
and effect: But to the salvation hereafter to be attained, the relation of an
Adjunct antecedent and disponent, as also of an Argument confirming the hope
and assurance thereof. They express themselves usually in the phrase of that
Father, (though possibly misunderstood by some) Via regni sunt, non causa
regnandi, which some do, all should thus construe (not that they are the way to
the Kingdom above, Christ alone being this way, but) they are the way of the
Saints which are Christ's spiritual Kingdom: according to that of the Apostle,
We are saved, not by works, for etc. God has ordained us to walk in them, Ephesians.
2. 8-10. in the way of sanctification are they to be found, not in the ways of
iniquity and prophanness, who are inrighted by Christ to salvation.

Let now the vast difference and contrariety in so many particulars between M.
Brs. and these Divines opinions, about this Question be considered, and then
let it be judged whether Mr. Br. had not taken his leave of all bashfulness,
when he would impose on his Readers an opinion, that he delivers upon this
Argument nothing but what they had taught before him.

2 The Testimonies which he cites from Calvin, p. 175. Perkins, p. 177. do only
affirm that the inherent righteousness of sanctification does sometimes give the
name of righteous persons to believers, in the Scriptures, and this none
denies. But here is no mention made that we are termed right^^us from the
righteousness of our own works, as or because they are the condition of our
justification, which is Mr. Br. Tenet. Calvin indeed rightly ascribes it to the
imputed righteousness of Christ, from which originally and radically our own
unperfect righteousness is owned of God, and our selves righteous in doing it.
But in no wise affirms that this our unperfect righteousness has any finger
in the procuration of Christ's righteousness to be imputed to us. But
consequentially given a flat denial of it, which is the thing questioned in
Mr. B. As for Mr. Perkins, he has in the place alleged nothing relating to
the question. So that he does an unexpiable wrong to the name of these famous
men, to father them with this his error.

3 That which he cites from Perkins, p. 176. and 178. and from Zanchy, p. 179.
from Dr. Davenant, p. 181. Molinaeus, Scharpius, and Pareus, p. 185. and Mr.
Burgess, p. 186. are nihil ad rem Nothing to the doctrines of Mr. Br that are
questioned and charged as Popish, etc. He commits a Paralogism in detorting
them into his opinions from which they are abhorrent. It is a mere ignoratio
Elenchi, to bring these writers as concluding with him contradictorily to our
Conclusions, who say nothing against us or for him. As those of Scharpius and
Pareus, p. 185. where he makes the wherein they affirm the substance of the New
Covenant [in generall] to consist, to speak for him in contradiction to what we
conclude of Justification, that is but one special part of that Covenant: as
if all that is affirmed or denied of the former are so also of the latter. The
falsehood whereof I have before manifested. Although Mr. Burgess in his
Testimony alleged, p. 186. speaks more against Mr. Br then for him, yet I make
not his Conclusion a part of my Creed, as being too peremptory, and boldly
fettering the hands of Gods grace to Laws, which God has not imposed upon
himself: viz. That Remission of sins is given us only in the use of those
Graces, [which he had before named.] Had he said [ordinarily, or mostly] in
steed of [onely] I should not have excepted against him. But I take him to be
so pious and learned, that upon a review he will relax and dispense with his [
onely] as not bottomed on the Scriptures there alleged, or any other. The like
may be said to the like speech of Molinaeus, p. 185. if he mean so universally
as Mr. Burgess speaks. But perhaps neither of them by remission of sins mean
Justification, but a quid distinctum from it, if so then they speak nothing to
Mr. Brs purpose. The other forecited Testimonies out of Perkins and Zanchy,
labor of the same fallacy, having nothing against us in those points in which
Mr. Br. professes himself an adversary to us.

4 But it seems he most triumphs in the testimony of Mr. Ball. Him he
magnifieth and exalts with suparletive praises, more then all the great
Theologers whom he alleges before and after him, as if all the rest were but
Sycamores to this Cedar: [This great, leaaned and holy Divine as almost England
ever bred,] and why so super excellent? for ^ooth he goes on in Grotius [that
Cassandrian Papist] his own words translated. And which is there of the D^vines
which England has bred, that can be praised for so illustrious an act besides
Mr. Br. and him? I envy not the praises of the man, yet this act of his
meriteth it not, no not from Mr. B. For as far as he transcribes him, p. 182.
Mr. Ball no further fo^lowes Grotius then to Gods relaxing of the Law to take
satisfaction from Christ in our steed: But if he had also asserted that after
satisfaction actually taken, they which in Christ have satisfied, are yet all
their lifetime under the Curse of the Law to bear it in their own persons;
would Mr. B. have hidden it? Yet this is the thing in question between Mr. B.
and the Protestants, whether after the giving and receiving of satisfaction for
our breaches of the Law, the Curs of the Law be either nulled, or else only in
part relaxed, as to our bearing it.

Yea if he ^e as M^. B. styles him, then have we the testimony of so great
learned and holy a Divine as almost England ever bred against Mr. B. himself
not being able to deny any one almost that England ever bred, which has
written more directly and contrarily to Mr. B. then this man in his Tractate of
Faith, about Justification. If elsewhere he contradicts himself, I shall oppose
Ball against Ball, yea Ball in afflictions, when he lived by Faith and had
nothing else but Christ apprehended by Faith to support his troubled soul, to
Ball n^w raised to a prosperous state in the world, and wh^ seeing the Court
infected with Popery Socinianism and Arminianism, and no other bridge to
preferm^nt so effectual as some show of bending at least to these ways, might
possibly as far as Conscience would permit him, make use of the language there
held most authentic. I say of the language, for I cannot condemn his doctrine
alleged in his three following Testimonies it taken in a good sense. But his
ambiguities of words seem to speak him out to have had a level to somewhat else
besides the supporting of the truth; and yet his Conscience seems to hold him
bound from saying any thing manifestly against the truth. Mr. B. may possibly
tickle himself with his words, but his matter duly pondered gives him a sting
sufficient to persuade him to forbear laughter. Let the unbiassed judicious
Reader, add consideration to his reading and then judge.

The rest of the testimonies which he has here cited and quoted I let pass as
altogether besides the questions which Mr. B. has set in agitation between
himself and all the Protestant-Churches.

And thus at length have his Arguments been examined which he brings to confirm
his Justification by works.

He has many things tending to the confirmation of some other Paradoxes
scattered in his Aphorisms, beginning at p. 123. of his Appendix, and ending at
p. 164. but because those things are handled by way of disputation against
others, and Mr. B. as a challenger does call out there by name Mr. Owen and
Maccovius to a Duel with himself, each after other, exposing them to the world
as base and silly Animals in what they have said, except they come forth into
open field to make it good: It shall be both impertinent and uncivil in me to
meddle in a business to which others and the same far more worthy and able, are
called as to their peculiar task: I should not be excused by any herein from
being one that loves (...), to be busy in another man's office, specially
seeing I know not what these challenged have done or are doing in the defense
of themselves and the doctrine which they have asserted. Were it that their
reputation alone, and not a truth of Christ which they had undertaken to defend
were here clouded by Mr. B. I should think it no fault in them to pass it by in
contemptuous silence: but seeing Mr. B. endeavors upon their ruins to erect
his mounts against the City of the living God, to destroy it, or at least
spoil it of its principal immunities; denying the full justification of the
Lords redeemed ones in this world, and holding them under the curs and wrath of
God both in their life and death: I perceive not how they can be silent,
without betraying the truth of God which they once undertook to defend. Since
this was written I understand Mr. Owen has fully vindicated himself, and
learnedly defended all that Mr. B. had laid on his score.

Thus far to his Arguments that he has brought to prove Justification by
works. I find no more, nor in these have I hidden any thing but set them forth
in their fullest strength.

CHAP. XV.
Mr. Baxters Plea to prove his Doctrine free from Popery, examined and refuted.

I Come now to the most accurate, finest, and chiefest part of Mr. Brs. Art,
his Alcumistry, by which he turns the basest metals into gold, darkness into
light, death into life, deformity into beauty, and hell into heaven it self.
All this he with strong endeavors labors to accomplish, while with strong
confidence he goes about to vindicate his doctrine from all error, all
infection of Popery, Socinianism, Pharisaism, and to render it the same with
the doctrine of Paul and of Christ, guiltless of all derogation to the praise
of Gods grace, Christ's merits, or the Saints comfort; Yea to set it forth in
such a splendour, that although he has hitherto described such a grace of God,
as by his donation was no more appropriated and peculiarized to Peter then to
Judas, to the cursed in hell, than to the Saints in heaven: and such a Christ
as reigns Tyrant-like in the Kingdom of grace, chaining up his own, all his
own subjects and friends, under the curse of the Law to bear the horrors and
torments of it in soul and body all their life, yea after death as long as the
world shall continue: though he has taken away from the Saints (after their
self-denial, repentance, building themselves by their most holy Faith upon
Christ the Rock, after their renovation and sanctification by the Spirit) all
hope and possibility of attaining any assurance of Gods unchangeable love to
them, or of their sins irrevocably pardoned, or of their perseverance in the
state of Grace, or of their indefeazable right to glory, or of their exemption
from the curse and wrath of God while they live, or of the rest and freedom of
their souls after death, either from the flames of Hell, or of Purgatory as
long as the world stands: After he has taught that no man shall have any
part in Christ and his benefits, which procures it not by his own
righteousness, his own perfect righteousness [ in suo genere] yea by the merits
of his righteousness: After that he has proclaimed that his Gospel brings no
better tidings of joy than these: Yet at length he comes to varnish over such
a Grace, such a Christ, such a Gospel, such a state of believers (who are all
of his own faigning) with such paints and fine colors, as by them to enamour
all men to embrace these as the only true and appetible Grace, Christ, Gospel,
and state of believers. That this Doctrine is as smooth as Esau's hands, as
free from Popery, Socinianism, from all injury against the grace of God,
all sufficiency of Christ's merits, consolation of the Saints, yea from all
error whatsoever, as Lazarus was from sores, or the poor Gadaren from Devils,
that had but a legion of them within him: That it agrees so harmoniously with
the doctrine of Paul, as light with darkness, Christ with Belial, and the
Temple of God with Idols: That in these things the Covenant of Grace consists
indeed, therefore invites all at the consideration of the innocence and
profundity of this his Gospel, to follow him in seeking a sure salvation by
their own righteousness in the Curse of the Law.

To insist no longer upon generals, I shall examine the particular Apologies
which he makes for this his Doctrine of Justification by works, to clear it
from the false imputations which the ignorant Antinomians that is (in his
Construction) Luther, Calvin, Twisse, Pemble, and their followers might charge
it withal.

His first Task which he appoints to himself, is to vindicate it from having
any smack of Popery; how so? does not both he and they maintain in the same
words that we are justified by works? this he cannot deny. But forsooth there
is a great difference in this, whose pen it is that drops the assertion. The
Papists do it with a quill of a Capitoline, Mr. Br. with a quill of a
Kederminster goose. This alters the case says Ploydon, and makes the same
Proposition to be Popery and no Popery. But let us hear himself speaking, and
multiplying his reasons why it must not be taken for Popery.

Br. Aphor. p. 304, 305. How this differs from the Popish Doctrine, I need
not tell any Scholar that has read their writings. 1 They take justifying for
sanctifying, so do not I. 2 They quite overthrow and deny the most real
difference between the Old Covenant and the New, and make them in a manner all
one. But I build this Exposition and Doctrine, chiefly upon the clear
differencing and opening of the Covenants. 3 When they say we are justified by
the works of the Gospel, they mean only that we are sanctified by works that
follow faith, and are bestowed by grace, they meriting our inherent justice at
Gods hands. In a word, there is scarce any one Doctrine wherein even their most
learned Schoolmen are most sottishly ignorant then in this of Justification: So
that when you have read them with profit and delight on some other subjects;
when they come to this, you would pity them, and admire their ignorance. 4
They take our works to be part of our legal Righteousness: I take them not to be
the smallest portion of it, but only a part of our Evangelicall righteousness,
or of the condition upon which Christ's righteousness shall be ours. Suppose all
these things were true, and the difference between him and the Papists were so
great and manifold, as in these particulars he pretends, yet all this nothing
evinceth his Doctrine not to be Popish, especially among Scholars to whom he
appealeth. For 1 All this would but excuse him a tanto, non a toto, that in
these particulars he is not, though in many other and greater, he be Popish.

2 Though he differed from them in the premises, yet he is one with them in
the conelusion. Bellarmine brings his arguments, and Stapleton his, to prove
that works justify. Are they not both Papists, because their arguments differ,
when their Conclusion is one? Mr. Br thinks, that in some particulars his
curious wit has prompted him with a finer and surer way of demonstration to
stablish Justification by works, than ever entered into the Cardinals Cap or
Cranion: Does this deny him to be a Papist, because he speaks more for them
than they could for themselves? 3 Though Bellarmins and Brs. way of arguing do
in some particulars differ, yet is the later as great an opposite to the truth
of the Gospel in his way, as the former in his. Both oppugn with their utmost
strength the doctrine of grace, though they divide the battle between them,
the one scaling from the North, the other from the South.

2 But it cannot be truly said, that there are truly those real differences
between Mr. Brs. and the Papists Doctrine, which he here particularizeth. For
1 Though in some of these particulars he speaks not the idem, yet he speaks the
Tantundem with them. 2 Where he speaks not the very idem, he speaks more
grossly, Pharisaically, and adversatively to the truth then they. For the
manifesting hereof, let us particularly examine those particulars in which he
says he differs from them.

1 Says he, They take justifying for sanctifying, so do not I. 1 This speaks
out their Doctrine to be more tolerable then his. For the Scripture denies not
the increase of sanctification to be in part by works (which is all that the
Papists hold) But accurseth them that shall attribute Justification either in
its beginning or growth (if there were any such thing) to works. 2 It is not
true, that the Papists make whole or all Justification to consist in
Sanctification. For in their many divisions and distinctions of Justification,
among the rest they have this. There is a first and a second justification. The
former of Infants and new Converts conferred in baptism. This consists in
remission of sins merely by the blood of Christ, sprinkled by the Spirit in
Baptism upon Infants that are not of age actually to believe; and received also
by Faith by believing Converts in their Baptism. The later end indeed they make
to consist in the infusion of the habit of grace and sanctification: when the
justified man, ex justo justior fit, is more and more justified. This will
afterward be manifested: So that all Scholars must acknowledge Mr. Br. to have
the Tantundem, and almost in every apex the Idem of this Doctrine. Yea worse is
his doctrine in this particular than theirs. For he makes Sanctification and
good works a Collateral with the righteousness of Christ in justifying. They
abandon this doctrine, teaching that they are but fruits of Gods grace and
Christ's merits. Thus he sets up vain man as Cheek-mate with Christ, they set
him at his footstool, or appoint him to follow and apprehend the hemm of his
garment, to draw virtue from him, though indeed to other and prouder ends then
he has ordained.

Br. They quite overthrow and deny the most real difference between the Old
Covenant and the New; and making them in a manner one, I build upon the clear
differencing and opening of the Covenants. 1 All this is said, not showed and
proved. 2 If the Papists did wholly as he says, Mr. Br. to every particle of
what he charges them with, might tune up the Poets Epigram, Jam sumus ergo
pares: Jam sumus ergo pares. In all this we shake hands. What fouler
confounding of the Covenants can there be then what Mr. Br has committed: when
he makes DO, and LIVE, to be the voice of both Covenants, denying any
usefulness to Faith it self in justifying, but as it is a deed and moral work.
Let Babel it self be raked from end to end, there will not be found more
confusion. The Papists say, doing and works, as works and doing cannot be our
righteousness to justify us: But as they receive purification from the blood
and grace of Christ, so they obtain acceptance with God, and become our
righteousness to justify us. Christ (say they) has merited that our fulfilling
of the Law should justify us. Mr. Br. says nay, but our fulfilling the works
which the Law requires, meriteth that we should receive Christ to
Justification (as we shall see by and by) Let now any rational man judge which
party does most confound the Covenants, he that makes the works of the Law in
and for themselves, as they are simply done, meritorious to Justification: or
they that ascribe nothing to works but what they have from Christ. Both I
acknowledge are to be abandoned; but the deeper grain of self-extolling, the
more sensual lusting after the fleshpots of Egypt is in Mr. Brs. Doctrine.
Let none object that Mr. Br. attributes it not to works as works of the Law,
but of the Gospel, himself knows and has learned that poor shift of the
Papists; and that they come off handsomer with it upon their, then it is
possible for him to do upon his principles.

Bax. 3. They are sottishly ignorant in the Doctrine of Justification [so am
not I.] This I conceive he puts as a third difference between his and their
doctrine. For what he says under this third particular, that when they say
justified, they mean sanctified, that he had made before the first difference.
If this be the difference, then is he much more guilty than they. I obtained
mercy, because I did it of ignorance, says the Apostle, implying that they
which did it maliciously against the light of their own understandings, were
excluded from mercy. He that knows his fathers will, and does it not, shall
be beaten with many stripes. Yet I conceive Mr. Br. means here the Schoolmen of
ancient times of Barbarism: not the Jesuits, Arminians, Socinians, and other
Scholastic, Phylosophick Theologasters of these later times: For these are so
knowing (in Mr. Brs. account) in the doctrine of Justification, that he has
borrowed all his knowledge and doctrine from them. And why the former should be
esteemed more sottishly ignorant in this than in other no less mysteriall
doctrines of the Gospel I know not. In thingt natural and moral indeed they
wrote as learned Philosophers, so far as refined reason could conduct them.
But in things purely Evangelicall (saving about the persons and natures of
Christ, which they also handled more Metaphysically than Theologically) besides
some fragments gathered out of Augustine, I could hardly ever meet with a sound
piece in such of them as have come to my reading. There may be a time when Mr.
Br. may recant his profit and delight in dipping holy waters from the muddy
streams, contemning the pure fountain of the Gospel.

Or if he puts the difference in the former words;

Bax. 3 When they say we are justified by the works of the Gospel, they mean
only that we are sanctified by works that follow Faith, and are bestowed by
Grace, they meriting our inherent Justice before God. And in that which
stands as it were in a fourth place.

Bax. They take our works to be part our legal, I take it only a part of our
Evangelicall righteousness: or of the condition upon which Christ's righteousness
shall be ours. Not to except here against his maimed alleging of their
opinions, thereby feigning a distance from them, that he might allure his
readers without suspicion to join as near with them as himself: Let us take it
for truth what he says of them, and then let the indifferent Reader judge. 1
Whether is the most arrogant Doctrine, the Papists that say, works that follow,
and are the fruits of Faith, and are done in the strength of grace
supernaturally infused into the soul do merit? or Mr. Br. that says, works as
concauses with, not fruits of Faith, that flow from no other grace, but
Pelagius his moral Suasion, without any Physical renovation and change upon
the will (as for distinctions sake some of our Divines are wont to express
themselves) do so merit? If Mr. Br. mean any thing else by grace, he conceals it
as a mystery from us, and will not throughout his whole book give one hint at
it: but makes man in his own natural and moral qualifications, the meriter of
his own Justification by Christ. 2 Or which ascribes most to works, they that
attribute to them inherent justice, which is the lesser; or he that ascribes
to them the meriting of Christ's imputed righteousness, which is the greater?
Concerning legal and Evangelicall Righteousness, I have spoken enough before:
And the phrase of the Papists and Mr. Br. is one and the same herein.

This might suffice to take off this delusion from his Readers, that his
Doctrine is not Popish. But to manifest more fully in the sight of the Sun,
that every one may run reading it, and read it running, how grossly, and in how
many particulars his Doctrine is Papisticall, I shall draw out in a parallel
his Doctrine, and the Doctrine of the Papists, setting them side by side, that
whosoever will, by comparing them may determine whether there be any worse
Popery from Rome it self than from Kedderminster. This I shall make the subject
of the next Chapter.

CHAP. XVI.
The Doctrine of Mr. Baxter and of the most Trentified and Jesuitized Papists,
compared together in many particulars, and found one and the same.

The Doctrine of the Papists and of Mr. Baxter compared together in many
particulars, in their Relation to Justification.

PAPISTS.
1. THere is a twofold Justification, a first and a 2d. Justification: the one
inchoate, unperfect, more properly to be termed the beginning or root of and a
disposition to justification, or being justified, than Justification it self,
or our being fully justified before God.

2 The first justification is by the first grace given, before all good works
for the remission of sins for the mere merits of Christ to Infants by baptism,
to them that are of Age by Faith. The second justification, is by new obedience
and good works, by which the faithful deserve increase of Righteousness to
their fuller Justification.

3 Good works are the condition of Justification, without which Christ's
satisfaction is not applied to us. [ Of this opinion Bellarmine affirms some
of his fellows to be, and finds no fault with it or them, only himself takes
up what seemed to him more probable. Himself also speaks to the same purpose.]
The Gospel promising life upon condition of actual and working Righteousness
which consists in keeping the Commandents.

4 It is false therefore that we are justified by Faith only, the Scriptures
no where affirm it, let him be accursed that shall say it. Many other graces,
virtues and works are required to it, viz. The fear of God, hope in his mercy,
Love, Repentance, a desire to receive the Sacraments, a purpose to lead a new
life, and keep the Commandments [ under this l^st special they comprize all
good works whatsoever.]

Nay so far are both parties from this Faith, that Faith only justifies, that
Both teach we are justified by Works only. For

5 We are justified by the Act of Faith, which is a work, and a Law, so that if
we are not justified by works, Faith it self must be excluded from justifying.
Though we are not justified by any works ( i. e.) by any works of the Law, yet
by a work of the Gospel, such as Faith is, we may be justified.

6 Our Adversaries ( i. e. the Protestants) consent together in this, that good
works are not necessary to salvation, otherwise than by the necessity of their
presence, but that they have not any relation to salvation, as merits, or
causes, or conditions thereof, etc. We contrariwise say that good works are
necessary to a righteous man, unto salvation, by way of [causality or]
efficiency, because [they effect] or work salvation.

7 When the Apostle says, we are justified by Faith and not by Works, there is
to be understood a Synecdoche in the words of Paul, that when he says we are
justified by Faith, he means [not without works, but] by Faith and works
together, [ so that Faith is put for Faith, and works of Faith.]

8 The good works of justified men [which effect their Justification] are
absolutely just and in their Mode or manner, perfect.

9 So the perfection of our righteousness and Justification is not from Faith
but from works, For Faith does but begin Justification, and afterward it has
assumed to it self Hope and Charity, it does [by these] perfect it.

10 Good works merit without all doubt, yet not by any intrinsecall virtue and
worth in themselves, but by virtue of Gods promise. A promise made with a
condition of work, brings to pass that he which performs the work, is said to
have merited the thing promised, and may challenge the reward as his debt in
Law.

11 The Heretics teach that it is unpossible for a righteous man to fulfill
Gods Law. The Catholics teach that it is absolutely possible for a righteous
man to fulfill it, by the help of Gods Grace, and Spirit of Faith and Charity
infused into them in their Justification.

12 The contrary doctrine which denies Justification by works, and the Merit of
works is a pernicious doctrine, an enemy to all good endeavors and good works,
invites all to a licentiousness of sinning, and to transgress without fear or
shame; what evil will he fear, or what good will he not despise, who thinks
faith alone sufficient to righteousness?

13 Though a man has received the infusion of grace, and the Spirit of Faith
and Charity, and is now justified, yet he is under the penalty and curse of the
Law still. For Christ has given and God has taken satisfaction only for the
fault, but not for the punishment, so that when God has fully pardoned the
fault, he may and will inflict the punishment upon the offender.

14 Yea this punishment remains upon the Justified both inlife and death, and
after death in Purgatory.

15 For the Righteous or Justified man is so under the obligation of Gods Law,
that except he shall fulfill it, he shall not be saved.

16 Because our Justification being still conditional, even after we are
Justified, may be sometimes lost, sometimes retained, now had, and then lost, and
after recovered yea and lost again, as we do hinder or not hinder the Grace of
God.

17 No man can be assured of his eternal Election, that he is ordained of God
to life; or of his perseverance in grace to the end; and consequently not of
his salvation. For the Scripture in express words teaches, that Salvation
depends of the condition of works; But no man can certainly conclude that he
shall do [much less persevere to do] all that Christ has Commanded.

18 It cannot be that the Righteousness of Christ be imputed to us in that
sense that by it we may be called, and be formally righteous; although it be
true that Christ's merits be imputed to us, because God has made them ours by
donation, and we may offer them to God the Father for our sins, because Christ
has taken upon him the burden of making satisfaction for us, and of
reconciling us to God the Father: yet the denomination of righteous persons is
from the intrinsecall righteousness in themselves.

19 Though we are justified by the works which the Law commands, yet are we
not justified by them as they are works of the Law; but as they are
Evangelicall and works of the Gospel, done in the strength of Christ, and by
the power of renewing grace powered upon the Elect by Christ under the Gospel.

20 Love or Charity is the form of Justifying Faith, so that when faith does
Justify, it justifies by charity as its form which gives it its life and
motion; so that if Faith justifies, love justifies either in an equality with
it, or more than it.

21 Justifying Faith consists in the Assent of the judgment to all things
which are written in the word of God: No other faith is required of any. But an
implicit Faith is sufficient in the Laity and ignorant, which are not
acquainted with the Scriptures, in whom it is enough to believe as the Church
believes, i. e. as their Clergy teaches and believes, though they do not
explicitly and in particulars know what the Church believes.

BAXTER.
Justification is twofold, either in Trident. Conc. Sess. 6. c. 6, 7, 8.
Tilet. in Apol. p. 237. and in defe^s. Trid. Conc. adversus Chemnitiu^, part 1.
title of Law, or in sentence of Judgment. [In this later, having out-runn the
Papists, to meet with them again, he looks back to the former, and makes it
twofold thus] Justification in title of Law is to be considered either in its
first point and possession, or in its [after] continuance and accomplishment:
The later he makes entire, and consequently (in the way of opposition there
used) the former to be put in part, Aph. p. 302. 311.

The first point and possession of Justification I acknowledge to be by faith
alone, without either the concomitancy or cooperation of works; Iidem Ibid.
for they cannot be performed in an instant: But the continuance and
accomplishment of Justification is not without the joint procurement of
obedience. Aphor. p. 302.

The righteousness of the New Covenant [i. e. in his sense, faith, and works]
is the only condition of our interest in, and enjoyment of Bell. l. 1. de purg
cap 14 Sect. 4. Ratio. 4. Bell. lib. 4. de Just. c. 2.
the Old. [i. e. of the righteousness of Christ to justification] Both these
righteousnesses are absolutely necessary to salvation. Aph. These. 17. 19. 60.
and from thence every where until the very end of his Book.

The bare Act of believing is not Trid. Conc. in the forecited place.
the only Condition of the New Covenant, but several other duties also are
parts of that Condition. I desire no more of those that deny this, but that the
Scripture may be judge Whosoever shall reduce the contrary Doctrine Bell. de
Justif. lib. 1. cap. 13, etc.
into practice (viz. to seek salvation and Justification by faith only, not at
al by works) it will und^ubtedly damn him. Those other duties that justify are
Repentance, praying for pardon, forgiving others, Love, sincere obedience,
works of Love (i. e. all good works) not faith alone, or some of these works
and virtues with it, but all must have their concurrence to justify, Aphor. p.
235, 236, 237. 325.

Nay so far are both parties from this Faith, that Faith only justifies, that
Both teach we are justified by Works only. For

We are still said to be justified by Bell. de Justif. lib. 1.
Faith which is an Act of ours. Append. p. 80. Moral duties are part of the
condition of our salvation; a^ for it to be performed: And ev^ faith is a
Moral duty. [So the Daventria. So Pemble cites the Papists objecting. Treat.
of justif. p. 37.
according to Mr. Brs. doctrine Moral works and duties alon^ as such, are
required of us to J^stification, and not Faith it se^ this way useful, but as
a mora^ work and duty, Append. p. 80.

When the Apostle says [by wor^ and not by faith only] he plain^ makes them
concomitant in procur^ment, Bell. de necessitate operum ad salutem.
or in that kind of Causal^ which they have: especially seeing ^ says not (as
he is commonly inte^preted) [not by faith which is ^ lone] but [not by faith
only.] ^ the phrase [Justified by works] t^ word [by] implies more than an
^dle concomitancy: If they should on^ stand by, while Faith (...) all, ^ would
not be said, we are justifi^ by works, Aph. p. 299, 300.

Faith in the largest sense, as comprehends all the conditions See
Weimrichius. l. 1. in Epist. ad Romanos, c. 3. p. 207.
the N: C: is when a sinner, etc. do believe the truth of the Gospel, a^
accept of Christ as his only Lord a^ Savior, etc. and sincerely (thou^
imperfectly obey him as his Lord, for Osor. lib. 3. de Instit. n. 70.
giving others, loving his people, be^ring all what sufferings are impose^
diligently using his Means and Or^nances, etc. And all this sincerely ^ to the
end, Aph. These. 70. and Ap^ Bell. lib 4. de Justif. c. 10. Qu. de veritate
honor. operum.
p. 243.

This personal Gospell-righteo^ness is in its kind a perfect Righ^ousness: and
so far we may admit the doctrine of personal perfection. Aphor. These. 24.

The first point of Justification (and that which is but a point, the first
point must needs be a very small pittance Bell. de Ju^if. lib. 1. ^ap. 20.
Malden. in Matthew. 9.
of it) I grant to be Faith alone, but the acco^plishment (i. e. the perfitting
thereof) is not without the joint procureme^t of obedience, Aph. p. 302.

In a Larger sense as promise is an obligation, and the thing promised is ^el.
de Mer.
called Debt; so the performers of the Condition are called worthy, and the
thing promised is called Debt. These. ^ea all the ^apists, as ^lleaged ^y Call.
Inst. ^b. 3. ca. 14. ^ect. 12. and ^ap. 17. ^ect. 3. 15.
26. Yea in this Meriting, the obligation to reward is Gods ordinate Justice,
and the truth of his promise, and the worthiness lies in our performance of
the Condition on our part. Aph. pa. 141.

As it was possible for Adam to have fullfilled the Law of works, by that Bell.
lib. 4. ^le Justif. ^ap. 1.
power which he had received by nature: So is it possible for us to fulfill
the Conditions of the New Covenant (i. e. the righteousness which the Law
requires) by the power which we receive from the Grace of Christ. [But whether
this be grace or no grace Pelagius his imaginary, or the Gospel real grace, he
will not let us know, so that herein the Papists are more ingenious than he, for
they express themselves plainly of effectual Grace indeed.] These. 27.

The Doctrine of Justification by Hos. in Con^ut. pa. 140 ^b. 3.
Faith only, tends to drive obedience out of the world; For if men do once
believe, that it is not so much Canis. inprefat. in Andr. Vega Andr. Vega de
Justif. in Epist. prefat. Osor. de Justif. lib. 2, and 7.
as a part of the Condition of their Justification, will it not much tend to
relax their diligence? And it does much confirm the world in their Soulcozening
Faith, etc. Aphor. page 325, 326.

It was not the intent of the Father Trident. Cone. Sess. 6. cap. 14, 16. and
Sess. 14. cap. 8; 9. Bell. de Purgatorio. Bell. de Poenitent. lib. 4.
or Son, that by this satisfaction the offenders should be immediately
delivered from the whole Curse of the Law, and freed from the evil which they
had brought upon themselves, but some part must be executed in soul and body,
and remain upon them at the pleasure of Christ: And this Curse is upon not
only affenders in general, but also upon the Elect, and believers, Aph. p.
65, 66, 68.

Not till the day of Resurrection and Judgment will all the effects of Sin
Bellarmine and all his fellows. Bell. de Justif. lib. 4. cap. 7. Syn. Trid. ib.
can. 12.
and Law and wrath be perfectly removed [from the believers and justified.]

Believers after they be justified, are under the Law as it is a Covenant of
works, [for life and death.] Aph. p. 78, 79. 82.

Only a conditional but not an absolute Andr. Vega de Fide and operibus q. 2
So also Thomas Seotus. and Bellarmine.
discharge is granted to any in this life. When we do perform the condition yet
still the discharge remains conditional, till we have quite finished our
performance, and where the condition is not performed the law is still in force
and shall be executed, A. p. 82.

[ The justification of believers in this life is conditional, ut supra, and]
Men that are but thus conditionally Bellarmine prosecuteth this Argument at
large.
pardoned and justified, may be unpardoned and unjustified again, for their
nonperformance of the conditions, and all the debt so forgiven, be required at
their hands. [so that there can be no certainty of perseverance to salvation.]
Aph. These. 44. He seems in the explication to lenifie his assertion, but to it
I have spoken before.

Our Legal Righteousness is not personal or in our selves, and in our own
qualificatio^s and actions etc. but wholly without us in Christ: Our
Evangelicall Bell. de justif. Lib. 1.
Righteousness consists in our own Actions of Faith and Gospel obedience.
This is the only Condition of our interest in the Righteousness of Christ. Now
by reason of this personal righteousness consisting in the Rec^^tude of their
own dispositions and actions, the godly are called Righteous in Scripture, and
their faith and duties are said to pleas God, viz. at they are related to the
Covenant of grace, i. e. as they are conditions procuring our Justification by
Christ; [as well as in regard of the imputed Righteousness,] which he adds but
as a cipher, bringing no proof for it but all seemingly for the former, Aphor.
These. 18, 19, 20, 22, and its explication, p. 119. etc.

We are justified by works commanded This is the general vote of all Popish
writers, none excepted.
in the Law, yet as they make up not our Legal but our Evangelicall
Righteousness, not as they are done upon legal terms, but as they are
conditions of the New Covenant. This is the chief substance of Mr Brs whole
book; and it is a poorer shift to elude the doctrine of Paul, than is that of
the Papists.

Love is an essential part of Justifying Faith, and not properly a fruit of of
it. Aph. p 266. When Faith therefore The common Tenet of Papists.
[ not love] is said to justify, it is said so to work (in its essential work
of accepting) by Love, pa. 268. That both are necessary to salvation, and are
concurrent in apprehending Christ, is doubtless. p. 271. Love does truly
receive Christ etc. p. 224.

The people are to understand, that for them to take upon trust from their
Teachers, what they cannot yet reach to see in its own evidence, is less absurd
and more necessary, that many This also is a known Tenet among the Papists.
do imagine. Epistle to the reader in the last page save two.

These may suffice for a Taste by which the reader may judge, whether Mr. Brs
and the Papists Barrells are filled with the same Herring, or not. Should I
proceed to Compare also his and their equivocations, ambiguities, and mental
reservations, together with their purposed and not unwary Contradictions, when
to say and deny the same thing in several places, as may severally make for
their advantage: But specially if I should go on to Compare them, how they
bring the same arguments to prove their several assertions, and the same
distinctions and other shifts of Sophistry to elude the Scriptures and reasons
which make against them; I should procedere ad infinitum almost, begin but
find no end.

In alleging the words of the several Authors, something here and there has
perhaps been abbreviated, some words (standing as ciphers without weight in
reference to the questions Controverted) interserted, to make up some orderly
Connection of the following with the foregoing particular cited: But no where
have I wittingly Committed any such alteration of the words as to alter in one
Title the sense of the Writer; as will be evident to all that will but take the
pains to examine the citations with their authentic or books from which they
are cited.

Neither is there any one thing alleged in which the two parties Cohere, but
what has been still Controverted between the Papists and Protestants. Else
would it be easy to produce a thousand particulars wherein the Pope and Luther
themselves speak one and the same thing without opposition or difference.

If any where, when Mr. Br and the Papists speak the same words, yet Mr. Br
means not punctually the same thing with the Papists, in every such allegation
I undertake to manifest that he is worse and delivers more self-exalting, and
Grace-depressing doctrine than they.

Yet all this is too little to set forth the frame of Mr. Brs spirit: he may
take himself injured, and left too obscure, if he be but matched with the
Papists, and have no pre-eminence granted him before and above them in exalting
man's righteousness, and nullifying the Grace of God in Christ. That we may not
rob him of the praise to which his ambition seems to aspire, we will grant to
him, that the Papists are but the Pigmies, and he the Giant: that in the
battle between Michael and the Dragon he has superexcelled, and more deserved
the Scarlet Hat, Miter, Crosier, yea Triple Crown it self, than they that have
and wear them; if not by his Art yet at least by his daring boldness in his
undertakings. This service therefore I shall do him, to manifest not only his
equality with but also his ex^perancy above many of the famous Champions of
Rome. That many of the brave Cardinals, Bishops, Jesuits, and Friars, of the
Church of Rome are Protestants in the point of Justification, as compared with
Mr. Br: and that he shows himself in many particular^ about this doctrine, a
Papist of a deeper dye than the more modest Papists, yea than some of the most
Jesuitized and Trentified Rabbi's among them. This shall be the business of the
next Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
A comparing of Mr. Baxters Doctrine with the Doctrine of some of the more
Modest, and other more Trentified and Jesuitized Papists, in which he is found
more Antichristian than they.

Papists.
1 IT is to be noted that the Scripture attributes this imputation of
Righteousness to no other thing but Faith.

2 Faith has not of it self any efficacy, as it is our act, to forgive and
reconcile: but all its virtue proceeds from its object, namely Christ, whose
virtue and merit God has disposed to apply to the sinner unto Justification,
by Faith on him.

3 If it be enquired how the Law of Faith is distinguished by Paul against the
Law of works, even of moral works, when Faith also is comprehended under the
genus [or kind] of works; for to believe is our work: The solution is, that to
believe in him that justifies the ungodly, leans upon the Righteousness of
another, to wit, of God through Christ: but other works do lean upon their own
Righteousness; every work is in [or after] it self good, and makes him good
that has it.

4 If Faith as it is a certain Act, and of it self, should procure
Righteousness, then were not Righteousness given freely. God has not used
works to justify, as he has used Faith, that men should not boast,
attributing Righteousness to the virtue or merit of works.

5 Faith is not counted to us for Righteousness, as if it self were made our
Righteousness; but because it brings a Righteousness on man before God; not as
it is an act of man, then Grace should be of works, for to believe is a kind of
work: but of Gods will, as he has willed that Righteousness should be given to
man by Faith, and the virtue of Christ upon whom man believes, should be
communicated to the believer. This is to count [or impute] Faith to
Righteousness before God.

6 Whereas we attain a twofold Righteousness by Faith, an inherent
Righteousness, etc. by which we become pertakers of Gods nature; and the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, etc. It remains to be enquired, upon
which of these we ought to lean [or trust] and to account our selves justified
before God? My judgment is that we are to rest, to rest I say as upon a stable
thing that firmly susteineth, namely the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us,
and not on the holiness and grace inherent in our selves. For this is
unperfect, etc. therefore we cannot for it be counted Righteous before God. But
the imputed righteousness of Christ is a perfect righteousness, in which there
is nothing that can offend the eyes of God, but all things that can abundantly
please him. Upon this alone therefore are we to rest as upon a thing sure and
stable, and to believe that by it alone we are justified.

7 This may undoubtedly be affirmed, and it is the opinion of all Divines, that
God can justify men and make them pleasing and amiable to him, without any
inherent quality or habits infused.

8 To the same purpose and somewhat more fully speaks Bellarmine. The guilt
or obligation to punishment ( says he) may be taken away without the infusion
of Righteousness. For nothing hinders by how much the less God can will the not
ordeining to punishment, and the pardoning of the offense, and the not
accounting him for an enemy, to whom he has not granted the gift of habitual
Righteousness.

9 The Scope of James (in the second Chapter of his Epistle) is to show that we
are justified not by a barren but by a fruitful Faith.

10 The meaning of James is not that Faith without works is dead, etc. For it
is evident that we are justified by Faith even without works. But his meaning
is, that Faith without works, that is which refuses to work, or is no^
disposed to work, is a dead Faith, vain and justifies not. What therefore
James alleges out of Genesis 15. Abraham believed God, to this purpose he
alleges it, that he believed being in readiness to work. Therefore he says
that in the work of offering his Son, the Scripture was fulfilled, speaking of
his Faith prepared to work: It was fulfilled (I say) as to the execution of
that great work, to which his Faith was prepared.

11 If any where in Scripture thou hear reward or wages promised, know that
it is no otherwise due then by Gods promise, freely he has promised, freely he
gives. If thou will abide in his Grace and Favor, make no mention of thy
Merits.

12 All Papists consentingly make the Merits of Christ the foundation of man's
merits, as far as he can merit. Neither Faith nor works, nor doing nor
sufferings (say they) have any other virtue to merit then what they receive
from the merits of Christ's death, then as they are dipped in his blood; this
makes them acceptable to the Father.

13 When Christ says of the woman, Luke 7. 47. Many sins are forgiven her, for
she loved much; it is to be understood not that she loved much, and so her much
love was the cause of her great forgiveness, but contrariwise that because many
sins were forgiven her, therefore she loved much.

14 To be given freely, and to be a retribution to works, are as much opposite,
as that which is free and that which is from Justice, or as not due, and debt.
And this way of inference the Apostle uses in the beginning of this 4th
Chapter [ viz. speaking of Justification by Grace.]

15 The work of Justice is wages or Reward, and this way of Justice Grace
excludes, whose work is mere gift or Donation.

16 In this verse the Apostle concludes that Christ has saved us from all the
evil both of fault and punishment. That there is nothing of condemnation
remaining to them that are in Christ, because all judgment is taken away both
to the fault and the punishment.

17 It is certain that when original sin is remited, that the evils which it
brought are not remitted and taken away, as all find by experience:
Notwithstanding they remain not under the consideration of punishment, because
the fault being taken away, there can be no desert, as to punishment, remaining.

18 I will remember their iniquities no more, says the Lord, i. e. I will
neither in this world injoin any Penance for them, nor in that which is to come
inflict any punishment for them. So has the Holy Ghost promised that our sins
shall be forgiven by the New Covenant of Grace.

19 In regard of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and the danger of
vain glory: it is most safe to repose our whole confidence in the sole mercy
and benignity of God.

Baxter.
THe bare act of believing is not the only condition of the New Cardinal
Contarenus in Romans 4.
Covenant, but several other duties also are parts of that Condition. The
Common opinion that justifying faith, as justifying, does consist in any one
single act, is a Wretched Mistake. [by the one act of faith he means, Faith in
opposition to works.] Aph. p. 235, 248.

Faith it self is our righteousness, viz. our Evangelicall, as Christ is our
Legal Righteousness. It self Toletus a Jesuit, upon Romans 3.
is imputed to us for righteousness, Aph. p. 125, 126. It justifies as it is
an act of ours, and as it is a moral duty, App. p. 80. and 102.

Both Faith and works make up one condition, one righteousness, one perfect
righteousness of our own, by Cardinal Cajetan upon Romans 3.
which we merit to be justified by God by the legal righteousness which is in
Christ. [And consequently Faith does not lean upon another, and works upon
their own righteousness, but both make up one compounded righteousness and
goodness which make us righteous and good also, and by this righteousness and
goodness, deservers of justification and salvation.] Aph. These. 17, 18, 19, 20,
23, 24, 26. and scatteringly throughout the whole Book.

Faith as an act of ours, and of it self, with other works, procures
Righteousness: And God has used Toletus the Jesuit up on Romans 1.
works to justify as he has used faith, even in the same kind of causality.
[So we have found Mr. Br. often affirming as may be seen in our former
quotations: Let him deny that he holds the consequents of these two
Antecedents, if he will.]

It is so far from being an error to affirm that Faith it self is our
righteousness, that it is a truth necessary for every Christian to know, yea it
both is our Righteousness, and is imputed to us for righteousness. The [very]
personal performance of faith shall be imputed to us, for a sufficient
personal payment [of righteousnes] Idem in Romans 4.
as if we had paid the full [duty and righteousness which the Law requires.]
This is the substance of his words, though not his very words, which being
continued in terms of a Metaphor, cannot without the citing of the whole
similitude be expressed to the understanding, otherwise, Aphor. p. 125, 126,
129.

There is a twofold righteousness attainable by Christ [at least in words]
the one an inherent righteousness in our selves, consisting in the seed and
acts of Faith, Love, Holiness, etc. the other in Christ, but made over to
believers, by Gods Donation if not imputation. Both of these are absolutely
necessary to salvation, neither is the one perfect and the other Contarenus
Card. in Tractat. de Justif.
unperfect, as to justification, but the inherent perfect in its kind as well
as the imputed, so that both in their kinds of causality are to be rested on as
things sure to support us to justification before God: and we are as truly
justified by and for the inherent as the imputed righteousness, if the
righteousness which is in Christ meriteth a possibility of the justification
of a sinner before God, he must by his inherent and actual righteousness
merit the actual application of Christ's righteousness, and justification by
it, else he cannot be justified. [Mr. Br cannot deny every particle of this
doctrine to be his own in words at length, and that has been already
manifested in those former and these latter quotations.]

The inherent righteousness is absolutely necessary to salvation, Aph. Medina
in 1. 2. Qu. 110. ^. 2, 4.
These. 17. [Otherwise justification from eternity also would peep in, and then
Actum est, etc. And if absolutely necessary, how can God justify without it?]

Manum a tabula, this is enough to wipe out Bellarmine from Mr. Brs Calendar of
Saints. A whole i will of Salt is too little to season Bell. de Justif. lib. 1.
cap. 16.
this passage. It overthrowes the great Goddess Condition so precious to Mr.
Br. and erects that Image of Jealousy in its place, justification an immanent
act in God. For if God may justify where there is no infused righteousness,
where then is the condition? Then is the justification in God, and not termined
on the Conscience of the justified: but Bellarmine has his time to deny it
again, else Actum esset de Amicitia.

Except apparent violence be used Ca^etan on James.
with this Chapter, etc. i^ cannot be doubted but that a man is justified by
works and not by Faith only, These. 75.

James says that Faith is dead being alone, because it is dead to the use and
purpose of justifying, For in it self it has a life according to its quality
still, etc. And so works make Faith alive, as to the attainment of Cajetan
^bidem.
its end, justification. Works therefore justify (not only proving our Faith
to be sound, but) themselves being in the obligation as well as Faith, and in
the same kind of causality and procurement with Faith, Salmero on cap. 2. Iac.
though not in equality with it, which I prove thus. When it is said we are
justified by works, the word [by] implies more then an idle concomitancy, etc.
as I have before alleged him, p. 229, 230.

Mr. B. makes the promise of God an obligation by which God is bound to man, so
that man may challenge God for debt; pronouncing the performers, worthy, and
their performances Friar Ferur on Mat. 20. 1.
merit. Yea scarce admits of any one drop of Gods blessings to descend upon the
good or bad which he ascribes not to some kind of man's merits, Aph. p. 137-141.

Mr. B. contrariwise ascribes all the meritorious virtue of man's works to their
own righteousness, leaving man so long naked of the righteousness which is by
Christ, until he has by his own strong endeavors merited it: so that
according to his doctrine, the application of Christ's merits to any is the
fruit of that man's merits, and not the man's merits the fruit of Christ's merits:
this is clear, from the former allegations.

M. Br. interprets it the contrary way, Aph. p. 236. as the understanding
Reader will easily perceive. [Let all judge that have but a mite of reason,
whether Soarez Bishop on the place.
this man has any awe of the Scripture which so abuses it, yet cries out upon
others as faulty. To use his own words, he may as well make a Creed of his own,
whatsoever the word says to the contrary.

There is no such opposition, Justification is from the ordinate Salmero disp,
35. ad Romans
justice of God, and the fruit of the merit of our righteousness: yet a free
gift of free grace nevertheless. So he declares his judgment in the forecited
places.

Mr. Br. directly teaches the contrary doctrine throughout Dominicus a Soto in
Romans 4.
his Book, every where solving the absurdity of his doctrine by his conditions.

Nay he has not so saved and freed us from the punishment and curse, but that
they that are in Christ must bear it both Soto, Salmero, and Aquinas ^ upon To
8. 1.
in soul and body. As his alleged words before declare.

Mr. B. asserts the contrary doctrine, and propugneth it with ten Arguments,
which Vasquez in 3. Tho^. disp. 156. cap. 3. de paenalitatibus.
have been examined in the first part of this Tractate.

Nay the believers sins tho pardoned, yet are but conditionally pardoned; so
that they Anselm.
are still in Gods remembrance to inflict the curse and punishment of the Law
upon them, as the curse, in life and death, giving them no full discharge till
the day of judgment. The place has been cited before.

So to repose our confidence Bellarmine.
on sole mercy and grace, is a soul-cozening Faith, Aph. p. 326. He must be
undoubtedly damned that does not work and obey to be justified and saved by,
and for his obedience and works, ibid. p. 325. compared with p. 300. and 320.

Let now not only Scholars, to whom Mr Br appealeth to judge of his freedom
from Popery, but with them all rational and conscientious men give their
verdict, whether he be not so clear as Pilate when he had washed his hands, was
from the blood of Christ: and whether the better Divinity come from Rome, or
from Kederminster.

CHAP. XVIII.
Whether Mr. Baxters Plea here be of sufficiency to prove his Doctrine free
from Socinianism.

THe second aspersion of infamy, from which he endeavors to vindicate his
doctrine is Socinianism: This he goes about to do in these words:

Bax. p. 306. But what difference is there betwixt it and the Socinian doctrine
of Justification? Answ. In some men's mouths, Socinianism is but a word of
reproach, or a stone to throw at the head of any man that says not as they.
Mr. Wotton is a Socinian, and Mr. Bradshaw, and Mr. Gataker, and Mr. Goodwin,
and why not Piscator, Pareus, etc. if some zealous Divines know what
Socinianism is. But I had rather study what is Scripture-truth than what is
Socinianism. I do not think that Faustus was so infaustus as to hold nothing
true. That which he held according to Scripture is not Socinianism. For my part I
have read little of their writings, but that little gave me enough, and made me
cast them away with abhorrence. In a word, The Socinians acknowledge not that
Christ had satisfied the Law for us, and consequently is none of our legal
righteousness, but only has set us a Copy to write after, and is become our
pattern, and that we are justified by following him as a Captain and guide to
heaven; and so all our proper Righteousness is in this Obedience. Most accursed
Doctrine! so far am I from this, that I say, The Righteousness which we must
plead against the Laws Accusation, is not one grain of it in our Faith or
Works, but all out of us in Christ's satisfaction. Only our Faith, Repentance,
and sincere Obedience are the conditions upon which we must partake of the
former: And yet such conditions as Christ works in us freely by his Spirit.
How forcible and unresistible is the power of Conscience, flying in the face of
the guilty, and accusing where men applaud, or at least hold their peace? Who
either of men or Angels could have charged Mr. Br. for saying that which he had
not yet said? or for venting Socinian Doctrine in his writings before he had
yet written? What none else can do, M. Br. is forced by Conscience to do against
himself: to arraign himself at the Bar for Socinianism. Conscience is the
accuser, what Patron will he retein to be his defender? Nothing out of himself
can suffice to answer an accuser within himself: Therefore he fees Reason, that
is his sophisticated, and sopisticall wit, art, and craft, to plead his Cause
against Conscience.

The first of these exceptions which these make for him against the Charge, is
the abuse which some make of this imputation, laying it upon all that speak not
as they.

But 1. This is besides the Charge: These some had not then spoken against Mr.
Br. it is the accusation of his own conscience which he should have answered,
and he hnows it not to have confederated with those some of whom he speaks.

2. I know none of those some that have laid that aspersion upon any of those
Divines which he mentions save one; and that one I suppose would be very
angry with any other man in England (M. Br. alone excepted) that should go
about to rob him of that honor which Mr. Br. calls a reproach. It is for
brotherhoodssake that he hears it from him.

3. But his craft herein is to befool his Readers with an opinion that he is of
the same judgment with Pareus, Wotton, Gataker, etc. of whom they that are dead
have as much showed their abhorrency from, and opposition against his
Doctrines, as any that have lived upon earth. And those that are living, if
they be consistent with themselves in their former writings (whereof I nothing
doubt) are as far from Mr Br. as he is from Christ and his truth.

4. His jeer that he casts upon them that are Adversaries to his Doctrine,
terming them Zealous Divines, infinuating that they have zeal without knowledge
and learning, I leave as proper to him that in that way of wisdom and
righteousness which his own reason either as refined with Philosophy, or
corrupted with Sophistry suggesteth, seeks for justification and eternal
glory. Let us be accounted fools to the world, and no bodies in that which is
falsely called science, so that we may be wise in, and zealous for that which is
the power and wisdom of God to salvation.

The second Plea which he makes for himself is the singlenes and sincerity of
his studies, bent rather to seek out what is Scripture truth than what is
Socinianism, and that he thinks that Socinus his Nature, Studies, and
Seize did not so much vary from his name. Faustus, the happy, that he
should be so unhappy as to hold nothing true: and consequently that neither
himself is so unhappy, but that he has learned some Truths from this happy
Socinus, and perhaps such as he could never learn from Christ, his Apostles, or
faithful Ministers.

But 1. This may be said of Faustus the Conjurer, who by giving himself to the
Devil, did not exterminate all notions of all truths from his soul. Will Mr
Br. be his Disciple also? Both had the like effectual influence from Satan,
neither know I which to prefer.

2. Who sent Mr. Br. to learn from such Teachers? to seek for light in
darkness, or Heaven in Hell, or Scripture-Truth, in the precept of Pagans, or
glosses of Papists, or Socinus his God Reason? Is it not because there is no
God in Israel, that he goes to enquire of Baal-zebab the God of Ekron? 2 King.
1. 3. The Lord Jesus rebukes, silenceth, and refuses to hear the Spirit of
lies, even when he speaks truth, Mar. 1. 23, 24, 25. and abandoneth the
spiritual Devil no less than if he had blasphemed, Mat. 4. So also Paul, Acts
16. 16-18. The truth of Christ needs not any, disdains all props from Hell to
sustain it. He that will not dip from the fountain, but at the pools which the
unclean beasts have defiled, let him without our envy have mudd and dung enough
in the water which he drinks.

3. It is much to be doubted the man's heart deceives him. Were his study so
unfeigned and serious to know what is Scripture truth, he would more study the
Scripture it self, and less Bellarmin, Socinus, Arminius, and such like
Sophisters, whose whole study it is to corrupt all, and to leave no Scripture
unperverted.

4. Had he not ploughed with Socinus his Heyfers (or rather Bulls) he could
never have sowed so much darnell in the field of Christ.

The third Plea which he brings to prove that his Doctrine is free from
Socinianism is, because there is one point wherein he dissenteth from Secinus.
That Socinus and his followers deny any expiatory sacrifice that Christ has
offered to God to satisfy his Justice for our sins; or that there is any
effectual virtue in Christ's death to purge our Consciences from dead works. But
that he becomes our Savior only in this, that [he has given us more perfect
precepts of Righteousness than were contained in the Law and the Prophets, and
withal he] has given us a Copy or pattern by his own practice to which we
must be conformed: And so we must be justified (not by the blood of Christ,
but) by our own obedience in following these precepts and this pattern which he
has given us. In this point Mr. Br. professes himself so far from joining
with him, that he casts off this Doctrine with abhorrence.

But this reasoning has no soundness in it: For

1 It is the same, as if I should argue, that Goliath was not of the race of the
Giants, because he had not upon each hand six fingers, and upon each foot six
toes, at some of the Giants progeny had, and possibly the Giant himself. Or
that Mr. Br. should seek by this Argument to prove himself no Englishman,
because he dwells nearer the Severn than Thames. So also might the Jews elude
the words of Christ, and Elymas the words of Paul, as slanderous, arguing
themselves not to be the children of the Devil, because they had flesh and
bone, so had not the Devil. They had never carried Christ aloft, and set him
on a pinnacle of the Temple (fearing they might fall headlong thence themselves)
so had the Devil. The seed, the Lusts of the Devil abiding and reigning in
them, spoke them out to be children of the Devil, though they brake not out in
them into every particular Act as in the Devil. The utmost that M. Br. can
from such premises conclude is, that (though in many things else it be, yet) in
this one his Doctrine is not aspersed with Socinianism.

2. I think it will not be objected by any to M. Br. that he is ambitious in
all things to be a Socinian, but in such only wherein the Socinians are most
subtle Sophisters than the Jesuits, and do bring more show of sophisticated
reason to exalt Popery than the Papists themselves, and with greater
plausibility and craft do pervert the truth and simplicity of the Gospel, more
extolling man's pride, and more nullifying Gods grace, than any of the Champions
of the Pope had either the wit or the audacity to do until these had taught
them. If then in the beforementioned point he holds not with Socinus, no
marvel, for then should he have relinquished the Papists. I do not think that
his wits do run in Pilgrimage to Racovia, upon any other grounds but in love to
Rome, and in abhorrence of free Jerusalem, Gal. 4. 26.

3. He should have cleared (if he could) his Doctrine from other pieces of
Socinianism, which he knows it guilty of, and would be objected against him. As
1. His To Credere, or Act of believing, justifying a sinner 2. All other works
of obedience, as our Acts or works, justifying in an equality, and in the same
manner with Faith (without mentioning any virtue that they have from the death
of Christ to this end, as the Papists teach, but rather that Christ fetches
virtue from these to justify:) 3 His doctrine of Gods dispensing with, and
relaxing of his Law. To which I might add in the 4th. place, his canonizing and
almost deifying Reason, and that without any adject of (renewed or
spirituallized, even of) natural and sophistical reason, to which he does so
frequently in his book almost sacrifice as to the sole and sufficient Judge of
the Scriptures, and guide unto salvation. These things he cannot deny to be
originally from Socinus, though probably brought home to him by other dirty
Channels, and not dipped from the spring or rather puddle it self. It is but a
vain piece of his sophistry to defend himself where none will accuse, and to
hide himself in the dark, where ke knows he should meet with opposition and
accusation.

4 He professes himself to be but yet a puny in the School of Secinus, has
read but little of their doctrine, yet is much sowred with the Leaven thereof,
when he has more fully tried the quaintnes and depth of their sophistry (in
which his soul delights more than in the plainnes and foolishnes of the
Gospel) who knows whether he may not, following such a guide as reason, at
length also sup up with pleasure what now he casts off with defiance? the
Apost. speaks something that may put us in fear of it, 2 Timothy 3. 13.

5 Even this error of Socinus, against which in special he protests his
abhorrence, he does in general maintain with as strong a Front as any of the
Socinians. They say that Christ offers salvation to all, but it is every
particular man's particular faith and obedience, their actual believing and
obeying, following his precepts and treading in his steps to the end, that in
the end makes him to be actually and effectually a Savior to them. And this is
the sum and full dimension of Mr. Brs. doctrine. Only they make Christ the
Prophet chiefly, but this man Christ as Priest and King, to be the Savior. In
this they both agree, that except we by our own righteousness become
Self-saviors, we shall have no salvation by him.

What else he has in this Section for the vindicating, yea magnifying of his
doctrine, has been often spoken to already, and will a little after be examined
again, where he uses the Tantundem, though not literally the Idem of these
words, to apologize for his doctrine against other crimes imputable to it.

CHAP. XIX.
Mr. Baxters first Reason examined, by which he endeavors to evince his
Doctrine not to be repugnant to Paul's, viz. that Paul's question in his
Epistles, and his question in his Aphorisms, are not one but diverse. Paul's
question, what is that proper Righteousness by which we are justified from the
laws malediction, which the Apostle concludes to be Christ's satisfaction only.
But Mr. Brs. and St. James his question, what is the condition of this
Justification by Christ's Righteousness, whether Faith alone, or works also?

We have examined what he has to say for the vindicating of his Doctrine from
Popery and Socinianism: we expected also that he should in the next place have
showed, or at least pretended some distance between him and the Arminians: But
it seems he glories in it as his Crown to be reputed one of their part.
Therefore leaving this, he undertakes a greater Task, an Herculean Labor in
his third dispute of this kind, viz. to clear his doctrine from all opposition
to Paul and the Scriptures. This is a work indeed, which if he discharge
honorably, and full up to what he promises, all will grant him the Laurel
above all the Angelical and Seraphical Divines that have in any age made use of
ink and paper. It is the sole thing that we long after for satisfaction. Let
him bless us with sound demonstrations to prove it, we shall all run after
him: And though some madd men may term us Papists, Socinians, Arminians, or
whatsoever else, we shall gladly bear it to become his Disciples. All what else
he has said would be superfluous to every conscientious man. This alone would
win him: But how poorly and Pigmie-like this supposed Giant discharges this
bold adventure, let his own words declare.

B. p. 307, etc. Lastly, let us see whether S. Paul, or any other Scripture do
contract (I think it should be printed [do contradict]) this. And for my part
I know no one word in the Bible that has any strong appearance of
contradiction to it. The usual places quoted are these, Romans 3. 28. and 4. 2,
3, 14, 15, 16. Gal. 2. 16. and 3. 21, 22. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Phil. 3. 8, 9. In all
which, and in all other the like places you shall easily perceive, 1 That the
Apostles dispute is upon this question, what is the Righteousness which we must
plead against the accusation of the Law? or by which we are justified as by the
proper Righteousness of that Law? And this he well concludes, is neither works
nor Faith, but the Righteousness which is by Faith, that is Christ's
Righteousness.

But now St. James his question is, what is the condition of our Justification
by this Righteousness of Christ? whether Faith only? or works also?

This is the first part of this his Dispute: Let us examine what force it has
to the end for which he uses it, whether it reconciles Paul to Mr Br. or show
they never contradicted one the other?

1 He tells us he knows no one word in St. Paul or the Bible, that has any
strong appearance of contradiction to his Doctrine. To which I answer,

1 That we look not to appearances whether they be weak or strong: But if
there be not strong Contradictions in the doctrine of the Apostle, and of the
Gospel to his, there is no cause of dissenting from him.

2 Who more blind and ignorant than he that will not know and see?

3 No marvail if he see not while he looks through the spectacles of Natural
reason and sophistical reasonings, whereas spiritual things cannot be
discerned but spiritually, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

4 Let him examine whether the words of Christ be not verified upon him. For
judgment I am come into the world, that they which see not might see, and they
which see might be made blind, Joh. 9. 39. But blessed be God who has hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes, Mat. 11. 25.

5 If he see not, know not, his wilful ignorance and blindness must not be
made the rule of other men's Faith and Judgment, nor prejudice their happiness
in seeing and knowing. It is somewhat a lofty language, he hnoweth not. What
then? Therefore either there is no such thing, or no man can know it, or it is
a fancy in any other to believe it. Not Mr. Br. but Christ is our ipse dixit,
we draw the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge from Christ, not from Mr. Br.

2 He acknowledges that other men at least seem to know what he denies
himself to know, Scriptures that have (if not a strong, yet) some appearance of
Contradiction to him, and quotes the Scriptures, which he says are usually
quoted, viz. Romans 3. 28, etc.

Here 1 I demand of him who they are that quote, and against whom they quote
those Scriptures? That they which quote them are the Protestant Churches and
writers* and that they are the Papists against whom they are so usually quoted,
he must needs confess, because he can produce none but Protestants that do,
none but Papists against whom they do alledg these Scripures. For although the
Arminians do enough declare themselves in their writings that they hold in
common with the Papists, Justification by works, yet I could never find that
they would suffer this Tenet to be brought to a dispute; but being charged
therewith, they have with sacred protestations and adjurations denied any such
thought in their hearts, and so never permitted these or any other Scriptures
to be quoted against them about this question, still declining the dispute. It
must be therefore the Papists against whom Mr. Br. says these Scriptures have
been usually quoted. And this speaks out to us in many respects what the frame
of this man's spirit is.

1 The integrity and ingenuity of his Conscience, that having but 2 pages
backward, verbally renounced the Papists and all concurrence of his doctrine
with theirs, he uses only a short digression to smooth the face, end spit in
the mouth of Socinus; and then forthwith makes a bridge of St Paul, to return
and make peace, and confirm a league with the Papists, as it were stroking the
shavelings and telling them. Notwithstanding all that I have said, I doubt not
but ye well perceive therein the equivocations and mental reservations which I
have learned from you. Still my horses are your horses, my charrets your
charrets, I am as ye are, and your Adversaries my Adversaries. Mark ye well
how finely I shall here divert from you the Scripture darts which the Heretics
fling at you. This all may see to be the sum of his words, or at least employed
therein.

2 His consistency with himself, that what ere-while he denied, here he
affirms, viz. that he is not only Popish in this point, but also a patron of
the Popish Cause: And thus also while he endeavors to purge his doctrine from
all contradiction of Scripture, he becomes a Contradictor of himself.

3 His honesty in explaining his meaning at last, whom he pointed at throughout
his Treatise under the name of ignorant Antinomians, viz. all that have quoted
those Scriptures against justification by works.

4 His good will to the Protestant Religion, and to the doctrine of grace, that
rather than these shall stand, he will say and unsay, join with, and borrow
from Papists, Socinians, Arminians, (and why not the Turkish Alcaron also, or
whatsoever prodigies of Doctors) that send men to blessedness by the merit of
their own works.

5. His matchles worth arising out of all these, for which such a confluence of
Divines from all parts of England is made to him, even such as were ere-while
Zelots against Popery, Socinianism and Arminianism, until they had fatted
themselves with the spoils of the friends thereof. Has not the Lord cause to
visit upon these men the breach of his Covenant, whereof they profess
themselves at this day transcendently zealous? Is not this one principal
branch thereof? Let others dream waking of the further exaltation of the
present Ministry of this Land, I see no ground of expecting any Change but to
the abasing thereof, though my self must take a share in such an abasement.
With such plausibility every where is this man and every seducer received in
their sowing the worst errors, if they will but pretend a zeal against supposed
Antinomians: And so generally is the doctrine of grace slighted. I undertake to
defend against all Opponents, that Mr. Br has no one assertion in his whole
Book about Justification by works, nor more than one, if one proof or argument
to confirm such an assertion; nay scarce any word, phrase, or Apex, which he
has not received from the Papists, Socinians, or at the best from the
Arminians. I acknowledge in some places he runs more in the Arminian, than
Popish method and dialect, when they speak more to the extolling of man's
righteousness, and annihilating of Gods grace: But in no one particle is he
better then they. I appeal not only to the Learned, but also to the rational
among the Readers of his Book, when they looked upon its Title, Aphorisms of
Justification, whether they expected not that the truth of the Gospel and
doctrine of the Protestant Churches should have been stoutly defended by so
Scholastic a man, against Papists, Arminians, etc. But when contrariwise they
find him undertaking no Combat against them, but all for them, and making none
other his Aversaries but Protestants, sometimes under, sometimes without the
nickname of Antinomians: Is it not a strange piece of incredulity, when he so
plainly discovers himself, not to believe him, to whom he is a Friend, and to
whom an Adversary? And a gross delusion to lick up as honey from the dirt of
Mr. Brs. shoos, what they detest as poison from the lips of Bellarmin, Socinus,
and Arminius? But I incurr blame by digressing, therefore return to the matter.

2 I except against his quotations as done partially and unfaithfully, to beget
in his weak and credulous Reader, an opinion that he and the Papists his
Masters have the whole body of the Scriptures on their side to prove
Justification by works; But that the Protestants can only catch here and there
a sentence of Scripture that has a seeming, and scarce a seeming to speak for
them. It is a Maxim of Mr. Br. himself, that men are seldom bold with
Scripture to force it, but they are first bold with Conscience to force it,
page 297. Yet here he is bold not only to force, but to stifle Scriptures. When
himself quoteth a Scripture to maintain his Popish Justification, see how he
improves it in the same page: If it were but some one phrase dissonant from the
ordinary language of Scripture, I should not doubt but it were to be reduced to
the rest. But when it is the very scope of a Chapter, etc. no whi^ dissonant
from any other Scripture; I think he that may so wrest it as to make it unsay
what it says, may as well make him a Creed of his own, let the Scripture say
what it will to the contrary. Lo, what a mountain he can make of a molehill,
and bring all Scriptures into the belly of one, making that one of what
dimension he lists, and all the rest to say what he commands them, when he is
to plead for the Papists: But here when he is ^o produce what the Protestants
have to urge against the Papists, what mincing and mayming does he use? forcing
the whole body of the Gospel into a Cherristone; it is but here and there a
sound without substance that they beguile themselves with. Did the man (as he
pretends) seek to apprehend to himself, and sincerely to make out unto others
Scripture T^u^h, we should find him faithfully alleging what the Churches of
Christ have cited against Antichrist. His false dealing herein declares his
hatred of the Truth, that he will not have the Scriptures shine upon it in
their full splendour, that it may not be known and embraced. Nay we have the
main body of the New Testament speaking for us, specially almost all the
Doctrinal part of the Epistles to the Romans, Galathians, Ephesians,
Colossions, Hebrews, all the four Evangelists, specially St John, as I have
before showed: A breviate of Scriptures which our Divines have urged to this
purpose I have before given, and it would be useless here to rehearse.

3. Even these few Scriptures which he quoteth, affirm that man is justified by
Faith without the deeds of the Law, that if he were justified by Works, he had
whereof to glory and boast himself; that if they which are of the Law be heirs,
Faith is made void, and the promise of no effect. That it is of Faith that it
may be of Grace; that it is by Grace through Faith, not of Works. Were there
nothing else, is there not a strong appearance of Contradiction in these
Scriptures to Mr. Brs. doctrine, that we are justified by Faith and Works
together?

4 But see we how he evades these Scriptures and all other Testimonies of the
Apostles, viz. That his dispute is, what is the Righteousness which we must
plead against the Accusation of the Law? or by which we are justified as the
proper Righteousness of the Law? and this he well concludes is neither works
nor faith, but the Righteousness which is by Faith, i. e. Christ's
Righteousness. But St. James his question is, what is the condition of our
Justification by this Righteousness of Christ? whether Faith only? or Works*
also? so far Mr. Baxter.

Must not Mr. Br. needs be happy that has learned so perfectly that which he
calls elsewhere the Papists Feat of making the Scriptures a nose of wax, and
turning them into his own complexion. Let any one now alledg against him that
of the Apostle, Gal. 1. 8. If Paul or an Angel from heaven shall preach to you
any other Gospel than what you have received, let him be accursed. Cannot he as
prettily and solidly shift the Curse from him, and retort it upon the denouncer
as he does these Scriptures upon the alledgers. True may he say, but I am not
Paul, nor an Angel from heaven, therefore the Curse cannot fall on me. Nay, I
have made Paul to preach another Gospel since his death, thatn what he preached
in his life, Therefore Paul is accursed. As good grounds has he for this as
his former arguing.

But let us see whether his interpretation of these Scriptures be so solid as
pretty. To that of James I have spoken before, therefore shall say little here.
Only I cannot omit how unsufferable his audacious confidence is, that he
thinks it enough to say, without showing, or endeavoring to show it from the
Context or otherwise, this is the meaning of Paul's, and that the scope of James
his dispute. No such immodesty is often there to be found in the very Jesuits,
Socinians, and Arminians. They, when they go about to pervert in stead of
expounding any Scripture, labor stoutly from the Context, and from a seeming
Coherence of other Scriptures, to make such a perverting exposition either
probable or plausible: This man does all pro Imperio, Sic volo, sic jubeo, etc.
I say it, what man or Angel dares to deny it? Does he think all the world to
be his Diocese, that he may force (what he has, or says he has upon his
Kederminsterians) upon the consciences of all men an implicit Faith, that all
must believe when and because he says it? Is the infallible spirit gone out of
Zedechiah, 1 King. 22. 24. or out of Bellarmine or Arminius in^o him? Or does
he execute the office of the Popes Legate, speaking to us only that which is
decreed in his unerring Chair? or has he gotten a monopoly of Socinus his
Right Reason, which is infallible? what else can he alledg that his word must
be taken for a Law without dispute? Or is it indeed because he finds Gods word
will yield him no succor, therefore he must proprio Mart militare, act in his
own name, because God is not with him? So indeed it seems, for neither God,
nor reason, nor any thing else, but a high conceit of himself will be accessory
to his reasonless Conclusions, viz. that James his question is, what is the
condition of our Justification by Christ's Righteousness; when James in his
whole dispute there, neither expressly nor implyedly utters a word of Christ's
righteousness, or if Mr. Brs Jesuito-Arminian condition, nor any thing that can
easily be reduced to Christ himself. Or where does Paul dispute only of the
righteousness proper to justification, and not also of the way and means by
which this righteousness may be applied to us and made ours? Or in which of his
quoted Scriptures, or any other of the Apostles writings; when he excludes
works, does he exclude Faith also from its subserviency to justifying? Such
peremptory dreams of a haughty brain cannot be more fitly answered than with
contempt and ^ilence. Thus should I do, were it not in respect to some pious
and not unlearned men, that have taken some infection of the Epidemicall
disease of our times, too easily to drink down errors, differing herein only
from the vulgar, that error is more appetible to them from a learned and
sophistical, than truth from a plainer, though faithful hand. Let a man once
have the name of a learnnd Scholar, and strict-walking Pharisee, all his
Doctrines by such men are concluded to be of rare use and excellency, before
they be seen whether they be white or black, from Heaven or from Hell,* Not a
few of these men having in my hearing stood firm and up moved in the defense of
the doctrines of this book of Mr. Brs. not being able to speak any thing to
refell the objections made against it, but this, that the Author thereof is an
eminently learned and pious man. As if Satan had not the wit to make choice of
his instruments that have the most complete aptitude and power to deceive, or
that the Jews had not so much to say for their Pharisees, the Papists for their
Bellarmine, and the Remo^strants for their Arminius, or the Devil had
forgotten his ancient subtlety when he will seduce from the verity of Christ's
Gospel, to change himself into an Angel of Light, or that no damning error
could proceed from a self-saving, or rather self-deceiving Pharisee. To clear
up the truth to such, at lest to give their occasion to search the Scriptures
by which they may clear it to themselves, I shall lay and compare together Paul
and Mr. Br. in that which Mr. Br. says was the question about which Paul
disputed, that it may be made evident whether they agree, or contradict either
the other.

To this purpose by the way, there is to be taken out of the way a fallacy that
lurketh in Mr. Brs. words, where he says, The dispute of St. Paul is upon this
Question; It is not enough to say this was A Question, exc^pt he say also it
was the Question, yea the Only Question upon which the Apostle disputed in
those places where he excludes works, and infers Faith alone to be ordained
as effectual to justification. He disputed in some of his Epistles upon many
questions. To reduce what he disputed severally to the several questions, all
to one, were to make nonsense of the whole. The same may be said of all men's,
yea of the most Scholastic disputes of Mr. Br. himself, who is a greater
Philosopher, and more studied in Logic and Metaphysics than ever the Apostle
was. But I deny it to be the only or the chief question about which St. Pa^l
so disputes, what is the Righteousness which we must plead against the
Accusation of the Law? or by which we are justified as the proper
Righteousness of the Law? I grant it to be one, but a less principal question
upon which he disputes. But the more principal question is, in general, by
what means we may be interessed into Christ, or obtain the righteousness of
Christ to become ours, and so still ret^in it to justification? More
particularly whether the Native Faederall holiness of the Jews, and the
privileges of the Covenant in part mentioned, Romans 9. 4, 5. and Phil. 3. 5.
and Gal. 2. 15. Or their actual and personal righteousness and sincere
obedience to the Law mentioned, Phil. 3. 6. Mat. 20. 12. and the 19, 20.
together with all the Typical purgings mentioned in the 9. and 10. Chapters of
the Epistle to the Hebrews? On the other side, whether all the Natural and
Moral righteousness of the Gentiles, which they performed by the instinct of
the Law of Nature written in their Consciences, without the help or knowledge of
Gods written law, or their exemption from the Covenant of God made with the
Jews, (For some of the believing Gentiles, reading the promises made of calling
unto the grace of Christ them that were not Gods people, or beloved before,
weakly concluded that their former uncircumcision and uncovenant-ship was a
special furtherance to their admission unto Christ, as may be probably
gathered from Romans 11. 19. and Gal. 5. 6.) whether any of these kinds of
holiness and works of righteousness, either with Faith, or without Faith? or
whether Faith alone without all, or any of these, be required as isntrumental,
subservient, and effectual to inright us to the Justification which is by
Christ? This was the more principal question upon which Paul disputes in the
places before mentioned; Somewhat he says to the former, but less
principally, and seldom but in subserviency to this. So the question upon which
Paul disputes in his Epistles, and Mr. Br. in his Aphorisms, is one and the
same, but their Conclusions absolutely contradictory either to other. The one
concludes that Faith alone without man's works and righteousness; The other,
that not faith alone, but Faith as a work together with all other works of
righteousness do justify, and all moral duties collaterally with Faith are
required to make the Righteousness of Christ ours to justification. No greater
or more palpable Contradiction can be devised. Whosoever shall preach another
Gospel [of Justification otherwise than by Faith in Christ without works] let
him be accursed, says Paul: Whosoever shall be practically a solifidian, trust
to a bare Faith, and not work for Justification shall be Damned says Mr. Br.
If one of these be granted to be an Apostle of Christ, the other must needs be
proclaimed to be the Apostle of Antichrist. But whether this which I have
expressed be indeed the principal question on which the Apostle so disputes,
adhuc sub judice lis est. We are left uncertain on both hands may some say.
True, and if I only say and not show it, I shall be guilty of the fault which
I blame in Mr. Br. And so we may deserve both to be laughed at as Triflers. This
therefore is the next thing to be added.

First then if we do but consider to whom, and against whom the Apostle
handles these disputes, (for Mr. Br. reduces them all to his Epistles) it
will be more than probable to every rational man, that his most principal
question is, By what means we possess and continue in the possession of the
righteousness which is by Christ, to Justification? And but secondarily, less
principally, and in subserviency to this question, What the righteousness is
by which we are to be justified. The persons to whom he writes were all
Christians, the purest and most eminent Churches of Christ, that had received
the pure doctrine of Christ by the preaching of the Apostles, viz. that
(whereas sin and death and the Curse by sin reigned over all men in all the
world, so that all wete Children of wrath, and every soul guilty before God)
Christ was given of the Father to be the Author of Righteousness and life, by
the Mediation of his death; that in him and in no other name under heaven was
salvation attainable, that whosoever would believe in him should have
everlasting life; should be Justified freely by Grace through the Redemption
which is in Jesus Christ; and by their very receiving of him should obtein
power to become the sonns of God; notwithstanding all their former pollutions,
and without all prejacent qualifications in them to purchase so great a
Redemption. Such was the doctrine preached to them, and in the embracing and
professing of this Doctrine, and their Faith in Christ the alone redeemer they
were first admitted into Christ gathered into Churches and so continued a while
stablished in this truth with the joy of the Holy Ghost abounding in them. The
persons against whom he disputes were chiefly if not only the False Apostles
of the Circumcision, who also professed the Faith of Christ and preached it,
not the unbeleeving Jews, for these should not have had any such audience from
the Churches; But such as went out from the Apostles and the Church that was at
Jerusalem to preach Christ, Act. 15. 24. Such as came from James, Gal. 2. 12.
Such as boasted themselves to be of C^phas, to hold forth the doctrine of
Peter, 1 Cor. 1. 12. Such as preached Christ of envy, strife, and conten^i^n,
not sincerely, but under the lu^e of so holy a name to take the advantage to
deceive, Phil. 1. 15, 16. Who not laboring to gather Disciples to Christ out
of infidelity as the Apostles had done, entered into the sever^ll Churches
before stablished by the Apostles, troubling them with words, subverting their
souls, teaching them that they must be circumcised and keep the Law of Moses,
else they could not be saved, Act. 15. 1. 24. And these were of the Sect of the
Pharisees which believed, Act. 15. 5. Emissaries out of those Many thousands or
rather Myriads of the Jews at Jerusalem which believed yet were all zealous
of the Law, Act. 21. 20. Had the Apostles dispute been against such as had
apostatiz^d from the profession of Christ, and against such unbeleevers as had
seduced them from trusling on Christ's imputed, to rest upon their own inherent
righteousness, for justification; i^ had not been besides the purpose to have
it his question (as Mr. Br says) whether it be Christ's righteousness or our
own righteousness that we must plead against the accusations of the Law? But
seeing both the seduced and seducers with whom he deals were such as
professed faith in Christ, as their justifier and Savior, and questioned only
whether Faith alone, or else their righteousness and works also together with
Faith, were required to inright them to Christ's righteousness and salvation, it
had been impertinent if not ridiculous to have made it his question what the
proper righteousness is by which we are justified; For this had been to decline
and not to prosecute the question between him and them. They would have granted
him all that he concluded without the least damage to their Cause. Therefore
his question was principally, By what means we come to partake of the
righteousness of Christ to Justification?

2 Let the Apostle himself give his Testimony what his principal question was,
For he better knew his own mind than Mr. Br or my self. And first in his
Epistle to the Romans having for an introduction to the question, in the three
first Chapters proved both the Jews with all their legal and the Gentiles
with all their natural righteousness and unrighteousness to be under sin,
guilt, and condemnation, he no sooner in the third Chapter begins to speak of
the mean of their recovery Christ Jesus, but he annexeth also by what means we
come to have right in him. In both which he no less Contradicts Mr. Br than
if he had seen before what Mr. Br has written so many ages after. Or the
former he affirms that we are justified (as by Christ, so) by the Redemption
which is in Jesus Christ, as he was set forth to be a propitiation [or
expiatory sacrifice] for our sins, Romans 3. 24, 25. Not as Mr. Br before so
stoutly Contended, as he is our Lord, i. e. in his sense our Lawgiver. Of the
latter, that it is faith alone that makes this redemption and Propitiation ours
to Justification, namely, Faith in his blood, Faith without the deeds of the
Law, Faith which excludes, without works which include boasting, ver. 25, 27,
28. And this faith in the death of Christ, without works, without deeds, cannot
include in it, Moral works and righteousness unto Justification, as Mr. Br
would extort from it elsewhere, by making Christ as our Lord and Lawgiver the
object of Justifying Faith. At length he Concludes ver. 30. that both in them
which have some seeming and plausible qualification of righteousness and works,
and in them that have it not, it is not that righteousness of their own, but
Faith which Justifies. And that this Faith is no less effectual to the
justifying of them that unto that very day, have been ungodly, than of them
which from their very birth have seemed to be holy to the Lord. So much is
Comprehended in those words of the Apostle; It is one God which Justifies the
Circumcision by faith, and the un-circumcision through Faith. In these words is
included the whole State of Paul's question. The Apostle writing to the Church
that was at Rome, Consisting of believing Jews and Gentiles, endeavors to
heal the divisions, Close the breaches, and settle a sweet union and Communion
between them. This he applies himself unto, first in that great and
fundamental point of Christianity, viz. Justification by Christ, in which
they dissented: Both Jews and Gentiles acknowledged Justification and
salvation to be by Christ alone, but in this they differed. The Jews Confined
this salvation by Christ to themselves alone, that to them only he was
promised, that they alone were qualified and in a capacity to receive him and
the benefits that are by him. That he came to be the Savior of his own
hallowed people that had waited for him, not of the common and unclean Pagans
that were aliens from the Common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenant of promise. To this purpose they boasted of their Natural, Faederal,
and personal righteousness and holiness, qualifying them for the Justification
which is by Christ, of all which the Gentiles were destitute. Their natural
Righteousness and holiness, that they were Jews by nature and not sinners of
the Gentiles, the seed of Abraham the holy stock to whom and whose seed the
promise was made: Their Faederall holiness, That they alone of all nations were
in Covenant with God, and did bear the badge and seal of the Covenant,
Circumcision in their Flesh, by which they were distinguishd from all other
people, as holy to God, when all other Nations under the Sun were an
abomination in his sight: Their Legal holiness that they had the Law, Word,
and Oracles of God Committed to them, all other Nations being left without Law,
without God, and without hope, in the world. Their personal and Actual
righteousness, that in reference to this holy Law of God they had walked
exactly, kept it from their youth, and touching the righteousness thereof were
blameless; When contrarwise the Gentiles had walked inordinately, lawlesly
after the instinct of their own nature, and lusts of their own hearts, servants
to idols and devils, not to God. For this Cause they Contended that they by
this their righteousness had, that the Gentiles by means of their
unrighteousness had not right to the redemption and Justification which are by
Christ. That the Gentiles in stead of the natural holiness before mentioned
must become Proselytes, and so the ascititious or adopted Children of Abraham,
becoming Jews, must receive the seal of the Covenant Circumcision in their
flesh; receive and be brought under the Law; and become personally righteous in
keeping it; Else they could not be saved by Christ, Act. 15. 1, 24. Their bare
Faith in Christ without their own righteousness and works could not make them
partakers of the tighteousnesse and salvation which are by Christ. And who
sees not here that Mr. Brs doctrine is one and the same in general with
theirs that were the first heretical troublers and subverters of the Church of
Christ? But against this plea of the believing Jews, the Apostle lays his
Contradictory Conclusion, That both the Circumcision and the uncircumcision,
they that had and they that had not all or any of these kinds of righteousness
were made partakers of Justification through Christ, only by Faith in him.
That our own prejacent works and righteousness are nothing to further, nor our
former unrighteousness and sin any thing to hinder our Justification, but
Faith in Christ is all: He that believes is not condemned, he that believes
not is already condemned, whether he be Jew or Gentile, clean or unclean
outwardly; because as he had said before ver. 22, 23. There is no difference,
For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. This Conclusion that
Faith alone without our prejacent or concomitant works and righteousness do
make the righteousness which is by Christ ours to Justification, he proves
soundly in the 4th Chapter. 1 From the example of Abraham the Father of the
Faithful. By what means Abraham found and obtained the Justification which is
by Christ, by the same means all now obtain it that are Justified. But Abraham
found or obteiaed it not by his own righteousness or works, but by Faith.
Therefore so do now all that are justified. The proposition he leaves as
standing so firm on its own pillars that none will dare to seek the demolishing
thereof. The assumption he proves in both its members, that it was not by his
own righteousness: either Natural, i. e. derived from parents and ancestors, for
they were Idolaters and served other Gods, Josh. 24. 2. Or faederall in the
Jews sense, for he was justified before he was circumcised, and after received
Circumcision as a seal of the Righteousness of Faith, ver. 10, 11, of this 4th
Chapter to the Romans: or Legal, For he was so Justified 400 years before the
Law was given: Or personal by the works of righteousness which he had done:
For then first he should have had matter of boasting that he had done something
toward his own Justification, ver. 2. And secondly, then his justification
should have been reckoned not of Grace but of debt, and so the glory thereof
should have redounded to Abraham and not to God, ver. 4. And if by no one of
these kinds of his own, then not at all by his own righteousness. That it was
by Faith he proves by clear Testimony of Scripture, ver. 3. Therefore the
conclusion stands that we are justified also by faith without works. That Faith
and not any righteousness of our own makes Christ's righteousness ours.

Another Argument he draws from clear and evident Scripture, witnessing that
the righteousness and justification, which consists in the forgivenes, not
imputing and covering of sin, is made ours without works, [therefore by Faith
alone] ver. 6, 7, 8.

When in these two Arguments none can deny but that the righteousness and
Justification which Abraham obtained, and which Consisted not in the doing, but
in the imputing of righteousness, and in the pardoning and not imputing of
sin; is the Justification which is by Christ; and when the Apostle labors
not at all to prove this to be The proper Righteousness to Justification, but
takes it as granted and unquestioned: all must acknowledge that his question
was not, What righteousness it is that Justifies? whether Christ's? or ours?
But when all his dispute is confined to this one point, to prove that this
righteousness by Christ is made ou^s not at all by works, but altogether by
Faith, what rational man can be so swayed by a Spirit of Contradiction, as to
say with Mr. Br. that St Paul's question was not to make out, by what means this
Justification by Christ may be made ours? Whosoever will see these two
Arguments further and fully illustrated and amplified, together with more
arguments to these annexed, let him peruse the residue of this 4 Chap. And if
he return with his Reason sound, and brings not this verdit, that it is
impudence not judgment in Mr. Br. to state Paul's question as he does: Then am
I a stranger both to Paul and Reason.

Again, when the Apostle still insisting upon the same subject, setts forth the
privileges of them that are justified by Faith, does withal affirm that while
they were yet sinners, Christ dyed for them, and so they became Justified by
his blood; and being yet enemies are reconciled to God by his death, Romans 5. 1,
8, 9, 10. thereby implying that there is nothing of our own works and
righteousness, (except sin and enmity against God be such) that does or can
Concur to our justification; so leaving justification to Faith only: it is
evident that his principal question was not whether we are Justified by
Christ, but whether Faith alone or works with Faith are appointed of God in
order to Justification?

I shall forbear to cite short testimonies from other Epistles of the Apostle,
evincing this Truth: and pass to his Epistle to the Galathians in which he
wholly levelleth to this mark. It cannot be denied by Mr. Br. himself that the
Apostle there disputes not of a legal but Gospel Justification, and that this
is a Justification only by Christ: that when he says, If any man, if we, or
an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel, etc. his meaning is, not a
Justification out of Christ (for this should be a legal not a Gospel
Justification) but any other way to the Justification which is by Christ, save
that which we have preached, let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8, 9. Herein it was
agreed between the Apostle and the false Apostles, that Christ is the alone
Justifier, and that salvation is only by him, and to this all the seduced ones
among the Galathians assented. Else had they been Apostate from Christ to the
Law, and not to another Gospel, as the Apostle terms it, Gal. 1. 6. And from
their beginning in the Spirit to seek perfecting by the flesh. The question
therefore was whether Faith alone in Christ, or e^^e together with it, a
natural, faederall and practical righteousness after the rule of the Law,
were required to the acquiring of the Justification which is by Christ.

Hence is that his zealous expostulating with Peter and Barnabas for giving
some occasion to the Gentiles to question whether besides Faith in Christ, some
Conformity to the Law were not also needful to Justification. We (says he)
who are Jews by Nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is
not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even
we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of
Christ, and not by the works of the Law: for by the works of the Law shall no
flesh be justified, Gal. 2. 15, 16. The sum of his debate is as if he had said:
If we that besides the supereminent prerogative vouchsafed to us to be the
Apostles of the Lord Jesus, have a derivative holiness by nature and the
Covenant of God, from Abraham, and withal a righteousness o^ works by living
up to our utmost in the highest pitch of obedience to the Law; having found by
revelation from the Lord Jesus Christ, that all these are nothing available,
but Faith alone proper and effectual to obtein the salvation and righteousness
which is by Christ; have wholly rejected all confidence in and use of these in
order and reference to justification, and made our addresses by Faith alone to
partake of his righteousness: why do we by our judaizing beguile the poor
Gentiles that have none of these prerogatives, into a pernicious opinion of
perfitting their justification by Christ, with their practical righteousness
in obedience to the Law? Where it is to be noted that in one and the same verse
the Apostle does thrice expressly banish works from having any thing to do in
the business of justification by Christ, and no less often attribute it to
Faith and bel^leeving in Christ without all help of works. And can it be
doubted what the question is about which he disputes?

To the same scope is directed all that he delivers in the third Chapter.
That he pronounces the Galathians, foolish and even bewitched that having
obtained justification already by Faith alone in Christ, they would be seduced
to seek the perfecting thereof by works, Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3. That while they were
ambitious to become the Children of Abraham, they fell utterly from Abraham and
from the justification which Abraham found, by seeking it another way then
Abraham found it, viz. by works and not by Faith only, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. That
so to seek it, was the way to meet with the Curse in steed of the blessing of
Christ's righteousness, ver. 10-12. of which more may be said a little after.
That the justification which is by Christ, discendeth by promise to us, and
promises are the object of Faith not of works, ver. 17, 18, 22. But all this
together with what the Apostle disputes of liberty and bondage in the fourth
Chapter, I leave to them that will but considerately read it, to judge whether
it evinceth not that to be Paul's question which I have mentioned.

Lastly, when the Apostle, Gal. 5. 4. brandisheth so heavy a denuntiation
against such as had suffered themselves in this point to be sedueed by the
false Apostles whom Mr Br. follows as his guides and gods. Christ is become
of no effect to you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law ye are fallen
from Grace. What force had there been in this wrathful threat, if the question
between him and them had been about the proper Righteousness by which we are
justified? if they had held i^ to be their own righteousness in opposition to
Paul that held it to be the righteousness of Christ, they would have laughed at
such a Commination as a merely frighting squibb or scar-crow answering, we
grant all, that we are fallen from Grace, that Christ is become of no effect to
us: But what damage can by all this befall us? we make not Christ our
Justifier, but labor to Justify our selves, we seek Salvation not from Grace,
but as a debt in justice due to the Righteousness of our own works. The Apostle
surely was not such an ignorant Antinomian, as to dispute so impotently that
his Arguments might by subtle Baxterians be thus flung back as absurdities in
his face: It is therefore evident that the Galathians when most sednced, ceased
not to make Christ their Righteousness, but had yielded to this imposture (as
the next V^rse declares) that not Faith alone but their own works and
righteousness with it, were pre-required to make them capable of the
righteousness which is by Christ, and that upon this ground the Apostle
denounces them to be Apostates from Christ and Grace, because they sought by
their own righteousness to entitle themselves to the righteousness which is by
Christ, and sought it not by Faith alone. If any demand the reason of this
Consequence, that whosoever seeks right to the Justification of Christ by his
own works, makes himself an alien from Christ, from Grace; the Apostle in part
implies it in that which he speaks in these 4 and 5 verses of Chapter 5. But
had more fully explained himself, Chap. 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. So that by comparing
together what he has said in both places, the reason of his Conclusion
resulteth into all men's view: viz. that such a one seeks the righteousness
and salvation which are by Christ, in a legal not an evangelicall way, by
works and not by Faith, therefore is bound to bring the perfect righteousness
and works which the Law requires to make him capable of justificasion by
Christ, or else falls from Christ, from Grace, to his everlasting ruin.

I shall add no more upon this subject, not because the Scripture has no more,
but because I hold this sufficient, and know the morosity and humorousness of
most readers in our times, preferring an erroneous conciseness, before a sound
and full manifestation of the truth. But my endeavor is to please not men but
Christ. I leave Mr. Br to trample his own rule, not to be bold with Scripture
by being first bold with Conscience. I dare not usurp to my self his peremptory
audaciousness with one breath of the mouth to destroy the whole Gospel, in
saying only not showing and proving that it must be thus understood. He that
can so do with holy things, bewrays much pride and prophanness in his heart,
though he be never so much pharisaically enamelled and philacterized in the
outside. Let him see how he can answer God for his audacious curtness, I shall
not fear the censures of men for my length in bringing to light what he has
stifled in darkness. Let my style please or displease fancies, it shall suffice
me to have taken off his first Paradoxicall imposture that he brings to prove
his doctrine to be the same with Paul's. This is not all that he has to say,
his other Reasons or rather Sophisms follow in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXI.
Mr. Baxters other Reasons to evince the same thing, Examined.

Bax. 2 p. 308. PAul does either in express words, or in the sense and scope of
his speech, exclude only the works of the Law, that is the fulfilling of the
conditions of the Law our selves. But never the fulfilling of the Gospel
conditions that we may have part in Christ. Indeed, if a man should obey the
Commands of the Gospel with a legal intent, that it might be a righteousness
conform to the Law of works; this obedience is not Evangelicall but legal
obedience: for the Form gives the Name. No less or-cu^a^ly than the Devil of
old was wont to speak out of Delphos. For this also as the former is only said
not showed and proved. What does he mean by such imperious Conclusions, but out
of the abounding of his humility and self-abasement to proclaim to the world
that he is a God, and that the words of his lips must be made the judge of all
Scriptures, and the Canon of all men's Faith? When he has spoken we must
subject both judgments and Conscience, without searching further. It is a
truth, he that cannot err has said it. Were it a Conclusion universally
received in the Churches of Christ, which he here delivers, it had been
indeed superfluous to wast time and labor in proving what all grant. But when
it it but a dream of his own brain sneezed thence through his Nostrils, or some
spirit by his Chimistry ^x^r^cted out of Bellarmine, Socinus, and Arminius
their notionall Fanci^s; when all the pious and judicious of all the Protestant
Churches have been unacquainted with it, and lay down Conclusions c^n^radictory
to it, what else but a most arrogant self Confidence, and contempt of his
betters, could move him thus to spit Paradoxe^, without the least e^deavours to
give a demonstration of the least probability of them. Does he th^nk his
raptures so Divine, that the holiest and most judicious of all mortals must
lick his spittle as Angels food, without enquiring what substance and virtue
there is in it? But this is the spirit and genius of the esuits, whom he
follows as his guides if not Gods, and against whom in this very case our
Classical Divines have so much and justly complained in these latter years.
S^tis est hodie Jesuit is nostris (says Dr. Twisse) pro authoritate nescio
qua, quidlibet affirmare, and dictata sua nulla probatione fulta, nobis
obtrudere. i. e. The Jesuits of Vind. lib. 1. par. 2. degr. 3. sect. 1. prope
finem.
our time think it sufficient by their own I know not what Authority, to affi^m
any thing, and obtrude upon us their own dictates without any proof to support
them. And Chamier often, calling it their Tyranny, [Sic volo, sic jubeo, etc.]
Qui cum alienam sententiam Panstr. tom. 1. lib. 1. c. 19. n. 11.
adeo refellant frigide suam tamen obtrudant nulla confirmatam Argumento, i. e.
which when they so coldly refell the opinion of others, yet obtrude their own
without any Argument to confirm Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 6. n. 8.
it. Again, Quis non miretur abijs viris null^ (...) indicatam vim
consequentiae, sed relictam nobis divinandam? At haec non jam segnities est sed
dolus malus. Certe hoc eorum est ingenium, qui maxim sunt inter sophistas,
nempe, ut eas occultent parts quas vident, infirmissimas. i. e. Who would not
marvel, that these men should conclude, without showing by any sign the force
of the Consequence. But leaving us to Divine or conjecture it? This is not
sloth but evil deceit. This indeed is the quality of these men that are
greatest among the Sophisters, to hide those parts which they see most weak. As
to Mr. Brs distinction here (which is of the same kind with the most of those
that he has in this Tractate) between the works of the Law as they are they
fulfilling of the Conditions of the Law our selves, or as they are the
fulfilling of the Conditions of the Gospel: enough were said, if I should only
say what Chamier says to the like wild distinctions of the Jesuits, Si e
Scriptura, Id. To. 2. l. 8. cap. 6. n. 17.
cedo locum, and cedimus: Sin e Scholasticorum somniis, (...), i. e. If these
distinctions be taken out of the Scripture, name where and we submit; but if
out of the dreams of the School men, we leave them to the Crows.

But observable it is that when the most conspicuous men in Learning and all
outward accomplishments, do once fall from the truth and simplicity of the
Gospel, they forth with yield up themselves, not caring what stone they throw,
if with it they may wound the Grace of God and face of the Lord Christ. Thus do
we find Mr. Br. here contradicting himself, to choke the truth. In his former
Sophistical eluding of the authority of Paul's testimony against him, we found
him affirming, that where Paul and James treat of Justification, it was James
his Question and not Paul's, what is the Condition of our Justification by the
Righteousness of Christ? whether Faith only? or works also? But Paul's
Question to be, what the Righteousness is which we must plead against the
accusations of the Law? or by which we are justified as the proper
Rightousnesse of that Law? viz. whether our own or Christ's righteousness? Here
now in the very nex^ breath without any one word interserted, he affirms Paul's
Question to be what he there denied, what the condition is of our Justification
by Christ or having part in Christ? What he excludes and what he includes to
this purpose. This is the integrity of the man, first wilfully to lay down his
Conclusion, that he will pervert the Gospel of Christ, and then to say and
gainsay any thing, all things, that Malice it self against the Gospel can
prompt or dictate to him.

And what is it that he produces here in the second place to elude and lay
prostrate Paul's authority? The notion and sound of his great God Condition, a
god which neither Christ nor any of his Prophets or Apostles ever knew, much
less ever named as operative in the business of Justification. Yet such a Dagon
to Mr. Br. that if he fall shivered, all Mr. Brs. Divinity together with
himself must fall after into the dirt. As to the matter it self, whether there
be any Conditions of the Gospel? and what Condition? and how far it may be
granted? all these have been so fully examined before, that unless I delighted
to feed upon crambe a hundred times more then bis cocta, I must here to prevent
the inconvenience of nauseousness to my self and the Reader, in steed of Answer
transmit the Reader to what has been Answered often before.

As for that which he philosophizingly distinguishes between the works and
conditions of the Law, and the works and conditions of the Gospel: 1 He only
says all but proves nothing; therefore deserves only the contempt of, not an
Answer from his Reader. 2 He says nothing but what he has been taught by the
Papists, that though we cannot be justified by the works of the Law, yet we are
justified by Gospel works such as Faith is. And must the Conclusions of the
holy Apostaticall not Apostolical Church be Canonical to us, because he has
made them so to himself? 3 If he therefore forbears to prove what he says
because he holds it enough proved by the Papists already, and so transmits his
Reader to their Writings: We also refer the reader to the perusal of the works
of our Protestant writers that have dashed into shivers all such seeming proofs
of the papists, and brought to light the truth which they sought to imprison in
darkness. 4 Whatsoever he fableth here of Gospel works, yet are they all legal
or works of the Law which he obtrudeth upon men to Justification, or (as he
here phraseth it) to acquire part in Christ, even to Faith it self he
attributes no such property or power, but as it is a moral work which the Law
commands, as we have found him speaking. 5 (to come to that in which the
whole force of his reasoning here lies) It is false what he affirms, either
that Paul does in express words, or in the sense and scope of his speech,
exclude only the works of the Law, but never the fulfilling of the same works,
as required by the Gospel (for unless he so means he says nothing) from
their cooperation with Faith to Justification: or that this is the real
difference between Legal and Gospel works, that whereas in matter and
substance they are one, yet as they are done to justify us by their own
righteousness, they are works of the Law, but as done to justify us by the
righteousness of Christ, so they are works of the Gospel, or Gospel Conditions.
This is nothing but the Sophistry of a brain sophisticated with strong
delusions to falsify and nullify the pure word of God. For,

1 What does he bring to prove ^^y least particle of what he says? if he had
the testimony of God and Christ on his side, would he leave their name and
authority unmentioned.

2 The Apostle when he treats of Justification by Christ, does not only
exclude works of the Law, but works indefinitely and universally, any works,
all works from having any power ordinate or not ordinate, to give us part in it
or him, as has been fully in its place before demonstrated.

3 His dispute every where is (as was declared and confirmed in the former
Chapter) not so much what is the righteousness which by its own power and
virtue justifies, but what it is that instrumentally uniteth us to Christ for
justification by him: This he denies to all to any works, and attributes to
Faith alone, as has been there evidenced.

4 In such places where he expressly speaks of the works of the Law he means
the Law written, as it was given and pertained to the Jews alone, as a signal
evidence of Gods love to them above all other Nations. This is clear from the
Apostles own Testimony, To. 2. 12, 14. 17. and 5. 13. as also where he numbreth
Circumcision, the observation of times and meats, and other rituall pieces of
the Ceremonial Law, together with the moral works of the Decalogue. And will
Mr. Br say that these rituall works are Conditions also of our part in Christ?

5 When he so gives the Adject of the Law to works, calling them the works of
the Law, he does it to beat down the pride and boasting of the Jews that
gloried in the Law, Romans 2. 23. declaring to them that although the Law were
one principal prerogative vouchsafed to them not to any other people, Romans 9.
4. yet the works of the Law so glorious and privilegious had nothing to do with
Faith to further our Justification by Christ: but that the Gentiles without the
Law had as free access to God by Faith in Christ, as they with all the
furniture of the Law and its works.

6 Paul does exclude all works under what name or notion soever, from
justifying so as Faith justifies, or to be isntrumental and conditional to
justification as Faith is. But Faith is isntrumental or (as M. Br. terms it)
conditional to receive Christ to Justification. Thereforr works are excludeded
from being so conditional, or to be Conditions of the Gospel, as he phraseth
it. This is apparent by those Scriptures where Paul says, Not of works but of
Faith, by Faith without works, to him that works not, but believes, etc. as
has been (...) before alleged and amplified. And all this of works without
the adjection of the Law, yea of works done hundreds of years before the Law
(to which Paul had reference in such disputes) was given.

7 Paul denies to works any operation in the Justification of Abraham, or of
us that obtein the same Justification with Abraham. But the works which are
denied to justify Abraham, could not in Paul's sense be the works of the Law,
being acted 430 years before the Law was given; and the Justification which is
common to Abraham and his spiritual seed, was and is justification by Christ.
So that works have nothing to do with Faith to condition us for justification
by Christ. This has been made out in the former Chapter, from Romans 4. 1, etc.

8 And lastly, If such imperious, arbitrary, unreasonable, and unproved
distinctions be harkened to in Divinity, what one part either of Law or Gospel
shall abide sacred? The whole word, as Mr. Br. the great Artificer in the
Trade, somewhere complains, shall be made a waxen Nose. For with as much
integrity as Mr. B. has here used to put the greatest Article of the Gospel to
a topsie turnie, may I mock at all the Commandments of the Decalogue, with a
distinctionary vanity to nullify them. Thou shall have no other Gods before
me. True, may I say, but God means other Gods of the Pagans devising, not
excluding the Gods of my own feigning. Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image. That is right (said the Greeks once) but God here excludes the
graven Images which the Romans, not the painted Images which we adore. Thou
shall not steal, the thief may here distinguish, the lean Cattle are here
excluded not the fat. Thou shall not murder; the Pharisees gloss upon it was,
to wit, my friends, but my enemies I may. The like might I say of the rest, yea
of every Gospel truth also, and all with as good reason as Mr. Br. here deals
with Paul. We are justified, or have part in Christ, not by works but by Faith,
by Faith without works, says Paul: Right says Mr. Br. for he excludes works
only as they are works of the Law, not as they are works and Conditions of the
Gospel. Yet, Vltra Sauromatus fugere hine libet, it makes me not only to wish
but even to hold my self almost in a desert as impatient of the company of some
of our distinctionary Rabbis, that admire and are ready to bless themselves
at the wit and profoundness of such wild, barbarous, profane, and senseless
distinctions of this incomparable man that has not his Peer in England, when
in this piece of his worth there is not a ploughboy so rustic but would easily
whistle so profanely in this kind as he: And if the reason were given to Mr.
Br. why he is in this artifice more full than others, it might be given in the
Poets words;

Non tibi plus cordis sed minus oris in est. Bax. pa. 309. 3 Paul does by the
word [Faith] especially direct your thoughts to Christ believed in; For to be
justified by Christ, and to be justified by receiving Christ, is with him all
one. Though I might except in some sense against this assertion; yet because I
cannot apprehend waking, what he dreams sleeping, how he will from this
assertion prove that Paul either does not exclude works from Justification, or
does not attribute it to Faith alone, I leave it unexamined: If by Receiving
Christ, he means our taking him as our Lord to be obeyed in all his
Commandments that we might thereby be justified, enough has been said before
in the examination of his 66, 72, and 73 These. in answer to the fourth Argument
that he brings for justification by works: unto it I refer the reader.

Bax: ibid. 4 And when he mentions Faith as the Condition, he always
implies Obedience to Christ. Therefore believing and obeying the Gospel, are
put for the two summaries of the whole Conditions. The vanity and falsity of
this assertion has been discovered in the examination of his 62, and 70
Theses, in which is Comprehended his 2 Argument for Justification by works.
What is there said being perused, will take off (I suppose) from the reader all
expectation of any more to be here said to it. Only by the way all may note, 1
That what he says here labors of the same disease with the former, it is
only said not proved. We must all sit at the Feet of this Gamaleel and
believe, because this great Doctor and Magister noster has spoken it. 2 That
although it be the Popish Cause which he here mainteineth, yet he with a holy
Craft makes use rather of the Arminian than Popish Phrase, the more easily to
beguile the simple, Calling works (not as the Papists do plainly Works, but)
Obedience to Christ, and Obedience to the Gospel. How does he fit his bait to
be swallowed by gudgeons that cannot discern a line from a halter. He knows
there is a generation of men that detest swines flesh, yet feed every morning
upon pistles of pork as the great ^^elicacie. Change the name, and they
disaff^ct not the subst^n^e. 3 Yet what he here says he has received in
matter though noti^n words from Stapleton the Priest and his fellows. We are
just^^ed (says the Apostle) by Faith, not by works, i. e. (says Staplet^) not
by works without faith, but by works and Faith: that is (says Mr. Br.) [not by
works or obedience out of Faith,] but by works employed in Faith. Let him that
can decide which of these two is the finer Sophist^r and Papist. 4 And no less
harmoniously do Paul's words and Mr. Brs exposition and distinction upon them
agree together, than a harp and a harrow. Paul affirms Justification or
imputation of Righteousness to be without works, Rom 4. 6 Mr. Br expounds his
meaning to be without works which are not, but by works that are employed in
Faith. As good a distinction as if I should distinguish between the brains that
a man has out of his head, and the brain which he has in his head* How great
is his self-Confidence that he should think such absurd distinctions should
take with any rational man, only upon this Authority, because such a
Cathedral scholar has said it? And when Paul says so frequently, Not by works
but by Faith, he should mean by Faith, works also employed in Faith? This were
to affirm that Paul in the delivery of the sacred doctrine of the Gospel speaks
by Contraries, and that what things he setts in opposition we must take to be
in a Conjunction, so that if he had said a man sees with his eyes not with his
heels, we must understand him to mean that he sees with his eyes and heels
together, or with his heels employed in his eyes.

What he adds of believing and obeying the Gospel, that they are the two
summaries of the Gospel, has been before examined, and both found to be the
same thing. Obedience to the Gospel being nothing else but the hearts
submission to the voice of Christ and doctrine of the Gospel in stretching
forth faith to apprehend Christ alone to Justification, illumination,
sanctification, etc. resting upon him both for salvation, and for grace and
power to walk worthy of it, as has been more fully before expressed.

Thus much in way of examination of the third part of his vindication, viz.
that his doctrine in nothing dissents from Paul's. And in this point I doubt not
but we have found Paul and him no less Cohering, than Christ and Antichrist.

CHAP. XXII.
Whether there be any validity in Mr. Brs Apologizing for his Doctrine, that it
is not derogatory from the Righteousness of Christ.

THe 4th part of his vindication is to free his doctrine [of Justification by
works] from being derogatory to Christ and his righteousness. Here unto his
endeavors bend in many parts of this his Tractate. In stead of all, I shall
mention only two or three places which Comprehend the sum and whole of all
the rest.

Bax. pa. 307. The Righteousness which we must plead against the Laws
accusations, is not one grain of it in our Faith or works: but all out of us in
Christ's satisfaction.

Again, Appendix pa. 78. Our doing [or works] are required, not to be any part
of our Legal Righteousness, nor any part of satisfaction for our
unrighteousness; but to be our Gospel Righteousness, or the Condition of our
participation in Christ, who is our Legal Righteousness, and so of all the
benefitts that come with him.

What his meaning is he expresses Aphor. These. 79. pa. 313. in a Syllogism,
thus:

This Doctrine is no whit derogatory to Christ and his Righteousness: For

He that ascribes to Faith or obedience, no part of that work which belongs
to Christ's satisfactory righteousness, does not derogate in that from that
Righteousness.

But he that makes Faith and Obedience to Christ, to be only the fullfilling
of the Conditions of the New Covenant, and so to be only Conditions of
Justification by him, does give them no part of the work of his Righteousness:
Seeing he came not to fulfill the Gospel, but the Law.

Ergo -- etc.

I shall speak only to the Syllogism, because in it is fully Comprehended all
that Mr. Br. has to say for the vindication of his doctrine from so fowl a
scandal and blemish. And here I shall in the first place only mind the reader
of what has been before Copiously (in its place) manifested, that Mr. Br.
takes up this Feat of arguing from the Papists, who to Clear their doctrine of
Merit and Justification by works, from being derogatory to Christ and his
Merits, do plead against us, That they in no wise lessen the Merits of Christ,
by teaching that good works do Merit and Justify: But that herein they advance
the Merits of Christ in ascribing to them this sovereign virtue and power, to
give validity and worth to man's good works to Merit and Justify. Nay the
Heretics (say they) degrade the Merits of Christ, in teaching that man's works
cannot Justify or Merit, as if there were not force enough in Christ's Merits
to enable them to it. Whether theirs or Mr. Brs Argumentation have more show of
reason to support it, I leave to the intelligent reader to judge.

2 The whole Argument is Sophistical and fallacious: 1 In that his Argument is
not full and wide to the proving of his position. The position which by this
Argument he pretends to Confirm, is in his own words, that This doctrine [of
his] is no whit derogatory to Christ and his Righteousness. But his Argument is
shapen only to prove, that his doctrine does not derogate from Christ's
righteousness, not that it does not derogate from Christ himself. Were it
granted that it does not derogate from Christ's righteousness, yet it follows
not that it does not derogate from Christ, any more than if a man should
ascribe all due praises to Mr. Brs learning, but should deny his honesty,
Charity, Chastity, verity, or other like virtue in him; yet because he does not
derogate from the learning of the man, he does not derogate from the man
himself in any of his accomplishments. Mr. Brs doctrine may derogate from
Christ in veiling his grace, mercy, and fullnes in other Conditions required to
the Completing of his Mediatorship, though it did (where it does not) ascribe
to his Righteousness its due praise and fullness. 2 In that he plays with
equivocation of words: For to shun the deserved hatred which the Papists
doctrine incurreth from the Saints of Christ, he delivers their doctrine not in
theirs but in the Arminian phrase, putting under the name and in stead of [
good works] Obedience to Christ: For this is an equivocall phrase, and as often
as it is used in the New Testament in order to Justification, it is the same
thing with Faith, and differs not a whit from it. The obedience of Faith,
obeying of the Gospel, and obedience to Christ, signifying nothing else but the
denial of our selves and our own righteousness, and our trusting in Christ
alone for Justification and salvation, as Christ and his Gospel Command; in
opposition to the voice of the Law that [ knowing nothing of Christ, speaking
nothing of faith] says, Do and work that thou may be saved, Gal. 3. 12.
But Mr. Br. takes this obedience to Christ not in that Gospel but in this
legal sense, for the fulfilling of the Moral works which the Law requires, to
interesse us in the justification which is by Christ, and so deceives his
reader with the homonymy of the phrase. 3 In putting a restricting in his
Argument, upon the Righteousness of Christ, which in his position that he was
to prove was left at large and in general, Christ and HIS Righteousness: but
in the Argument he putts a limitation upon it in the Major, That Righteousness,
which also he explaineth to be only the Satisfactory Righteousness, of Christ:
as if there were no other but that righteousness in Christ, and whosoever
derogates not from it could not derogate at all from Christ's righteousness. I
may subscribe to the righteousness of Mr. Br. in some Acts of his, though I
only desire but find it not in other. Many other Acts of righteousness were
required in Christ (even as he is our Mediator) besides that by which he gave
satisfaction to Justice for our Sins, without which his satisfactory
righteousness becomes unavaileable to us. And he that derogates not from the
one, may derogate from the other. Yet see we the boldness of our Sophister,
what he restreigneth in the proposition about Christ's righteousness, in the
Assumpeion he leaves indefinite, loose, general, and without restriction
again, not [ that] righteousness, but [ HIS] Righteousness: so making his
Argument, by his fallacy of four terms, to run four-footed. 4 By begging the
question in Calling good works (which with him is the same with Obedience to
Christ) the Condition of the New Covenant and Justification by Christ. Well
does he put it upon himself, saying, He that makes them such, for neither God
nor Chtist ever made them such. 5 His Activity and Liegerdemain, which he uses
to draw off his reader from Considering the palpable sophistry used in this
Argument. This he seeks to do by giving and prosecuting in the explication of
this Thesis, a seeming reason that he brings to prove his assumption; viz.
that Christ came not to fulfill the Gospel but the Law, and then spending his
whole explication about it. When (not to speak how equivocall and ambiguous the
phrase is, and in its most literal and grammatical sense the assertion
altogether false) we utterly deny, either that Christ has fulfilled the works
of the Law or the Gospel in our stead, otherwise than by giving satisfaction by
his death for our infirm and maimed fulfilling of them; or that works done to
justify us are as all works of the Gospel, but are contrariwise wise wholly
works of the Law; or that Christ has any more satisfied for our infirmities in
fullfilling the works of the Law than of the Gospel, in that sense in which Mr.
Br. distinguishes them. It was his part not to say but to prove soundly his
assertion, if he would not have it exploded for a new and vain fancy, rather
than to have answered in his explication, objections of his own making that
scarce touch upon the matter in question.

This might suffice as a full answer to his Argument, to have proved it in so
many particulars to be unargumentall, no argument, or a faulty argument, not a
Syllogism but a Para-logism. Yea not to leave an occasion to any of excepting
that the propositions of the syllogism may have some force in them or either of
them apart from other, to his purpose; I shall afford the labor to examine
them also.

To the Consequent of the Major I have many things to say. 1 That it is (as the
whole Argument) sophistical, a mere declining of not a speaking to the
question; The word [ in that] is foysted in besides the question, and makes
that which is said unsaid, as altogether besides the question. That which he
undertakes to prove, is (in his own words) that His doctrine is no whit
derogatory from Christ and his Righteousness. To prove this see how grossly he
acts the Sophister to be gu^le fools, in stead of a Logician to satisfy the
intelligent. He that ascribes (says he) [ to works or] obedience, no part of
that work which belongs to Christ's satisfactory Righteousness, does not
derogate [in that] from that Righteousness. No less true than the Gospel, but
so far from the question as the earth is from heaven. For who ever questioned
whether the not ascribing to works that which belongs to Christ's satisfactory
righteousness, be a derogating feom that righteousness? Yea it were madness in
any to question it. For if the not ascribing should so derogate, then God,
Christ, Spirit, Word, Apostles, Prophets, all Protestants, yea all animate and
inanimate Creatures without understanding, should be guilty of derogating from
Christ's satisfactory righteousness. For none of these ascribe to works any part
of that work which belongs to that righteousness of Christ. How palpable is
this cheat which Mr. Br. would put upon us? He that does not ascribe etc. does
not derogate in that, i. e. in his not ascribing to man's works what belongs to
Christ, from Christ. By the like Argumentation might Joah clear himself from
the guilt of murder Committed upon two better men than himself; and Christ's
Tormentors themselves from having any hand in his death: Thus might they learn
of Mr. Br. to plead; They that wound not, that keep a man's head from wounding,
do not in that take away his life. True, the not wounding of the head was not
prejudicial to the life of them whom they slew. But the wounding and piercing
of their bodies and shedding out their bowels, made them as actually
murderers, as if they had also dashed out the brains of them whom they slew.
It was not what they did not, but what they did that Constituted them guilty of
murder. So it is not Mr. Brs not ascribing but his ascribing to works that
derogates from Christ. Shall we think that Mr. Br. slumbered and doated into
this fallacy? Is he a puny that he should need to be taught how to express
himself in an argument? Nay all must see that he knows it to be a heterodox and
desperate Conclusion which he mainteineth, that no honest and holy means can
pillar up; therefore tramples all ingenuity under-foot, running over it to
fetch patronage from his Sophistry. And even herein bewraies the high thoughts
that he has of himself, that all his flies are Eagles, and his gross^st
Conceptions oracles; and his abasing of all others, that they are so blind as
not to see, and so blunt as to be all taken in his rook nets.

Or if we take his meaning thus, That his doctrine in making Works a
Collateral with Faith to Justification, (which he would say plainly if he
meant not fraudulently, and had not his own judgment and Conscience suggesting
to him the weakness and falsehood of such an assertion) because it ascribes no
part of the work of Christ's satisfactory righteousness to works, does not
derogate from Christ and his righteousness: Then I deny both the Consequent and
Consequence of the Proposition. For 1 It derogates from him and it a full
potency and efficacy to justify any one, until it be animated and enlivened
by our own works to do it, leaving it all feeble and dead to produce its effect
until our obedience as its Concause gives life to it. And this is
Contradictive to the doctrine of the Apostle, who asserteth the efficacy and
actual efficiency of Christ and his righteousness to justify us yet ungodly,
Romans 4. 5. yet without strength [to work] yet sinners, yet enemies, and so
workers against him, Romans 5. 6, 8, 9, 10. 2 It derogates from it its glory, in
parting and dividing our Justification between his righteousness and our
righteousness; so ascribing part of the praise to man which ought to be
attributed full and entire to Christ. This also is contrary to the doctrine of
the Apostle, that excludes works under every notion from having to do in the
business of Justification, to exclude Boasting, lest any man should boast, or
glory in himself, Romans 3. 27. and 4. 2. Ephesians. 2. 9. But that He that glories
may glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31.

Nay it does not only derogate from, but totally destroy and nullify the
righteousness of Christ, as to us and our justification. For so first the
Apostle testifies, Christ is become of no effect to you, whosoever of you are
justified by the Law, Gal. 5. 4. And to be justified by the Law, or by the
works of the Law, are with the Apostle the same thing, as has been often showed
before. Yea to seek justification in any part or degree by the works or
obedience which the Law requires as a Condition of Justification, is to seek
to be Justified by the Law. Works being the Condition of Justification by the
Law and not by Grace. 2 Because it obstructeth the way of Justification which
Christ has made and sends poor souls to seek it in a way that is impervious,
by which there can be no access to Christ his righteousness. For the
righteousness of Christ is given of free Love, pure grace, mere mercy; as a
free Gift, Romans 5. 15. Freely offered and received, Rev. 22. 17. Without money
and without price, Isa. 55. 1. He is the worst Simoniak that seeks to buy this
gift of the Holy Ghost for money, to make it his by his own Merit and
obedience. Whosoever is admitted to it, such a one is rejected from it: For
Christ came to call not the Righteous but sinners to repentance. The Publicans
and Harlots enter when these are excluded. They shall come from the East and
from the West etc. From all parts of Paganism and Barbarism, that shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jaakok, in the kingdom of God, in the possession
of gra^e and righteousness by Christ: but these that think themselves in their
own righteousness to be the children of the kingdom shall be cast out with the
Jews, into whose doctrine and manners they are naturallized. And justly, For
he that works, i. e. brings works to inright him to Justification,
Challenges it as Debt from Gods Justice, as the fruit of his own work and
Merit that God owes to him, not as a free gift from his grace, Romans 4. 4. Who
will envy to him the fruit of his deservings? This is Condemnation from the
Tribunal of Justice where no flesh can be justified; when they which [ work
not] but believe on him which Justifies the ungodly, i. e. which bring Faith
alone without works as Coadjutors to put them into the actual and sensible
possession of the righteousness which is by Christ; these even these alone
shall be justified at the throne of grace, Romans 4. 5. Why? these seek it in the
way where God is present to give it: The other in a way wherein God never was,
never will be present to bestow it.

Lastly I deny the Assumption also. It is false that Mr. Br. making (so as he
does it) Obedience or Works the condition of Justification by Christ, does not
give them any part of the work of Christ's righteousness. For it belongs to
Christ's righteousness by it self alone, and to Christ by his Mediatory
righteousness alone to perfect for ever the Justification and salvation of his
redeemed ones, Heb. 10. 14. And that without any accessory help of their own
righteousness, John 13. 10. But Mr. Br. so parts justification between
Christ's righteousness and our righteousness, as that he makes them equally
concurrent to our salvation and justifying: That Christ's Righteousness without
ours can no more profit us, than ours without Christ's: yea makes Christ's
righteousness wholly unprofitable to every man, till by the serving and
deserving of each man it be purchased and made useful to benefit him. And so
by making the efficacy of it the fruit of our Merit, he dis-robes it of its
honor and ornament, derogating from it its all sufficiency by it self to
perfect us, that he may arrogate to our righteousness what is stolen from his.
But how far this doctrine of his derogates both from the grace of God, and
merits of Christ has been often discussed. After all that he has said to the
defacing of both, here he wipes his mouth, and says it was never foul: and
will have his Reader conclude, that when his face of Christ is spittled, yet if
it be from Mr. Brs. lips touched with a Cole from Bellarmine and Arminius, it
is a blessing of him.

This one truth I acknowledge, employed, though not expressed in this Argument of
Mr. Br. that he acknowledges himself to be the man that has made obedience or
works condition of the New Covenant, or of justification by Christ. In this I
contradict him not. It is of man's, not of Gods making, it is a creature of his
own, not created by God, at least not by God assigned to this use and end. It
being therefore not formed to his hand, but a graven image, the work of his own
hand, we leave him (since he will do it) alone without us to persist in
worshipping it.

CHAP. XXIII.
Whether the Reasons which he brings prove him not to be a Legallist and
Anti-gospeller.

HIS fifth endeavor is to vindicate his doctrine from being legal and
Anti-Evangelicall: That although it hold Believers not only under the bondage,
but also under the Curse of the Law, in life and death till the day of
Judgment, These. 9. pa. 65. and p. 73. and elsewhere often: Though it makes works
the condition of the New, as well as of the Old Covenant; though he maintains
that Do and Live, is the voice of the Gospel as well as of the Law, Append. p.
81. Yet is he not a Pharisee or Legallist, nor his doctrine ungospel-like; It
is purely Christian, and full of sweet and ravishing Consolation to a Believer,
not the least tangue of the Covenant of works, but the odor and very marrow of
the Covenant of grace in it. It would be too long to set forth in his own words
all the reasons that scatteringly throughout this Book of his he brings to
prove a probability and likelihood of truth in this his Paradox. The sum of it
is this.

B. 1. As to the bondage and Curse of the Law, though they that are in Christ
are under it in part, yet they are not under it in the whole, as all sinners
under the Law, wholly out of Christ. For they are conditionally pardoned and
justified [as he frequently expresses himself] and so there is some ground of
hope, to take off the extremity of despair. And it is not the whole, but some
part of the Curse of the Law that lies upon them, p. 65. These. 9. Christ's
death has suspended the RIGOROVS execution of the sentence of the Law, that it
does not immediately fall upon his Redeemed ones, p. 67. though they suffer,
after they are in Christ, much of the Curse in execution of the threatening of
the Law, [and that not without rigour] yet is it not in its full rigor, p. 69.
And Christ which has suspended the rigor of the Curse, manageth that which
lies on them to their good and advantage, page 72. And is not this cordial
Gospel? the balm of Gilead? and the healing of Christ's wings to a wounded soul?
The force of all this has been examined already, as elsewhere, so most
copiously in the Examination of his ninth Thesis, and the explication thereof,
to which for the prevention of Tautologizing here, I refer the Reader. Only let
him by the way consider with me how fitly these glosses of Mr. Br. do agree
with many plain and evident Sriptures. Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. i. e. says M. Br. from the
rigor of the Curse, not from the Curse it self, for it lies upon us still: or
from the Curse, that it shall not follow us to heaven after the world is ended;
not but that until the worlds end it shall torment us both dead and living.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1. i. e. No condemnation in its full
rigor, but condemnation unto, and the execution of the Curse they must bear
until the day of judgment, and after that he knows not what will become of
them. Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered, Romans 4. 7. i. e. in part blessed, and in part cursed. The blood of
Christ purges from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. i. e. from all sin, not from all the
curse and vengeance due to any one of our sins are we delivered. God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you all your sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 4. 32. Col.
2. 13. i. e. has forgiven you the fault, but not the curse and punishment. By
one offering, Christ has perfected for ever them that are sanctifird, i. e.
has laid a ground to perfect them if he will in the next world, not that he
has perfected them in point of Justification here. The time past is put for a
time to come, and a certain for an uncertain time. Heb. 10. 14. They that are
once purged by sacrifice, have no more conscience of sin, i. e. when they are
wholly purged in heaven, not while they are but in part purged upon earth. Heb.
10. 2. Their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more, Heb. 10. 17. i.
e. no more as forgiven to spare them: But as long as the Sun and Moon endure, I
will remember to pour out the Curse and vengeance for them. We are justified
by the blood, and reconciled to the Father by the death of the Son, Romans 5. 9,
10. That is, we have right and title so to be reconciled and justified in
another world, if we lose it not by the way. He was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, and with his stripes we are
healed, Isa. 53. 5. i. e. So healed with his stripes that he shall wound us
again with the strokes of his Curse so sorely, that we shall be healed no more
while the world lasts. I have sworn that I would no more be wroth with thee,
nor rebuke thee, Isa. 54 9. i. e. I have sworn, but never meant to stand to it.
I might instance hundreds more of such Scriptures, wherewith Mr. Brs. glosses
and distinctions do as well agree as fire and towe together. If Mr. Br. did so
much honor the very intrals of Gods word, as he does the backside of
Aristotle's Topics, he would not dare so to elude and elide them. But Gods
authority with him must (it seems) stand or fall, as it has or has not
approbation from Aristotle's or Socinus his Reason, being submitted to the
censure thereof. And then what living plant of God can stand, where this man
brings the Axe of his distinctions to fell and prepare billets in heaps for his
Cole-fires?

B. 2. As to the Covenant of works, though he make them Concomitants with Faith
in justifying, and that the voice of the New C: is (after his Assertion) the
same with the voice of the Old, Do, and Live, yet he denies his doctrine to be
herein Legal: Because there is a manifold difference employed, though not
expressed between the Laws and the Gospels justifying by works. 1 The Law
requires an obedience or righteousness of works in every number and degree
perfect, to justification: But he makes the New Covenant or Gospel to require
only sincere obedience, or obedience perfect in sincerity for the attainment of
this end, Aph. pa. 133. and 316. and These. 77. pa. 310. and App. pa. 76, 77.
And the sincere covenanting of this obedience, or this sincere obedience
covenanted, must be thus conditioned, else it is not sincere. 1 It must follow
upon the knowledge of the Nature, ends, and conditions of the Covenant. 2 It
must be done deliberately, and not in a fit of passion, or rashly. 3 It must be
done seriously, and not dissemblingly, or slightly. 4 Freely and heartily, and
not through mere constraint and fear. 5 Entirely, and with a resolution to
perform the [whole] Covenant, and not with reservations, giving themselves to
Christ by the halves, or reserving a purpose to maintain their fleshly
interests. 6 It must be the taking and obeying of Christ alone, not joining
others in office with him, but renouncing all other happiness, save what is by
him, and all government and salvation from any, which is not in direct
subordination to him, Append. pa. 33. These make up a sincere and perfect
obedience, a sincere and perfect Gospel-righteousness, perfect in respect of
Evangelicall, though not of legal perfection. For sincerity is our Gospel
perfection, being a conformity to the rule of perfection, viz. the New Covenant
as it is a Covenant, a perfection of sufficiency in order to its end, which is
to be the condition of Justification, Aph. p. 132, 133. [Who now is there of
all men that has eyes in his elbows, but sees distinctly a vast difference
between the Laws and the Gospels justifying by works. For it is justice which
requires perfect, but Grace that requires but sincere obedience to
justification. All this is without book, the dictates not of the Holy Ghost,
but of Mr. Br. and that spirit which wrought in his Masters from whom he
learned it. For 1. The Scriptures which he alleges in any part of this
Treatise to make any part thereof probable, have been examined, and none of
them found to speak for him, most against him. Neither do these assertions of
Scripture that affirm Christ to give, or promise that he will give life,
salvation, etc. to such or such qualified or working persons, [as to them that
love him, or fear him, or obey him, or to the meek, the righteous, etc.] any
more infer that these qualifications or works have any proper or improper
causality to produce their justification; than when the Scriptures affirm him
to give grace and life to Centurions, Publicans, Harlots, Sinners, Enemies,
U^godly, Chief sinners, Samaritans, Heathen, do infer, that their being such
had any causality unto their justification.

2. Nay the Scriptures utterly deny the Gospel to have to do with the Law in
this voice, Do, and Live, as I have before often alleged them. Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but of his Mercy he has saved us, by Faith
not of works. Not of works, but of Grace. And how poor a shift Mr. Br. uses
to elude the force of these and the like Scriptures, has been showed in the
examination of his vindicating himself from being contradictive to St. Paul.

3. Yea if works in any notion or consideration be brought as coupled with
Faith to promote Justification, the Scriptures affirm them to destroy the hope
of Justification, and to repel the grace of Christ, by which the Believers are
justified. If ye be circumcised (which in Paul's sense there is, if ye bring
but this one work to forward your Justification by Christ) ye are bound to keep
the whole law; Christ is become of no effect, ye are fallen from grace, and fallen
under the Curse, Gal. 5. 3, 4. and 3. 10.

4. And if works or obedience in Mr. Brs. sense (which is the doing of the
moral Righteousness that the Law commands) be not as much as adjuvant to
Justification, then surely sincere obedience cannot be helpful, where
obedience, yea perfect obedience is excluded. This is, and appears to be either
an instinct, or a distinction of Mr. Brs. own brain, not a doctrine of the
Scripture, for which way shall we turn the leaves thereof to find it?

5. Yea, how rational, or how ridiculous this distinction or gloss of Mr. Br.
applied to those Scriptures which deny justification by the obedience of works,
I leave both to the seeing and the blind to judge. By the works of the law no
flesh shall be justified, says the Apostle, i. e. says Mr. Br. by the perfect
obedience of works, but by unperfect obedience, if sincere, we may be
justified. Not of works but of grace, i. e. not of works perfectly done, but of
works unperfectly, yet sincerely done: so grace and works may be made friends,
that is, Gods grace and man's vain glory may kiss each other as coequal workers
of man's justification. Not by works of Righteousness which we have done, but of
his mercy, etc. i. e. which we have done perfectly, but which we have done
maimedly, yet sincerely. If some Festus should hear such a Commentary of Mr.
Br. upon Paul, he would conclude sure, that one of them is beside himself, much
learning has made him madd. Either Paul, that he had not wit or words to
express his own meaning, that in the whole bulk of his disputes, denying unto
our works and righteousness indefinitely, all operation to Justification, and
does not as much as with a Parenthesis, in any place inform his Reader that he
speaks not of Gospel, but of legal works, not of sincere, but of perfect
obedience; that these are rejected from, those necessarily required to
justification: Or Mr. Br. that without craving leave of Paul, by such gross
distinetions goes about to make him unsay what he has said, and the world to
believe, that in all what he wrote of Justification, he meant to be understood
on the contrary to what he speaks.

6. If we bring works at all to procure justification by Christ, we do by
evacuating the grace of God and merits of Christ to our selves, oblige and put
a bondage upon our selvet to fulfill the whole Law legally in its perfection,
else can we never be justified, but abide under the Curse for ever. For he that
works, requires the reward as a debt in law, and not as a gift of grace;
therefore, except his work be so perfect, as that it can in strict justice save
him, he can never attain salvation, as by comparing together these Scriptures
will be evident, viz. Gal. 5. 3, 4. and 3. 10. Romans 4. 4, 5. and 9. 30, 31, 32.

7. As to the rules or qualifications which he gives to covenanting and
obedience that it may be sincere, they are in substance merely legal, the Name
of Christ being only put in stead of the Name of God. And who is there not only
of the Jesuits and Socinians, with the Arminians, from whom he borrows most
of his principles, but even of the real Antinomians, whom he pretends to
oppose, who in all those particulars thinks not himself or gives not cause to
all to think them as sincere as Mr. Br? what ground have we to conclude but
that they know the ends, nature and conditions of the Covenant so truly, and
obey with so much deliberation and as little fittishness and rashness; so
seriously, without dissimulation and slightness; so freely, entirely, and
singly, a^ Mr. Br. does? Thus every stigmatized Heretic in his own way,
bringing with him such a sincerity of obedience, shall thereby be possessed of
the investiture of Christ's righteousness, though he seek it in his own, not in
Gods way, by his own righteousness, and not by Faith alone, which alone God
has stamped with an aptitude and efficacy to this work.

B. 2. The Law (says he) requires obedience and doing, by its own
righteousness to justify us: but the Gospel requires it as a Medium to
acquire to us Christ's Righteousness by which we may be justified. So that the
one requires works to justify us withoutt, the other the same works to
justify us by a Mediator. This he says so frequently in substance, that it
were lost labor to quote the places. And it has been almost so often answered
as said. Therefore I shall referr the Reader to the places where it has been
answered, and specially to the examination of those his disputes in which he
labors to clear his doctrine from all tincture of Popery, from all
contradiction to Paul, and from being derogatory to Christ, and his
righteousness. Here only I add, that this doctrine is the same with that of the
most legal Pharisees, against whom the Apostle so much inveigheth, wishing them
accursed and cut off, for troubling the Churches therewith, Gal. 1 9. and 5. 12.
For they arrogated to themselves alone part in Christ and his Righteousness,
because of their own personal righteousness in the works and obedience which
the Law requires; resisting the Gentiles, and denying to them all possibility
to partake in the Justification which is by Christ by means of Faith alone,
except they also fulfilled the righteousness which the Law required to give
them right to him and it. Yea Mr. Br. [with these] ascribes more to works than
the very unbeleeving Pharisees. For these claymed Justification only by their
works; but he and the believing Pharisees challenged for their works, right
both in the Justifier and in his justification also: For Causa causae est etiam
causa causati. As far as they ascribe to their works a Causality to make
Christ theirs, they make them causal to render the Justification which is by
Christ theirs also.

B. 3. That neither is his Doctrine legal, nor does he ascribe too much to
works, because he makes Faith and obedience to be but a Condition, or a
M^dium, or a poor improper Causa sine qua non, of our Justification, Aph. pa.
223, 224. and our doing no part of satisfaction for our unrighteousness (for
this he seems to have ascribed before to our sufferings in bearing the Curse)
but to be our Gospel-Righteousness, or the Condition of our participation in
Christ who is our legal Righteousness, and so of all the benefits that come by
him, App. p. 78. I say, that subjection and obedience justify. 1 Not as works
simply considered: 2 Nor as legal works: 3 Nor as meritorious works: 4 Nor as
good works which God is pleased with: 5 But as Conditions to which the free Law
giver has promised Justification and life

Nay your ( i. e. the Protestants) doctrine ascribes far more of the work to
man than mine; For you make Justification an effect of your own Faith, and your
faith an isntrumental cause of it, and so make your self your own Justifier.
And you say your faith justifies as it apprehends Christ, which is the most
intrinsicall, essential consideration of Faith; and so faith has much of the
Honor. But while I affirm that it justifies only as a condition, which is an
extrinsicall consideration, and alien from its essence and Nature, I give the
glory to him that freely gives me life, and that made so sweet a condition to
his Covenant, and that enableth me to perform the said Condition, App. page
120, 121.

All this has been often and fully examined before in its place also, and how
little truth there is in any part or parcel thereof discovered. It would be
weariness to the flesh, and vexation to the Spirit, but to look so often upon
his great Goddess, his Queen of Heaven [CONDITION] as he blesses her. O that
his conscience had been so well acquainted with Christ, as his fancy is with
this Idol; he would not then have pestered the Church with such an imaginary
Deity, nor prostituted all that is called God at the feet of such a Proserpina.
I am weary any more to attend to him, making the will of God, i. e. God willing
conditional, and so the immutable God a conditional God, the salvation of
Christ conditional, and so Christ a conditional Savior; or the witness and
seal of Christ a conditional seal and witness, and so the Holy Ghost a
conditional Spirit of Adoption; or the gospel of righteousness, forgiveness,
and life, a conditional Gospel, and consequently nulling all th^se, and
pronouncing them no God, no Christ, no Holy Ghost, no Gospel. For a conditional
proposition does Nihil ponere, and after Mr Brs. principles, it is in man's
righteosness to give or destroy the actual existence of every of these. But I
leave to him that delights therein to bury himself in this gu^ph. I conceive my
self obnoxious to censure for spending and spilling so many words already, to
show the deformity and ugliness of this imaginary Chimera. Here therefore it
shall suffice (leaving the Reader to the perusal of what has been said
already upon this subject) to mind him of these two things.

1. That both the whole and every least fragment of all that is here collected,
whether we look to the substance or Artifice used about it, is not his, but
borrowed partly from the Papists, partly from the Socinians, and their Apes the
Arminians, as has been before showed: and if I shall be called thereto, I am
ready more fully to show, by quoting the Authors, out of whom he has
transcribed all almost word for word, to his use: So that the Reader may
consult with such of our Writers, that have answered their sophistry, if he
desire to read more fully and largely upon this subject, and not expect it from
me who have already transgressed (as some will judge) by my too much largeness
thereon, as to Mr. Baxter.

2 That although the voice here be the voice of Jacob, yet the hands are the
hands of Esau. Sweet words, but subverting doctrine in matter and substance.
Pills of poison wrapped up in gold, we except not against the gold, but the
poison therein enclosed, not against the Terms of words considered by
themselves, but against the pernicious doctrine which they palliate. Whether we
ascribe too much to Faith by making it an instrument, see the examination of
his answer to the last question which he propounds in the explication of
These. 56. But how false and fallacious his flaattering words which he uses
here to make tolerable, yea sweet his arrogant doctrine of Justification by
works (viz. that We, that is, I and the Papists, with Socinus and Arminius,
make our righteousness but a Condition, or Medium, or a poor improper Causa
sine qua non, no part of satisfaction for our unrighteousness, Not as works
simply considered, nor as Legal works, nor as Meritorious works, Nor as good
works with which God is pleased, but as our Gospel-righteousness, and
conditions to which the free Lawgiver has promised justification and life)
will easily appear to him that considers what and how much he ascribes to
works. Though he calls works a poor Causa sine qua non, yet himself affirms
that some Causes sine qua non, deserve far greater praise in moral respect,
than some that have a proper Causality, do, Aph. pa. 216. which though in words
he deny of Faith (meaning by faith all obedience and good works which he calls
the several Acts of Faith, Aph. p. 126.) that it does so deserve, Aphor. p.
224. yet in matter and substance he affirms it. And

Nulla fides verbis cum res adversa loquatur. For as I have more than hinted
before,

1 He makes our righteousness of works and Christ's satisfactory righteousness,
coordinate and collateral in the procurement of our Justification, the one as
absolutely necessary as the other to the attainment of this end; the one to
purchase a possibility of Justification, the other to render that which was but
in possibility, actual and effectual to us: Both satisfactory, the one as a
sufficient Fine and payment, the other as satisfactory Rent and homage, Aph.
These. 17, 18, 19. pa. 129.

2 He puts both in the same order and kind of Causes, making our righteousness
and Christ's satisfaction to be both the Causa sine qua non, These. 56. For
although he names Faith there, yet himself declares himself under Faith to
mean and comprehend obedience also. This Civility alone he vouchsafes to
Christ, that he names Christ's satisfaction before our faith or obedience,
because it seems that is the elder. But in order, power and authority, to the
producing of this effect, Christ has no pre-eminence given him above man.

3 He affirms man's righteousness to be as perfect as Christ's righteousness in
order to Justification, viz. both perfect [in suo genere] Christ's righteousness
perfect to do its work, and man's to its work; or (as he explains himself) both
perfect in the perfection of sufficiency in order to its end. So that here also
is a parity, no efficiency in Christ's righteousness without man's, nor in man's
without Christ's to justify. But when the two perfections meet, if neither lose
its perfection, they may after the world is ended, perfect our justification,
These. 24. p. 132. In the mean while, till our works be added to Christ's
satisfaction, what he says of faith, that he every where implies of the
satisfaction of Christ, that it is dead being alone, as to the use and purpose
of justifying. And so as works make faith alive, so they make Christ's
satisfaction alive, as to the attainment of its end, justification.

4 That works justify in the same kind of Causality and procurement with
faith, not only proving Faith to be sound; but themselves being in the same
obligation with Faith, not idle Concomitants, only standing by while Faith does
all (which some fools might imagine he means, when he calls them only
necessary Antecedents of Justification, pa. 223.) Nay they are Concomitants
with Faith in the [very Act of] procuring it, and in that kind of Causality
which they have, p. 299, 300.

5 They do all this as they are works. Even Faith it self justifies, as it is
an Act of ours, Append. p. 80. and as a moral duty, Append. p. 102. So do all
other Moral duties as they are part of our sincere obedience to Christ, ibid.

6 That we are justified not only by works, Aph. p. 300. and according to our
works, but also for our works, pa. 320. that good works are a ground and Reason
of it, p. 221.

7 That we are justified for our works, that is, for the Merit of them. Not
Merit in the most proper and strict sense, which is the performance of somewhat
not due (by one that is not under the Sovereignty of him to whom it is
performed) of that worth in it self, which binds him to whom it is done, in
strict and natural justice to requite him. Such an obligation can no creature
lay upon God; Neither could perfect obedience, in respect of the Law of Works
(if man had continued still upright) have so merited. [But so far as it was
possible for a perfect man to have merited under the Covenant of works] he may
now merit also under the Covenant of Grace by his works, viz. in an improper
way of Meriting: where the obligation to reward is Gods Ordinate Justice, and
the truth of his promise, and the worthiness lies in our performance of the
Condition on our part. [Thus far might Adam in his perfection have merited
according to the Law of works, and so far may we merit according to the
Covenant of Grace.] Aphorism, Thesis, 26. and pa. 138. 140, 141.

Let all this be laid together, and who can but per-force acknowledge together
with the horns of the Lamb, the voice of the Dragon also? and all that he has
spoken pretendedly to the diminution of works, under the fine terms of his [
causa sine qua non, his Gospel Condition, and necessary Antecedents] to be
really but a Cloak to hide his diminution of Christ and exaltation of sinful
man? A Sirens song to draw poor souls to dash against the Rocks and be drowned
in the gulf? Why had he not made our works conjunctly with Christ's
satisfaction, in his These. 56. the procatarctick and meritorious cause of our
Justification, as well as he does the satisfaction of Christ conjunctly with
our Faith [or obedience] in the same Thesis the Causa ssne qua non, thereof?
Had he so done, could he have ascribed more to works under the name of a
Meritorious cause, then he does under the title of a poor improper Causa sine
qua non? But by so doing he should have showed himself in the light, when
contrariwise he that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light
lest his deeds should be reproved. Let now any of his Disciples produce (I will
not say one Arminian, but) one Socinian, Papist, yea or Jew, that ascribes more
to works, then this man, in derogation from Christ and Grace, else let him
cease to be a follower of him, or openly and ingenuously profess that he
follows him as a Jew, Papist, or Socinian, and consequently that he has made
not Mr. Br. but Mr Brs Masters his Master also in the doctrine of
Justification: And that in advancing self so high, as to affirm he meriteth no
less fully and properly then Christ himself has or could have done: For, his
merits are in order to Gods ordinate not natural justice. But to show the
vanity of his distinction here, how carelessly he eludeth the holy Scriptures as
mere shaddows and play-games, the Apostle denies man in this or that or in any
sense to be justified by works. He says not, Not by works, [as the efficient
or meritorious cause, or as the Medium or Antecedent, or Condition, or Causa
sine qu^ non] lest any man should boast: but positively and peremptorily, not
by Works as by Faith, yea not by works in any acceptance, upon any score and
account. Mr. Brs chippings therefore have no more force then a chip to make the
Holy Ghost to unsay what he has said. And it is as good sense as if I should
say, Man's bread does not apparel him, as it is the maker, or matter, or
instrument, or merit of his clothing, but as it is the antecedent, or medium,
or condition, or Causa sine qua non of his apparrelling, when contrariwise it
does not at all in any sense apparel him.

CHAP. XXIV.
Mr. Baxters Sophism to prove that his Doctrine of Justification by Works, does
not at all derogate from the Doctrine of Faith, examined, and found to be mere
vanity.

BEcause the Scripture attributes Justification to Faith without works, and to
Faith in opposition to works, excluding works and requiring Faith alone to
apprehend the Righteousness which is by Christ, and denominating it the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. The Righteousness which is of Faith, Romans
9. 30. and 10. 6. in opposition to the Righteousness of works. He easily sees
that he shall be excepted against for his antiscripturall doctrine in making
Faith and works Concomitants in the same kind of causality and procurement of
Justification. Therefore he makes it his sixth task to vindicate this his
doctrine from all derogation from Faith, and from all unscripturall confounding
of Faith and works together. To prove himself as innocent in this as in all the
rest, he brings these Reasons.

B. These. 62. 1 Because though he makes Works and Faith to be the Conditions of
our Justification yet (according to Scripture phrase) Faith may be called the
only Condition of the New Covenant, 1 Because it is the principal Condition,
and works but the less principal: And so as a whole Country has often its
name from the chief City, so may the Conditions of this Covenant from Faith. 2
Because all the rest are reducible to it; Either being presupposed as necessary
Antecedents or means, or contained in it as its parts, properties, or
modifications; or else employed as its immediate products, or necessary
subservient means or consequents.

All without Book, one of Mr Brs Mysticks that has no one sound of Gods word
patronizing or favoring it. Witness Mr. Br. who neither in his Thesis, nor in
its Explication has alleged one Scripture to make it good. Is Pythagoras come
among us in a new body, speaking nothing but Parables and Paradoxes, which
vulgar capacities can no more comprehend then they can Plato's Idea's, or
Democritus his Atoms? If so, it shall be needful for him to injoin upon his
Scholars (as he did of old) five years dumbness or silence: Else if the mouth
of a very Ass should be open, it would rebuke the madness of the Prophet, for
delivering things so contradictive to the word, to himself, and to reason.

1 To the word and the Holy Ghost speaking by it, who every where opposes
Faith and works, as to Justification, making them to exclude not to infer or
imply either the other. By faith, therefore not [at all] by works: not by
works, therefore by faith alone. But this man puts them in a conjunction, makes
Faith and works together the Condition of our justification, from thence to
conclude that Faith is the only Condition, and justifies alone. So much a
greater Artist is Mr. Br. then the Holy Ghost, and so ambitious of the praise
of wisdom that he thinks himself to be but a vulgar idiot, if his wisdom be
not stretched Nine whole words by measure, beyond and above the wisdom of the
Holy Ghost.

2 Contradictive to himself. For Aph. p. 300. He denies that which he calls
an idle Concomitacny of works with Faith, that they only stand by while Faith
does all, and concludes that they act together with faith in the same kind of
causality to procure Justification, and so denies that we are justified by
Faith only. Here contrariwise he denies all such co-working of works with
Faith, but that faith may be said to be the only Condition, and to justify
only.

3 Contradictive to reason also, (and yet this next to [ Condition] he seems to
honor as the greatest God) it must be to the Goats and sheep of the mountains,
not to Christ's sheep, to men that have reason, that Mr. Br. must deliver this
doctrine, That we are justified not by faith alone, but by works also, yet it
stands nevertheles as a firm Maxim, faith is the only condition, or justifies
alone. If the lips were shut and sealed up, yet reason would use a ventriloquy,
or force a way through the ears to reclaim against such an absurdity. If I
should so reason of Condemnation the contrary to Justification, that when the
blind lead the blind and both fall into the ditch, when seducers pervert those
that are made to be taken and destroyed, and so all utterly perish and are
damned; That tho all are damned, yet it is but the leader and seducer alone
that is damned, he for all that he has seduced, and they all but damned in him
their principal and leader: Would not Mr. Br be one of the first that would
cry out at such an Arguing, as absurd and not Logical.

Yet because he is a man made up of the very spirits of Reason, and brings his
Reasons that his Assertion agrees with right reason according to the tenor of
the Gospel: I shall produce two or three in steed of many Gospel Scriptures,
and lay by them his Reasons to see how pertinently they will agree as a
Commentary with the Text. The Holy Ghost tells us, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. We are saved
by Grace through faith, not of works lest any man should boast. Mr. Br.
Comments upon this Text thus, i. e. Principally by Faith least any man should
boast principally [of himself.] But not of works principally to exclude this
principal boasting, yet less principally of works also that man may also
boast less principally [of himself.] Or thus, according to his second reason:
Of Faith and not of works unreducible to Faith lest any should boast, yet of
works also that by some relation or cognation are reducible to Faith, that of
such works we might boast. Shall we call this a hatchet or a Comment upon the
Text. Which of these Explications is the more absurd? Or as if in this latter
that runs more smoothly then the former, we might not conclude so wisely of any
moral virtue or duty: When we are said to be justified by any or all good
qualifications and works, we are said to be justified by Mercy or Chastity or
Wisdom only, because all other virtues and works are reducible to this, by
some one or other kind of relation or cognation.

Again, Romans 4. 16. It is of faith that it may be of grace, the Antithesis
whereof is given, ver. 4. Not of works that it might not be of debt. The
Comment which Mr. Brs first reason gives to this Text is, Nay it is both of
Faith and works, works are comprehended in Faith as the less principal in the
principal: So that the meaning of the Text is, that it is principally of
Faith, that it may be principally of Grace, but less principally of works that
[at least] less principally it may be of debt also. His second reason thus
Comments, It is of Faith, that is of Faith, and works reducible to Faith, that
it may be of Grace, not of works unreducible to faith, (such as are murder,
witchcraft, Sodomy, blasphemy, etc.) that it may not be of debt.

Again, Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, i. e. says Mr. Br. Not principally by our
works, but according to his mercy. Yet less principally by our works, and not
according to his mercy. Or not by works of righteousness done by us that are
not, but according to Gods mercy that is reducible to Faith. What else to make
of it when he has taught me, I may divulge. I might annex many Texts of the
same nature, upon which these two reasons of his set as Comments, will speak
out so much of sense, as the Commentator does in them of Conscience. But I have
fully both examined and an^wered before, all that is comprised in this Thesis,
where I took occasion to weigh every branch thereof, under the notion of his
second Argument which he brings to prove Justification by works. To it I refer
the reader for fuller satisfaction.

B. 2 That he does not derogate from faith, in yoking works with it in the
joint procurement of justification; because he does not ascribe to works an
equal part with it in this office or business: but makes faith the more
principal, and works but the less principal part of the Condition: granting
our first Justification to be chiefly by faith, and the second Justification
only, by Obedience: and ascribing the beginning or first point of
Justification to faith alone, and but the continuance and consummation thereof
to works. Aphor. These. 74. and p. 302, 311, 312. And in many other parts of his
Book. All this has been fully and often answered before. Here only I shall
entreat the reader to retein in mind what has been before pointed at.

1 That the Gospel mentions not, knows not any such distinction of a first
and second Justification by Christ, but speaks only of one justification. That
this doubling of Justifications is but a juggling fancy of the Papists by them
first created, and by Mr. Br. licked into a finer mode and form, for the
pillaring up of their Justification by works which has no proppage from the
word.

2 That according to Mr. Brs principles who caseth both together in one kind of
causality, it cannot be discerned how [otherwise then by bare and glozing
words] any pre-eminence can be given so as duly to belong to Faith above and
before works in this business.

3 That even where and in what respects Mr. Br. gives a pre-eminence, it
belongs more properly to works then to Faith: Because the consummation and
perfitting of Justification is so far more excellent then the beginning
thereof, as that which is perfect, then that which is unperfect. And herein he
equalizeth and in some phrases seems to prefer works to Faith, in their
operation to perfect what is begun.

4 That the Scripture affirms not only the first but also the last point and
period, the consummation as well as the beginning of Justification to be by
Faith. By the Gospel the righteousness of God (viz. which he gives us to
Justification) is revealed from Faith to Faith, says the Apostle; he says not
from Faith to works, but from Faith to Faith, that is (omitting other
Interpretations partly ridiculous, and partly invalid and besides the scope of
the Apostle) from Faith inchoat to Faith growing and consummat, or coming
nearer and nearer to consummation. This Exposition the choicest of our Divines
give, as both properly agreeing with the drift of the Text, and as owned and
patronized by the like phrase in other Scriptures: From strength to strength,
Psalm. 88. 7. From glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. which even all acknowledge to
be understood, from one to another, from a lesser to a greater degree of
strength and glory. So also of this phrase, from faith to faith. And thus not
only the beginning but also the increase and consummation of Gospel
Justification in our own Consci^nces before God, is here attributed to Faith,
which as it grows to more and more strength, by apprehending more and more
revelations of the Gospel; so it more and more declares and evidenceth to the
soul the certainty of our Justification, to the continual stablishment and
increase of our peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. And thus the Magis and Minus
is in us not in God; and whatsoever of increase there is, is from Faith not
from works. Nay the same Apostle tells us it is a most unglorious task which
this uncomparably wise and profound man undertakes, viz. to teach them that are
wise to salvation to become fools thereunto. Are ye so foolish? says he,
having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the Flesh? That by the
Spirit and the Flesh is to be understood Faith and works in order to
Justification, cannot, will not be denied. When therefore Mr. B. teaches men
to seek the beginning of Justification by faith, and the perfecting thereof not
by Faith only but by works also, he teaches them to be foolish [ O foolish]
the worst fools to salvation, and to be wise only to condemnation. This is to
be wise according to Mr. B. wisdom in this Tractate, that is wise after the
Flesh not after the Spirit, in seeking happiness in the way of works which the
wisdom of the Flesh teaches, not in the way of Faith which the wisdom of the
Spirit, the wisdom of Christ and his Gospel reveals. But all this, together
with a plain and full discovery of the vanity of this evasion, has been in its
due place before held out, which would be but a tyring of the Reader here again
to be troubled with.

Only the general and chief thing which Mr. Br. both here and elsewhere lays
as a foundation to his Justification by works, it shall not be amiss briefly
to examine here, for the prevention of deceit to his Reader, before I put a
total conclusion and period to what I have thought fit to except against this
Work of his. If it prove sandy and unsound, his great Colossus of Justification
by works, falls all to shivers. This is his quaint interpretation of [ faith]
in all such Scriptures as ascribe to Faith (in opposition to works) our
justification. That then by it we are to understand all Gospel duties, all that
Christ Commands; not Faith in a distinct consideration from other
qualifications and duties, but Faith in a collective sense, comprizing all
moral duties and actions within it, which is Faith and all its fruits, yea
more, Faith and all that is reducible to it. And thus according to Mr. Br. so
often as we are said to be justified by Faith not by works, we must understand
that the Holy Ghost means, that we are justified by Faith and works done
after the tenor of the Gospel, not by Faith and works done after the tenor of
the Law. Behold now the unfathomed depth of Mr. Brs wit, and the unlimitted
verge of his power. His wit surpassing all the wisdom of all good and Orthodox
men and Angels; of whom no one had ever the reach since the world began, to
find with all his searching such a bugbear sense lurking in the plain Scripture
Texts of the Apostle: His power, that with the stroking of this Mercuriall rod,
he makes fire and water, life and death, hell and heaven, to lay down all their
enmity each to other, and sweetly to coll lodge and incorporate together. Who
would have thought that Paul who so seriously and sacredly professes that he
had rather in the Church to speak five words with his understanding so that he
might teach and edify others also, than ten thousand in an [unknown] Tongue, 1
Cor. 14. 17, 19. And in preaching the Gospel descended to the unlearned and
babes to feed them with milk, to make all plain and easy to their
understandings, 1 Cor. 3. 2. should yet every where deliver the chief doctrine
of the Gospel [Justification by Christ] in so dark Parables and riddles, that
none could find it out, until this Oedipus inspired from Socinus and Arminius,
rose up to un^iddle him? For let there be named any one Protestant in any age
(till Mr. Br. held out his Candle to give light to the Sun) that ever could
dream of this Allegorical sense, after the principles of Origin, lurking in
Paul's words? Or what hinders now but Faith may be turned into works and works
into Faith, Grace into strict justice and strict justice into free Grace, the
Law into Gospel and the Gospel into mere Law; since Mr. Br. has made a
reconciliation and composure between Faith and Works in the point of
Justification.

But whether this interpretation of Mr. B. be so firm as it is pretty and
witty, has been before examined, as elsewhere, so in the Examination of his
third Argument for Justification by works, drawn from his large definition of
Faith which he gives in his Thesis 70. Here only I shall mention some phrases
or names by which Justifying Faith is described in Scriptures, and leave it to
the judgment of every intelligent Reader, to determine whether works can
properly or in any tolerable sense be said to be comprised in faith as acting
in the same kind of causality about such acts as those phrases or names imply.

1 As Mr. Br. himself in his shorter definition defines faith, it is called
our Receiving of Christ, Jo. 1. 12. and that not in that wide sense which Mr.
Br. fancieth, but in that strict sense wherein Paul interprets it, viz. the
receiving of Christ to be our Righteousness, or receiving abundance of Grace and
of the gift of righteousness by him, Romans 5. 16.

2 It is called the directing of the eye, or looking to Christ yea to Christ
lifted up [upon the Cross] for healing. Io. 3. 14.

3 A coming to Christ for Life, Jo. 6. 37. and 5. 40.

4 The eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood to everlasting life, Jo.
6. 53-56.

5 A putting on of Christ [as a Garment of Righteousness] to cover our
nakedness and filthiness, Phil. 3. 9. Rev. 3. 18. I could add many the like
phrases if it were needful. But these may suffice; and who is there that sees
not these to imply an instrumentality in faith to make Christ ours to
Justification? Yea and that in faith only and not in works at all? for how can
Charity, Chastity, Mercy, righteousness, and the several acts of these and
other qualifications, of which most have our Neighbor or Brother for their
immediate Object, about which in acting they are occupant; be called the
receiving, intuition of, and coming to Christ? the eating of his flesh and
drinking his blood, or the putting on of him for righteousness? It would seem
strange to me that any man waking and not dreaming should conclude such works
to be Antecedents, and not the fruits of Justification and life by Christ. Or
that when faith is described by these denominating phrases, works also as
couched in faith, should contrary to their nature be so denominated. Nay Faith
is thus dive^sly named in opposition to works, yea to Gospel works. For so does
our Savior answer and determine the question put to him, what to do [under the
Gospel] that we might work the works of God? i. e. what is to be done on our
part that we may be justified and saved? This is the work of God (says he)
[that is, this is in steed of all doings all workings] that ye believe in him
whom he has sent, Jo. 6. 28, 29. which after he expresses more fully to be a
believing in him that came down from heaven, and that gave, and as he gave his
life for the world, and gives life to the world. All works are excluded that
this believing might be reserved, sole, entire, sacred, and sovereign to
receive Christ to Justification and salvation.

Here at length I shall put a period to my Examination of this Tractate of Mr.
Br. in which I have not wittingly let pass any one particle of all that he
has brought to the re-erecting of Justification by works, without examining
the strength and force of it, which if he had done in relation to all the
Arguments which the Protestant Churches and Divines have brought against it,
before he adventured peremptorily to pronounce their doctrine H^torodox and
Antinomistick, and the doctrine of the Papists in this point sound and holy; I
am of opinion that either this work of his had never come forth to the
subverting of souls and troubling of the Church, or if it had so come forth, it
would have been a very abomination to all that are not made to be taken, and
trampled under foot as an accursed thing. But now having begun in that manner
as we see, to set up this worst piece of damning Popery, under a false pretense
of love to the Protestant, and hatred of the Popish Religion. It is not to be
expected but that seeing his reputation jeoparded, he will per fas and nefas,
proceed to seek the support of it, though it be to the further ecclipsing of
the Grace of God and honor of Christ.

CHAP. XXV.
The Conclusion of the whole Treatise, demonstrating that although we with the
Scriptures exclude works from Justification, yet we include them as necessary
to a Christian life, and that no less seriously, and upon more spiritual
grounds, than the Evil Workers that will be justified by them.

HAving ended (at present) with Mr. Baxter, I have for the Conclusion of all,
somewhat to say that may have relation to the weak reader. It is a difficult
thing to remove works from justification, and not to expose our selves therein
to the Censure of babish, ungospellized, and unstablished men, that we therein
banish them also from the life and practice of a Christian. When we teach that
the righteousness of the Gospel is revealed from Faith to Faith: as it is
written, the just shall live by Faith, [not by works:] Romans 1. 17. And that no
man is justified by the Law, i. e. by the strictest observation of the
righteousness of the Law, Because it is written, that the just shall live by
Faith, Gal. 3. 11. That the inheritance is by Faith, not by works, lest any man
should boast, Romans 4. 1, 2. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. That it is of Faith that it may be of
Grace: and if it be of grace, then is it no more of works, else grace were no
more Grace; But if it be of works, then is it no more of grace, otherwise works
were no more works, Romans 4. 16. and 11. 6. That whosoever seeks justification
and blessedness by works, works himself out of it, and shall never attain
it, because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works af the
Law, Romans 9. 31, 32. At the sound of this doctrine the unspiritual man
excepteth, and flesh and blood swells murmuringly Crying out, What profit is
it then to serve the Lord? Why should I fast, pray, give alms, show mercy,
study holiness and purity, deny my self the pleasures of sin, any more, when
all these have no ^fficacy in them to justify and save? It was the Clamor of
men against Paul, when he preached the riches of grace abounding the more, by
the abounding of Man's sins: We will therefore sin (said they) that Grace may
abound, Romans 6. 1. And do evil that good may come, Romans 3. 8. This doctrine of
Faith makes void the Law, loosing us from all obligation to perform the holiness
and righteousness which the Law requires, Romans 3. 31. And (as Mr. Br. teaches
them further to reply against God) tends to drive obedience out of the world.
For if it be denied that man can merit happiness by his own righteousness, he
will cease to be righteous and take the bitt in his teeth to run rebel. So
deep an impression has the Covenant of works yet still in man's heart, that
though he be insufficient to do or to think as he ought, 2 Cor. 3. 5. yet he
will have [ Do and Live] to be the issue of Life and Death still. And Mr. Br.
teaches them to stopp the hole of man's insufficiency with this nayl (not of
the Sanctuary but of Alexander the Copper-Smith) because we cannot perform
legal therefore Gospel-obedience shall do the work, (as if work were not work,
when the Title of Gospel is written on it) and because we cannot fulfill
perfect, therefore sincere obedience shall serve the Turn.

Hence is it that the Popish and Arminian doctrines wherewith this Book of Mr.
Br. is fully fraughted, takes every where so plausibly with, and has such
Complete acceptance among the multitude both of the learned and unlearned. It
is a doctrine not above but agreeing with the principles of Nature and the
natural man: even the natural Conscience suggesteth it to the unlearned, to
seek for happiness by their own righteousness. And both that and the precepts
of Moral Philosophy also, together with the Law of Moses, instruct the learned
to seek for the Summum Bonum, the best felicity, all felicity in the way of
virtue and virtuous performances. Here now when any comes to them in the name
of Christ, holding forth to them the same doctrine, it kindles in them so
swiftly as fire in towe, no need of the teaching of God, or renewing of the
Spirit; Flesh and blood of it self gives its suffrage to it. An easy task have
these teachers to persuade men and draw disciples after them, and set them in
an activeness and dexterity of practicing what they teach. It is easily learned
to swimm swiftly with the stream, and to drop the Bowl down the hill. But to
teach men to live by Faith, and yet to be fruitful in good works too: Not to
seek justification and life by their righteousness, yet to be zealous of all
righteousness and good works continually; hic labor hoc opus est. It is above
the principles of Nature to apprehend it. He must swimm against the stream, and
roll the Bowl against the Hill, walk after the Spirit and not after the Flesh,
that puts it effectually into practice.

Yet that our Doctrine does not let loose the reins to the flesh, nor
(howsoever carnal sensuallists may abuse it to their Condemnation) in the
least degree blunt the spirits of the spiritual man to well-doing, nor deny
the both expediency and necessity of all good works in the life of a Christian,
is evident. 1 Because although we exclude moral qualifications and works from
officiating to Justification, yet we retein and include them in and unto
sanctification. Our doctrine with Christ's and his Apostles, holds forth the
Lord Jesus to every soul to be received both as a justifier and sanctifier;
declares him to have descended from heaven both to justify the ungodly, and
to sanctify the justified. That he is made unto us of God, not only
Righteousness, but Sanctification also: To justify us by an imputed and
sanctify us by an inherent righteousness: The one by the effusion of his
blood, the other by the infusion of his Spirit. That his office is not only to
satisfy justice for us that we may live, but also to new principle and create
us, that we may live to God. Not only to redeem us from all iniquity, but
withal to purify us [into] a peculiar people, zealous of good works. In whom
both these works are not in good measure, neither of them is in any measure,
effectually accomplished. That sanctification is the purchase of Christ's blood,
but the immediate effect of his Spirit; merited by his death, but Conferred and
Communicated by his life as all power both in heaven and in earth is given into
his hand, and as he is ascended on high to give gifts to men. That both imputed
and inherent righteousness as termined and actually existent in and upon man,
proceed from his union unto Christ. That Sanctification is as great and
glorious a work as Justification, and our real as our relative holiness and
righteousness: Neither could it be discerned so clearly how we were quickened
[in Law] and raised from the dead, who were dead in sins and trespasses, and
so passed from death to life, from Condemnation to salvation, by the
forgiveness of sin; were we not also quickened and raised up from under the
death and bondage of sin, no more to serve sin, but as alive from the dead,
had our fruit [and living motions] to practical holiness and righteousness.
That as well our sanctification as our Justification, is in Christ, and both
from him derivable to us by Faith in him. That Faith is qualified by God to
apprehend Christ both to purify us by his blood, and to sanctify us by his
Spirit, and so becomes isntrumental both to Justification and sanctification,
yet by a twofold Act; as the Condemned Traitor extends one and the same hand to
receive from his gracious Prince a pardon of his Treason, and a Commission to
be his vicegerent in some Noble and magnificent office therein to serve his
Prince, promote the welfare of his Country, and make his own name and person
famous and precious in the eyes of all men, among whom his present virtuous
behavior and Noble achievements may wipe off and bring to oblivion the stain
of his former delinquency. That one (and the same a chief) end of our
Justification by Christ is our sanctification and the fruits thereof, here
inchoat and increasing, hereafter Consummate and perfected. Therefore are we
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, that we may serve him without Fear
in holiness and righteousness, Luke 1. 74, 75. Therefore are we dead to and
delivered from the Law, by the body of Christ, that we should be married to
another, even to him that is raised from the dead, that we might bring forth
fruit to God, and serve not in the oldness of the letter, but in the Newness of
the Spirit, Romans 7. 4, 6. Christ has made us Kings and Priests, or a Royal
Priesthood unto God, to offer up living sacrifices acceptable to God through
him, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. Rev. 1. 6. To our instalment therein are pre-required, the
sanctification of Consecration, and the sanctification of habitual
righteousness and holiness infused into us and set in actual operation in us.
The former of these is done chiefly by the sacrificed blood of Christ sprinkled
upon the Conscience, and the sacred vestiments of his Righteousness put on by
Faith (as was typified primarily of Christ the High Priest, and secondarily of
the Priesthood of Saints under the kingdom of Christ, by the Consecration of
Aaron and his sonns, with the blood of the Altar sprinkled on them, and the
putting on of holy vestiments upon them, their own being Cast off, Lev. 8.) The
latter Chiefly by the Spirit of Christ, in livening enabling and acting them to
the work and worship for which they are Consecrated (and I know not but this
may be also figured in the ordination of the Priests under the Law, by the
Anointing oil in the same Chapter mentioned and used.) That differs but little
from Justification as termined to this its end: This differs not at all from
sanctification when it is taken in the sense wherein the scriptures often, and
our Divines still use it, (when they distinguish between Justification and
sanctification) viz. in its active sense, the inspiration of the habits of
holiness and righteousness, in its passive sense, the same habits inspired into
the soul. Whosoever wants either of these prerequisits to this sacred office,
we grant him to be but a titular Priest, a Mock-Saint. For without Consecration
to offer as a Priest speaks him an usurper: And to profess Priest and not to
offer speaks him a rebel and revolter. We own no sanctification by the Spirit
of Christ, which has not Justification by his blood, in order going before it,
nor any Justification or forgiveness by the death of Christ, which has not
sanctification by his Spirit, in order of nature following it.

Thus we do not (as the Papists and Mr. Br. learning from the Papists object
calumniously) exclude works from the life of a Christian; but assert them to be
necessary to a Christian life: so necessary, that without them whosoever is
Capable of working, is no Christian. Though we exclude them from Justification,
yet we include them in sanctification, their habits as parts in the whole,
their acts or themselves acted, as fruits thereof. Nay we do not deny in a good
sense some kind of Causality which they have to sanctify, that is, to the
increase of sanctification. To him that has, it shall be given, and he shall
have more abundantly. Well done good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful in a little, I will make thee Ruler over much, etc. says our
Savior; Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened to you. The ground or earth which drinks in the Rain which comes often
upon it, and brings forth herbs [or fruit, etc.] is near to a blessing. But
that which brings forth briars and thorns is rejected and near to cursing,
etc. Heb. 6. 7, 8. with many other the like Testimonies of Scripture, which it
would be superfluous here to recite. How then do we in the least measure blunt
the edge of men's affections to good works, by teaching that they do not
justify, when we affirm them necessary to sanctification? If Mr. Br. should
affirm that Bread and Wine and other Creatures appropriated to man's nutriment,
are not ordained of God to Clothe him, or that his garments are not ordained of
God to Feed him; does he therein minister to me just Cause to exclaym against
him, that he fights against natural reason, persuading men never more to eat,
because their meat is not appointed to Clothe them? or to walk naked because he
says, their garments are not useful to nourish them? No more Cause has Mr.
Br. or the Papists to accuse us that we banish good works from the life of a
Christian, by teaching that they are not useful or appropriated to justify,
but to sanctify very useful in all the particulars beforementioned. How
unacquainted with the frame of a Christian spirit are these objectors? Either
they do not experimentally know, or else do stifle within themselves this
knowledge, that a Christ-enjoying and Gospellized soul gaspeth no less for
deliverance from the bondage, than from the Condemnation of sin: delights so
much in performing duty to Christ, as in receiving pardon from him; groans so
pathetically under the body as ever he did under the guilt of sin: Cries with
equal vehemence of aff^ction^ for holiness unto God as for happiness with him;
for Conformity to him in righteousness as in glory: makes no other use of his
redemption, than to run at liberty the race of obedience set before him:
embraces and delights in sanctifying as well as in saving grace, in the
infusion as in the imputation of righteousness: labors to dispense all for the
Lord and his service, whatsoever he has received from the Lord and his free
grace. Therefore whatsoever the Lord powrs upon him to sanctification is
received with so great joy in the Holy Ghost as that which is communicated to
him to justification: and he labors to be and express himself wholly Christ's,
as well as to obtein Christ wholly his. As for Mr. Brs merely Moral Men that
will receive Christ neither to Justification nor to sanctification, but upon
their own terms, purchasing him by Fine and rent, that the glory might be
partly theirs and not wholly Christ's; It is enough that Mr. Br. hardens and
subverts them in this their Moral madness wholly contradictive to the
spirituallness and wisdom of the Gospel. We shall not be ensnared by all the
nicities of his Arts and Chimicall extracts of the spirits of his spoiling
Philosophy, to involve our selves with him in the guilt of poisoning so many
souls, and turning their best righteousness and devotion into sin, by
encouraging them to appropriate the same to such an end as is destructive to
the glory of Gods grace, and contrary to the mind and rule of the Gospel. We
have one Master which is Christ, his dictates expressed by him and his Apostles
in the plainness and foolishness of their preaching are so sacred and
authoritative with us, that neither the most labyrinthical mazes of sophistry
shall unwinde us, nor the extravagancies of the most luxuriating wits, nor the
most Curious plausibilities of humane reason shall (by Gods Grace) unreason us
so from our selves, as to undisciple us from him. Yea though we could not in
some things give a satisfactory answer to the sophisticated reasonings of these
disputers against Christ and his Gospel, yet should we fit down as fools with
Christ and his Apostles adoring the manifold wisdom of God revealed in a
mystery, rather than be wise with these men to the world; knowing that the
foolishness of God is wiser, and the weakness of God is stronger than men: And
we seek wisdom and happiness from the mines of Christ's Gospel, not from the
dry quarrie of man's literature and inventions.

2 Though we reject it as an arrogant and presumptuous doctrine, which Mr. Br.
in Common with the Papists teaches, [That we are justified and saved by our
good qualifications and works for our works, for the merit and worthiness of
our good works] yet we teach and believe that they are (in respect of all that
have age, ability, and time to perform them) necessary Consequents of our
Justification and Antecedents of our glorification. Let a man pretend what he
will of Faith in Christ; yet if by Faith he do not cleave firmly to him, to
derive from him power to mortify every sin, to perform all duty: if he can
allow within himself any known evil, or continue in the neglect of any known
duty, without striving to get the victory in the strength of Christ's Spirit,
over every such infirmity: we take such a man so far from Christ, as Christ
is from Belial, A branch in Christ not bearing fruit, which is appointed to be
cut off and cast into the fire, because he was never in Christ otherwise but by
a formal profession, never had vital union to him, or communion with him, by
the ligatures of Faith and the Spirit. For sanctification is an individual
companion of Justification: And the office of Christ is to be the Author of
both to all that believe. Otherwise the work of his Mediator-ship should not be
completed in either one of these, and so he should not be our Christ if a
half Christ only to us. And Sanctification is still begun and carried on
toward perfection also (where there is time and means) in the kingdom of
Grace, before its perfecting and swallowing up into glory, in the Kingdom of
glory. No righteousness and holiness of man is begun in the next life: But
there shall be the consummation in power, of that which here was begun in
truth, though it labored of, and languished with much infirmity.

3 We are guiltless of those Crimes wherewith Mr. Br. endeavors to defame us
and our Doctrine. For 1. Neither do we teach or think (as M. Br. suggesteth)
that nothing is preaching Christ, but preaching him as a pardoning justifying
Savior? Aph. pa. 328. Indeed we preach Justification to consist, if not only,
yet chiefly in the pardon of sin through the mediation of Christ's death. That
this benefit of Christ is perfected by the satisfaction which he has made to
Gods justice in suffering for us, and appropriated to us by faith alone. But
we deny this to be all the Gospel Grace exhibited to us by Christ, and in and
through him. We hold him forth as the Light of the world also, having all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid in him, Joh. 8. 12. Col. 2. 3. from whom
are all the irradiations and Revelations of all the mysteries of Grace
effectual to life and holiness, Mat. 13. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 10. And to the word and
spirit of Christ we send all men for illumination. And the Life of the world,
not only to restore them to life in law, by Justification, but as the Lord and
principle of Life, to beget in us an inherent life active and moving to all
obedience. Therefore we endeavor to send all to Christ for life, even for this
life, because the whole judgment and dispensation thereof is committed to him,
and he is our all [to sanctification also.] Joh. 5. 21, 22, 25, 26. Col. 3. 11.
We indeed except against that Doctrine as more Legal than Evangelical, that
roars and thunders Condemnation against poor Exiles in a dry wilderness, where
is no water, fainting and even dead with thirst, if they do not arise, work,
and fulfill their task. We require first, that the Rock be cloven with the Rod
of God, that the water of life may gush out in full Rivers, and that the
fainting souls be brought to drink thereof, and then called upon in the life
and strength which they have hence received, to work and be doing. Yea to come
to this stream often to drink, that their strength and spirits may be daily
more revived, that they may b^come daily more enabled for, and more abundant in
the work of the Lord. We have not with Mr. Br. yet learned the skill of
preaching good works to make Christ ours, but follow the rule of the
Scriptures, to preach Christ into the hearts of men, to make them fruitful in
good works. Neither do we count all formal obedience and righteousness of
men, though conscientiously, and by the guidance of Natural Conscience,
performed to be either sanctification, or the fruit thereof.

That only is sanctification which flows from the heart of Christ, and is
infused by the Spirit of Christ. For the attai^ment thereof we call all men
into union and fellowship with Christ; so far are we from holding that Nothing
is preaching Christ, but the preaching him as Justifier and Savior, that we
hold it an empty Preachment that preaches any good thing without Christ, or
out of Christ, of which men are not taught to make Christ the Alpha and the
Omega. We leave it to Mr. Br. and his brethren to urge works, duties,
obedience, etc. and once in a Moon, upon an auspicious Tropic thereof, to
remember Christ and grace, and tell us that all must be done by the help of
grace, and without Christ we can do nothing: Yet leaving us uncertain still,
whether it be the Grace and Christ of Pelagius, or else of God reconciled to
us, that he speaks. I should be too long in expressing fully how we hold
forth Christ, whole Christ, and only Christ, to Adoption, protection,
perseverance, strengthening, comforting, perfecting, etc. In a word, to all
that is either good to be received, or good to be done. In him we teach that
God will have all his fr^sh springs to reside, that without him we are nothing,
can do nothing; that in him and by him we have all, and can do all things. That
therefore we preach nothing but Christ, yet preach all that is to be preached
in preaching him, because in him it pleased the Father that all fullness should
dwell, Col. 1. 19. even all fullness for us: so that in him we are full, out of
him mere emptiness. We would not have one beam of this Sun of Righteousness
clouded, but labor to discover to our people his full glory and Sovereignty to
all those sacred ends to which God has consecrated him, that if any would have
nothing of Christ to be preached but his pardoning and saving, the sin may be
wholly theirs, not ours, that they will receive the skirt of Christ, and
consequently refuse Christ, when we preach to them whole Christ, and all the
benefits that are by him.

Nor 2 do we deny an ordinate and subordinate love to our selves (as M^. Br.
slanders us no less bitingly than secretly, App. pa. 81, 82.) in teaching that
it is the most Gospel-^rame of Spirit to perform duty out of mere love to God,
without seeking by such duties wrought [ quasi opere operato] remission of
sins, redemption from Hell, and right to glory by the Merit thereof, (as he
teaches us to do, thinking no doubt, his glory shall be great, if he can there
persuade where all the su^tlest sons of Satan, the Jesuits have not been able.)
Nay we maintayn that none can regularly love himself who loves not God above
himself, and seeks not Gods glory more than his own good. That whosoever in a
pretext of love to himself brings his fardle of trashie works at the feet of
Christ, by them to purchase to himself the benefits of his death, is of all men
the worst enemy to himself, incurs rejection and expulsion from Christ and all
the benefits of his death and resurrection. For he was sent to seek only
that which was lost, came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repen^^nce.
He loves himself indeed, and spiritually, that for his love to God denies
himself. The self-dejected Publican is acce^ted with God, when the prating
Pharisee is hurled with his mouth full of works out at the door. Or is there
any great difference between this and the Devils doctrine preached to our first
Parents? Ye shall be as Gods, said the Devil; Ye shall be all Christ's,
Saviors, Justifiers, says Mr. Br. Your righteousness and Christ's
righteousness shall jump together into the same kind of Causality to justify
and save you. Our first Parents hearkened, and seeking to become Gods, became
Devils, or (what is worse) slaves to the Devil. We have all felt the smart,
yet many, and that of them which are termed Angels, listen earnestly to the
like hissing of the Serpent now again. We can but mourn for them, that in madd
love to themselves will hasten up to heaven, by climbing high Steeples, that
look fairly thither-ward, but can never heave them up to it, nay contrariwise
can give them no such sustentation, but that they fall thence, and dash
themselves into shivers. Yet in our doctrine is contained a wise and ordinate
love to our selves: Though we use not works as waxen wings to soar aloft to
kiss the Sun, and settle our selves in the same Sphere with him, yet we make
use of our qualifications and duties to the continual increase of our
sanctification: and to what greater good for himself can man's strongest love to
himself aspire, than to his full and real perfection, consisting in his
restitution to Gods image, and conformity to his will and nature? This shall be
the Consummate blessedness which we shall enjoy above, and it is a blessedness
inchoate and increasing, while we pass from strength to strength in it here.
Who are the self-haters and self-destroyers, the Papists or we, the success
will at length evidence, and such professed Divines and Christians among us, as
have not their eyes soyled with Kederminster dust and smoke, can discern
already.

Nor thirdly, does our doctrine tend to drive obedience out of the world: So
that we may answer Mr. Brs question, Aphor. p. 325. [ If men once believe that
works are not so much as a part of the Condition of our Justification, will it
not much tend to relax their dilig^nce?] with the authority of the Apostle, who
having taught his Ephesians that we are saved by grace through faith, not of
works lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Yet concludes, that as many as
have learned Christ truly, and heard him, and have been taught by him as the
truth is in Jesus: These all have learned to put off concerning the former*
conversation, the old Man which is corrupt, etc. and to be renewed in the
spirit of the mind, and to put on the New Man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 20. -- 24. If Mr. Br. had been taught
of God as the truth is in Jesus, I should think he would not have put, at least
upon deliberation left in print such a question and bold Cavil against the
Apostle, yea against Christ himself.

Object. But if good works will neither justify nor save me, why should I do
them, and not take the liberty to do what I list?

Answ. The voice of a Rebel against God, who if he may not serve God to his
own ends, will not serve him at all, and professes openly that he does all
that he does in Gods work, not for Gods sake, but for his own sake. An
Objection more deserving to be answered with a Thunderbolt, than with
Scripture-reason. Yet may there be alleged many other most holy and honorable
ends for which we are to do good works, though we be not justified and saved by
them. These I had thought here to have particularized, but the work is swollen
already to a bigness and dimension never intended at first. And this Task has
been already so fully performed by so many of our Protestant Writers in answer
to the Papists, that I should but glean after them to say a little, but begin a
new work, if I should say all that they have said, and might be said to this
purpose. I therefore transmit the Reader for his full satisfaction to read
Calv. Instit. lib. 3. Cap. 16. Zanch. Confess. Fidei pro se and sua Familia,
bound with his Miscellan Vrsin. Catech. Quest 91. Catech. and his Quest. 5.
upon that Question. Tylenus Synt. part 2. disp. 46. Th. 8, 9, 10, 11. where is
to be read too short an abbreviation of the three former. But M. Perkins in one
of his works I remember (though at present I am bereaved of them all) has the
very same words of Zanchy translated into English in answer to this question.
And since these, whole hundreds both of English and foreign Divines, have
after Zanchy and Perkins delivered the same things in substance with them,
though some more largely, some more compendiously, so that to the exercised
Reader it will be superfluous for me to write any thing upon the same subject.

I shall conclude all in the words of Augustine, as more needing his Apology
than himself, where he uses it. Lib. de Spir. and Litera. Cap. 35. Haec egi
libro isto loquacius fortasse quam sat est: Sed contra inimicos Gratia Dei
paraeum mihi dixisse videor. Nihil que mihi tam multum dicere delectat, quam
ubi mihi and Scriptura ejus plurimum suffragatur, and id agitur, ut qui
gloriatur, in Domomino glorietur, and in omnibus gratias agamus, Domino Deo
nostro sursum corda habentes; unde a patre luminum omne Datum optimum, and omne
donum perfectum est; that is, These things have I treated of in this Book, it
may be with more than enough plenty of words and language: But I seem to my
self to have spoken little against the Enemies of the grace of God. And I take
delight to be large in speaking about nothing else so much, as when both the
Scripture does most give its testimony with me, and the question treated on is,
that he which glories may glory in the Lord, and that in all things we may
give thanks to God, having our hearts lifted up to the Father of Lights from
whom every good and every perfect gift discendeth.

He it is that freely justifies us by his Grace, To him be the praise and
glory of all, and let his Kingdom come, and be speedily enlarged throughout the
world, that from all parts thereof there may be a joyful acclamation of
Saints, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the General and Chief Heads of Doctrine Treated of in this Book.
A
WHether the To credere or Act of believing be that by which we are justified,
part 1. p. 164. and onward to p. 181. and p. 363, 364* Mr. Br. to show that
both Papists and Arminians are met together in his own breast, teaaheth both
that it is our justifying Righteousness, and imputed to us for Righteousness,
his Reasons to prove it examined, ibid. p. 166, etc. More of Act, viz. Immanent
and Life. A short Animadversion upon Mr. Brs dispute of Christ's Active and
passive righteousness, in order to Justification, Part 1. p. 21. to 25.
Afflictions befalling the Saints, not parts of the Curse, but fruits of Gods
Love, Part 1. p. 35. to 37. What they are in their nature, ib. p. 44, 45
Antinomians, their first rise, original, and what their Tenets then were, part
1. p. 263, 264. Their growth, and what has been in these latter years charged
on them as errors, ib. 264, -- 266. What of all wherewith they have been
charged is error indeed, ibid. p. 267. to 271. and 273. Who are such in Mr.
Brs Calendar, Pref. p. 7, 8. part 1. p. 271, 272. His Fraud under this
Nickname to make odious the Gospel and all true Protestants, Pref. ibid. part
1. p 274. In the midst of his Invectives against imaginary, he has more then
all men besides, honored the real Antinomians, part 1. p. 162, 163. and
declared himself really one of them, p. 277. Exotic Arts how far useful in
Divinity, Pref. p. 14. to the 17. They are incompetent to be Rules and Judges,
in purely Gospel matters, ibid. and in some following pages, and part 1. p.
341. What evils have followed such use and abuse of it, Pref. 24, etc. How
abasingly the Scriptures* speak of it as so abused, Pref. p. 22, 23. More viz.
Sophistry. Authority of men viz. Faith.
B
Bellarmine and Mr. Br. speak the same things in the point of Justification,
part 2. p. 25. and 31. Bullingers judgment of mingling profane Arts (in
teaching) with the Gospel, pref. p. 42, 43.
C
Mr. Brs new Model of the Causes of Justification and Salvation examined, part
1. p. 314, etc. And 1 of the principal efficient Cause, ib. p. 316, 317. 2 Of
the isntrumental Cause, ib. p. 317, 318. 3 Of the procatarctick Causes, ib. p.
318. to 321. 4 Of the natural Cause, and the Protestant doctrine defended
against his cavils, ib. p. 323. to 327. 5 Likewise of the formal Cause, ib. p.
327. 329. The Protestant doctrine that Faith is the Instrument or Isntrumental
Cause of Justification, viz. Gods effective and man's receptive Instrument,
largely defended against Mr. Brs Sophisms, ib. p. 330. to 348. Whether Faith be
the Causa sine qua non, ib. p. 356, 357. Works cannot be the causa sine qua
non, part 2. p. 110, 111. Charity the Rule of judging one another, and by what
evidence it must judge, part 2. p. 93, 94. What it is to take half and what to
take whole Christ to justification, part 2. p. 184, 186. What to make Christ
our All in Preaching, part 2. p. 291. More, viz. Grace. -- 293. Whether
Justification run upon Conditions, or else be free and absolute, and in what
sense it may be granted to be Conditional, pa. 1. p. 108. to 118. The
numerousnesse and withal unprofitablenesse of the Conditions which Mr. Br.
assigns, part 2. p. 31, 32. His vain ascribing to Conditions, part 2. p. 26,
83, 108, 109, etc. 272, 273. His Reasons to prove it examined, part 1. p. 353,
to 356. The hurtfullness of the contrary doctrine which Mr. Br mainteineth,
part 1. p. 351-353. His dispute to prove it still after we are in Christ to
remain Conditional, par. 1. p. 292. to 308. What the judgment of the
Protestant Divines in this point is, part 2. p. 17 to 22. and 204, 205. The
promulgation and offer of it may be granted Conditional, but once in being and
possession it is absolute, part 1. p. 355, 356. The rashness of some Ministers
in closing with Mr. Br. in this his Popish Arminian doctrine, pa. 2. p. 22, 23,
25, 237. Whether the Covenant of Grace were originally made between the Father
and the Son, and what the Covenant was, and upon what terms so made, p: 1. p.
99. to 107. What relation all the other Covenants made in time between God and
man, had to this, ibid. Mr Br. after the Papists distinguishes between the
Commands and Counsels of the word, part 1. p. 213, 214. The doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone, not a soul*Cozening doctrine, p: 2. p. 173, etc.
Believers not under the Curse as the Curse, or revenging punishment for sin,
part 1. largely discussed from p. 24. to p. 61. The Question stated, ib. p. 32.
etc. The Reasons brought by the Protestant Writers to prove the Negative
against the Papists, ib. p. 33. to 37. Mr. Brs Arguments for the Affirmative,
ib. p. 29-31. His Arguments answered, ib. p. 38. to 49. How many ways popish
and pernicious this his doctrine is, ib. p. 49. to 62.
D
Darkening in stead of clearing Truths common to Mr. Br. with the Papists, part
1. p. 5, 9, 10. The Death and blood of Christ only expiatory and satisfactory
to Justification, part 2. p. 64, 65, 67. to 70. Whether Justification admit of
Degrees or magis and minus, part 1. p. 286. to 291. Whether the Devil shall
manage the accusation of men in the day of Judgment, part 1. p. 281.
Distinctions in Divine matters not grounded upon the word, viz. Arts and
Sophistry. Doctrines not to be judged of after the personal splendor of their
Authors, pref. p. 4, 5. Do, viz. Life and Live.
E
Whether it be Easy to persuade men to embrace Justification by Faith, but
difficult by works, part 2. p. 181. to 184. Sanctification a sure Evidence of
Justification, and so convertibly, pa. 2. 176. to 178. In what respects good
works do so Evidence, ib.
F
Faith without works not competent to justify according to Mr. Br. part 2. p.
4. How far he follows the Papists in the doctrine of implicit Faith, part
1. p 1, 2, 3, etc. His doctrine herein directly pointed against the
Protestants, ib. p. 4. We must not admit doctrine of Faith upon the authority
of our Teachers, ib. p. 6. The evils attending the doing thereof, ib. p. 7, 8.
Mr. Brs wild and irregular definition of Faith to prove justification by works
discovered to be ridiculous, pa. 2. p. 56. etc. The doctrine of the Protestants
about Faith and works, part 2. p. 174. etc. What Mr. Br. means by Faith or
his To credere, part 2. p. 71. etc. How different Mr. Brs sense is from some of
the Protestant writers, that with him call Faith the Condition of
justification, part 1. p. 349, 350. Forgiving of others not a Condition of Gods
justifying and forgiving us, part 2. p. 31, 33, etc. to the 37. Mr. Brs Fraud
in hiding all that the protestants have written against his popish doctrines,
part 2. p. 17, 18. 128, 129.
G
The Genius of men when conspiring, is apt to draw each other into truth or
error, pref. p. 10, 11. By what means the Gospel was so much and so suddenly
propagated at the beginning of the Reformation by Luther, pref. p. 39, 40. How
the further propagation of it was stopped, ib. p. 40, 41. Gospel Comforts are
Antidotes against sin and carnal liberty, not fomenters of it, par. 2. p. 162,
163, 167, 168. Mr. Brs Reasons to prove his doctrines not to be legal and
against the Gospel, examined, part 2. p. 266. to p. 276. Whether or in what
respects Christ has or has not satisfied for sins against the Gospel as for
sins against the Law. p. 1. p. 219-227 Whether works as helped by Grace
justify, part 1. p. 139. to 143. Mr. Br. and the papists vainly make this
their common plea, to excuse their arrogance in ascribing justification to
works, ib. p. 175, 176
H
Whether believers ought to serve for fear of Hell, part 2. p. 155-157. Hiding,
viz. Fraud.
I
What the judgment of many learned protestant Divines has been and is about
justification as an Immanent and eternal act in God, part 1. p. 231. to 238.
What Scriptures they bring to prove the affirmative, ib. p. 238. to 247. Mr.
Brs dispute against them examined, ib. p. 248-262. Faith the Instrument of
justification, p. 1. p. 330. And the some both Gods and man's Instrument, and in
what sense each is such, ib. p. 332, 334, 336, to 341. Man's Instrument,
334-336. 342-348. Mr. Brs cavils against this doctrine answered, ib. p. 358. to
361. 364. to 368. 370. Whether believers as well as the reprobates shall be
judged for and according to their works in the last day, largely discussed
against Mr. Br. p. 2. p. 124-136. Whether the Scriptures which speak in the
future tense of justifying, do denote the day of Judgment, p. 1. p 278-280.
Judgment, viz. Devil. 282. The State of the question between Mr. Br and the
Protestants, about Justification by works, Part 2. p. 4, 5, 6. Justification by
works denied, ibid. etc. Scriptures produced to prove that Works have no part
with Faith in justifying, ibid. p. 10. to 17. The Scriptures cited by Mr. Br to
prove the contrary assertion examined, ibid. Chap. 3. Whether according to his
own principles he rightly calls Faith the more and works the less principal
Condition of Justification, ibid. p. 49. 51 and 278, 279. And if so, whether
this proves that when we are said to be justified by Faith only, we are said
to be justified by works also, and yet justified by Faith alone. ibid. Or
whether the Reducibleness of all works to faith in some kind prove it, ibid.
p. 49, 50, 52, 53-56. and 278, 279. Justification considerable in 3 respects, 1
in God, 2 in Christ, 3 in our own persons, and how in every of these. Part 1.
p. 89 -91. Mr. Brs distinction of justification and pardon, into Title of Law,
and sentence of Judgment, Constitutive and Declarative; virtuall and Actual;
examined and proved unscripturall and vain: and his reasons to prove a
Justification in the day of Judgment, answered, Part 1. p. 277. to the 286.
More of Justification, see Bellarmine, Repentance, Faith, Works, Condition,
Scripture, Lord, Prayer, Forgiving, Love, Easy, Christ, Papists, Paul, Cozen,
Grace, Causes, Reconciliation, Degrees.
K.
The kingdom and pardon of God and of Christ, are one and the same. Part 1. p.
228, 229.
L.
Whether believers are under the Law as a Covenant of works, largely discussed
against Mr. Br. part 1. p. 61 -- to 97. Protestants reasons for the Negative,
ibid. p. 62-66. Mr. Brs Sophistry in stating the question, ibid. p. 66-70. The
Law not repealed as a Covenant of Works to any, but (in a right sense) nulld to
believers, part 1. p. 71-74. The vanity of the distinctions and fallaciousness
of the Arguments which Mr. Br brings to prove the Affi^mative. ibid. p. 75. to
the 97 Many abuse the Law in preaching it first not only to kill, but then
also to make alive again. Pref. p. 11, 12. Distinguishing the same works into
works of the Law and works of the Gospel, viz Paul and Moral. Lawgiver, vid.
Lord. Legal or Law- teacher, vid. Gospel. Secular Learning, see Arts,
Sophistry, Tertullion, Bullinger. The doctrine of Faith gives not the Reins to
carnal Liberty. Part 2. p. 286. to the 295 The doctrine of Mr. Br so accusing
it, does se. ibid. p. 170, 171, etc. Do and Live, whether and in what respects
the voice of the Gospel; and in what sense, to work for Life, not from Life, or
from Life not for Life, are either and both sound doctrine. Part 2. p. 137. to
the 153. and 158. Part 1. p. 179. Whether Christ Justify as our Lord and Law
giver, and that it follow thence, we are justified by works as well as by
Faith. Part 2. p. 64. to the 84. How far and in what sense only the
affirmative may be granted. ibid. p. 79. The question stated, ibid. p. 65. Mr.
Baxters Arguments to prove the affirmative, answered, ibid. p. 71. to 84.
Whether Love cooperate with Faith in Justifying. Part 2. p. 37. 40. Our Acting
from Love to God, denies not a regular Love to our selves. Part 2. p. 293,
294.
M.
Mr. Brs Magisteriall and usurped Authority in saying without proving. Part 2
p. 252, 253. Marks, vid. Evidences. Metaphysics, see Arts. Mr. Brs doctrine of
Merits examined in which he shows himself as high-flown a Papist as any of the
Jesuits. Part 1. p. 186. to the 194. An Admonition to such Ministers as
inconsiderately suck up Mr. Brs doctrines, Part 1. p 59, 60. What the Moral Law
is as considered in it self, and in what sense taken. Part 1. p. 197-199. What
Relation it has to the several Covenants. ibid. p. 201, 202, etc. Why the
Gospel continues it as a Rule, and that it can be no more repealed or abrogated
than God, un-Godded. ibid. p. 199, 200, 203-206.
N.
Novelty or Newnes of words and phrases used often for the Vshering in of errors.
Part 1. p. 128, 129.
O.
Obscuring, see Darkening. How all the Offices of Christ concur in our
Justification, yet nothing concludible thence for Justification by works. Part
2. p. 63, 64. Origin how great a Scholar, and how great an abuser of his
Learning and corrupter of the Gospel. Pref. p. 33, 34.
P.
Whether our doctrine by excluding works from justifying, be a stumbling block
to Papists, hindering their conversion, and an occasion given to many learned
men to turn Papists, and therefore unsound. Part 2. p. 188 -- to 197. Mr. Brs
doctrine compared with the worst of the Papists, and found one and the same
with theirs. Part 2. p. 215. to p. 222 His doctrine compared with such of the
Papists as write more moderately, and found worse than theirs. ibid. p. 223. to
the 229. Whether his doctrine contradicts Paul's, or not, ibid. p. 234. to the
258. His first Reason refuted (viz. that Paul's question was, what is the proper
Righteousness by which we are justified, but his own, by what means we may
attain this Righteousness, though they answer differently to these differing
questions, they consent in Judgments) ibid. p. 239 to the 250. His 2 reason
that Paul excludes the works of the Law, not of the Gospel, vain and Popish.
ibid. p. 251. to the 257. His 3 reason that Paul under the word Faith, implies
works and obedience, vicious in the same kind with the former. ibid. p. 257,
258. It is no sound reason that Christ commands not the Perfect Righteousness
of the Law, because Mr. Br sees no Reason why he should require what he
enableth no man to perform, Part 1. p. 215. 217 What Reasons thereof may be
given. ibid. p. 216, 217. Perfect, See Sincere and Righteousness. Person, vid.
Work. Philosophy, vid. Arts. Whether Mr. Brs doctrine be (as he contendeth)
free from Popery. Part. 2. p. 209, to 215. Whether it be possible for us to
perform a Righteousness perfect to Justification. Part 1. p. 194. 196. Whether
and in what sense Praying for pardon, may be said to be a condition of
pardoning and justifying. Pa. 2. p. 31-33 Promises see Qualify. Punish and
Punishment, vid. Curse and Affliction. Whether Mr. Br hold for Purgatory Part
1. p. 54-56.
Q.
Promises of life made to persons so and so Qualified, describe the Justified,
but demonstrate not for what they are justified. Part 2. p. 40, 41. 269. Rules
given by our Divines for the right understanding of such promises to persons of
such qualifications. P. 2. p. 112, etc. Quotations without the words of
Scripture, or showing how he would argue thence, why so frequent with Mr. Br.
P. 2. Cha. 2, and 3 in the beginning thereof.
R.
Whether Reconciliatio^ denotes the same thing with or different from Remission
and Justification. Part 1. p. 227, 228 308, 309. Whether and in what Respects
sin may be Remitted before it be committed. Part 1. p. 310. to the 313. Whether
and in what sense Repentance may be said to officiat in Justifying. Par. 2. p.
26. to the 31. Scripture seemingly asserting it examined, ibid. What Legal
Repentance is. ibid. p. 26. What the life promised and death threatened under
the Law to this legal Repentance are. ibid. p. 26-28. What Gospel Repentance
is, and how manifold. ibid. p. 29-31. Sometimes one with Faith. ibid. p. 29,
30. In what sense life is promised to it. ibid. Repentance either in its large
or strict sense, how it gives life. ibid. p. 28, 29, 30. Mr. Brs doctrine of a
twofold Righteousness, absolutely necessary to Justification, the one Legal,
the other Evangelical; this in our selves, that in Christ: and his Reasons to
make good; 1 his phrase, 2 his matter, examined and refelled. Part 1. p. 119.
to p. 143. His dispute that his doctrine is not derotory to Christ and his
Righteousness, proved fallacious and false. Part 2. p. 259. to the 265.
Whether Righteousness be a Real Being, or else but a Modification of a Being.
Part 1. p. 149, 150. and 159. to 161 Whether the Scripture call men Righteous
only for performing the Cnnditions of the New Covenant. Part 1. p. 144. to 163.
Whether the inherent Righteousness of Believers be perfect. Part 1. p. 181, to
the 186. Whether Faith as our Righteousness Justify. Part 1. p. 366-368.
S.
What to judge of some passages that fell from Mr. Saltmarsh his pen. Part 1.
p. 138. Salvation twofold, the state of Grace and of Glory. Part 2. p. 104,
105. In the former sense it is the same with Justification. ibid. p. 105.
Whether in the latter sense it runs upon the same Conditions with
Justification. ibid. p. 105 Mr. Brs arguing for the affirmative, proved
fallacious and invalid. ibid. p. 102, oath e 1 12. The Scriptures which he
alleged to prove works the condition of Salvation, found incompetent and
invalid to prove it. ibid. p. 116. to the 123. As soundly may we argue from
Justification to Salvation, that it is universally conditional, as
convertibly. p. 1. p. 331. Satisfaction, vid. death, Schoolmens Learning and
studies described. Pref. p. 37, 38. Mr. Br. pretends to admit the Scripture as
Judge in the Controversy of Justification by works, but fallaciously. Pa. 2.
p. 7, 8. What Scriptures he produces to prove Justification by works. pa. 2.
p. 25, etc. These all collected by the Papists to his hands. ibid. These
several Scriptures examined whether they make for him. ibid. p. 25. to the 48.
His calumny that the Protestants wrest; and implyedly that the Papists truly
expound the Scriptures. ib. p 9 85, 86, 87, 89. Whether and in what respects
God does see or not see sin in his people. Part. 1. p. 70. to 72. Signs, vid.
Evidences. Similies prove not but illustrate what is proved. Part 2. p 172.
Sincerity what it is. Part 1 p. 210. Whether the Gospel requires Perfection or
sincerity only. ibid. p. 208. to the 217. and Part 1. p. 270. Reasons
ministering doubts of Mr. Baxters much applauded sincerity. Pref. p. 5. to the
9. Mr. Brs often excusing himself from affectation of Singularity true, yet
examined upon what grounds it is true, and that he does it. Part 1. p. 331.
Whether and how far Mr. Brs doctrine is tainted with or free from Socinianism
part 2. p. 229. to the 234. Mr. Brs Sophistry and the evils thereof discovered,
p. 1. p. 8. to 21. 284. to 281. Sophistical distinction, how pernicious, part
1. p. 180, 189, 278, 382. How incoherent with the mind of Christ, ib. p. 350.
Whether to affirm that Christ Suffered the idem for us, denies pardon and free
grace, part 1. 229, 230.
T
Tertullians judgment of secular intermixed with Divine learning, in Gospel
matters, pref. p. 34, 35. The Testimonies of those eminent writers whom Mr. Br.
cites as Patrons of his opinion, manifested to be against him not for him,
part 2. p. 197-208.
W
Word alone competent to determine in Gospel matters, pref. p. 16, 18. to 21.
Works and duties coordinate with Faith to justify, according to Mr. Br. part
2. p. 4. what duties and works these are, ib. p. 5. In what consideration and
sense he makes them to justify, ibid. How far we are justified by them before
men, viz. Charity. Mr. Brs and the Papists arguing from St. James for
justification by works, examined and refelled, part 2. p. 184 to 102. His
arrogant ascribing to works under his Causa sine qua non, or condition, part 2.
p. 274-276. Whether when we are said to be justified by Faith, works be
comprised in faith, part 2. p. 281. to 284. How apt man's nature is to put it
self under the Covenant of works, part 2. p. 285, 286. Mr. Brs untoward
question answered, whether if God had ordained any work or virtue to justify,
it should not have done it, part 1. p. 379. etc. In what sense our Divines say,
God justifies first the person then his actions, pa. 1. p. 193, 194. Covenant
of works, see Law. More of works, see Life and Live, Grace and Justification.
In what sense and respects the Scripture calls the Saints worthy, part 1 p.
187, 188.
FINIS.

