THE RED-RIBBOND News from the Army.

In a Discourse between a Minister and a Soldier of the State.

Written from thence by a Minister of Gods holy Word in the County of Suffolk,
who loves a Soldier as he does his own life: The Characters of his name T. Cox

London, Printed for M. S. 1647.

A Dialogue between a Minister, and a Soldier of the State.
Minister. GEntleman Soldier, you are well met, may I be so bold as to
exchange a word or two with you?


Soldier. Whereabout, or what is your will good sir?


Minist. You have been, I suppose, sometime in the Service of the State, have
you not?


Soul. Truly sir, I have served the King and State these five years and
upwards, I have been in all the fights ever since Keinton field, or the battle
at Edgehill.


Min. Very well: you are much to be honored for your zeal to God, and to your
Country. And now without offense, I would be much beholding unto you if I might
propound a question or two unto you.


Soul. Good sir, speak and spare not: I shall give such answers as my poor
Genius shall enable me. And if I fail in any material thing, I hope, of your
Christian Charity you will bear with me, and give me good advice.


Min. I shall do both most willingly: And first I pray you tell me were you
impressed or went you a volunteer into the Service of the State?


Soul. I always scorned compulsion: I went out freely for my King and Countries
good.


Min. Blessed be God. But I pray you what enemies went you out against? What to
fight against your King?


Soul. No forsooth, but against his Majesty's and the Kingdoms enemies against
those that have set the three Nations in combustion: They have committed many
outrages, and did patronize all under his Majesty's authority: Had these been
delivered up to justice, then all hostility on this part, had long since
ceased, and so much Christian blood had not been spilt.


Min. But with what good conscience could you take up Arms against the Kings
party?

The Kings party is two ways to be considered,

1. Either as his Majesty's person may be engaged by mere su^przall only.

2. Or as he may engage himself by voluntary consent, whereby he may be said to
be surprised in his judgment also.

1. For the first, the case is clear, viz. That Arms may, nay must be taken up
by all good subjects (alleigeance binding them thereunto) to dis-ingage his
Majesty's person, howsoever, or by whomsoever it may be in danger of
surprising, or be actually surprised. Somewhat to this purpose is Abishai his
restoring David's person from Ishbi-benob, when slaughter or surprizall was
justly to be feared, 2 Samuel 21. 16. etc.

2. And for the second, though it were not his Majesty's case directly, (for no
good subject judging of his Majesty's ways, by the Law and rule of charity as
things have stood, can suppose the same so to be) but grant it were so yet
where this voluntary consent is not regulated in the judgment of the Grand
Council of the Kingdom (which ought to be judge next under God and his Word
to examine and determine all queries in the State) In this case Arms might be
taken up by the advice and authority of that grand Council, rather then the
whole should wrack and come to ruin. And this makes the case clear, That Arms
were not taken up against the person of the King, not against his Politic
power, nor against a Legal party; but against an unruly rout, that having
surprised his Majesty's person, or his judgment, or both, by force, or
flattery, to work their own ends, and the Kingdoms woe. And his Majesty himself
has granted, That the Parliament has more then power sufficient to take up
Arms in their just defense, for the Kingdoms safety, and to bring Del^nquents
unto justice, which is an unanswerable Argument to prove the legality of the
Defensive War, and to justify the Parliament against all depravers, it being
directly concluded a concessis.


Min. But what think you, can the King and Parliament be severed?


Soul. Under correction, I think they cannot as the case now stands, God and
the Law has conjoined them, and what God and the Law have so happily conjoined
let no man go about to put asunder. Wheresoever the person of his Majesty is,
where shall we seek his politic power, but in that place and with those
faithful Counselors, to which himself by a sacred law has confirmed and
confined it? For besides the Lawful call of this present Parliament, which is
common to this with precedent Parliaments: we are to consider the Solemn
Confirmation of it, wherein it differs from all Parliaments that have gone
before. I say the confirmation of it in its full Authority, and with all its
Rights, and Privileges. This makes the case strong and the Kingdoms Armies
that have been all this time on foot, were at the first raised to maintain this
Act, to defend this Title.


Min. Sir, I perceive you are rightly stated in the case. I did not expect to
hear so good an account from you: I am afraid there are not many more in all
the Army, can give the like satisfaction.


Soul. Believe me Sr, I am the weakest of many thousands; there are many of
most able parts, and can speak of this or of any other subject, humane or
divine, to admiration. And I confess I was a little principled before I went
out, by hearing some good Divines as you are. And have been much confirmed by
some of our Noble Commanders, and by some of my fellow Soldiers. Do you see,
good Sir, in my head, face, and other Visible parts, the wounds I have received
at York, Naseby, and other fights?


Min. I see them well, I would not have you call them wounds, but glorious
marks and characters of a valiant and undaunted mind: Blessed be God who has
preserved you, you sacrificed your life for his Glory, and he has preserved it
most miraculously as appears unto me.

But good sir, what is the matter now? much rumor is in the Country, and some
cause of fears. Certainly there are some projects intended by the Souldery,
witness both words and signs. A Covenant (it is said) is made by them; and what
means the Red Ribbond on each soldiers left arm?


Soul. I make no question but you have heard of a Petition sent by us, and
slighted by the Parliament; and the Ribbond shows that we will defend the
equity of our Petition with our blood.


Min. Slighted? I believe it not. It may be it was not humble enough, or not
seasonable at this time; and I am to seek sufficient warrant for your defense
thereof in that manner as you have said, and so I think are you. For where is
your Commission, or by what authority shall you manage that defense (as you
call it?)


Soul. Have we not authority, think you?


Min. No truly: you have neither King nor State to enable you to such an
enterprise.


Soul. Then we will have: for seeing our chief Commanders fail and fail off from
us, we will to his Majesty, and make him our General; and we are sure he will
give us Commission.


Min. You are not sure of that: And we hope his Majesty is inclining to an
accord: If otherwise; make his Majesty your General? To what end? God has
blessed the State with most glorious succ^ss^s, that there is, in a manner, a
full and perfect Conquest of all the old enemies of the Kingdom: and (in all
likelihood) the way is thereby laid open to a full period of the present
Hostility, for which every Soldier deserves the Laurel, an eternal, an
immortal Trophie: And shall they now think of a means to blast their forepast
glory by blowing the coals again, and by kindling a new Combustion out of the
embers of the old Distraction? God forbid. Will this stand with conscience?
Certainly it cannot: For subjection is peremptorily commanded by Saint Paul
unto the Higher Powers, Romans 13. 1, And where is the full politic Power now
but in the King and Parliament conjunction? God and the Law has conjoined them
etc. they are your own words. The Parliament does nothing but by his Majesty's
authority conferred on them, or confirmed to them: and his Majesty can do
nothing legally that concerns the Public Interest without the advice of his
great Council conveened and confirmed for that purpose. This Kingdom, though a
Monarchy, is not an absolute but a mixed Monarchy; of all Monarchies the best.
An absolute Monarchy does easily degenerate into a tyranny, if not law, but
will do guide the Steerage: but a mixed Monarchy has power in it self to keep
out or to suppress Tyranny: And whatsoever is commanded by full authority of
the Power must be obeyed for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. obeyed (I say) either
by doing the thing commanded, if lawful: or by submitting unto punishment: And
for this the case of the three children is very remarkable, Nebuchadnezzars
command was unlawful, yet they made no resistance, but submitted to the censure
and sentence of the King, Dan. 3. 16. And I would propound this thing unto
Conscience, viz. By what right, either humane or divine, the Soldiers can
either oppose that power which they have hitherto defended and upheld as
lawful? Or side with and set up that power which til now they have resisted as
illegal and unjust? Certainly it is not upon any new grounds and principles of
Conscience, for it appears plainly to be merely upon Discontents, which will
not bear them out at and before the great Tribunal. And good Soldier mark
this, either all your undertakings hitherto in the service of the State have
been unlawful, which none can prove: or your intended purpose (if it be really
intended by you) is Illegal, and will prove destructive unto Church and State,
of which (I hope) you will consider: and not hazard the undoing of all that you
have well done, for indirect and sinister ends.


Soul. Sir, I thank you, I am sensible of what you have now said. But I pray
you resolve me in this; may not we Soldiers go and fetch his Majesty from
Holmby, and carry him to his place in Parliament?


Min. What vi and Armis? and without Authority? we do all wish well to his
Majesty. I know not one godly man that does not wish his Majesty there, even
in the height and summity of his Honnour. But where is the let, the main
obstruction?

1. Is not the great Council wise enough to frame the best conditions both of
his Majesty's, and of the Kingdoms safety, by his coming thither?

2. Has not the Parliament been solicitous, obsequious enough to seek, and sue
for his Majesty's royal favor in this kind?

3. Are not both houses conscientious enough to provide for the honor of the
King, and for the safety of the Kingdom?

What needs then such indirect, and inconsiderate means? The Soldiers to
bring his Majesty (if it be in their power) in a distempered Passion, cannot
sound well: it must of necessity, portend some intended, or accessory mischief.
I pray you consider what the blessed Apostle says. The wrath of man works
not the righteousness of God, James. 1. 20.


Soul. Blessed be God for this your good, and sound advice. I have but one
thing more to say. What if we have not all our Areers?


Min. I confess I admire and mourn to hear it, great words are spoken by many
of the Souldery. But let me speak my mind freely. If that be the only, or the
main ground work of the Soldiers intentions, then both in all the good that
they have well done: and in whatsoever they shall do il, they are but merely
mercenary, which (I confess) is but a base term, if deserved by Military men.
It would appear that they aim only at self ends, and intend not the common, the
public good; It is heartily wished by all men that the Soldiers had their full
content: they have deserved well, and no doubt but they shall be well considered.
But if full satisfaction cannot be given, or not so soon as is desired, let not
the Soldiers run a hazard of Rebellion, for that would eclips the glory of all
their former valorous achievements. Gentlemen Soldiers prize the common good
above and before you own particular advantages; and make not another combustion
to obtain your own ends, though never so just and honest. We praise God for
what you have done for the public: The glory of your victories will be recorded
to after generations to your eternal fame. And we pray for you, and withal
entreat you in the name of Christ and in the behalf of the Christian Religion
to set yout eyes upon the common good before your own particular interests. If
ye intend not good to bleeding Ireland by your personal undertakings, then sit
down in quiet and hinder it not by distractions: take not off the Parliament
from expediting Recruits thither, lest all the Protestant blood which shall be
shed there cry to heaven against you. The State is wise, and sensible of your
good services, and will give satisfaction to their power, beyond which more
cannot be expected much less exacted by men that are truly conscientious, to
whom the public good is and ought to be more precious then their own. What say
you Gentleman have I not spoken reason?


Soul. Truly, Sr, you have spoken reason and Religion too: I am fully
satisfied. I pray you make this discourse public and no question but it will
give us all content.


Min. Say you so? I will take pen and paper and write verbatim and send it for
Impression.


Soul. Sir, I thank you, and I hope the whole Army will praise God for your good
council and sit down in peace.


FINIS.

