Two Sermons Preached at Christ-Church in the City of Dublin, before the
Honorable the General CONVENTION of IRELAND.

The first on Prove. 11. 14.

At the first meeting of the said Convention, March 2. 1659.

The second on Jude v. 19.

At a public Fast appointed by the said Convention, March 9. 1659.

By Sem Coxe Minister of the Gospel and Pastor at St. Katherines in Dublin.

DVBLIN, Printed by WILLIAM BLADEN* Anno Domini, 1660.

TO THE HONORABLE The General CONVENTION of Ireland.
Worthy Patriots,
YOur desire (which I interpret in the nature of a command) has caused me
(contrary to mine own disposition and inclination) to appear in public.

I can behold nothing in these my poor Labors that may deserve your
acceptance, only this I can say, That I have endeavored in these two Sermons
to discharge a good conscience to God, to his Church, and to You in particular,
in which I do and shall find comfort.

It is no small mercy, That plain preaching of seasonable Truths (which was
formerly stifled by Sectarian spirits) is now revived and countenanced through
your Patronage; this will stand upon your account for good at the great day of
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I am not ignorant of the rash censures of unstable spirits that have passed
upon me for preaching these Sermons, because I have meddled with their Diana;
and I expect much more unfriendly dealing now they appear to public view; but
I shall say with the Poet,

-- Hic murus aheneus esto
Nil conscire sibi, etc.
I can speak it in sincerity, That I have not intended to bespatter any man's
person, but to set out the loathsomness which is in the Tenets of those men
that have studied (under the specious pretense of piety and Christian Liberty)
to enslave these three nations of England, Ireland and Scotland, yea (and which
is worse) to unchurch them.

It is now above thirty years since my reverend and learned Tutor, Mr. Arthur
Hildersam (whose name and praise is yet fresh in the Church of God, being in
his life time accepted of all the godly, though differing in judgment, as
Fuller witnesses in his History of Britain, Cent. 17. Book 11.) did frequently
advise me (and others) to beware of separation from the Church of England
(which error began then to be busy in the land) assuring me, That Separation
was likely to be the bane both of Church and State; (How prophetic his words
were, the woeful experience of diverse years by past has sufficiently informed
us) And therefore, whilst he suffered much trouble and restraint under the
exorbitances of Prelacy, he acted both by preaching and writing against this
bitter weed of Separation; insomuch as the learned Dr. Willet (in his Epistle
dedicatory to Christ's College before his harmony upon the first of Samuel)
styles him, Schismaticorum (qui vulgo Brownistae) malleum.

What difference there is between the Brownists formerly, and our Separatists
now, I yet descern not, (both of them in words and deeds denying to hold
communion with our Church) save only that these later have put a fairer dress
upon this Monster, that it may appear more amiable.

Being warned by this divine Oracle, most consonant to Scripture, I have
endeavored (ever since the Lord counted me faithful putting me into the
Ministry) to bear my weak testimony against this general error of the time;
both because it is the fruitful mother of manifold Heresies, depriving the
Church of all means to suppress them; and also because from this
Church-separation, has proceeded State-separation even to the depriving us of
all our birth-privileges as subjects, if Gods mercy had not seasonably
interposed.

Now God almighty direct you in those great affairs that are before you; and
help you in the strength of his holy Spirit to contend earnestly for the faith
once committed to the Saints, both against schism and heresy on the one hand,
and also against all profaneness and ungodliness on the other hand, That ye may
be called the repairers of the breach made in the Church of God, the restorers
of paths to dwell in, that so at the last the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ
may be advanced in the power and purity of his Ordinances among us, and Ireland
may be indeed Insula Sanctorum. So still shall pray

Yours and the Churches Servant in the work of the Gospel, SEM COXE.
From my study in St. Thomas-street in Dublin March 1659.
March the 3. 1659.
By the General Convention of Ireland.
ORdered, That Sir Paul Davys, Sir Theophilus Jones, and Doctor Dudley Loftus,
be and are appointed a Committee to return the thanks of the Convention to Mr.
Coxe, for the Sermon preached by him before the Convention yesterday, and to
desire Mr. Coxe to cause his Sermon to be printed; And it is also Ordered, That
Mr. Coxe be desired by the said Committee to attend the Convention every
morning to pray with them before the Sitting.

Signed by Order, Ma. Barry Clerk of the General Convention of Ireland.

The First Sermon.
Proverbs 11. 14. Where no counsel is the people fall, but in the multitude of
Counselors there is safety.
THe Proverbs of Solomon the son of David, King of Israel, are usually
methodized under three heads, viz. His Ethics, his Politics, and his
Oeconomicks.

His Politics contain the Doctrine of the Government of Kingdoms, or
Commonwealths. Wherein Solomon treats of four sorts of Persons that complete
such a Government, and make it happy; viz. 1 A King or supreme Governor; 2
Counselors of State; 3 Nobles, Favorites or Courtiers; 4 Subjects. Where such
a Government is the people flourish, otherwise they cannot be happy.

Our Text, and our present Occasion, lead us to speak concerning Counselors
and their counsels; of persons that are called to consult de arduis
Reipublicae; upon which account ye (Noble Senators) are convened this day.

Concerning Counselors, Solomon acquainteth us, 1. With the Necessity of them.
2. With their Qualifications. The first our Text speaks of wherein the second
will also be included. So we shall come to the words themselves* Where no
counsel is the people fall, but in the multitude of Counselors there is safety.

That this divine Sentence may have the deeper impression upon our hearts, let
us seriously consider who has delivered it. This shall be laid down in two
particulars.

1. Solomon (who wrote this golden sentence) was the wisest man in the world.
The Holy Ghost informs us, 1 King 4. 30, 31. That his wisdom excelled the
wisdom of all the children of the East country, (that is, of the Arabians or
Chaldeans) and all the wisdom of Egypt (which was very great, as appears by
that commendation given to Moses Acts 7. 22. that he was learned in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians) that he was wiser than all men, than Ethan the
Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda the sons of Mahol. None that write
of civil polity are to be compared with him. Now upon this very account his
judgment is to be diligently harkened unto. A wise man's sayings deserve the
heeding.

2. But there is more than this to be considered touching Solomon; for he wrote
this Proverb (as he did many others) by inspiration of the Holy Ghost. He was
but the Penman of that which the Spirit of God dictated to him. And therefore
this (as all other Scripture) is written for our learning Romans 15. 4. His
judgment herein is unerring and infallible, so as we may rest upon it as an
undoubted truth of God.

The Wise man by direction from God acquainteth us in this Text with two things,

1 With that unavoidable hurt and damage which befalls a people destitute of
counsel. Where no counsel is the people fall. 2 With that great prosperity and
advantage that arises to a Nation by good Counselors and their counsels. But
in the multitude of Counselors there is safety.
The ruin and misery that overtaketh a people for want of counsel is called a
falling. The word Naphal in the Original bears a double signification. For
there is a twofold falling.

1 There is a falling into sin against God, and so by sin from God. Hence it is
that the giants spoken of Genesis 6. 4. are called Nephilim, as being Apostates,
fallen from God by their impiety. Of this kind of fall it is that the Apostle
speaks 1. Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he
fall.

2 There is a falling under judgment for sin committed against God. As is
clear. Hos. 14. 1. O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen
by thine iniquity; that is, thy sin has plunged thee into misery. So the word
is taken Genesis 14. 10. The Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there;
that is to say, they were slain there.

This Text will bear both these acceptations, Where there is no counsel the
people fall both into sin and misery: but I take it in the later sense
especially, they fall into utter ruin, into unspeakable misery.

The benefit or advantage that comes to a Nation or People by much counsel, is
called Safety, which word originally compriseth all manner of safety, both
corporal and spiritual, both from sin and misery.

There are two entire Propositions in the Text.

1 Where no counsel is the people fall. 2 In the multitude of Counselors there
is safety.
The one of these Propositions illustrateth the other. No counsel, and a
multitude of Counselors are opposed, so likewise are falling and safety.

But I shall comprehend both these under this one general Doctrinal Proposition.

Doct. That the prosperity or adversity of a people depends very much upon
their counselors and counsels.

I know you will expect before I proceed to the handling of this truth, that I
caution it to prevent mistake.

Caution. It must always be acknowledged, and thankfully confessed, That the
Lord our God (who is wonderful in working) has the chiefhand in the
prosperity or downfall of Nations.

There is nothing that comes to pass without the Providence of God, that is it
which disposes even in the least matters; in the fall of a sparrow to the
ground Matthew. 10 29. in the growth and beauty of the flowers of the field
Matthew. 6. 28-30. and so in all other things that seem to be of the least
concernment. Christians must not believe the maxim of the Heathens, Non vacat
exiguis rebus adesse Jovi.

Much more is the Lords hand visibly seen in the adversity or prosperity of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths. Whence it is that the Lord appropriateth this unto
himself as the chief agent in it. Isa. 47. 5. I form the light and create
darkness: I make peace and create evil: I the Lord do all these things. As if
he should have said, I am the cause of all goodness and prosperity through my
benignity, as likewise by my justice I am author of afflictions, punishments
and calamities; for so we are to understand evil here; the evil of punishment
and not the evil of sin; for of that God cannot be the author. So likewise the
Lord speaks again Jer. 18. 7. At what instant I shall speak concerning a
nation and concerning a kingdom to pluck up, and pull down, and to destroy it.
And Verse 9. At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation and concerning a
kingdom to build and, to plant it. The Lord (you see) ascribes both these to
himself. So that the Providence of God is determined by no cause, but
determines all causes, being the universal and particular cause of all things.

Yet God does often times work mediately or by the use of means. And this he
does, not for want of power, for he is El-shaddai, the Almighty God Genesis 17. 1.
But that (through the abundance of his goodness and bounty) he may communicate
a certain dignity of working with him to his creatures also, and may thereby
make his efficacy more perspicuous. We are (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 3. 9.)
laborers together with God, (...). Men and other creatures work with God, but
under God, and by his direction for the accomplishment of his designs, even as
God wrought by Jonathan and his Armor-bearer to the discomfiture, and total
rout of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14. 6-16.

Thus God works the safety or ruin of Kingdoms and great Nations by
Counsels, Armies, and such like means.

Of this mediate working of God, this Text and Doctrine is to be understood.
Counselors and their counsels are Instruments and Tools in Gods hand, which he
sometimes uses, and sometimes he breaks, as seems good unto him. He
sometimes makes the most fit means (as to the judgment and apprehension of
man), to prove in effectual to accomplish the end intended; And sometimes he
produces the most noble effects by those ways and means which of themselves
have no aptitude to bring forth those effects.

And God works thus, to the end that our Faith may not properly respect those
means which God uses, nor depend only or, chiefly upon them; but upon God
alone, who can relieve all our wants and necessityes, with means, or without
means, as it seems good unto him. And indeed this is the excellency of Faith,
when a Christian takes up that noble resolution of Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, Dan. 3. 17. Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us from thine hand O King.

What therefore I shall say of the prosperity, or adversity of Nations and
People, or of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, in regard of their dependence upon
Counselors and Counsels, must be understood as they are subordinate unto, and
cooperating with the mind, decree, and providence of God. For there is no
wisdom, nor understanding; nor counsel against the Lord; The horse is prepared
against the day of battle; but safety is of the Lord, as our wise Solomon
observes, Prove. 21. 30, 31.

Much time needs not be spent in the proof of this point, which of it self is
so perspicuous. Observe it only in three particulars.

1 This Master of Politics (Solomon) does often times repeat this as an
undoubted truth. He tells us Prove. 15. 22. That without Counsel purposes are
disappointed, but in the multitude of Counselors they are established; And
Chap. 20. 18. Every purpose is established by Counsel; And again Chap. 24. 6.
In multitude of Counselors there is safety.

2 Unto this mediate cause it is that also the Lord himself does ascribe the
prosperity, or ruin of Kings and their Kingdoms. The Lord informs us, That
Rehoboams misery, came upon him by neglecting the counsel of the Sages that had
stood before his Father, their Advice had been his welfare if he had hearkened
unto it. 2. Chron. 10. 8-14. And the word of God minds us that it was the
destruction of Ahaziah King of Judah, that he hearkened unto the wicked counsel
of his Mother, and others that were of the house of Ahab, 2. Chron. 22. 3-5. On
the otherside, It was the wisdom of David, and that which did strengthen him in
his Kingdom, That in all weighty cases he consulted with the Captains of
thousands, and hundreds, and with every leader, even with all the congregation
of Israel, 1. Chron. 13. 1-4. He would not act without Counsel.

3 Even the Law of nature by its glimmering, does dictate this truth to all
civillized Nations, That they should have their great Counsels and Counselors,
with whom to advise in all matters of moment; The Israelites had their
Sanhedri^, The Lacedaemonians had their Ephori, The Athenians had their
Demarchi, The Romans had their Senate, The Germans have their Diets. We in
these Nations have our Parliaments; Yea the Indians have some kind of Councils;
All Nations know that without counsels they cannot well subsist, that by
counsels their safety is maintained.

The reason why the prosperity, or adversity of a People depends very much
upon their Counselors and Counsels, is, because Counsel is the guide of all
actions. The transacting of great Affairs without Counsel, is like the riding
upon a wild colt without bit or bridle, it is a thousand to one that the rider
is cast. Rash proceedings without deliberate Advice, do make Affairs miscarry.
Gods own Counsel and decree took place before his works, he said Let it be so,
and so, before he wrought any work in the Creation, Genesis 1. 3. 6. 9. Counsel is
like the helm of a Ship, if that be wanting, the vessel is in danger to be
dashed in pieces against the rocks; if that be sound it steereth the ship
through all winds and tempests until it arrive at its desired haven.

The Uses of this Doctrine are three. 1 Of information 2 Of praise and
thanksgiving. 3 Of exhortation. Of these I shall speak in order.

First, The Use of this point is for information, and that again divides it
self into two branches.

First, If it be so, That the prosperity or ruin of a people depends so much
upon Counselors and counsels, then this informs us of the abominable
wickedness, and desperate madness of those men in these Dominions, who have
endeavored to bereave us of our Counselors and counsels, they have done what
they can to destroy us.

That there have been and are such, yea many such in this Commonwealth, I need
not spend time to demonstrate. Our too dear bought experience for diverse years
by past does sufficiently inform us; so that the very Persons that have been
the chief actors may be pointed out by the^^ names.

The Anabaptists, the Quakers, and even all those that have separated from the
Church of Christ in these Nations, have so interrupted our counsels, dismembered
our Parliament, and supplanted our laws and birth privileges; that it may be
said of us, as once it was said of Israel 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. Now for a long season
England, Ireland and Scotland have been without Law.

Who has not felt the direful effects of these men's fury, upon their persons,
families and estates, yea and upon our Religion also? So that we are all
brought thereby to the very brink of ruin and destruction.

Of these men I affirm two things.

1 That it is abominable wickedness in them that have acted thus, to the
dismembring and interruption of our Parliament, or great Council; they have
contributed what they could to the overthrow of these Dominions.

It is a great sin to contrive the death, or ruin of a single person only.
David complains of this as a great fault in his adversaries, Psalm. 31. 13.
They devised (says he) to take away my life. How much greater is their sin
that have endeavored to cut off the Head of three great Nations at one blow?

And this their sin is the greater upon a twofold account.

1 Because they have devised this mischief against those that trusted them, and
looked upon them as their friend,, received them into their counsels, put
Commissions, Arms, Ammunition, Treasure into their hands, and expected the
support of Religion, Laws, Liberties, Parliaments by their means.

So that we may well complain with the Prophet David, Psalm. 55. 12-14. It was
not an Enemy that reproached me, then could I have born it; neither was it he
that hated me that magnifyed himself against me, then I would have hid my self
from him. But it was thou, mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance. We took
sweet Counsel together, and walked unto the House of God in company.

O this is a great aggravation of their offense, that they have devised evil
against their neighbors that dwell securely by them, Prove. 3. 29. Treachery
against trust is superlative wickedness.

2 Because, they have done all this wrong to the Commonwealth under a pretense
of Religion; as if thereby they should advance the Kingdom and Interest of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

These persons have dreamed certain dreams of the personal reign of Christ upon
earth, and of their own Saint-ship; and holiness, as the only persons fit to
reign with him; and from hence they have endeavored to set up for themselves,
and to take the whole Earth into their possession.

These piae frauds are those cheats which are most abominable both before God
and man.

But can they think to have any thanks from the Lord Jesus for seeking to
advance his Interest, by subverting his standing Laws of Magistracy and
Ministry? Or is this the way to introduce the Kingdom of Christ, to trample
those great Ordinances and Institutions under foot? I trow not. By his written
word they must be judged, at his glorious appearing and in his Kingdom; which
word says thus. Romans 13. 1. Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers.
And 1. Pet. 2 13-15. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake. -- For so is the will of God.

These persons learned not this lesson of the good old Non-conformists, who
were disgracefully called by the name of Puritans; but of Stock, and Muncer,
and John of Leiden, and other Rebels, Apostates from the reformed Religion. And
therefore it is pity that their miscarriages should be cast in the teeth of any
honest and sober Christians.

But it is no new thing to commit Treasons under the vizzard of holiness. The
Apostle long since foretold that there should be traitors, heady, high minded
persons having a form of godliness. 2. Tim. 3. 1-5. This Prophesy is eminently
fulfilled in these our backsliding times. By their means our holy and good
profession is scandalized, and the way of truth is evil spoken of by Papists
and Atheists, and all profane men, as the Apostle speaks 2 Pet. 2. 2.

II. It is also desperate madness in them to act after this rate, for the
extirpation of our counselors and their counsels. For; If they had
accomplished their designs, could they have escaped scot-free in the common
overthrow?

Who but a man bereft of his wits, will sink the vessel wherein he is embarked?
or fire the house wherein he dwells?

Wherefore they are to be looked upon, and dealt withal as mad man use to be,
being fitter for bedlam then for sober society. The possessed of the Devil used
to be bound in chains and fetters, Mar. 5. 4. You cannot deal too warily with
this generation of men.

Secondly, If it be so, That the prosperity or adversity of a people depends
so much upon counselors and counsels, Then this also informs us, of the
great worth and excellency of those honorable Persons, who have ventured their
all for the restitution of our Grand Council the Parliament, they have done
what in them is to keep these Nations from utter ruin and confusion. This is
true Nobility.

This was it that made Saul honorable in the eyes of all Israel when he stood
up so manfully for the preservation, and deliverance of the inhabitants of
Jabesh-Gilead, 1. Sam. 11.

Certainly such Worthies deserve well from us, and from our posterity; We
should all say with Deborah in her song, Judge. 5. 9. My heart is toward the
Governors of Israel that offered themselves willingly among the people.

I know full well what some black mouths belch out against these Noble persons,
and Saviors of our country, and against the Magistrates of this famous City.
But let them alone, when they are come to themselves they will be wiser, and
consider, That it was a duty to save three Nations from sinking into
destruction.

And as thankfulness, love and honor are due from us all unto them; So they may
expect a reward from God for this incomparable service done to the Church and
Nations, Yea, and God will reward them.

If a cup of cold water given to any one in the name of a disciple, shall not
be unrewarded, Mat. 10. 42. What then shall the reward of those be, that have
ventured Life, Estate, and all that is dear unto them, to save this Republique,
wherein are a multitude of true disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ?

The second Use of this Doctrine affords ground of praise and thanksgiving
unto the Lord our God for two great mercies.

First, If the want of counselors does portend the fall of a people; Then,
what abundant cause have we all to bless the Lord, that these Dominions are not
totally ruined ere this day, by the secluding of our counselors, and
interrupting their counsels for so many years together?

You see that such a want of council as we have had, is usually the fall of a
people, and yet herein God has been more merciful to us than to others;
although we were plunged into the ditch, yet we are not quite drowned. We may
say truly with the Psalmist, Psalm. 118, 13. Thou have thrust sore at me that I
might fall, but the Lord helped me. And verse 2^. This is the Lords doing, and
it is marvelous in our eyes. You must set a Selah upon this mercy, and say,
Hitherto has the Lord helped us. The 124 Psalm and the 129 Psalm ought to be
sung frequently by all the godly in these Nations in commemoration of this
mercy.

Secondly, If it be so, That the flourishing estate of a people arises from
their enjoyment of a multitude of Counselors, Then what cause have we to
praise the name of the Lord, that he has at last restored unto us our Free
Parliament, that great Council, that may save us from destruction and ruin?

God has this day begun to perform unto us that gracious promise which he made
to the Jews Isa. 1. 26. I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning. It is a wonder of mercy, that the Lord has
done this great thing for us.

And it is a great addition of mercy to us in this Island, that God has raised
up to us also so many worthy Counselors in this poor peeled Nation, and has
(notwithstanding manifold obstructions which were in the way) brought them
together into this City, to consult and advise of those things that so nearly
concern us, both in matters religious and civil.

That both these mercies I am speaking of may have the greater impression upon
our hearts, consider seriously these four things.

1 Our own unworthiness for whom God has appeared so eminently. Well may we
take up that humble expression of Jacob Gen: 32. 10. We are not worthy of the
least of all the mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy
servants; much less of so great mercy and truth as has appeared in these
mercies that we are now speaking of.

2 Look upon the depth of the misery that we were plunged into, and that will
illustrate the greatness of these mercies; our laws were discountenanced, our
properties impropriated, our liberties infringed; yea and which is more, our
selves were unchurched, some of our godly Ministers silenced and banished, and
the Gospel ready to depart from us, and nothing but blackness and darkness of
error countenanced and encouraged, to the wounding of the hearts of all truly
pious men.

The actings of these late times have been like the Rebellion of Korah, Dathan
and Abiram, that strove against Moses and Aaron; of which you may read Numb.
Chapter 16. They endeavored to pull down Magistracy and Ministry, and so have
these done.

Dathan and Abiram were Gentlemen of the tribe of Reuben the eldest son of
Israel Number. 26. 5. Famous in the Congregation Verse 9. They thought they had as
much right to the civil Government as Moses had; and therefore say they
(speaking in the Levellers dialect) Why lift you up your selves above the
congregation of the Lord? in the third verse. And when they were summoned by
Moses, they refused appear, Chapter 16. v. 12. 13. We will not come up, (say they)
Is it a small thing, that thou have brought us up out of a land that flows
with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thy self
altogether a Prince over us? Their quarrel against Moses was about civil power,
they would needs assume the supreme Magistracy.

Korah was a Levite, and he would have none above him in the Church, he would
needs do the Office of a Priest as well as Aaron, as appears verse 10, 11. His
quarrel was ecclesiastical he would level the Priests Office and make it
common, because all the people had the gifts of the spirit; The congregation
(says he verse 3.) are holy every one of them, and the Lord is among them.

The same thing that they did has been acting over again upon the theater of
these lands. The Apostle Jude verse 11 tells you that the sin of Korah may be
committed in the days of the Gospel.

If this have not been the time of killing the two Witnesses spoken of Revel.
11. 7. I am sure it is very like to it, a very few years will inform us more
fully.

Now Gods appearance for us in such a time does make the mercy so much the
greater.

3 Consider the way whereby the Lord began to work up our hopes for deliverance
and restitution to our pristine condition. He sets the adversaries themselves
at odds, they that had engrossed all the power, riches and great Offices into
their hands, quarrel who should be the greatest. The military Anabaptists reach
further than their sleeve would stretch, in regard of power and command, they
resolve to win all or to lose all. But in the thing wherein they dealt proudly,
God was above them Exodus 18. 11. Their divisions were the signal omen of our
deliverance and their own ruin.

So that we may well take up that of David Psalm. 7. 14-16. Behold he travelleth
with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood, he
made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made, His
mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come
down upon his own pate.

4 Lastly, Observe what eminent instruments God has raised up to carry on this
great work, after the enemies themselves had begun it; even by persons
unthought of has God wrought both in England and Ireland and Scotland; raising
up the hearts even of multitudes of the common people to stand for the
Parliament.

All these things conferred together do make Gods mercies in these deliverances
to shine most gloriously.

The third and last Use of this Doctrine is for Exhortation, which also will
divide it self into two parts. For (in handling this Use) I would direct my
speech 1 To all here present in general, 2 To you (our honorable and grave
Counselors) in particular.

Exhort. 1. And first this Doctrine speaks generally to all here present, and
to all others in this land, who have had an hand or voice in the election of
these honorable Persons to be your Representatives in this great Convention, or
that do expect to receive any benefit by them as instruments in Gods hand for
your good.

You must carry it so toward them, as you would do toward such from whom you
expect safety, and to be kept from falling.

This duty of yours toward them whom God has set up to be the conservators of
your peace, I shall lay down and illustrate in Four particulars.

1 You must honor, love and respect them, as those that are to be your
Saviors, prize them as Gods ordinance, for the procuring of your safety, and
deliverance from destruction.

When the Apostle had spoken of Magistracy, and the protection we recieve from
it, Romans 13. 1-4. he makes this Use of that he had taught, in the 7. Verse,
Render therefore to all their dues, Honor to whom honor is due. As if he
should have said, the Magistrate deserves honor for the safety you recieve by
his means.

The Heathens used to Deify their Heroes for those noble acts they had done for
them; herein they exceeded their due bounds and limits; But we that are called
Christians usually fall too short in our esteem of Magistrates, we give them
not the honor due to them.

This is foul ingratitude, to deny honor to those that are the means under God
of our safety

2 You must not pass rash censures upon what they shall act in your name, and
for your good. It is a great fault in many, (both Ministers and others,) that
they pry too far into the Ark of State, and when their eyes dazzle, then they
speak evil of the things they understand not, it were better for such to keep
themselves within the compass of their own callings. It is too disingenuous to
censure those Persons that have been chosen by us, and do act (according to
their abilities) for our good. Thou shall not revile the Gods (says the Lord,
Exodus 22. 28.) nor curse the ruler of thy people. Whisperers, backbiters,
murmurers, complainers upon every supposed occasion, are the refuse of the
people. A Moses cannot escape the lash of such men's tongues.

3 You must yield subjection to such things as they shall agree upon for your
good, to such Ordinances as they shall make on your behalf.

They are the persons who are entrusted in this Land, for ordering your
public affairs, Wherefore Let every soul be subject to the higher powers,
Romans 13. 1.

You must submit to them, even in those necessary Taxes and Impositions that
must by their advice be leavyed for your defense. For this cause (that is,
because of the protection you receive from Magistracy, Romans 13. 6.) Pay you
tribute also. Soldiers must be paid their wages, and the charge of other
public businesses must be defrayed, or else you will fall into unavoidable
misery.

4 Lastly, and especially. You must pray for them. The Nation is heart sick,
these are your Physicians, you can do no less then pray for a blessing from God
upon those means they shall make use of for your cure and healing.

Mark well the advice the Apostle gives, 1. Tim. 2. 1. 2. I exhort therefore
that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made for all men; For Kings and for all that are in authority, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. You must pray for
them with all kind of prayer, and if you do your duty in this particular, the
Apostle assures you of three benefits you shall obtain by it. 1 The Church
shall enjoy more peace by this means. 2 Honesty, that is, justice, and fidelity
in the civil conversation of men, will be the better preserved. 3. Godliness,
true piety and Religion will prosper by this means.

And the rather must you pay this debt at this time upon a threefold account,
(viz.)

1 Because, Our counsels have not been successful for many years by past, they
have not accomplished the things we hoped for either in Church or State, but
things have grown worse and worse.

And we have cause to impute this great obstruction to this, That we have not
prayed for a blessing upon our counselors and their counsels, or at least,
That we have not prayed in that manner as we ought. Ye fight and war (says the
Apostle Jam. 4. 2. and so may we say) yet ye have not. Why? Because ye ask not,
That is our fault. And though ye ask yet ye recieve not (says he Verse 3.
Why?) because ye ask amiss.

It never sped well with our counsels since our public Fasts were neglected*
and turned into private meetings; upon what account I know not, unless it was
done to gratify and promote the way of Separation.

It will never speed well with our Counsels, nor with the Church of God in
this Land, till our public Fasts be restored, and appointed by them that
sustain the highest place of power among us; according to the famous examples
of the most pious and renowned Kings of Judah, as Jehoshaphat 2. Chron. 20. 3.
and others.

And forasmuch as it has been the laudable practice of all godly Magistrates,
to proclaim Fasts to be publicly observed throughout their Territories, when
any grievous calamity has been felt or feared, or when they have wanted
special mercies, or have enterprised some difficult matter: I therefore humbly
offer; whether it be not convenient, and necessary upon all these accounts,
That a public Fast be appointed to be observed throughout this whole Land.

2 Because, The affairs which are under hand, are of great importance; our
safety, or our ruin depending much thereupon; as you may see by that Religious
and full Declaration set forth the sixteenth day of February last past. You
expect that God should do much for you by this honorable Convention, that your
Religion, Lives Libertyes, Estates shall be secured by their means; But you
must remember, That God will be enquired of by you that he may do all these
things by them, as it is in Ezekiel. 36. 27.

3 Because, If ye pray, ye have promises that ye shall receive great benefit
thereby. I shall only mind you of one promise made in this case, Isa, 58. 9.
12. Thou shall call and the Lord shall answer. -- And they that shall be of
thee shall build the old waste places, thou shall raise up the foundations of
many generations, and thou shall be called the repairer of the breach, the
restorer of paths to dwell in. O that this gracious promise may be made good to
this Church and Nation at this time, but prayer is the condition on our part.

Exhort. 2. And now I must address my self to you (our honorable and grave
Senators) upon whom all our eyes are fixed, in expectation of help and safety
under the shadow of your wings, from those great miseries that threaten us at
this time.

And I beseech you to bear with me, and to allow me freedom of speech, that I
may deliver the Lords message to you, speaking as I ought to speak. And yet I
shall (through the divine assistance) keep my self within the limits of my
calling, least by any means the Office of the Ministry should be blamed through
my default.

That which I have unto you from the Lord shall be couched under two heads. 1
Be ye such Counselors as may save the people from falling. 2 Let your
Counsels be such as may procure their safety. The first appertains to the
Qualifications of your Persons, The Second relates to your Actings. Of them I
shall speak distinctly.

First, I entreat, and earnestly exhort you in the Lord, that ye study to be
such persons as may prevent our destruction.

It is not every one that is meet to be in such a place of honor and trust, as
to be accounted a Savior of the Land; those only are to be in this
employment, that are fitted of the Lord. and spirited with due Qualifications
to this great work. Now I shall lay this down in Five particulars.

1 You that are to be members of this great Council, had need to be men truly
fearing the Lord, Pious, Holy, and Gracious Persons.

They that are called to places of judgment in a Nation, are styled Gods, Psalm.
82. 1. 6. They are Gods Lievtenants, do represent his Majesty and Sovereignty.
Holiness is that image of God that you ought especially to bear, to make you
fit for this high undertaking, that ought in an eminent manner to be engraven
upon your hearts and foreheads. This was that qualification which God himself
requires to be in those that were to be Judges in Israel, Deuteronomy. 18. 21. Thou
shall provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God.

And if the fear of God be in you, if ye strive after holiness of spirit, and
conversation, then ye cannot much miscarry in your counsels. For,

1 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of all sound wisdom, and
understanding, Job 28. 28. Sound counsel flows thence.

2 Ye have a promise of direction in your counsels if ye be truly religious
and holy, Psalm 25. 9. The meek will he guide in judgment; and Verse 14. The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. They shall be of his cabinet
counsel, and receive advice from him.

Pious Counselors, (though they be not so knowing or prudent as others are,)
will be the best safety of a people. Of such it is that Eliphaz speaks. Job
22. 28. Thou shall decree a thing and it shall be established unto thee, and
the light shall shine upon thy ways.

II Ye had need to be wise, prudent and experienced men that are to be Pilots
of our leaking vessel, which is tossed with so many tempests and contrary winds
and tides, else we are not likely to get into a safe harbor.

If wisdom be wanting in counselors it portendeth ruin approaching. This was
it that proclaimed the destruction of Egypt to be near at hand, Isa. 19. 11.
Surely the Princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise counselors is
become brutish.

On the other side, if the counselors of a nation be wise and understanding
men, then prosperity is likely to befall such a people.

This was the just commendation of Ahitophel (though otherwise a most wicked
and ungodly man) That the counsel which he did counsel, was as if a man had
enquired at the Oracle of God, so (says the Holy Ghost 2 Samuel 16. 23.) was all
the counsel of Ahitophel, both with David and with Absalom.

Counselors had need to understand the Laws of the Land, to be well seen in
the customs and usages of the people, to know the affairs of the Countries, the
practices of former ages, and the state of the present times.

It is recorded of the chief Heads of the children of Issachar that came to
Hebron to make David King. 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. That they were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do. Some understand
it, that they had knowledge in Astrology, by which they did foresee the natural
dispositions of seasons, and diverse accidents of inferior bodies, depending on
the influence and government of the celestial ones; which Science is not
altogether unlawful in it self, though the practisers of judicial Astrology
seldom keep within their lawful bounds. But I rather understand it thus, That
they were men endued with singular wisdom and sagacity, either natural, or
acquired by long experience; whereby they were able to discern and know the
very moment of opportunities; which is a thing very important, and whereupon
ordinarily depends the good success of affairs. Of this the wise man
admonishes, Eccl. 3. 1. That to every thing there is a season, und a time to
every purpose under the sun. And verse 11. Every thing is beautiful in its
time. To time a business aright is the excellency of wisdom.

Upon the wisdom or the mistakes in counsels, there does usually follow
answerable events. Wherefore when the Lord intends to destroy a People, he
does usually in the first place infatuate their counsels, according to that of
the Prophet, Isa. 44. 25. He frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes
diviners mad, he turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge foolish:
And has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? says the Apostle 1
Cor. 1. 20.

You see then what an extraordinary measure of knowledge you had need to have to
capacitate you for this great buisiness. Daniel was judged meet to be called
unto the Kings Council, because the spirit of the holy God was in him, even an
excellent spirit in knowledge and understanding and wisdom Dan. 5. 11, 12.

III. Ye ought to be men of public spirits, and must be such, if ever ye
intend to be a protection and safety to the people. Private, self-seeking men
are not fit to be employed in public counsels*

When God called Solomon to bear the Kingly Office in Israel, it is said 1 King
4. 29. That he gave him largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea
shore, he was not of a straightened, self interested temper. I crave leave to
enlarge my self in a few particulars.

1 Ye must resolve to serve your Country though ye cannot profit your selves at
all thereby, but should rather waste your own outward estates. Nehemiah for
twelve years together did not eat the bread of the Governor (when the people
were in distress) as the former Governors had done. Neh. 5. 14, 15. An
excellent pattern. Covetousness, pursuing after a private profit in public
matters may well be called pestis Reipublicae; this is a special thing to be
avoided by them that are to judge others Deuteronomy. 18. 21. they must hate
covetousness.

2 A public spirit will not suffer injuries of any sort to be put upon the
people; he bears with and puts up private in juries with patience, but
that wrong that is offered to the public goes to his heart, he cannot brook
it. It was a noble virtue, and a public spirit in Saul, that when a private
despite was done unto himself, yet he did hold his peace and was silent 1 Samuel
10. 27. But when he heard of the wrong done to his Subjects the men of
Jabesh-Gilead by Nahash the Ammonite, the Text says, that the spirit of God
came upon Saul when he heard these tidings, and his anger was kindled greatly,
1 Samuel 11. 6. and he rested not till he had relieved them.

3 A public spirit is more sensible of the peoples sufferings and
afflictions, then of any private mercies that concern himself only. See this
in good Nehemiah, although he was in high honor, cup bearer to a great King,
yet he minded not that, but his countenance was sad and his heart full of
sorrow, when he heard of the great affliction and reproach that was befallen
his countrymen, Why should not my countenance be sad (says he Neh. 2. 2, 3.)
when the city, the place of my fathers sepulchers lies waste, and the gates
thereof are consumed with fire. So also Uriah denies his own private content
upon a public account, 2 Samuel 11. 11. The Ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in
Tents, and my Lord Joab, and the servants of my Lord are encamped in the open
fields, shall I then go into my house to eat, and to drink and to ly with my
wife? as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing.

4 A public spirit will not stick at his own private danger though it be
apparent, but will venture his own person to the greatest hazard, so that he
may further the public interest. He will use his sword as well as his tongue
if necessity require it. David did fight the Lords battles 1 Samuel 10, 17. When
religion is in danger, he will not spare himself, but venture life and limb to
uphold it. Excellent was the resolution of Queen Esther in this case, Chap. 4.
16. I will go in unto the King, which is not according to the Law, and if I
perish, I perish. He knows that he is not born for himself, but for his
country also, and can willingly dye in the service thereof. He can say as that
reverend Bishop did, Moriar ego modo me moriente vigeat Ecclesiae.

5 He that has a public spirit desires rather to be useful in his
generation then to be great. When the Lord puts Solomon to his choice what he
would have, 1 King. 3. 5. He beggeth nothing but a public spirit Verse 9.
Give thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern
between good and bad; for who is able to judge this thy so great a people. He
asks not honor and grandeur in the world, but that he might be useful to the
people of God over whom he was placed.

6 I will add but one thing more, A man that has the public upon his heart,
will lay aside all private animosities, put up all private wrongs and
differences, rather then endanger the public peace and settlement of the
people. When there was some private difference between Abraham and Lot,
occasioned by their herdmen, whence the Canaanite and Perizzite (who dwelt in
the land) might have taken an opportunity to have done hurt to both of them* we
find that Abraham passes over that difference, and would take no notice of it
to the public disadvantage. Genesis 13. 7. 8. 9. Let there be no strife. I pray
thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be
brethren. Is not the whole land before thee, separate I pray thee thy self from
me, if thou will take the left hand then I will go to she right, or if thou
depart to the right hand then I will go to the left. If the mariners fall out
the ship must needs be in jeopardy. If private grudges be in the heart, the
public concernments are like to suffer.

I have the rather pressed this duty of public spiritedness upon you (worthy
Patriots,) because you know as well as I, that private interest, and self
seeking in public affairs, have for a long time by past destroyed all our
national counsels and consultations.

IIII Ye ought to be of settled and well resolved spirits, and full of courage
for God and your country. To this end ye have your swords girt.

How shall ye be able to persevere in seeking the good of Gods house, or of the
Nation, if ye be not resolved and grounded in your Religion, and in the Laws of
the Land? And especially is it requisite at this time that ye be full of
immovable resolution, because there is such a multitude of unstable spirits in
the land, who change in their principles upon every occasion, of whom ye are
admonished to beware. Prove. 24. 21. My son fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change. Hearken not unto them, have
nothing to do with them that are every day devising a new cut in regard of
religious and civil matters. And he gives you fix Reasons against this
unsetledness of spirit, and against intermedling with them that are so
changeable in Verse 22. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows
the ruin of them both.

1 Calamity shall be the portion both of these changlings, and of those that
meddle with them, their calamity shall rise etc. neither of them shall escape
danger. Gideous idolatry in making an Ephod, and putting it in his own city,
became a snare to him and to his house, and to all Israel Judge. 8. 27. it
brought much misery upon them.

2 This calamity shall rise, as a bird out of the bush unthought of, by such
ways and means as are not by us imaginable, by some extraordinary hand of God.
As it fell out with King Uzziah, who would needs invade the Priests office to
burn incense in the temple, but the Lord in a miraculous manner plagued him,
the leprosy even rose upin his forehead says the Text 2. Chron. 26. 19.

3 It shall rise suddenly, before it can be thought of, Prove. 6. 15. Tberefore
his calamity come suddenly, suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. They
shall have no time to parley with it.

4. This calamity shall end in ruin, in a total destruction; the misery of
such persons shall be capital, Thou woundedst the head out of the house of the
wicked, says Habbakkuk in his prayer Chap. 3. 13. God will utterly destroy
them.

5 It shall be the ruin of them both, They that are given to change, and they
that meddle with them, shall fare both alike. Not only Korah, Dathan and
Abiram did perish for their innovation in matters appertaining to religion and
civil government, but also those two hundred and fifty princes that were
ensnared by them, and drawn into that mutany, as you find Numb 16. 31-35.

6 This ruin shall be unexpressible, unconceivable, Who knows it? who is
able to declare how great it shall be?

Ye shall not doubt have many giddy phanatick spirits fawning upon you, who
will seek to unsettle your judgments, and to turn you out of the right and old
way; for these croaking frogs swarm in every corner. Therefore stand your
ground, be well resolved in your own judgments.

And as you must be well settled in your judgments, so you must take good
courage to carry on the work before you, and to withstand all difficulties you
shall encounter with. This befitteth your place. Be strong and of a good
courage, says the Lord to Joshua Chapter 1. 6, 7, 9. And stir up one another in
the words of Joab 2 Samuel 10. 12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men,
for our people, and for the Cities of our God; and the Lord do that which
seems him good.

V. Lastly, Ye must also be unanimous, of one heart, and of one spirit in your
counsels and consultations, else ye shall never be able to save the people from
falling. Though Counselors be many and prudent, yet if they fall to division
among themselves and side into parties, and make factions, the people can have
no hope of safety and protection from them, but must needs be in continual
fears and jealousies.

This was it that put the Israelites into very sad thoughts in the time of
their war against Jabin the King of Canaan, because that the Reubenites were
divided from them in that enterprise, and made more account of their own
security, than of employing themselves any way for the assistance of their
brethren in that common danger; Judge. 5. 15, 16. For the divisions of Reuben
there were great searchings of heart.

Divisions and factions in counsels are sad signs to a Land, or to a particular
person. When that Ahitophel counseled Absalom to fall upon David while he was
weary and weak-handed; and on the otherside, Hushai advised to protract the
time until a great army could be prepared to fight a set battle 2 Samuel 17.
1-13. you know what ruin it brought at last upon Absalom and his party. It is
strange to observe how great miseries and calamities befell both to Abimelech
the son of Jerubbaal or Gideon, and likewise to the men of Shechem after that
God had sent an evil spirit of division between them, Judge. 9. 23. they rested
not till they had contrived and effected each others destruction.

But unity and oneness in counsels does usually procure safety. We use to say
vi^ unita fortior, and it is a truth, Many arrows bound together are strong,
but being divided asunder they are weak, and easily broken in pieces.

I know that I am speaking to such worthy Persons as are very sensible of the
bitter fruits of divided couns^ls, no people in any age have been more
disturbed by factions and parties than we have been. Wherefore I humbly beg two
Petitions of you, who are to be our Representatives in this great Council.

1 That ye keep a full accord among your selves. Fall not out by the way, was
the good advice of Joseph to his brethren Genesis 45. 24. Satan and his
instruments will do their utmost to divide you; watch therefore (I beseech you)
against all temptations in this kind, you cannot be too heedfull. The Apostle
Paul gives excellent counsel, which I also give unto you Romans 16. 17. Mark
them which cause divisions and offenses, and avoid them, have nothing to do
with such men.

2 That ye also hold a full correspondence in your counsels with your brethren
in the other nations that live under the same government with you, and
particularly with the Parliament of England, (now so mercifully restored to
their freedom,) and with those that they shall leave in Government during the
interval of Parliament. From them you have received eminent assistance in your
national distress. O let it never be forgotten by you.

The Islands of great Britain and Ireland are like two bottles swimming in the
water, if they clash they break; or rather they are like a gallant ship and a
small boat floating in the Ocean, if they dash one against the other by reason
of winds and tempests, the boat is in great danger to be sunk, or split in
pieces. Think not that you are able to stand alone; in taking advice with
England will be your honor and safety, and a threefold cord is not easily
broken, as Solomon observes. Eccles. 4. 12.

Some of you have already made a Covenant and league of friendship with them,
with hands lifted up to the most high God, you must not only vow, but pay your
vows to God most high Psalm. 50. 14.

Having thus spoken concerning the Qualifications of Counselors that would
save a Nation, I am now (in the second place) to add, That your Acts of
counsel must also be such as may save us from ruin, and settle us in peace and
safety.

And herein I cannot, nor may undertake to direct your wisdoms as to civil
affairs, (that is not my work.) Ye are persons that know the Laws of the Land,
and the occasions of the times, and what our Israel ought to do.

I shall only mind you of my Masters concernments, being now sent with an
Embassage unto you from the Lord, and that is this.

If ye desire (as I doubt not but ye do,) to keep this great people from a
fall, and to effect their safety; then your first and principal work must be to
promote true Religion amongst us.

If any shall ask, What Religion I mean? I say the reformed Protestant
Religion, according to the written word of God. This is that Religion that has
been sealed unto by so many famous martyrs and confessors; this is that
Religion which ye all profess; this is that Religon which ye must seriously
promote if ye intend to save this Island from destruction; upon this it is that
the flourishng estate of the Commonwealth especially depends. I shall make
this plain unto you in three particulars.

1 There is nothing will make a Nation so honorable, and full of splendour, as
the maintaining and vigorous propagating of Religion will do. The Apostle Paul
informs us Rom: 9. 4. that the glory pertained to the Israelites. And why so?
Because they had the service of God among them. The true worship and service of
God, whilst it was upheld among them, made them the most glorious people in the
world. And on the otherside when the Ark of God (before which God was served
and worshipped) was taken by the Philistines, then the glory departed from
Israel 1. Sam. 4. 21. 22. The loss of that did obscure their glory and renown.

2 There is nothing can make a people so strong and free from trouble, as the
advanceing of Religion will do; no policy or munition, or armies can do it.
When the worship of God was settled at Jerusalem, then God was known for a
refuge there; and the Kings that intended to invade the country saw it and
marvailed, and fear took hold upon them, and pain as of a woman in travail,
Psalm. 48. 1-6 The sanctuary of God among the Israelites was the excellency of
their strength, Ezekiel. 24. 21. This is the bulwarks of a Nation:

3 There is nothing can make the land so prosperous and plenteous in all sorts
of outward blessings as this will do, if Religion be maintained in its purity.
When Jehoshaphat had reformed Religion after a great apostasy, and had
advanced it to its former glory and luster, it is said* 2. Chron. 17. 5. that
all Judah brought him presents and he had riches and honor in abundance. This
was it that made him prosperous. So likewise it is said concerning Obed edom,
that the Lord blessed the house of Obed edom and all that pertained to him
because of the Ark of God, that abode in his house for a time, as you may read
2. Sam. 6. 12.

Now to the intent that Religion may he advanced and propagated throughout this
Land, give me leave humbly to propose two things. 1 Remove that which may
hinder the growth and glory of our Religion. 2 Do those things which may
promote and advance it.

First, If ye would have the Gospel to prosper, and Religion to flourish, then
endeavor to your utmost strength and power to take those evils out of the way
that may keep it under, and obstruct its growth, beauty, and glory. I will name
some of those impediments.

1 Popery together with all its appurtenances, does much hinder the progress of
the glorious Gospel in this Land. As the Pope is the (...): so his doctrine,
worship, and Church Government, are opposite to that doctrine, worship and
discipline which Christ would have to be established in his Church. Popery is
destructive to the Protestant Religion. Satan, the angel of the bottomless
pit, who is King over the Papists, has his name in the Hebrew tongue Abaddon,
and in the Greek tongue Apollyon, i. e. A destroyer Rev. 9. 11. He does what he
can by his seminary Priests and Jesuits to destroy our Religion with all the
professors of it.

May it (therefore) be the special care of you our Worthies to extirpate Popery
with all that pertains to it out of this Land: And to that end to command;
That those good Laws already in force against Priests and Jesuits may be put
into execution; That Papists and their children may be enjoined to attend upon
the public worship of God in our Congregations; and That where any defect
shall be found in the Laws (as to this matter) it may be amended for the time
to come.

2 Our Religion groaneth under that Schism and Separation that has been made
from the Church of Christ in this land, and by reason of those many Sects,
Errors, and Heresies that have issued from thence, the remembrances whereof
remain written in tears and blood in England and Scotland. It may be said of
these Errors in general, as the Apostle speaks of the word of Hymeneus and
Philetus 2 Timothy 2. 17. that they eat as the canker or gangren, insomuch as the
very heart of our religion is almost torn out by them

May ye (therefore) be pleased to use your utmost endeavors for the
suppression of them all, and of that which is the fountain of them all, namely
the Separate Congregations in the Land. Both root and branch must be taken away
if ye intend to have Religion to flourish.

Yet would I be rightly understood herein. I mean not that I would have any
godly persons interrupted in their meeting together to pray, or confer about
the things pertaining to the kingdom of God; so as care be taken that none do
plot or contrive mischief against the Government under which they live, by
pretense of those meetings, as some have too leudly done. But I desire this,
That none be permitted to gather Churches (as they call them) out of our
parochial Congregations, or to exercise acts pertaining to Church Government in
any of their private meetings.

3 Prophanness of all sorts does exceedingly hinder the flourishing estate of
Religion in this Island, never were greater abominations committed in a land of
light, than among us, which may justly cause the Lord to depart from his
sanctuary, and to abhor us.

May the Lord (therefore) be pleased to work up your hearts to an unfeigned
hatred of all prophanness and ungodliness whatsoever, and to use all good means
to purge it out of the land. And to that end I beg; That all Magistrates in
their several capacities may be required to put the Laws made against gross
sins into due execution, especially those that relate to the punishment of that
general sin, the profanation of the Lords day; and That further provisions may
be made against gross offenses, where the Laws are defective.

Secondly, If ye would have true Religion to thrive and flourish, then ye must
also set upon the doing of those things which may promote and advance Religion.
I will instance only in five things which (if done) would magnify our
Religion, wherein I become your most humble Petitioner in Christ's stead.

1 There is nothing can exalt Religion so much as a godly, learned, orthodox
and painful Ministry. It is said of good King Jehoshaphat 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. that
his heart was lift up in the ways of God. As if the Holy Ghost had said thus of
him, He did most zealously seek to promote and advance the true religion of
God. But what course took he to advance it? That you shall see in the three
next verses. He provided carefully that all his people might be taught and
instructed in Religion, he sent teaching Levites and able Ministers into all
parts of the land, and Magistrates also with them to protect and encourage them
in their Ministry. And it is said of King Josiah, that he encouraged the
Priests and Levites to the service of the house of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 35. 2, 3.
That was the way he made use of for the settling of Religion.

Therefore I entreat, That persons unordained to that great work, and who
despise that great Ordinance of Christ, may not be admitted into any
Ministerial employment in this Church and Nation; That such Ministers ordained
as are ignorant, scandalous, or unsound in judgment in the fundamentals of
Religion, may not be admitted to any pastoral charge in the Land; That those
who are already crept in may upon due proof be suspended from their places, and
in case they reform not, ejected; That all good endeavors be used to store
every congregation with such a soul-saving Preacher, as may seed them with
knowledge and understanding; And That timous care may be taken to encourage such
Ministers, least themselves and their families starve for want of outward
necessaries, whilst they deal forth their spirituals to others.

2 The settlement and due administration of that Discipline or
Cburch-Government which Christ has appointed to be in his Church, is of
singular use to pluck up the weeds that the wheat may flourish. This is that
fence of Gods vineyard spoken of Isa. 5. 2. that serves both to keep in the
godly, and to keep out the ungodly. The want of this holy discipline is a great
ground of lamentation.

Herein I entreat; That, forasmuch as the matters of Church Government are of
so great weight and importance, ye would please therein to walk hand in hand
with our Brethren in the other parts of these Dominions, and That all such
matters may be concluded of by a Synodical Assembly of the three Nations.

3 The due administration of all Christ's holy Ordinances, and Institutions
makes much to the flourishing condition of Religion in the Land, especially of
those that are the sealing Ordinances; and the misusage or non-usage of those
Ordinances is our great reproach in all the reformed Churches. These are the
food of our souls.

I therefore pray; That all such Ministers as have the care of Congregations,
may be required to administer all Christ's Ordinances, even the sealing
Ordinances to duly qualified persons within their precincts, though as yet the
Government of the Church be not settled. Methinks it is sad that any of the
Lords people should be deprived of their spiritual food, and so famish, whilst
we are contending which is the best way of carving it out unto them; And That
none be permitted to administer any of the sealing Ordinances save in the
parishes whereof they are Pastors, unless it be by the consent of the Minister
in whose Parish they desire to administer them.

4 Catechizing in the principles of Religion is also an excellent way and mean
to propagate Religion and cause it to flourish. This is, milk for babes in
Christ. And it is for want of the due performance of this, by Ministers,
Parents, and Masters of Families, that there is so little found knowledge and
understanding in the Land.

My request therefore is, That ye will by all due ways and means show your
approbation of the way of Catechizing, and That ye will (as ye have
opportunity,) stir up all sorts of persons in their several places to a
conscientious performance of their duty therein.

5 Lastly. Schools of Learning do also contribute much to the flourishing state
of Religion. Those are the nurseries wherein grow up many plants for the use
both of Church, and Commonwealth.

May you therefore please to take this also into your serious thoughts, and to
provide That the University near this City, and all such Schools as are already
erected and founded, may be nourished and maintained; That fit Schoolmasters
may be provided and well encouraged; and That other Schools may also be erected
as occasion shall require.

These things (amongst many others that might have been mentioned) I have been
bold to mind you of from the Lord, that so by your counsels ye may prove to be
the blessed Physicians of this languishing Church and Nation.

I shall conclude with that speech of David to his son Solomon when he was to
build the house of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 22. 16. Arise therefore, and be doing,
and the Lord be with you.

The Second Sermon.
Jude verse 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
Spirit.
THat it is a duty appertaining to the Ministers of the Gospel to preach the
Word of God soundly and sincerely, in doctrine showing incorruptness, is a
thing that none will deny. It is commanded that they use sound speech that
cannot be condemned, Tit. 2. 8, 9.

But that is not all that Ministers have to do; they stand bound also to preach
seasonable Truths, otherwise they shall be found wanting in their duty toward
the people of God. We are informed that the right timing of a thing is that
which sets a luster upon it, Eccl. 3. 11. Every thing is beautiful in its
time; fruit is the best when it is ripe; words though they may be truths, yet
lose their beauty if unseasonably spoken. And therefore Solomon has an
excellent Proverb for this Prove. 25. 11. A word fitly spoken (or upon its
wheels, (as it is in the margin,) with a due concurrence and observation of
all its circumstances,) Is like apples of gold in pictures of silver, pleasant
as apples, profitable as gold and silver. When the Apostle Peter observed the
giddy humors of Sectaries, Apostates from the faith which once they had
professed, he makes this the work of that time by all good means to confirm the
Saints in the truth against those fantasies, and to that end writes an
Epistle to them (1 Pet. 5. 12.) Exhorting and testifying that this is the true
grace of God wherein they stand. So when Paul observed that the City of Athens
was wholly given to idolatry, he bends himself to this seasonable doctrine,
even to declare to them that God whom they did ignorantly worship, Act. 16. 23.
Ministers must preach such points as may be of most use for the present
occasion.

Now the special work upon Fasting days is to humble the soul for sin. God
requires that on the tenth day of the second month which was the aniversary
day of humiliation to Israel, they should afflict their souls Lev. 16 29. 31;
and threatens Chap. 23 29 that, whatsoever soul it shall be that shall not be
afflicted on that same day, shall be cut off from among his people.

Hence it is that the word of God ought to be preached upon the Fasting day,
that so the people may be brought to sound repentance and humiliation for sin,
and so made more fervent in their supplications to God for pardon; As appears
by that direction the Prophet Jeremiah gives to Baruch Jer. 36. 6. 7. Go thou
(says he) and read in the roll which thou have written from my mouth the words
of the Lord in the ears of the people in the Lords house upon the Fasting day;
it may be they will present their supplication before the Lord, and turn every
one from his evil way.

But how should we mourn for our sins unless we know them? That which brought
David to true sorrow and heart breaking for his sin was the certain knowledge
he had of his own sinful condition, I know, or acknowledge my transgressions
(says he Psalm. 51. 3.) and my sin is ever before me.

And how should we know our sins so as to mourn for them, unless Gods Ministers
do their endeavors to discover them to us? David (of whom mention was made
before) never repented or mourned for his sins of Adultery and Murder until
Nathan the Prophet came unto him, and took pains with him in the discovery of
them, as is clear Psalm. 51. title; you may read the whole history a Sam. Cap.
12. To this end it is that the Lord calls upon every one of us who are his
Heralds Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and
show my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. This
alone is the usual way that God takes for the discovery of sin.

Yet to make an exact and particular discovery of sin, is a thing altogether
impossible to be done by any Minister in the world. For who can know his own
errors, Psalm. 19. 12. how much less the errors that other men are overtaken
with? Wherefore the Ministers of Christ have used to do in this case of the
discovery of sin, as he that draws the Land-skip of a Country or Kingdom, who
because he cannot describe every bush, or tree, or house, does therefore take
notice only of the most eminent cities, and towns, and rivers therein. Nathan
takes notice of David's great spots and stains only, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Thou have
killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his wife to be thy
wife; he speaks of his great sins. So the holy Prophets in their discovery of
sin take notice of the foulest, as of Ingratitude against God, Hypocrisy,
Covetousness, Murder, Drunkenness, Idolatry, Lying, Pride, Contempt of Gods
word, Security in sinning, and the like. The greatest sins are especially to be
taken notice of.

Upon this account (that I may discharge my duty aright upon this our Fasting
day,) I have singled out the sin of Separation, as the foulest sin of this age,
and generation, and therefore most seasonable to be spoken of that we may be
humbled before the Lord our God.

I know indeed that it is the part of the Lords messengers to cry out against,
and to endeavor to bring others unto a godly sorrow for all the abominations
of the Land, for all that gross ignorance, superstition and damnable
prophanness that is rise amongst us. And I doubt not but my brethren that are
to beat a part in the work of this day, will endeavor to acknowledge all our
iniquities, and transgressions before the Lord, and wrestle with the Lord for
the pardon of them.

But I must ingenuously profess that I conceive the sin of Separation to be the
Achan, the great abomination of these Lands, upon diverse accounts, of which I
shall speak anon, and therefore most to be laid to heart by the Lords people
this day; To which end I have made choice of this Text, These are they who
separate themselves, etc. And before I proceed any further, I must first show
the dependence of these words upon those that go before.

The subject matter of this Epistle is a vehement exhortation of the Apostle
Jude to all the godly in all ages; That they contend earnestly for the faith
which was once committed to the Saints, as you see in the third Verse; and That
they suffer not themselves to be drawn from the faith and belief of the Gospel
by those false teachers who were crept in among them unawares in the fourth
Verse.

The arguments by which the Apostle persuadeth with these believers to beware
of these seducers are of two sorts,

I He argues from the punishments that the Lord has inflicted upon those sins
to which these false teachers endeavored to seduce them; which judgments he
lays down before them in three examples.

1 Of the destruction of the people of Israel for their unbelief, in the fifth
Verse. 2 Of the everlasting ruin of the reprobate Angels for their pride, in
the sixth Verse. 3 Of the vengeance of God upon Sodom, and Gomorrha for their
fornication and buggery, in the seventh Verse.
II He also argues from the personal vices that reigned in these seducers,
Whence it was altogether unfit that they should be leaders of these believers,
and also unsafe that these believers should be followers of them.

The sins that these seducers were guilty of, are reckoned up under thirteen
heads in this Epistle; two of them are comprised in this Verse, (viz.)

1 Schism, they were such as made a rent in, and separation from the Church of
God, that is laid down in these words, These are they who separate themselves.
2 Steering their course by sense, and carnal reason and not by the Spirit of
God, in these words, Sensual having not the spirit.
Mine intention is to speak of the first of the sins mentioned in this Verse,
to which these false Teachers were addicted, and which did evidence them to be
seducers, they were such as did separate themselves from the Church and people
of God.

Where it is to be noted how the Apostle points them out as it were with the
finger, (...). As if he should have said thus, Behold, observe, and mark these
men to be vile and pernicious persons; for they do willingly cut themselves off
from communion with the Church of God. The word (...) (as Estius notes upon
the Text) signifies to lead or allure beyond the bounds of the Church, to
break the pale thereof; A term which I am not ashamed to use* though it have
been much flouted a^ of late. These are they that single and separate
themselves from the Church, making parties and factions therein, and drawing
into sect^ among themselves, observe avoid them.

Now whereas the the Apostle reckons up this for one of those great sins that
these false teachers were guilty of, that they did separate themselves from the
Church of God. You may observe,

Doct. That there is a Separation that has been an old error, even in some
men that have pretended to be knowing and religious men, and have undertaken to
be leaders and teachers of others.

You see the doctrine to be clearly grounded upon the Text, These persons Jude
speaks of were such as pretended to be so full of knowledge and piety, that
they undertook to be guides to these Christians, and again these Christians
looked upon them as meet for such an employment, so as the Apostle is
necessitated to write unto them to admonish them that they be not seduced by
them; and yet though they pretended to so much, they were guilty of Separation,
this was one of the great faults they were inclined unto.

I must acknowledge that this point (although it be a plain truth arising
naturally from the Text) may seem to some to be a most unmeet point to be
insisted upon in such an age as this is, and especially at a public Fa^t, and
before such an honorably Assembly as is now gathered together.

But I must profess that I judge the sin of Separation to be the great sin of
our times (as I said before) and that therefore I am bound to give mine open
testimony against it here in this public Assembly, as well as I have done in
mine own more private Congregation in the worst of times; which I speak not
(God is my witness) out of any vain ostentation (for I have nothing to glory
in, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ) but that I may withhold an
occasion from them that shall seek occasion of offense at this doctrine.

And because I know (and shall prove) that there is a Separation, even amongst
us, that is a great sin, therefore I am convinced that it is my duty to speak
of it upon this our day of Humiliation, and that no time is more seasonable
than this.

Yet in treating upon this point, I resolve (the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
assisting) to use all circumspection and caution, and to speak nothing but by
plain proof of Scripture. And therefore,

1 I resolve that I will not willingly use any sharp or bitter reflections upon
any that I hope do truly fear God, so as justly to grieve them. I know it is a
foul fault to make the heart of the rightous sad, whom the Lord has not made
sad Ezekiel. 13. 22. which is done by speaking lies, and not by speaking plain
Scripture truths. For to the godly every word of God is sweet, yea it is the
joy and rejoicing of their hearts, as Jeremiah speaks Chap. 15. 16.

2 I shall in my discourse design the information of mistaken judgments, rather
than the dirt-daubing or bespattering of those that differ in judgment from me;
and that I am sure is a duty commanded Gal. 6. 1. Brethren if a man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit
of meekness.

3 I will not gratify wicked, profane and superstitious men by any thing that
I shall speak unto this point. For that would be a great sin to strengthen the
hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way by promising
him life, as the Lord speaks Ezekiel. 13. 22. I profess to hate prophanness and
superstition on the one side, as I do sinful Separation on the other side.

That therefore I may duly qualify that which I am to speak at this time, it
must be known and remembered, that I condemn not all Separation as sinful, I
said, There is a separation that is an error, not that all kind of Separation
is erroneous. For there is a lawful and holy Separation, and an unlawful and
unholy Separation, there is a Separation commanded in the Word of God, and
there is a Separation forbidden in the same Word.

And it will be needful, and I hope profitable to speak of both these, to the
intent, That those who decry and speak against all the people of the Lord under
the name of Sectaries, Schismatics and Separatists may be convinced of their
fault, and humbled for their miscarriage in their rash censuring and
nick-naming of those that are sound and orthodox in their judgments; and That
those who are guilty of this sin indeed may be informed in their judgments, and
(if the will of God be so) may also be reformed.

First, There is then a lawful Separation, and holy Separatist. Such were the
Nazarites mentioned Numb. 6. 1. Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto
them (says the Lord) when either man or woman shall separate themselves to vow
a vow of a Nazarite, to separate themselves unto the Lord, he shall separate
himself from wine etc. And they were called Nazarites of Nazar, separavit,
because they were separated from worldly occasions, and devoted and sanctified
to the Lord. Thus all those that are baptized into the name of Christ are by
profession Separatists, that is, they are separated from sin, the world and the
devil to the use and service of God only; and they ought so to walk as those
that are dead to sin, but alive to God through Jesus Christ. And as baptized
persons are by their baptism declared to be separated and set apart to God, so
we are all bound to judge them to be Gods, and to have full right to all Church
mercies whilst they continue in that good profession. This was Paul's judgment
Gal. 3. 27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ.

Yea there is a Separation strictly commanded of God, and to be made by all the
godly, as appears by many Scriptures of the old and new Testament; of which
these are the chief, Isa. 52. 11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence,
touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the midst of her. And Jer. 15. 19.
Therefore thus says the Lord, If thou return then will I bring thee again, and
thou shall stand before me, and if thou take forth the precious from the vile,
thou shall be as my mouth, let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto
them. And 2 Cor. 6. 17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing. And 2 These. 3. 6. Now we
command you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw
your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after the
traditions which he received from us. And Revel. 18. 4. Come out of her my
people. I have mentioned all these Scriptures together, that you may observe
the harmonious consent of Gods holy Word for an holy Separation; what is
intended in them will be opened unto you as we go on in our discourse.

Now this Separation commanded, and by all the godly to be endeavored, I shall
lay down particularly and distinctly in seven things.

I The Ministers of Jesus Christ must in their preaching make a separation, or
put a difference between the precious and the vile, between the godly and the
ungodly, by confirming and comforting the one, and by reproving and threatening
the other. In the purest Churches there is chaff as well as wheat, dross as well
as gold; and that man that undertaketh the calling of the Ministry, and yet
has not learned to make this distinction, can hardly be judged a Teacher sent
from God. This, this (I say) is that taking forth (or separating) the precious
from the vile, which the Lord gives in commandment to the Prophet Jeremiah in
that place before quoted Chap. 15. 19. And they that ground their gathering of
Churches out of Churches upon this scripture (as many do) do squeez blood out
of the Text instead of sincere milk; as will appear by these three
considerations.

1 From the words conjoined in the Text, which are these, Thus says the Lord,
if thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shall stand before me;
and if thou take the precious from the vile thou shall be as my mouth; let them
return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. These words are spoken unto
Jeremiah who was one of the Lords prophets, employed in delivering his message
to the Church of the Jews especially; the native sense and meaning of this
enunciation of the Lord to him is thus much. If thou cast off all thy
distrustfulness, impatiencie and grudging against me, whereunto thou art
inclinable, and turnest unto me, relying upon me by faith, and walking in a
constant course of obedience, then I will strengthen thee (as in times past)
and give thee grace to attend upon my service freely without any fear or
distractedness. And if thou do faithfully and constantly (without fear of man
or flattery of any) declare what the true good is which I approve of, and the
evil which I dislike; if thou countenancest that that is good, and do bear up
and comfort good men and contrariwise condemnest that which is evil, and
keep down wicked men, then thou shall show by these effects that thou art my
true prophet, that thou speak in thy Ministry as the Oracle of God So as its
clear that this taking forth of the precious from the vile was an act
appertaining to his ministerial Office in dividing the Word of God aright to
the comfort of the godly and terror of the ungodly, and not in gathering a
particular Church out of the national Church of the Jews, and unchurching the
rest of the people.

2 We find it no where recorded in the holy Scriptures that the Prophet
Jeremiah did any such thing, as to take any out of the Church of the Jews, and
join them into a separate Church or society among themselves. And certainly if
it had been the Lords intention that in that great defection and backsliding of
the Church of the Jews, the Prophet should have gathered a select number out of
them into a particular Church fellowship amongst themselves, there would have
been some footsteps of his actings in that kind, especially considering that it
was so new, rare, and strange a work.

3 If the Prophet had attempted to have done such a thing he had without doubt
sinned therein, and so had not been as Gods mouth, but must have been numbered
among the false Prophets. For he had therein transgressed by digressing from
the practice of the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who was born in as corrupt a
time of the Church as Jeremiah lived in, and yet he made no rent nor separation
among them, but held communion with them in all the Ordinances, and
Institutions of the Lord, kept the holy Sabbath with them in their Synagogues,
observed the Passover with them, waited at Jerusalem during the time of their
solemn Feasts, doing all things in Church fellowship wirh them, as is
abundantly manifest in the Histories of the Evangelists. So that you see that
this word of the Lord to Jeremiah intended not any such separation as some
would infer from it, but only the putting of a distinction in his preaching
between the godly and the ungodly.

But this taking forth the precious from the vile, putting a destinction
between the holy, and the wicked, in preaching comfortable doctrine to the
children of God, and terror to the children of the devil, is a duty belonging
to every faithful Minister of Christ; and if Gods messengers do not observe
this distinction they give that which is holy to dogs, and cast their pearls
before swine, which is a thing utterly forbidden them to do Mat. 7. 6.

II All the people of God must separate from communion with Idolaters in the
worship and service of God. This is a duty frequently enjoined in the word of
God. And this separation must be twofold.

1 From that worship that heathens give to their false Gods, unto idols; which
is forbidden in the first Commandment. This is that which is especially
intended in the 52. of Isaiah. Verse. 11. before cited, where the Lord
enjoyneth his people to depart, and go out from Babylon, and to touch no
unclean thing that they did or offered in the service of their idols. We must
separate from all idolaters in their idolatrous worship, for it is written,
Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. All divine honor both that that is called (...), worship, and that
which is called (...), service, belongs unto the Lord our God only, and
therefore we may not meddle with idolaters, not with their idols.

2 From the false and idolatrous worship of the true God, such as the Papists
perform to God by their images and ceremonies. Of this kind of Separation it is
that the Lord speaks Revel. 18. 4. before mentioned. Come out of her my
people, that is, Separate from the Papal jurisdiction which is the spiritual
Babylon, under which the people of God have been in as great spiritual
captivity and slavery, as ever the Church of the Jews were under in Caldea, or
all Israel in Egypt. And there are two reasons rendered there why we must thus
separate.

1 Because unless we separate from the idolatrous worship of the Papists, we
shall certainly be partakers of the sins which they commit in that worship,
That ye be not partakers of her sins. It is a vanity for a man to think that he
can be present at a Mass, or other worship that they do, and yet keep his heart
to God, and not sin therein; presence at idol-worship voluntarily, makes a man
to be partaker in the sin of it.

2 Because, If we do not thus come out, all those intolerable miseries that
shall come inevitably upon these idolaters shall light upon us likewise, and
that ye receive not of her plagues. Those that will needs sin together must
also suffer together, this is a just and righteous thing with God.

Both these reasons should mightily prevail with us to hate idolatry and to
avoid and separate from them that are idolaters in that worship and service
they pretend to do to God. And this is the second branch of lawful Separation.

III The godly must separate from all conjugal society with idolaters, they may
not contract marriage with them at all. This is that separation spoken of Ezra
Chap. 10. 11. Separate your selves from the people of the land, and from the
strange wives; and also Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Thou shall not make marriages with them,
thy daughter thou shall not give unto his son, nor his daughter shall thou take
unto thy son. Of this kind of Separation it is that the Apostle speaks in the
2. Cor. 6. 17. if you compare it with the verses precedent. Be ye not unequally
yoaked with unbeleevers -- Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye
separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing.

It is utterly unlawful for the true worshippers of God to soder in affinity
with such as are idolaters; for them that profess the true Protestant religion
to marry with heathens, or with Papists.

Yet this that I say in this matter is to be understood with those Cautions
that the Apostle gives in this case, 1 Cor. 7. 10-15. For if it be so that any
one that is a believer has contracted marriage with one that is an unbeleever
or heathen, this difference of religion is not a sufficient cause of divorce or
separation in the days of the Gospel. Though it be a sin to marry with them of
a false religion, and so a just cause of humiliation, yet after marriage this
is not a just ground for a divorce.

IIII It is a duty appertaining to the servants of God to separate themselves
from the unnecessary civil society of all wicked men, even of all such as walk
and act in an ungodly manner. This was Jacobs care Genesis 49. 6. O my soul come
not thou into their secret, unto their assembly, mine honor be not thou
united. He resolves to have nothing to do unnecessarily with cruel and
merciless men though they were his near relations. If godly men come into
ungodly company without good occasion so to do, they may ruin themselves
thereby, For Solomon informs us Prove. 13. 20. that a companion of fools shall
be destroyed.

This is a most certain truth that the godly may come into the company of such
as are most wicked and profane, and converse with them upon just occasions,
(viz.)

1 If necessary civil affairs whether public or private do call for it. The
Apostle forbids not to forbear company altogether with fornicators, or
covetous, or extortioners, or idolaters, for then we must needs go out of the
world, 1 Cor. 5. 10. Doubtless it is lawful for any good Christian, whether
Minister or other to converse with the worst of men upon a necessary civil
account, and none ought to pass a rash judgment against his neighbor for so
doing.

2 If a believer have any cause to hope that he may win another to God, or to
the love of religion by companying with him, he may also company with him
lawfully upon that account. Of this the Apostle speaks 1 Pet. 2. 12. Having
your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against
you, as evil doers they may by your good works which they shall behold glorify
God in the day of their visitation. You see then that it is lawful and
convenient for the godly upon some occasions to converse with the worst of men.
But if such like special occasions do not intervene, then the company of the
ungodly must be quite forborne, and a separation made from their society; which
is the fourth branch of an holy and lawful Separation.

V When the children of God have a just cause to be in the company of ungodly
men, they must always be sure of this that they do Separate from their wicked
courses; they must hold no eommunion with them in their sins though they do
converse with them; that is a thing utterly unlawful. It is a thing absolutely
required of all believers, 1 Timothy 5. 12. that they be not partakers with other
men's sins. A man truly gracious will let such a watch over himself when he is
necessitated to be among ungodly men that he will not give the least
approbation or countenance to any of their lewd and ungracious courses; and it
is a great sin to keep them company when they are acting their wicked prancks.
This the godly are often advised to beware, Prove. 23. 20. Be not among
wine-bibbers, among riotous eaters of flesh. Come not among them when they are
committing their sins, meddle not with them in their drunkenness and gluttony.
We must ever be such Separatists.

VI. The godly may and must separate from the pollutions of any Church they
live in. It is one thing to separate from the Church of God, and another to
separate from the defilements that are in the Church. If that a Church be
corrupted, so as any of Gods Institutions be broken, and his standing rules
transgressed and swerved from, it concerns all godly men to take heed to
themselves that they be not also defiled. A notable pattern and example of this
we have in our Lord Jesus Christ himself. It was one of Gods statute Laws
concerning the Passover that it should be kept every year on the fourteenth
day of the first month at even, as you may see in its first institution Exodus
12. 6. Ye shall keep up the (paschal) Lamb until the fourteenth day of the same
(that is to say of the first Verse 2.) month, and the whole assembly of the
congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening; And so the Lord speaks
expressly Levit. 23. 5. In the fourteenth day of the first month at even is the
Lords passover. But the Church of the Jews did transgress this in regard of
the circumstance of time. For they had made it a tradition among them that when
the Passover fell upon the evening before their ordinary Sabbath, they did put
off the keeping of the Passover unto the Sabbath day, and so kept the
Passover upon their ordinary Sabbath, performing both duties under one. Thus
it fell out in that year wherein our Lord was crucified, as appears by
comparing Mat. 26. 20. with Mar. 15. 42. and John 18. 28. where you may note
that the Jews kept the Passover that evening the Lord Jesus was crucified, at
which time began their ordinary sabbath. Yet the Lord Jesus (who held close
communion with the Church of the Jews) declineth their practice in that very
circumstance of time in which they failed, and observes the Passover in its
proper season appointed by the Lord; and this is carefully observed by the
Evangelists Mat. 26. 20. Now when the evening was come he sat down with the
twelve; And Luke 22. 14. And when the hour was come he sare down etc. He would
not fail in the very time of this Ordinance though a whole Church digressed
from it.

Though Christians are bound to hold communion with the Church in which they
live, so far as they walk up to the rule, yet in any pollution that is in that
Church, they need not, nor ought to be partakers; and such a frame of spirit
does well become every Christian. This therefore justifies the practice of
such as fly from the errors that are in the Church, not daring to meddle with
any impositions which are not of the Lords appointment therein, though they may
not, nor dare separate from her.

VII. Lastly, After due admonition given to scandalous sinners who live in the
Church, if the admonition be rejected, and the sinners prove obstinate, the
Church must separate them, and cast them out from her communion. This lesson
our Lord Jesus teaches Mat. 18. 15-17. If thy brother shall trespass against
thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him, if he shall hear thee
thou have gained thy brother, But if he will not hear thee then take with thee
one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be
established, And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church; but
if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a
publican. In which Text our Savior does not teach a Non-communion as some call
it, viz. that when we see Church members to offend, and there is in the Church
no help to be found for the redress thereof, we must therefore decline
communion with that Church immediately; but he teaches an Excommunion, viz.
that such as offend are to be cast out of that Church, in case they do not
reform upon admonition seasonably and frequently given; according to that in
Tit. 3. 10 A man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition
reject, cast him off, separate him from your communion. This Separation is
approvable; Thus far you see, we may and must be Separatists, the Holy Ghost
enjoyneth it, we sin if we be not so; and they that cast a reproach upon any
man for this kind of Separation are in a great fault, and it will be sin unto
them.

And the Apostle in the 2 Cor. Chan. 6. gives five reasons to persuade to such
a Separation as this, when he commands to come out from sinners, and to be
separate.

1 Because there can be no agreement between the people of God and such sins
and sinners. This he proves and confirms by propounding five Questions Verse
14, 15, 16. The first is, What fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? The second, What communion has light with darkness? The
third, What concord has Christ with Belial? The fourth, What part has he that
believes with an infidel? The fifth, What agreement has the Temple of God
with idols? As if he should have said, These things are diametrally contrary
the one to the other, they are separated asunder, and so must ye be separated
from sin and sinners.

2 Because the people of God are the house or Temple of God, ver. 16. For ye
are the temple of God. And it is unmeet that the temple of God should be
defiled by having any society with sin and sinners; therefore be ye separate.

3 Because God dwells in this temple, ibid. As God has said, I will dwell in
them and walk in them. And it is treachery, yea high treason to lodge any rebels
within or near the habitation of this great King; therefore separate.

4 Because this God who dwells in this temple is the living God, ibid. Ye are
the temple of the living God, so as he takes notice of our behavior, and his
spirit is grieved at this as a great miscarriage if we hold any communion with
such; and therefore we must separate from them.

5 Because the people of God are an holy covenant engaged people, God is their
God, and they are his people, ibid. I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. According to that which is written Deuteronomy. ^6. 17, 18. Thou have avouched
the Lord this day to be thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes,
and his commandments and judgments, and to hearken unto his voice. And the Lord
has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people. And therefore the people
of God ought warily to avoid and separate from such things or persons as may
endanger a breach of that love and amity that is between God and them.

Observe then that I speak not against all kind of Separation, there is a
Separation that is lawful, holy, and strictly enjoined us in the word of God.

Second. Yet there is an unholy, unlawful Separation, an ungodly Separatist,
condemned in the unerring word of God. You see that the Apostle Jude condemns
these false Teachers of whom he speaks in this Epistle for their Separation,
amongst other vices that they were guilty of, and sets a black mark of infamy
upon them, These be they (says he, mark, observe them well, follow them not)
who separate themselves.

Let us therefore make enquiry (by the written word of God) who these
Separatists are, that we may know them and avoid them. And I shall demonstrate
that in six particulars.

I. Such may justly be challenged as guilty of sinful Separation, who deline
as unlawful all necessary society with them whom they conceive to be
unregenerate, so as they will not eat or drink or converse with them at all.
Such were the Pharisees of whom mention is frequently made in the New
Testament; and they were called Pharisees from the Hebrew Pharash, separavit.
For though that word be metaphorically expounded to declare or to interpret,
yet properly it signifies to divide or separate as the learned observe; and so
the Greeks used to call the Pharisees (...) Separatists; to this Epiphanius
agrees, Dicebantur Pharisaei, eo quod separati essent ab aliis, propter
spontaneam superfluam religionem apud ipsos receptam. Now one main point of
their religion lay in this thing, That they refused to eat, or drink, or come
into the company of any whom they looked upon as sinners, and blamed all those
that followed not their example in this matter, as you find in that speech of
theirs to the Disciples Mat. 9. 11. Why eats your Master with publicans and
sinners? But our Lord Jesus refused not to converse with them upon just
occasion as appears by his defense in the twelfth and thirteenth verses, But
when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole need not a
Physician, but they that are sick. But go ye and learn what that means, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance. By which answer our Lord Jesus Christ does fully declare
unto us that the Pharisees were in a great error in that point.

And they that practice this kind of separation do fail grossly in two things:

1 They are an hinderance to the conversion of sinners, as our Lord shows in
the scripture now mentioned, if he had not conversed with them a^ well as
preached publicly unto them they had never been converted and brought home to
God.

2 They harden sinners against religion and the professors of it by this means;
too much austerity in this kind drives men into a dislike of piety and
holiness, who might be won by a more gentle and meek demeanor toward them.
Hence it is that the Apostle Paul gives that grave advice to Timothy 1 Timothy 2.
24-26. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt
to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; and
that they may recover themselves out of the snares of the devil, who are taken
captive by him at his will. By what has been said we see that it is sinful
Separation for a man to refuse necessary company with those who are
unregenerate, that it is a great fault and much to be condemned. And therefore
the Apostle gives a notable caveat concerning it 1 Cor. 5. 9-11. I wrote
(says he) unto you in an epistle not to company with fornicators. Yet not
altogether with the fornicators of this world, etc. But now I have written unto
you (for the explanation of my meaning wherein I was not rightly understood)
not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with
such an one no not to eat. Where he plainly teaches, That we ought to estrange
our selves more from such as have made a profession and afterward do fall into
soul offenses, than from such as never did yet come up to such an holy
profession of the gospel. This is the first branch of sinful Separation.

II. Those also are guilty in this kind that forsake family society upon this
pretense, that their relations are unconverted. And I the rather mention this,
because it is a great fault of some persons in these our days as well as in
former times. Against this practice it is that the Apostle speaks expressly 1
Cor. 7. 10-15. Let not the wife depart or separate from her husband etc. This
kind of separation is in it self a great sin, and does occasion manifold
mischiefs and inconveniences.

III. They also are to be accounted very faulty in this matter, and have justly
deserved the name of Separatists, who separate themselves from the solemn
Assemblies and Ordinances of Christ, and particularly from that great sealing
Ordinance of the Lords supper, because there are some that communicate with
them whom they judge to be unworthy communicants and graceless men.

Before I speak to this point, I must lay down and constantly affirm these two
received and well grounded truths, lest I should be misunderstood in what I am
to say.

1 I say, That persons grossly ignorant, or notoriously ungodly and profane are
not fit to receive the Lords Supper, these are not able to discern the Lords
body, but eat and drink unworthily, and so are guilty of the body and bloud-of
the Lord, as the Apostle informs us 1 Gor. 11. 27. 29. Such persons eat and
drink their own damnation.

2 I affirm, That it is the duty of the Officers of the Church to exclude from
the Lords Supper all such as shall appear unto them to be unduly qualified for
the receiving of that Ordinance; and in particular this belongs to the
Minister to put a difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and
clean, and accordingly to admit or exclude from ordinances. They were the
Priests that thrust Uzziah out of the temple when the leprosy appeared upon
him 2. Chr. 26. 19. 20.

From these two undoubted truths which we profess, and fear not to practice, it
is apparent that we allow not promiscuous or mixed communion; but that it is a
false report and slander that the devil and the sectaries have cast upon us to
advance their own interest thereby. And (if it were lawful to boast) we may say
that our Ordinances are kept as pure from mixed communion as theirs are, blessed
be God.

Yet (though all this be true) it must be constantly received and maintained as
a great truth, That private Christians may not therefore separate themselves
from the Church, or decline any of Christ's Ordinances, because they see some
persons admitted to participate with them in those Ordinances whom themselves
look upon as ungodly men; and That it is a foul fault thus to separate. There
were great disorders in the Church of Corinth in those persons who came unto
the Table of the Lord 1. Cor. 11. 21, 22. one came to it hungry and another
drunken (greater miscarriages then are to be found amongst our communicants
when they come to the Sacrament) and the Apostle chideth them sharply about
those things, What (says he) have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or
despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I say to
you? shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. Their disorder called aloud
for reformation, and the Apostle took a great deal of pains to reform it, by
reducing them to the first institution. But you find not that he gives any
commandment or allowance to any of the members of that Church to withdraw
themselves and separate from communion in that Ordinance with the Church. No,
he commends them for this that they who were godly did not separate but came
still together into one place, Verse 20; and he sharply reproves their schisms
and divisions Chap. 3. 3. And there is great reason why Christians should be
very cautious in this case. For,

1 Such persons who may by a private Christian or Christians be judged to be
unworthy to participate in that Ordinance, may yet be worthy, and so accounted
of in the judgment of those that are Officers of the Church; whose judgment is
to be preferred before any private opinion of the best men. It may be said of a
private Christian in this case as the Hebrew said to Moses Acts 7. 27. Who made
thee a ruler and a judge?

2 Though the persons be indeed unworthy, yet their unworthiness may be unknown
unto the Officers of the Church. And it is the duty of private Christians to
make known such offenders to those that are over them in the Lord, that so
their reformation may be endeavored, and not therefore to decline and separate
from the Ordinances. This is the standing rule, Dic ecclesiae Mat. 18. 17. He
says not, If thou be offended fall off from the Church, but acquaint the
Church, that so the scandal in thy way may be removed.

3 Those that rule in the Church may suspect that such or such persons are
unworthy, and yet there can be no full proof made of it. The opinion or
knowledge of one private Christian may not be a sufficient proof in some cases,
but there must be two or three witnesses. And where full proof is wanting,
there can be no warrant for a judicial proceeding, nor sufficient ground to
account such person or persons unworthy of that Ordinance. Charity will surmise
no evil without sufficient proof made. When Paul was coming the third time to
Corinth to reform their disorder in the Ordinances of Christ, he tells them
what course he would follow in that work 2 Cor. 13. 1. In the mouth of two or
three witnesses shall every word be established; he would not take upon him to
judge by hearsay and bare reports, but by full and clear proof; which ought to
be laid down as a pattern in all Church censures.

4 Although it fall out so that full proof may be had of a fault committed by a
Churchmember, and that the Officers of the congregation may be fully
persuaded, that that person has done such a thing as might justly exclude him
from the Lotds table, if he do not repent of it; yet it may be there has not
been an opportunity as yet to hear the witnesses, and to deal with him by
private Admonition, whereupon repentance may follow so evidently that there may
be no occasion to proceed to suspension; much less can there then be an
occasion for a private Christian to withdraw communion in Ordinances upon that
account. It were (as I conceive) preposterous and against the rule, to suspend
any Churchmember from the sealing Ordinances before he be admonished of his
fault, and have showed his obstinacy. Or it may be that such a man's repentance
as well as his fault is sufficiently known to the Governors of the Church,
though not to every private member, and if his repentance be known to them, and
they be satisfied therewith, that should give much content to others in diverse
cases. Paul supposed that his testimony of the repentance of Onesimus was a
sufficient ground of satisfaction to Philemon, as is evident in the epistle to
Philemon.

5. Admit that the fault be notorious, and evidently proved, and that those who
are in authority in the Church do sinfully connive at it, and cast not out the
offender according to his merit; (as it seems to have been in the church of
Corinth) yet that is no sound ground to forsake communion with that church. No
private christian needs to fear that he shall be accessory to that man's sin, or
receive hurt by participation in that Ordinance whereunto the other is
admitted. No, it is the fault of children to refuse the bread which their
father offers to them, because dogs are suffered to be in the room and snatch
at the childrens portion, there would appear more of surliness than of
discretion and godly wisdom in that. The Apostles or some of them at least did
participate with Judas in a sealing Ordinance after he was detected to be the
traitor, as appears by comparing John 13. 23-27. with Mat. 26. 23-26.

This rejection of Ordinances, this separation from them, upon supposition that
unworthy persons are admitted, is to be severely censured as proud
censoriousness, and uncharitable rashness, which God abhors, notwithstanding
that pretense of piety that is put upon it. These are they that say, Stand by
thy self and come not near us, for we are bolier than thou. But mark what a
character the Lord gives of them Isa 65. 5. These are a smoke in my nose, they
are a greater offense to God, than the stinking snuff of a candle can be to any
of us. It becomes true Christians to judge themselves and to suspect themselves
rather than other men, and to sweep at their own doors first. Our Lord gives
excellent advice to us all Mat. 7. 1, 2. Judge not that ye be not judged: for
with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what measure ye mete
it shall be measured to you again. It comes to pass frequently, that the
weakest Christians are most censorious, and those that are strongest are most
charitable.

I say not but that it is the part of a godly man to mourn if he see those that
are unworthy persons admitted to sealing Ordinances; but he may not therefore
separate from those Ordinances whilst they remain Gods Ordinances. This is an
occasion of much hurt and mischief in the church of God, and it were more safe
for Christians to keep themselves within their due bounds and limits. It was
the sin of the people to abhor the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17. although
those that did officiate therein were very lewd men. That is the third branch
of sinful separation.

IIII Those are also in a great measure guilty of hateful Separation that
decline private christian communion with the godly in such duties as are of
common concernment to all that fear God, as prayer, reading the word,
conference etc. They that feared God spoke often one to another, Mal. 3. 16.

Yet even herein there is singular caution to be used. For when such private
meetings are made the anvil whereon to hammer out treason, and sedition in the
land, and the snare and bait to draw men into separation from our public
Congregations, then (whatsoever glorious gloss may be put upon them) they cease
to be such meetings wherein Christ will be present; such assemblies every good
foul ought to withdraw from, and they ought to be supprested by the civil
Magistrate. Such seditious meetings I am sure have many of those been of late
years which have been said to be religious, and in them many of our late
miseries have been first plotted and contrived.

But when Gods people do meet only for edification, and to build up themselves
in their most holy faith with prayer in the holy Ghost, and do not intermeddle
to the disadvantage of Church or Commonwealth, but pray for and seek the
general good of both (as the people of God did in these nations forty and fifty
years ago,) then such meetings are to be countenanced and frequented. And for
want of this holy private communion of Saints it comes to pass that believers
lose much comfort, cool in their love to God and his people, and rust in their
graces much more then formerly. From this private Christian communion we must
not separate.

V They that separate from the church of Christ from that particular
congregation whereof they are members, for some error which they conceive to
be therein, and gather themselves into other societies distinct therefrom, are
without doubt guilty of sinful Separation in an high degree. It is no light
thing to give a bill of divorce to the Spouse of Christ to count her for an
harlot in whose womb we have been conceived, who has brought us forth for God,
and nourished us till we were brought up, and all because she has some spots
and blemishes upon her. This course is against the Law of the divine nature,
and repugnant to the modesty of a Saint like profession. True born children
will rather endeavor to wipe off the stains that are upon their mothers face,
and lay a garment upon their shoulders and go backward, and cover her
nakedness. The Lord Jesus Christ would not cast off the church of the Jews,
though there was abundance of corruption therein, but held her as a true
church, and so did the Apostles likewise. God does and will bear much more with
us before he will cast us off, he never gives a bill of divorce to any church
till she first leave him; And we should be like unto our heavenly Father. Those
persons who take this course, to unchurch the church of Christ, do proclaim
openly to the world that they are bastards, and not sons. That is the fifth
branch of unholy Separation.

VI. Lastly. They also are guilty of this fault that separate to humane devices
in the worship and service of God, though yet they hold communion with the true
church. There are many that live in the church, of whom also we have cause to
hope that they are true members and dear to God, and yet they fail herein, are
apt to make mixtures of their own in Gods worship. Hence it is that the Lord
gives such a strict charge to the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. and else
where. What thing soever I command thee thou shall observe to do, thou shall
neither ad to it nor diminish from it. Such were the Pharisees of whom I spoke
even now, they set up their own washings and purisyings together with rhose
that were appointed in the Law of the Lord, and put more sanctity and holiness
in them then in the Lords own institutions. Of this the Evangelist speaks
Mar. 7 3 4. The Pharisees and all the Jews, except they wash their hands often,
eat not, holding the traditions of the Elders. And when they come from the
market except they wash they eat not, And many other things there be which they
have received to hold, as the washing of cups and pots, brazen vessels and of
tables. But our Savior charge them with separation for it Verse 7. 8. In
vain do they worship me teaching for doctrines the commandments of men, for
laying aside the commandment of God ye hold the traditions of men. And Verse
10. Ye reject the commandment of God that ye may keep your own traditions. When
the ceremonies and devices of men in any kind are imposed, or received into the
worship of God, so far God is slighted, his worship defiled, and a rent made in
the Church of God.

Thus have we seen that there is an unholy and unlawful Separation, and what it
is. And from these qualifications of the Doctrine, it now appears more fully
and evidently, That there is a separation that has been an old error in some
men that have pretended to be knowing and religious, even teachers in Israel.

There needs not to be much time spent in further proof of this point, you may
be pleased to observe these few particulars briefly.

1 Out own experience does sufficiently inform us of the truth of this point,
there is at this day a grievous Separation made from the church, the bitterness
of this cup we have tasted in the three nations, we find it to have infected
many Cities, Towns, and Families.

2 We have also sufficient testimony of the antiquity of this abomination; it
is not a brat of yesterdayes breeding, but it is an old error wherewith many
professors have been defiled. Let us look backward a little, and take notice
of its Pedigree.

So soon as the children of Israel were settled in a church state by Moses in
the wilderness, we find that Korah, Dathan and Abiram began this Separation, of
whom we read in the sixteenth Chapter of the book of Numbers, They were men
famous in the Congregation, and Korah was a Levite also; you may likewise
observe there, what a wonderful fair pretense of holiness they put on for the
carrying on of their schism, and rebellion, to the intent that they might draw
the people after them.

Gideon was an holy and good man, yet he also made a rent in the church of God,
insomuch as all Israel in a manner went a whoring after the Ephod which he had
made and put in his city Ophrah Judge. 8. 27.

What a schism, rene, and separation did Jeroboam the son of Nebat make from
the church of God when he drew the ten tribes to idolatry? and yet he covers
it with a fair pretense of reason and piety also, as is to be seen at large 1
King. Chap. 12.

The Apostle Paul informs us that the Corinthians were guilty of Separation
and divisions 1 Cor. 3. 3; one would be of Paul's church, another of Apolloes*
another of Cephas his church, so that they were broken into diverse parties and
factions, and yet they were very wise men, and pretended to very much holiness
also.

Jude that out lived him, is not silent concerning the separation made in his
days by those that pretended to be teachers in the church of God, as you have
heard already cleared out of the Text.

The Pelagians, Donatists, Familists and all the old heretics in the church
for diverse hundred years after Christ, were many of them learned men and laid
claim to much sanctity and holiness yet you know what sad rents and separations
they made in the church of Christ.

The Antichrist of Rome has made as great a pretense to holiness as any other;
and yet you cannot be ignorant that the schism, and separation he has made in
the church of God has been to great, that for diverse hundreds of years scarce
so much as the face of a church appeared in these Westernly parts of the world
save in some few holes and corners.

When God was pleased to dispell the darkness of popery in the days of Luiher,
and that the church of God began to flourish in Germany, behold on a sudden
there arises a deadly Separation made by the Anabaptists and their Associates
in those parts, and all was under the disguise of inspirations and revelations
from God.

And Lastly, When the work of reformation began to be set on foot among us in
these nations about the year one thousand six hundred and forty, and the minds
of the good people of the Lands were much comforted in hope of unity, and
uniformity in the worship of God in these Lands, be hold what a Separation and
Schism has been made to the retarding of that glorious work, insomuch as the
building of the temple of God has ceased for diverse years elapsed, and yet
this has been done under the pretense of holiness and the advancement of the
interest of our Lord Jesus Christ. I need say no more for proof.

Let us now proceed to the uses of the Doctrine, which are three, 1 Of
Inquisition. 2 Of Humiliation. 3 Of Exhortation.

Use 1. Of inquisition or enquiry, Whether there be any of these sinful
Separatists among us in this Common wealth, or no? But this is so obvious that
it is written with a Sun beam. Have not we multitudes among us that have
departed from our solemn Assemblies, and cast off the public Ordinances of
the Lord Jesus Christ, especially the sealing Ordinances upon a mere pretense
of non-communion with the ungodly? Nay have we not very many, both Ministers
and others that have cast off our Churches, and en bodied themselves into other
societies? None can deny this, he is blind that sees it not.

Now let us yet enquire further. What is the reason why they have so done? They
must either acknowledge our Congregations to be true Churches of Jesus Christ,
or else they must say that we are false Churches. Non datur tertium.

If they acknowledge us to be true Churches (as some of them do) then why do
they separate from us? They cannot be excused from the guilt of Schism at the
least. And do they not put themselves out of Christ's protection by their
separation? Yea verily, and they will feel it to be so at the last. If they
endeavor to excuse the matter thus, That though we be true Churches, yet we
are not pure Churches, and they desire to gather into a more pure Church way,
and therefore are not to be accused for unlawful Separation. I must answer in
four words.

1 That they have no precept or example in the whole Book of God, for going out
of a true Church upon pretense of greater purity to be found in another, and
whatsoever is not of faith is sin Romans 14. 23.

2 That we have the example of Christ to the contrary who would not separate
from the Church of the Jews though corrupted, and gather another from among
them of a more pure constitution, whilst they were to remain a Church; and they
ought to be followers of God a^ dear children, Ephesians. 5. 1.

3 That this separation (though under the pretense of greater purity to be
found else where) is a dangerous sign that they were never true members of the
church. I would not judge them, but let us hear what the Holy Ghost says by
the Apostle 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us; for
if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they
went out that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us.

4 This departure of theirs is an occasion of very grievous discommodity and
disadvantage to the church of God in general, which they ought warily to have
declined; insomuch as the blessed work of reformation is retarded by their
means; and our Savior says Mat. 18. 7. We to that man by whom the offense
comes.

If (on the other side) they shall say we are not true churches of Christ, and
that therefore they leave us; then (behold) we have (blessed be God) all the
marks and signs of a true church. We acknowledge the true and incorruptible
doctrine of the Prophets, and Apostles, and receive it as the only rule for
faith and manners; We have a continuation of the right and lawful use of the
Word and Sacraments among us; and (which is the thing that themselves make the
most essential note of a church truly instituted.) We have the sound and
sincere profession of the true faith among us. So as they can have no cause to
judge otherwise then that we are the true church of God.

What then is the cause that should make them to separate from us? Surely the
fault lies not in us because we are not the church of God, but there is
something in themselves that is amiss it will fall under one of these three
causes, I will not determine which of them.

1 Either, They are proud and high minded men, that set more price, and esteem
upon their own abilities, parts, and graces then upon their brethrens. This is
indeed the seed of Separation, when a man is puffed up with pride of spirit.
This was the fault of those that ^om^nted division in the church of Corinth,
they had an high conceit of themselves, and commended themselves and then own
abilities as the Apostle intimates 2 Cor. 10. 18. but they had ^ase thoughts
and uttered unsit speeches against Paul Verse 10. His bodily presence (say
they) is weak, and his speech contemptible; he had no good elocution. But this
is far off from that which Christ requires to be in his disciples, the first
lesson to be learned in his school is self denial Mat. 16. 24. If any man will
come after me, let him deny himself. A low esteem of self, would keep a man
safe from being a Separatist; but when pride thus pricketh a man forward, and
that he valueth his own wisdom, and learning at a higher rate then the wisdom,
prudence, and holiness of a whole national Assembly of Orthodox Divines it is
no wonder though he run upon this dangerous rock of separation.

2 Or else, Self ends and base carnal respects draw men into this gulf; they
aim at their own advantage and self interest, to make themselves great and rich
in the world. The Apostle speaks fully to this 2 Pet. 2. 1-3. where he
informs us that false teachers through covetousness do with fained words make
merchandise of professors. Such kind of trading as is there spoken of is base
among men, and abominable in the sight of God. Hope of great gifts and large
rewards makes many a man to turn Separatist. Or if they aim not at an outward
estate, yet at least a great name, fame and honor among men does entice them to
this vanity. This was it that tickled the new fangled preachers at Ephesus Acts
20. 30. They shall speak perverse things to draw away disciples after them;
they thought they should have a great company of followers if they set up new
fashions in doctrine and discipline. And have not some of the Separatists
enlarged their precincts beyond the bounds of a Lord Bishops diocese, they are
likely to watch well one over another living at such a distance. These are they
(says our Savior) that seek honor one of another, and seek not the honor
that comes of God only Joh. 5. 44.

3 Or else, they warp to separation through their own injudiciousness being
unsettled in the knowledge of the truth. It is for want of sound catechizing in
the fundamentals of religion that so many have of late been troubled with this
vertigo ^^ they have got more use of their tongues than Christians had
formerly, but they have less in their hearts than the old Christians had. If
men were well instructed in religion they would not be so easily seduced to
separation. The cause why men are deceived by such delusions, is because they
have not received the love of the truth into their souls 2 These. 2. 10, 11.
They cannot by found judgment discern between truth and error when a false
teacher comes in appearance as if he were an angel of light; this want of
judgment perverteth thousands.

Use 2. Hence there arises just ground of humiliation before the Lord this
day, in that this error of separation from the Church of Christ is so overspred
these dominions, and over this island particularly. I told you in the beginning
of my discourse that this is the Achan, the Pest of our lands, and that I would
clear that unto you; which I shall now do (but with much brevity) that so our
hearts may be the more deeply humbled in the presence of God. The abomination
of this sin of separating from the Church and Ordinances of Christ will appear
in these four particulars.

1 Separation is the most fruitful sin of many others, it is a very
comprehensive evil, the womb out of which issues many prodigious monsters. If I
should begin to show its rise and growth it may be it would prove offensive to
some here present, and it would be beside my purpose. Observe (therefore) only
its of spring; hence arise many of the heresies and abominations that are how
among us; we are pestered with Anabaptists, Seekers, Quakers, and the like
sorts of vipers, but they all began in Separation. Men first run out of the
Church and then they may be of any religion they please. Our late experience
does abundantly confirm this. And how indeed should it be otherwise, when men
forsake the true Church, what hinders but they may erect any Church that they
shall devise. The fruitfulness of it makes it the fouler sin.

2 Separation is a sin that many of Gods own people (as we do conceive in the
judgment of charity) are smutted and tainted with. And the sins of Gods
children are aggravated by many more circumstances than the sins of other men
are. Israel has sinned was that which God affirms to Joshua as a great
ground of humiliation, Chap. 7. 11. The children of God sin against greater
outward light and means of grace than others do, they sin against the inward
light of the spirit of God, they sin against greater mercies than others do,
they sin against covenants, vows, and strong resolutions. This makes their sin
of separation much the greater, and more to be lamented in the presence of God,
it is the sin his own people.

3 Separation is a greater sin by far than otherwise it would be, in this
respect, because it is maintained, countenanced and preached up as if it were
no sin at all but a duty. This kind withdrawing from Church and Ordinances is
held forth as a great gospel truth by many. Satan's temptation was the more
dangerous, and the woman's transgression the greater, when the forbidden fruit
was eaten of under the show and appearance of good Genesis 3. 5, 6. It is a great
sin to call that good that is evil in it self. God cannot abide it when men are
so stupid as to call darkness light. This also calls for mourning.

4 Separation is that leaven which leaveneth the whole lump, it is that canker
or gangren that will (if God prevent it not) eat out the heart of all goodness,
as the Apostle speaks of the doctrine of Hymeneus and Philetus 2 Timothy 2. 17.
It is indeed a dangerous sign of a carnal man, though he may be clothed in a
religious habit. The Apostle propounds this question to those that studied to
make a rent at Corinth, and to those that were led by them 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. Are
ye not carnal? As if he had said, I much suspect your grace, and doubt that you
are persons carnal, sensual, having not the spirit, because ye run thus into
separations and divisions in the Church. We have now done with the second use.

Use 3. If separation be such an old, dangerous, spreading and contaminating
evil, then here is exhortation in two branches,

I. If this be so great an evil, then (I beg) that you fly separation, and
also those that would entice you to it, take heed of being drawn from that
Church in which you have been born and brought up for God. Meddle you not with
them that are given to change their Church, It becomes us all to be of David's
mind who professes Psalm. 119. 113. I hate vain thoughts. It is in the original
more emphatical ramos, or summitates arborum. I hate to be like the upper
branches of a tree that are bowed and shaken with every wind, to be a
weathercock in religion, without ballast, changing and turning with every turn
of the times. O this is an hateful thing indeed.

Now if you would be preserved from this evil, that you may not be seduced into
separation, I shall prescribe unto you five helps, which are all laid down by
the Apostle Jude in the two verses that do succeed our Text (viz.) Verse 20.
21. But ye beloved, building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in
the holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

1 He that would be kept from separation must lay a good foundation of faith in
his heart. This is clearly hinted in these words. Building up your selves in
your most holy faith; there must first be a foundation laid before we can rear
a building* Faith is this foundation to build upon, building on your faith.
Faith in Christ Jesus will keep a man from seduction. Upon this rock (says our
Savor Mat. 16 18. viz. upon my self whom thou have now confessed.) I will
build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, neither
Satan nor seducers shall be able to lead him from the church who has true
faith fixed upon Christ, faith will conquer.

2 When you have dug deep and are come to the foundation you must build upon
it unto perfection. Building up your selves on your most holy faith. He that
would stand against wind and weather and not be shaken and rent from the
church, must be sure to build upon the foundation, and upon that only. If a
man build partly upon the foundation, and partly beside it, his building will
settle and fall; or if a man leave earth and rubish between the foundation and
the building, the fabric will come to naught. The cause why the house stood
when the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon
it, was because it was founded upon a rock, Mat. 7. 24. 25. On the otherside,
The cause why the other house stood not but fell when the rain descended, and
the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon it was because it was built
upon the sand, and not upon the foundation. Verse 26. 27. The more that a man
labors for perfection of faith, to be made complete in Christ, the more
shall he be kept from being a Separatist.

3 You must pray fervently for your perfeverance in church state, and
fellowship. Praying in the holy Ghost; that is, in the strength of the spirit
of God, by his motion and inspiration, and not with the mouth only as
hypocrites use to do; it is not lip labor that will serve the turn, but prayer
with the spirit, will keep a man from this error. There is a promise which may
be extended thus far, Act. 2. 21. It shall come to pass that whosoever shall
call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, not only from everlasting
ruin, but from forsaking, and departing from the true church. Prayer is a
notable help in this thing.

4 He that would be preserved from this evil must love God, and his truth. Keep
your selves in the love of God. He that builds upon the foundation, and
prays much shall be so kept in the love of God, and of his church and people,
that he shall not fall off to Separation.

5 Hope of heaven must be firmly rooted in the heart of him that would decline
this sinful Separation, Looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life. Hope of eternal glory will make a man carefully to avoid those
allurements that may draw him into this disorder, and so obstruct his
expectation of that everlasting rest, whereof his abiding in the church of God
upon earth is a sign or symbol. So much for the first exhortation.

II If Separation be fo old, and dangerous an error, and have so overspread
this Commonwealth, Then labor (I pray you) to recover those who are seduced
into this error. This is a great act of charity to recover a fallen Christian
from the error of his way.

How this is to be done is also declared by this our Apostle Jude in the two
and twentieth and three and twentieth verses of this Epistle And of some have
compassion making a difference: And others save with fear pulling them out of
the fire. Where we are to observe, That we must not deal with all men alike in
reducing them to soundness in the faith, but we must put a difference in our
dealing with them. Where the Apostle seems to allude to the Lords direction
given under the Law concerning the purifying of things taken or recovered in
war, Number. 31. 23. Every thing that may abide the fire ye shall make it go
through the fire, and it shall be clean; nevertheless it shall be purifyed with
the water of Separation: and all that abides not the fire ye shall make it go
through the water. They were to deal in their purification as the nature of the
thing to be purified did require. If that they took any prey that would abide
the fire as gold, silver, brass, iron, tin, or lead, that was to be purifyed
by fire; but that which was combustible and would be consumed if put into the
fire, must be purifyed by water only. So here, in reducing a seduced brother
fallen into an error, he advises to distinguish of men, to make a difference
of the temper of their spirits and to deal with them accordingly in this case.
For that severity that may be profitable to one man, may prove very
unprofitable and destructive to another, and that gentleness that may recover
one man may leave another still in his error. And therefore he advises in
both these things that which may be worth our consideration and practice in
these times of seduction and separation.

1 He directs that of some we have compassion. Those persons who are of a
meek and tractible frame of spirit should be handled gently and tenderly
although they have erred. Meek and humble spirits will soon be oppressed if any
violence be offered to them. The Apostle Paul speaks notably to this point,
Gal. 6. 1. Brethren if any man be overtaken in a fault ye which are spiritual
restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou
also be tempted. Where observe. 1 Of whom he speaks such as were fallen
through infirmity only and not wilfully which he calls an evertaking in a
fault, fallen into an error inconsiderately. 2 What is to be done in this
case. Restore such a one in the spirit of meekness (...) Restore or set him in
joint again, The phrase is borrowed from Chirurgions, who being to deal with a
broken joint will handle the same very tenderly: ^o tender must we be in
dealing with those that err through infirmity. 3 The reason the Apostle
gives, Considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. Every man, the best
Christian is subject to error; therefore be tender and compassionate to such
as are not sullen, wilful, and resolute, but have slipped only through
inadvertancy and common frailty. This is the course to be taken with meek and
humble souls that err.

2 He advises, That those which are stuborn, obstinate, and contumacious
should be more roughly handled, with greater and more earnest expression of
detestation to their errors. And others save with fear (says he,) pulling
them out of the fire. Snatch them out of the danger as firebrands out of the
fire; or as the angel did Lot and his wife, and daughters out of Sodom when
they lingered and put off, Genesis 19. 16.

It will be a singular point of prudence and piety in you who are members of
this Honorable Convention, and in all Magistrates, Ministers, and private
Christians to learn to put this difference, that so you may carry it aright
toward them that are fallen into this sinful Separation. The Lord be pleased
out of his great mercy to teach us all this lesson. Amen.

FINIS.
March the 9. 1659.
By the General Convention of Ireland.
ORdered, That Sir John Clotworthy, Doctor Jones, and Colonel Hill be and are
hereby appointed a Committee to return the thanks of this Convention to Mr.
Coxe, Mr. Charnock, Mr. Adare and Mr. Bains for their pains in carrying on the
work of this day in Christ-Church Dublin; And that Mr. Coxe, and Mr. Charnock
be desired to print their respective Sermons this day by them delivered before
the Convention.

Signed by Order, Ma. Barry Clerk of the General Convention of Ireland.

DVBLIN, Imprinted by WILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Domini, 1660.


