A LETTER FROM Mr. CRASHAW to the Countess of DENBIGH,

Sept: (...)

LONDON.

Against Irresolution and Delay in matters of RELIGION.
WHat Heav'n-besieged Heart is this
Stands Trembling at the Gate of Bliss:
Holds fast the Door, yet dares not venture
Fairly to open and to enter?
Whose Definition is, A Doubt
'Twixt Life and Death, 'twixt In and Out.
Ah! linger not, loved Soul: A slow
And late Consent was a long No.
Who grants at last, a great while try'de,
And did his best to have Deny'de.
What Magick-Bolts, what my stick Bars
Maintain the Will in these strange Wars?
What Fatal, yet fantastic, Bands
Keep the free Heart from his own Hands?
Say, lingering Fair, why comes the Birth
Of your brave Soul so slowly forth?
Plead your Pretenses, (O you strong
In weakness) why you choose so long
In Labor of your self to ly,
Not daring quite to Live nor Die.
So when the Year takes cold we see
Poor Waters their own Prisoners be:
Fettered and locked up fast they lie
In a cold self-captivity.
Th'astonish'd Nymphs their Floud's strange Fate deplore,
To find themselves their own severer Shore.
Love, that lends haste to heaviest things,
In you alone has lost his wings.
Look round and read the World's wide face,
The field of Nature or of Grace;
Where can you fix, to find Excuse
Or Pattern for the Pace you use?
Mark with what Faith Fruits answer Flowers,
And know the Call of Heaven's kind showers:
Each mindful Plant hasts to make good
The hope and promise of his Bud.
Seed-time's not all; there should be Harvest too.
Alas! and has the Year no Spring for you?
Both Winds and Waters urge their way,
And murmr if they meet a stay.
Mark how the curled Waves work and wind,
All hating to be left behind.
Each big with business thrusts the other,
And seems to say, Make haste, my Brother.
The aerie nation of neat Doves,
That draw the Chariot of chaste Loves,
Chide your delay: yea those dull things,
Whose ways have least to do with wings,
Make wings at least of their own Weight,
And by their Love control their Fate.
So lumpish Steel, untaught to move,
Learned first his Lightness by his Love.
What e're Love's matter be, he moves
By th'even wings of his own Doves,
Lives by his own Laws, and does hold
In grossest Metalls his own Gold.
All things swear friends to Fair and Good,
Yea Suitours; Man alone is wo'ed,
Tediously wo'ed, and hardly wone:
Only not slow to be undone.
As if the Bargain had been driven
So hardly betwixt Earth and Heaven;
Our God would thrive too fast, and be
Too much a gainer by it, should we
Our purchased selves too soon bestow
On him, who has not lov'dus so.
When love of Us called Him to see
If we would vouchsafe his company,
He left his Father's Court, and came
Lightly as a Lambent Flame,
Leaping upon the Hills, to be
The Humble King of You and Me.
Nor can the cares of his whole Crown
(When one poor Sigh sends for him down)
Detain him, but he leaves behind
The late wings of the lazy Wind,
Spurns the tame Laws of Time and Place,
And breaks through all ten Heavens to our embrace.
Yield to his Siege, wise Soul, and see
Your Triumph in his Victory.
Disband dull Fears, give Faith the day:
To save your Life, kill your Delay.
It Is Cowardice that keeps this Field;
And want of Courage not to Yield.
Yield then, O yield, that Love may win
The Fort at last, and let Life in.
Yield quickly, lest perhaps you prove
Death's Prey, before the Prize of Love.
This Fort of your Fair Self if it be not wone,
He is repulsed indeed, but You Are undone.
FINIS.

