COVENT GARDEN DROLERY, OR A COLECTION, Of all the Choice Songs, Poems,
Prologues, and Epilogues, (Sung and Spoken at Courts and Theaters) never in
Print before.

Written by the refined'st Wits of the Age.

And Collected by A. B.

LONDON, Printed for James Magnes near the Piazza in Russel Street, 1672.

PROLOGUE Spoken by Mrs. Boutell to the Maiden Queen.
WOmen like us (passing for men) you will cry,
Presume too much upon your Secrecy.
There Is not a fop in town but will pretend,
To know the cheat himself, or by his friend.
Then make no words on it, Gallants it is e'ne true,
We are condemned to look, and strut, like you.
Since we thus freely our hard fate confess,
Accept us these bad times in any dress.
You Will find the sweet on it, now old Pantaloons,
Will go as far, as formerly new Gowns,
And from your own cast Wigs, expect no frowns.
The Ladies we shall not so easily please.
They Will say what impudent bold things are these.
That dare provoke, yet cannot do us right,
Like men with huffing looks, that dare not fight.
But this reproach, our courage must not daunt,
The Bravest Soldier may a Weapon want,
Let Her that doubts us, still send Her Gallant.
Ladies in us, you will Youth and Beauty find,
All things but one, according to your mind.
And when your Eyes and Ears are feasted here,
Rise up and make out the short Meal elsewhere.
EPILOGUE Spoken by Mrs. Reeves to the Maiden Queen.
What think you Sirs, was it not all well enough,
Will you not grant that we can strut, and huff.
Men may be proud, but faith for ought I see,
They neither walk, nor cock, so well as we.
And for the fighting Part we may in time,
Grow up to swagger in heroic Rhyme.
For though we cannot boast of equal force,
Yet at some Weapon's men have still the worse.
Why should not then we Women act alone,
Or whence are men so necessary grown,
Our's are so old, they are as good as none
Some who have tried em if you will take their Oaths,
Sweat they are as arrant tinsell as their Clothes.
Imagine us but what we represent,
And we could e'ne, give you as good content.
Our faces, shapes, all is better than you see,
And for the rest they want as much as we!
Oh would the higher Powers be kind to us,
And grant us to set up a female house.
We Will make our selves to please both Sexes then,
To the Men Women, to the Women Men.
Here we presume, our Legs are no ill sight,
And they would give you no ill Dreams at night.
In Dream's both Sexes may their passions ease,
You make us then as civil as you please.
This would prevent the houses joining two,
At which we are as much displeased as you.
For all our Women most devoutly swear,
Each would be rather a poor Actress here,
Then to be made a Mamamouchi there.
Prologue to the Parsons Wedding, spoken by M. Marshall.
AFter so many sad complaints to us,
The painful laboring Woman of this house.
We with our Poet have prevailed again,
To give us our Revenge upon the men.
Our tricks, our jelting has been often told,
They nere were taxed for impotent, and old.
'Twas not our crime, the house so long lay still,
When e're we play not, it is against our will.
We could have acted, could but they have joined,
You know the fault lies seldom in our kind,
Poor Sinners their best parts are worn away,
And now they quarrel, when they cannot play.
'Twas somewhat better when they did agree,
'Twas old but 'twas a willing company.
Mean time till they their quarrels can atone,
You may supply their Parts now they are gone,
We hope you will not let us act alone,
The House, the Scenes, and all things are free,
While this Play lasts it is ours, and you, and we
Can join and make an abler Company.
For so much every Woman here assures,
The Profit ours, the Pleasure shall be yours.
Epilogue to the Parson's Wedding.
WHen boys played women's parts, you would think the Stage,
Was innocent in that untempting Age.
No: for your amorous Fathers then, like you,
Amongst those Boys had Playhouse Misses too:
They set those bearded Beauties on their laps,
Men gave 'em Kisses, and the Ladies Claps.
But they, poor hearts, could not supply our room;
They went but Females to the Tyring-room:
While we, in kindness to our selves, and you,
Can hold out Women to our Lodgings too.
Now, to oppose the humor of that Age,
We have this day, expelled our Men the Stage.
Why cannot we as well perform their Parts?
No, it would not take: the tender Lady's hearts
Would then their former charity give over:
The Madams in disguise would steal no more
To the young Actors Chambe^s in masked Faces,
To leave Love offerings of Points and Laces.
Nor can we Act their Parts: Alas! too soon
You Would find the cheat in the empty Pantaloon.
Well; though we are not Womens-Men, at least
We hope to have you Gallants constant Guests;
Which if you grant, and fill our house each day,
We will return your kindnesses this way:
We Will build up a new Theater to gain you,
And turn this to a House to entertain you.
A Prologue to Marriage Al la mode, by Mr. Heart.
LOrd how reformed and quiet are we grown,
Since all our Braves, and all our Wits are gone,
Fop corner now is free from civil War,
While Wig and Vizzard Masks, no longer jar.
France and the Fleet, has swept the Town so clear,
That we can Act in Peace, and you can hear;
Those that durst fight are gone to get renown,
And those that durst not, blush to stand in Town.
'Twas a sad sight, before they went from home,
To see our Warriors in Red wastcots come,
With Hair tuck't up into our tyring-Room.
But 'twas more sad, to hear their last adeiu,
The women sob'd, and swore they would be true.
And so they were as long as ere they could;
But powerful Guinnie cannot be withstood:
And they were made of Playhouse Flesh and Blood.
Fate did their Friends for double use ordain,
In Wars abroad, the grinning honor gain,
And Mistresses, for all that stay maintain.
Now they are gone, it is dead vacation here,
For neither Friends, nor Enemies appear.
Poor pensive Punck, now peeps ere Plays begin,
Sees the bare Bench, and dares not venture in.
But manages her half-Crown with care,
And trudges to the Mall, on foot for Air;
Our City Friends, so far will heardly roame,
They can take up with pleasures nearer home.
And see gay Shows, with gaudy Scenes else where,
For it is presumed they seldom come to hear:
But they have now taken up a glorious trade,
And cunning Morecraft, strut in masquerade;
Here Is all our hope, for we shall show to do,
A masquing Ball, to recommend our Play.
Nay to indear them more, and let them see,
We scorn to come behind in courtesy;
We Will follow the new Mode, which they begin,
And treat them with a Room and Couch within:
For that is one way, how ere the Play falls short,
To oblige the Town, the City, and the Court.
Epilogue by Mr. Moon.
THus have my Spouse and I informed the Nation,
And led you all the way to Reformation:
Not with dull morals, gravely writ like those,
Which Men of easy phlegm, with care compose.
Your Poets of stiff words and limber sense,
Born on the confines of indifference!
But by example drawn, I dare to say,
From most of you, who see and hear the Play.
There are more Rhodolphis in this Theater,
More Palamedes, and some few wives I fear.
But yet too far, our Poet would not run,
Though 'twas well offered, there was nothing done:
He wood not quite the Women faulty bare,
But stripped them to the waste, and left them there.
And the men's faults were less severely shown,
For he considers that himself is one;
Some stabbing wits to bloody Satyr lent,
Would fret both Sexes with less compliment.
Would lay the Scene at home, of Husband tell,
For wenches taking up their wives in the Mell;
And a brisk bout, which of them did want,
Made by mistake of Mistress and Gallant:
Our modest Author thought it was enough,
To cut you off a sample of the Stuff.
He spared my Shame, which you I Am sure would not
For you are all for driving on the Plot.
You sighed when I came in to break the sport,
And set your Teeth, when each design fell short.
To Wives and Servants all good wishes lend,
But the poor Cuckold seldom finds a Friend.
Since therefore Town, nor Court will take no pity
O humbly cast my self upon the City.
Prologue to Julius Caesar.
IN Country Beauties as we often see,
Something that takes in their simplicity.
Yet while they charm, they know not they are fair,
And take without their spreading of the snare;
Such Artless beauty lies in Shakespears wit,
'Twas well inspight of him what ere he writ.
His Excellencies came and were not sought,
His words like casual Atoms made a thought:
Drew up themselves in Rank and File, and writ,
He wondering how the Devil it were such wit.
Thus like the drunken Tinker, in his Play,
He grew a Prince, and never knew which way.
He did not know what trope or Figure meant,
But to persuade is to be eloquent,
So in this Caesar which this day you see,
Tully never spoke as he makes Anthony.
Those then that tax his Learning are too blame,
He knew the thing, but did not know the Name:
Great Johnson did that Ignorance adore,
And though he envied much, admired him more,
The faultless Johnson equally writ well,
Shakespeare made faults; but then did more excel.
One close at Guard like some old Fencer lay,
I other more open, but he showed more play.
In Imitation Iohnsons wit was shown,
Heaven made his men but Shakespeare made his own.
Wise Iohnson's talent in observing lay,
But others follies still made up his play.
He drew the like in each elaborate line,
But Shakespeare like a Master did design.
Johnson with skill dissected humane kind,
And showed their faults that they their faults might find.
But then as all Anatomists must do,
He to the meanest of mankind did go.
And took from Gibbets such as he would show.
Both are so great that he must boldly dare,
Who both of 'em does judge and both compare.
If amongst Poets one more bold there be,
The man that dare attempt in either way, is he.
The Prologue to Wit without money: being the first Play acted after the Fire.
SO shipwrack't Passengers escape to Land,
So look they, when on bare Beach they stand,
Dropping and cold; and their first fear scarce over,
Expecting Famine from a desert Shore;
From that hard Climate, we must wait for Bread,
Whence even the Natives forced by hunger fled.
Our Stage does humane chance present to view,
But never before was seen so sadly true,
You are changed to, and your pretense to see
Is but a nobler name of charity.
Your own provisions furnish out our Feasts
Whilst yon the Founders make your selves our guests.
Of all mankind besides Fate had some care,
But for poor Wit no portion did prepare,
It Is left a rentcharge to the brave and fair.
You cherish it, and now its fall yon mourn,
Which blind unmanner'd Zealots make their scorn,
Who think the Fire a judgment on the Stage,
Which spared not Temples in its furious rage.
But as our new-built City rises higher,
So from old Theaters may new aspire,
Since Fate contrives magnificence by fire.
A Prolouge to the Pilgrim.
OUr Author once was one that drove a trade,
Till pinching some odd customers (as it is said)
Shop was shut up forthwith, and from that fall
Like broken Tradesmen humbly took a stall.
And fell to Cobling, all that he has done,
Is to piece up what Fletcher had begun.
He dares make nothing new, for fear some may
Turn that to earnest which he meant a Play.
Suppose a Painter should a Story draw,
And invent postures which he never saw,
With several looks, to one you may suppose
He gives grave looks, another a great Nose.
Would you not laugh if one of gravity
Should see it, and swear by this the Rogue meant me,
Or one lead by the Nose something too high,
Should see the piece and swear, judge me that is I.
Another figure may be finely dressed,
Painted in Feathers and a gaudy Vest.
Should therefore a Gallant that weres good store,
Swear I am Painted by this Son of a whore.
This is the case, and now be judge I pray,
Whether the Poet be in fault or they.
A Poet from his fancy draws alone
They that the likeness find make it their own.
Yet let them at least not seem to know it,
But Pox 'ont, the business that they do will show it,
Yet such perhaps may justly cry to day,
Hang him, he that finds fault with us cannot mend a Play,
Then hiss him off and let him learn to be,
Wise, and grow rich, and leave off Poetry.
Prologue to Richard the third.
LOck up your doors and bring the keys to me,
From henceforth learn to value liberty.
This day we Act a Tyrant, ere you go
I fear that to your cost you will find it so.
What early have you have made to pass a Fine,
To purchase Fetters, how you crowd to join
With an Usurper, be advised by me
Never serve Usurpers, fix to Loyalty.
For you will find, at latter end ot'h day
It is your noblest and the safest way.
Who steers that course, needs fear nor wind, nor tide,
He wants no Pilott who has such a guide.
Tyrants (like childrens bubbles in the Air)
Puffed up with pride, still vanish in despair.
But lawful Monarchs are preserved by Heaven,
And it is from thence that their Commissions given.
Though giddy Fortune, for a time may frown,
And seem to eclipse the luster of a Crown.
Yet a King can with one Majestic Raye,
Dispearse those Clouds and make a glorious day.
This blessed truth we to our joy have found,
Since our great Master happily was Crowned.
So from the rage of Richards Tyranny,
Richmond himself will come and set you free.
Prologue to the double Marriage.
GAllants you have so long bin absent hence,
That you have almost cooled your diligence,
For while we studdy or revive a Play,
You like good Husbands in the Country stay.
There frugally were out your Summer Suite,
And in Frize Jerkin after Beagles Toote,
Or in Mountere Caps at field far shoot.
Nay some are so obdurate in their Sin,
That they swear never to come up again.
But all their charge of Clothes and treat Retrench,
To Gloves and Stockings for some Country Wench.
Even they who in the summer had mishaps,
Send up to Town for Physic for their Claps.
The Ladies too are as resolved as they,
And having debts unknown to them they stay.
And with the gain of Cheese and Poultry pay,
Even in their visits they from Banquets fall,
To entertain with Nuts and boule Ale.
And in discourse with secresy reports,
Stale News that past a Twelvemonth since at Courts.
Those of them, who are most refined and gay,
Now learn the Songs of a last Summers Play.
While the young Daughter does in private Mourn,
Her Loves in Town, and hopes not to return;
These Country grievances too great appear,
But cruel Ladies, we have greater here.
You come not sharp, as you were wont to Plays,
But only on the first and second Days:
This made our Poet in his visits look,
What new strange courses, for your time you took;
And to his great regret he found too soon,
Damned Beast and Umbre, spent the afternoon.
So that we cannot hope to see you here,
Before the little Network Purse be clear:
Suppose you should have luck;
Yet sitting up so late as I am told,
You Will lose in Beauty, what you win in Gold.
And what each Lady of another says,
Will make you new Lampoones, and us new Plays.
A SONG.
1.
FAre well fair Arminda, my joy and my grief,
In vain I have loved you, and hope no relief;
Undone by your virtue, too strict and severe,
Your Eyes gave me Love, and you gave me Despair,
Now called by my Honor, I seek with content,
The Fate which in pity, you would not prevent:
To languish in Love, were to find by delay,
A death that is more welcome the speedyest way,
2.
Or Seas, and in Battles, in Bullets and Fire,
The danger is less, then in hopeless desire;
My Death's-wound you gave, though far off I bear,
My fall from your sight, not to cost you a Tear.
But if the kind Flood, on a Wave should convey,
And under your Window, my Body would lay!
The wound on my breast, when you happen to see,
You I say with a sigh -- it was given by me.
The Answer.
1.
BLame not your Arminda, nor call her your grief
'Twas honor, not she, that denied you relief
Abuse not her virtue, nor call it severe,
Who Loves without honor, must meet with despair
Now prompted by pity I truly Lament,
And Mourn for your fall, which I could not prevent;
I Languish to think that your Blood should defray,
The expense of a fall, though so noble a way.
2.
In Seas, and in Battles that you did expire,
Was the effect of your Valor, not hopeless desire;
Of the Fame you acquired, I greedily hear,
And grieve when I think that it cost you so dear.
And when dismal Fate, did your Body convey,
By my window your Funeral Rites for to pay:
I sigh that your Fate, I could not reverse,
And all my kind wishes, I strew on your Hearse.
Prologue spoken by Mrs. Marshall, to Philaster.
LAte Prologues, have had so much confidence,
We did believe we had frighted you from hence.
And plainly told the Poets of this house,
Such wit would ruin both themselves and us.
But they replied we much mistook the age.
If we thought virtue, must support the Stage;
Our Bawdery will lose you here it is true,
Some civel women; and of them but few.
The most discreet amongst 'em will come still,
Good souls --
They neither near not understand, what is ill:
But what are these to Vi^^^o Masks, who come,
To appland that here, which keeps 'em fine at home^
And all the spruce Gallants will hither crowd,
To laugh at what themselves perform abroad;
They and their dear loved Misses, it is well known,
Ate much the strongest party of the Town.
And while --
Or, you; or, we; are Vicious, never fear,
To have a full, and candid Audience here;
Our Poets this, to excuse themselves did say:
And faith by your appearance here to day
We find they had reason; Confidence will not lose you.
You'are always the best pleased when we abuse you,
And that is a Courtesy; we'el nere refuse you --
Your follyes, are so obvious; and so great,
It Is much the cheapest way, Wit has to treat.
There Is no delight we give you with such ease,
Lord; why do they say the Age is hard to please.
When it will dote, on its own fooleries.
Gallants; Men need not study much to gain you,
Since telling you your faults, will entertain you.
Epilogue spoken by Mrs. Marshall to Philaster.
THough change all times, both practice and allow,
Women were never left as we are now.
We blame the Inconstant Gallants of the Age,
But yet the Pit is nothing to the Stage.
You leave us one; by one; they, all at once,
And unprovoked, our company Renounce.
We put them to no Charge, no House in the Fields,
No damask Coach, which the last Guinnie, yields.
And yet they left us; had they been like you,
We had kept them sure, till they, or we, got new.
Gallants; your Fathers with one sex made shift,
Sure out's of pleasing; has the better gift.
A bearded Princess their concern could move,
Why may not now, a beardless Prince make Love.
Nor should soft lines; for youth, and beauty meant,
Be on Men's blew, and withered faces spent.
We have all that Modesty pretends to prize,
And what we want, is hid from vulger eyes.
It is all one to us, but 'twill appear,
It Is much your cheapest way to keep us here.
A Lampoon on the Greenwich Strowlers.
1.
OH! Assist me you Powers, who have Rhimes a command
For I faith I Have a weighty business in hand sing
Of the late Greenwich Strowlers I Am now going to
But all things in order -- first, God save the King
2.
Hem; hem; now put we off to the matter,
On Easter Sunday, the Raskals took water.
Where landing at Greenwich they agreed that a shar^
Should be settled of the Sculler, instead of his fare.
3.
Then up they marched to the sign of the Bull,
Where asking for Lodging, quoth the folks we are full.
But weel see for some for you, and so with that wheedle
Ud's, lid exit's the Landlord, and enter the Beadle.
4.
With that their chief Actor begins for to bristle,
Quoth he, p'shaw waw' let the Beadle go whistle.
For I can; and he did too produce straight a Pattent,
That had the Kings Hand and Seal, and all that in it.
5.
Well this rub of fortune is over; but stay,
They call for a Reckning, there is six Pence to pay.
Now mark how damned fortune these Strowlers does cozen
They Pawn all their stock to pay the half dozen.
6.
But promising the Host that he should Tricket free,
See their Plays every day, and his whole family.
He releases them straight, and now all the rabble;
Marched up to go lie in their Playhouse -- a Stable.
7.
This fortunate stable had Faggots in it
Which served to seat all the House but the Pit,
For that was more decently spread I confess
With straw to secure 'em from horse dung and piss.
8.
Now he that sat here, had much the better place,
He broke not his neck though he wetted his Ar --
For by the ill succe^^ve disposure of the other
Folks saw, and they tumbled too, one ore another.
9.
I confess they had never a Scene at all,
They wanted no copy, they had the original,
For the windows being down, and most part of the roof,
How could they want Scenes, when they had prospect enough.
10.
Now will we suppose that Monday is come,
And the Play is proclaimed by beat of a Drum
Faith now you are supposing, let it be Tuesday morn,
For of Monday I know no more then the child unborn.
11.
Its said that they Acted not upon Monday,
Something was wanting, and so they lost one day,
They send unto London, what is lacking is gotten
And so on the next day, wy'e all things did cotton.
12.
The Prizes they took, were a Londoners groat,
A Gentleman's size, but his skipkennels pot,
The Townsmen they let in for drink and good cheer,
The School boys for peace, and the Seamen for fear.
13.
On Tuesday at three a clock I was we'e 'em,
I kissed their doorkeeper and went into see 'em,
Being entered an Actor straight brought me a stool,
He Would a held my cloak too, but I wa'nt such a fool.
14.
The first that appeared when I was come in
With her train to her ankles, was who but the Queen
She civilly made me a curtsy and straight
Retired to sit on her Fagots of state.
15.
Then in came the King with a Murtherous mind,
Against his new married Queen which when I did find;
I called him a side, and whispering in's Ear,
Desired him to fetch me a Flagon of Bear.
16.
There Is twelve pence said, I take the rest for your pains,
Your Servant said he Sir, sweet Mr. Haines.
His Majesty faith, I must needs say was civil,
For he took up his Heels, and ran for it like a Devil,
17.
Mean time I addressed my self to his Bride,
And took her into the tireing House side;
A hay loft it was which at a dead lift,
Instead of a better served then for a shift.
18.
But mark the Fate of her Civility,
The Players did rant both at her and me:
And therefore because for fear she would be lacked,
I ordered the Drummer to beat a long Act.
19.
He beat and he beat, but no Queen appeared,
He beat till at length the house was all cleared;
By my Troath a sad loss, but to make them amends*
I threw them a Crown, and we were all Friends:
And so this Renowned History ends.
SONG.
1.
Maid, CHaron Charon come away,
Bring forth thy Boat and Oar;
That I poor Maid may make no stay,
But Row me to some Shore.
2.
Charon Who cal's on Charon in such have,
As if they suffered Pain:
I carry none but pure and Chaste,
Such as true Love has Slain.
3.
Maid, Oh! carry me within thy Boat,
I Will tell thee a true Love's Tale?
With sigh's so deep, when as we float,
Shall serve us for a Gale.
4.
Charon I Come I come, sweet Soul I come,
Thy Beauty does so charm me;
Come in my Boar, take there a Room,
Nor Wind nor Rain, shall harm thee.
5.
Maid, And now I am within thy Boat,
I Will sing thee a true Love Song:
My Eyes shall shed a Sea of Waves,
To float our Boat along.
6.
Charon. But what is become of those hard hearts,
That Virgins did not pity
They live within Virginia parts
Where Pluto built his City.
A Song.
SInce we poor slavish Women know,
Like men we cannot pick and choose;
To him we like, why say we no,
And both our time and labor lose,
By our put off's, and feigned delays:
A Lovers appetite we pall,
And if too long the Youngsters stays,
His stomack's gone for good and all.
2.
Or our impatient amorous Guest,
Unknown to us away may steal;
And rather then stay for a Feast,
Take up with some course ready Meal:
When oppertunity is kind,
Let prudent women be so two,
And if the man be to her mind.
Be sure she do not let him go.
3.
The match soon made, is happiest still,
For Love has only there to do,
Let no one Marry against her will,
But stand off when her Parents woe;
And to the Suitor be not coy,
For they whom Jointure can obtain:
To let a Fop her bed enjoy,
Is but a lawful VVench for gain.
HOw many Lovers Poetry has got
No mistress by so many Rivals saught.
And sure to be so courted, she is the first,
That was so very poor and very cursed.
All her enjoyments too, is but a name,
Yet coy of that, nor safe in her own Fame.
The vain Gallants that unto Poetry,
Or women do pretend, in this agree,
Each thinks his Mistress sure, and in despite,
Though he never hopes to gain her, swears he might.
Another Damme Lover with a smile,
Cry's I could have her, were it worth the while.
Says the other, would I court this Rich ming dame,
Gad I could show the world both salt and flame,
One line should Not be high, and the other sinking,
But Iac and Tom Pox take em, keep me drinking.
Against such censurers we do declare,
Before they plead they should be called to the Bar.
To Judges places, these ought not to rise,
That for degrees have done no exercise.
For some who did pretend to the most wit,
Have not made out their claims when they have writ,
By those contentions, should not sure be saught,
When their own titles are in question brought,
Those judges he allows whose claims are clear,
For those he thinks are few and less severe.
SONG.
1.
IN few words I Will describe a Fanatic knave,
That snarles and knows not what he would have,
Pray mark but the tricks of this prick eared slave,
Which no body can deny.
2.
He Would kill his King, to preserve his cause,
Hang honest men in defense of the Law's
And this he says is a legal cause,
Which no body, etc.
3.
He flies from the scripture, and stands to the Word,
Protests the Gospel must come in by the Sword,
But that the Devil is his good Lord,
There Is no body can deny.
4.
He prays by the spirit two hours at least,
And spends in edification the rest,
With an Evil spirit he is possessed,
Which no body can deny.
5.
His Text you shall find in a States Declaration,
His doctrine is an association,
Rebellion is his application.
Which no body can deny.
6.
He bids Plunder, and tells 'em the meek must inherit
He had rather be guilty of Murder then merit,
And these he cries up for the fruits of the spirit.
Which no body, etc.
7.
He talks of the Miter, but would strike at the Crown,
And stands for the public advance and his own,
He will have smocks up, and Surplices down.
Which no body can, etc.
8.
A Church is profane and a barn does as well
Where the holy sister her wants may tell,
But verily this is a codpeice zeal,
Which no body can deny.
SONG
1.
PRide for the most part,
When we lose a Sweetheart;
Will make us dissemble and seem to disdain,
The conquest which we, can no longer maintain.
But such was my Love, and such was my Lover,
That in spite of my Pride I my Grief did discover.
2.
Though short was my Reign,
Yet I will not complain;
When Pleasure grow dull then a Lover may range,
And seek fresh delights in some happy new change.
The Devils in her that will have a poor man,
Still Love, and still Love, when he has Loved all he can.
SONG.
1.
TO her Beauty I Will pay
My devotions each day,
That all jaunty delights will me give,
Though her soul do expire,
Phenix-like in loves fire,
Yet again her enjoyments does live.
2.
With a brisk Aerie spark,
At Spring Garden or Park,
In Glass Coach or Balcony thus free,
She will vanquish all hearts,
With her Boon Mien and parts,
She Is the heaven on earth unto me.
Prologue.
HE who comes hither with design to hiss,
And with a bum reversed, to whisper Miss,
To comb a Perriwig, or to show gay clothes,
Or to vent Antique nonsense with new oaths,
Our Poet welcomes as the Muses friend,
For he will by irony each play commend.
Next these we welcome such as briskly dine,
At Locket's, at Iiffords, or with Shatiline.
Swelld with Pottage, and the Burgundian Grape,
They hither come to take a kindly napp.
In these our Poet don't conceive much harm,
For they pay well and keep out benches warm,
And though scarce half awake some Plays they dam
They do it by wholesale, not by Ounce and Dram.
But when feirce Critics get them in their clutch,
They Are crueller then the Tirannique Dutch.
And with more art, do dislocate each Scene,
Then in Amboyna they the limbs of men.
They wrack each line, and every word unknit,
As if they would find a way to cramp all Wit.
They are the terror of all adventurers here,
The very objects of their hate and fear,
And like rude Commonwealths they still are knit,
Against English Plays the Monarchy's of wit,
They invade Poetique Lisence; and still rail,
At Plays to which in duty they should veil?
Yet still they infest this coast to fish for jeasts,
To supplyment their Wits at City feasts.
Thus much for Critics: to the more generous Wit,
Our Poet Frankly, does each scene submit;
And begs your kind Alliance to engage,
Those Hogen interlopers of the Stage.
Epilogue.
OUr next new Play, if this Mode hold in vogue,
Shall be half Prologue, and half Epilogue.
The way to please you is easy if we knew't,
A jigg, a Song, a Rhyme or two will do it.
When your in the vain: and sometimes a good Play,
Strangly miscarries and is thrown away;
That this is such our Poet dares not think,
For what displeases you's, a wast of Ink:
Besides this Play was writ nine years ago,
And how times alters, Ladies you best know;
Many then, fair and courted, I dare say,
Act half as out of Fashion, as our Play.
Besides if you would consider't well, you would find,
Y' have altered since, ten thousand times, your mind;
And if your humors do so often vary,
These in our Commedy must needs miscarry?
For as you change, each Poet moves his Pen,
They take from you their Characters of Men.
The Wit they write, the Valor and the Love,
Are all but Coppies, of what you approve;
Our's followed the same rule, but does confess,
The love and humor of that season less.
And every Artist knows that Coppies fall,
For th'most part short of their Original.
A Song.
When first my free heart was surpised by desire
So soft was the Wound, and so gentle the Fire;
My sighs were so sweet, and so pleasant the smart,
I pitty'd the Slave who had never lost his heart;
He thinks himself happy, and free, but alas!
He is far from that Heaven, which Lovers possess.
In Nature was nothing, that I could compare,
With the beauty of Phillis, I thought her so fair:
A Wit so divine all her sayings did fill,
A Goddess she seemed; and I mentioned her still
With a Zeal more inflamed, and a Passion more true,
Then a Martyr in flames, for Religion can show.
More Virtues and Graces, I found in her mind,
Then Schools can invent, or the Gods e're designed;
She seemed to be mine by each glance of her Eye,
(If mortals might aim at a blessing so high)
Each day, with new favors, new hopes she did give;
But alas! what is wished, we too soon do believe.
With awful respect, while I loved and admired,
But feared to attempt, what so much I desired;
How soon were my Hopes, and my Heaven destroyed,
A Shepherd more dareing, fell on and enjoyed:
Yet, in spite of ill Fate, and the pains I endure,
I will find a new Phillis, to give me my Cure.
A SONG.
LOves dareing flight, is unconfined,
No Laws can reach his soaring Wings,
More free then Air, or pathless wind,
Or sec et thoughts formed in a youthful mind.
Above the power of the highest Kings;
The Gods (if there were any more,
Besides great Love) by him were made;
His favor they did all implore.
His Darts they all obeyed,
Their deities by his, did shine or fade.
The lasting fame bold Haeroes win,
The sacred virtues you admire;
All that the World can glory in,
By Loves assistance did at first begin.
Your beauty's raised from this Promethean fire:
Whom Love inspires, though dull before,
Becomes accomplished, wise and brave,
To conquer her he does adore.
The glories which you have,
Your Lovers passion, and their praises gave.
Then ask not how I dare aspire,
Before your sacred shrine to kneel,
And after my ambitious fire.
For were your Beauty, and your Title higher,
Love would betray the pains, you make me feel.
If you are scornful and severe,
You add new Vigor to my flame:
And make it still more bright appear:
If I possess my aim,
My happyness shall never spot your Fame.
Though I should feast my greedy Eyes,
And every minute steal a Kiss;
Taste all those joys men Idolize,
Your sum of pleasures still as high would rise.
Nor would you have one charming grace the less,
But if our wishes equal are;
In Loves Elyzium, you shall Reign,
And by our secret amorous War.
That Paradise obtain,
Which all the graver World have sought in vain.
A SONG.
1.
FAir was my Mistress, and fine as a Bride,
That is decked in her wedding attire,
Her eyes does protest, I shall not be denied,
And yet I dare hardly come nigh her,
I seemed to be sad, and she smiled,
Which I thought did a kindness betray,
Then forward I go,
But was dashed with a no,
Yet came off with a ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha
Hey, ha ha ha ha ha.
2.
Strange was she then as a politic Nun,
And I found my first courting was lost,
Her frowns put me farther then when I begun,
O see how poor Mortals are crossed,
I then made another assault,
When her kindness began to display,
And I brought her to this,
That she gave me a kiss,
And came off with a ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha,
Hey, ha ha ha ha ha.
3.
High was my courage, but more my desire,
Which fed my addresses with force,
That you could not distinguish whose eyes had most Fire.
Or who had the prettiest discourse,
Agreed we laid down and tumbled
Till both were a weary of play,
Though I spent a full share,
Yet by Cupid I swear,
I came off with a ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha,
Hey, ha ha ha ha ha ha ha.
SONG.
1.
Farewell dear Revechia my joy and my grief,
Too long I have loved you and found no releif,
Undone by your Jailer too strict and severe,
Your eyes gave me Love and he gives me despair
Now urged by your interest I seek to retire,
Far off from the cause of so hopeless a fire.
To stay near you still, were in vain to torment,
Your ears with a passion you must not content.
2.
To live in the Country with fools is less pain,
Then still to endure an unwilling disdain,
You Are the cause of my exile, and far off I Will go,
That none of my sufferings you ever may know.
But if some kind fate, you should chance to convey
And through woods where i have been your journey should lay.
Your name when you find upon every tree,
You Will say poor Alexis! 'twas written by thee.
On Calliope retiring to her Spring. Song.
1.
SAcred to Love and Harmony,
And to the Fair Calliope,
There is a Spring, by Heaven desig'nd,
To feed a Melancholy mind:
Hither, when bigg with sighs and tears,
The troubled Deity repairs,
And with those Crystal dropps the spring augments,
Pouring into the Nymph her discontents.
2.
So Nero to a Hill retired,
When Rome by his command was fired,
And on his Harp contemptuosly,
Played the sad City's Elegy;
As here, when to her conquering eyes,
Mankind's a flaming sacrifice,
Calliope insultingly retreats,
And with her Voice and Lute, her scorn repeats.
3.
Her voice the harmonious Swans admire,
And in attention half expire;
Catching the Echo of each sound,
And drunk with air, and almost drowned.
Charming Calliope! thy voice controul's.
Even the passions of our souls!
Charm me yet more, that dying, I may be
A Sacrifice, to Harmony and Thee.
Mad Tom of Bedlam.
FOrth form the Dark and Dismal Cell,
And deep abiss of Hell.
Poor Tom is come to view the World again,
To see if he can cure his distempered Brain.
Fears and Cares oppress my Soul,
And hark how the angry Furies houle.
Pluto laughs and Proserpine is glad,
To see poor Tom of Bedlam mad.
Through the world I wander night and day,
To seek my stragled senses;
In an angry mood, I met old Tom,
With his Pentarch of tences;
When me he spied,
Away he hi'd;
For time will stay for no man,
In vain with cries,
I rend the Skies,
For Pity is not common.
Cold and comfortless I lie,
Help! Oh help, for Charity.
Hark, I hear Appoll's teame:
The Carman gins to whistle,
Chaste Diana, has bent her Bow,
And the Bore begins to bristle.
Come Vulcan with Tools and with Jackles,
Come knock off these troublesome Shackles:
Bid Charles make ready his wain,
To bring me my Senses again.
Last night I heard the Dog Star bark,
Mars met with Venus in the dark;
Limping Vulcan het an Iron bar,
And furiously ran at the God of War.
Mars with his Weapon laid about,
But Limping Vulcan, had the Gout,
His broad Horns did hang so in's light,
He could not see, to aim his blow aright.
Mercury the nimble Post of Heaven,
Stood still to see the Quarrel:
Gorbellyed Bacchus Giant like,
Bestrid a great Bear Barrel.
To me he drank,
I did him thank,
But I could get no Sider,
He drank whole Butts,
And split his Gutts:
But mine were nere the wider.
Poor Tom is very dry,
A little Drink for charity;
Hark, I hear Acteous horn:
The Huntsman whoopes and hollows,
Bowman, Ringwood, Ropter, Joylen, ho, ho:
At the Chase now follows.
The man in the Moon, drinks Clarret,
Eats powdered ^^if, Turnip and Carret;
But a glass of old Malago Sack,
Will fire the Bush at his back.
Upon his Dead Mistress, represented in a Dream.
UNkind! And cruel fancy too!
Mocking my Senses to renew,
The memory of that face!
Which (Death) tyrannically took,
On purpose he might gaze, and look:
And all his empire grace.
For, as, wild sullen, fettered Beasts, do tire
Themselves by strangling; and put out their fire,
So, my unrully grief, it self had tamed,
Which now, by fresher Passion is enflamed.
2.
Were there but hopeing from the Grave,
I would to sorrow, live a Slave;
And wait for her return,
Or, stifle craftily my Breath
With sigh's; if proud, and stubborn death
Would lay me in her Urne:
But he is too fond of her, there she must stay,
Where I access want, since he guards the way.
I Will chide no more then; Fancies! use thy skill,
That I may dream such killing pleasure still.
An Epithalamium.
1.
THough so many say that chance is
Sole disposer of our lives,
That our actions and our fancies
It directs and gives us Wives,
Yet the story here Divine is,
Past the reach of mortal sense,
He Is mistaken, whose design is
To prevent a Providence.
2.
There was neither Birth nor Beauty,
Made these years Parenthesis,
Fitting accidents and duty
Did, before deny the bliss.
Since they now embrace each other,
With a just and mutual fire;
May their passions never smother,
Or their spirits fail desire.
3.
Happy be your first embraces,
So to answer both your flames,
That when either time defaces
You restored be in your names.
Prudence let your deeds contrive all,
Free from jealousy and rage,
Death alone let be your Rival,
And the challenge brought by age.
SONG
THe beams of Lovers sparkling Eyes,
Such strange misterious powers dart,
They make their object sympathize,
And feel the flames that fire their heart,
If this were true, as reason seems to prove
You cannot be insensible of Love,
2.
Fires active Element ascends
Loves passion is defined a flame,
If then my heart too high pretends
Ambition does its truth proclaim.
Love sometimes bows, though flames still upward move,
So heavenly Cinthia did Endimion love.
Love does of life and death dispose
Commands as chief in Court and Field,
Then how can I a Prince oppose
To whom the greatest Kings do yield.
SONG.
1.
HOw charming are those pleasant pains
Which the succesful Lover gains,
Oh how the longing spirit flies,
From searching sighs, on dying eyes.
Whose intermixing rays impart,
Loves welcome message to the heart.
2.
Then how the active Pulse grows warm,
To every sense gives the Alarm,
But oh the raptures and the qualmes
When Love unites the melting palms,
What ecstasies, what hopes and fears,
What pretty talk, and Amourous tears.
3.
To these a thousand Vows succeed,
Oh then oh Heavens the secret deed;
When Sense and Soul are bathed in bliss,
Think dear Arminda, think on this.
And curse those hours we did not prove,
The ravishing delights of Love.
CATCH.
JAck drink away,
Thou have lost a whole minute,
Hang Wenches and Play.
There Is no pleasure in it;
Faith take the other glass,
Though the Nights old and gray,
We may all have a pass,
To the Grave before Day.
And in the cold forsaken Grave,
There Is no drink Jack, no drink,
No wine nor women, can we have:
No company but Worms that stinck.
Then name thy own health, and begin it.
SONG.
1.
CAlina you see
How from Court the new fashion,
Has Conquered the Nation
All Lovers must be,
None but Phanaticks oppose the invasion
Then pray why should we.
2.
Hang conscience and fear,
I am secret and Loyal,
No envious espyal
Shall frighten my Dear.
That blush was so sweet, I can take no denial
Nor longer forbear.
3.
Nay strive not in vain,
I Will overcome thee with kisses,
Such pleasure as this is,
Would make love again.
Despise his high state, to partake of our blisses
Then who can abstain.
4.
O these are the sweets,
Which none can discover
But the secret Lover
Great Coesar never meets
A joy more sublime, though he is first mover
To Love he submits.
SONG.
IN vain my dear Muse, you coyly refuse,
What Nature and Love do inspire,
That formal old way, which your mother did use,
Can never confine the desire
It rather adds Oil to the fire.
2.
When the tempting delights of Wooing are lost
And pleasures a duty become,
We both shall appear, like some dead Lovers Ghost,
To frighten each other from home,
And the genial bed like a Tomb.
3.
Now low at your feet, your fond Lover will lie
And seek a new fate in your eyes,
One amorous smile, will exalt him so high
He can all but Aminda despise,
Then change to a frown and he dies.
4.
To love, and each other we will ever be true,
But to raise our enjoyments by Art,
We Will often fall out, and often renew:
For to wound, and to cure the smart,
Is the pleasure which captives the Heart.
SONG.
GIve over foolish heart, and make have to despair,
For Daphne regards not thy vows nor thy prayers.
When I plead for thy passion, thy pains to prolong,
She Courts her Gyttar, and replies with a Song.
No more shall true Lovers, thy Beauty adore,
Were the Gods so severe, men would Worship no more.
2.
No more will I wait like a Slave at the door,
I Will spend the cold Nights, at thy windore no more.
My Lungs in long sighs, no more I Will exhale,
Since thy Pride is to make me grow sullen and pale.
No more shall Amyntas thy Pity implore,
Were the Gods ingrate men would Worship no more.
3.
No more shall thy frowns or free humor persuade,
To court the fair Idol my fancy has made;
When thy Saints so neglected their follies give over,
Thy dieties lost, and thy beauties no more.
No more -- etc.
4.
How weak are the Vows of a Lover in pain,
When flater'd by hope, or oppressed by disdain.
No sooner my Daphnes bright eyes I review,
But all is forgot, and I vow all a new:
No more cruel Nymph, I will murmer no more,
Did the gods seem so fair, men would Worship them more.
A SONG.
With so much ease ungrateful Swains,
Your faithless Vows have cured your pains.
You think by those, your perjuries betrayed,
That all are false* or else may so be made;
And every smile of pleasing word proclaims,
The coldest Nymph, an offering to your flames.
2.
Vain Shepherd know, that now is the time,
To suffer for thy boasted Crime:
Repeated Vows with me less credit find,
Then smiling Seas, or the uncertain Wind.
Deep Sigh's and frequent Tears, as things of course,
So common are, that they have lost their force.
3.
Thy passions Truth will best appear,
Disguised in doubts, and guilty fear!
when all the heart and careful Tongue conceal,
The sense disordered, and the eyes reveal.
Such dark confusion makes the Flame shine bright,
So Stars are best discerned through shades of night.
4.
One stolen look, can better woe,
Then Sighs, and Tears, and Vows, can do.
The falsest tears, like empty vessels sound,
But may thy feigned become a real wound;
That thy severer penance may declare,
How great men's crimes, and women's virtues are.
A Poem.
FAirest Clariza, when you read,
This rudness of my mornings Muse,
My Pardon let my Passion plead.
But how can Guilt a Crime excuse:
Then to your goodness only, I appeal,
The Wounds your Justice makes, let Pity heal.
I court Occasion but in vain,
My restless passion to relate,
From your entrancing Lips to gain;
The knowledge of my doubtful Fate.
You are my sacred Oracle, from whom,
The sentence of my Life, or Death, must come.
Prophetic influence of Stars,
Henceforth I will no longer prize,
Nor search the fate of Peace or Wars,
But in your more resplendant Eyes.
If you but smile, Fate cannot cast me down,
So highest joys will vanish when you frown.
Nature wants Language to impart,
The real Paradise of bliss,
With which your smiles possess my heart:
If there be Heaven on Earth, it is this.
If I had all man's boundless wish, would have,
I Would slight whole Empires, to become your Slave.
How tedious six short Suns appear,
Which vail your beauty from my sight,
Each flying minute seems a year.
An Age is shorter then a Night,
But when dull time, the long wished day has brought,
The treacherous hours, out fly the swiftest thought.
Impatience never revealed my Love,
To silent Screams or whispering Air,
I trust no melancholy Grove:
With Echoes of my sad despair.
Friendship and Duty lose their interest here,
To none -- but you, my passion shall appear.
All human actions must obey,
The sure decrees of powerful Fate,
From their prescriptions none can stray;
Nor of themselves or love, or hate.
We must, or must not, it is designed above,
Perhaps my fate must be, to dye for Love.
On his Mistress going from home. SONG.
1.
SO does the Sun withdraw his Beams,
From off the Northern coasts and streams*
Whence Clouds and Frosts ensue,
And leaves the melancholy Slaves
Stupid and dull, as near their Graves.
Till he their joys renew;
Those that in Green land, followed game,
Too long, and sound when back they came.
Their shipping gone, believed they must dye,
Ere Succor came, but yet more blessed then I.
2.
How Soon our happyness does fly,
Like Sounds, which with their Echoes dye.
And leave us in a Trance,
Bewailing we had ere enjoyed,
The blessing, since it is still destroyed.
By some unhappy chance,
Why should the spightful stars agree,
To vex and mock mortality.
For thus like Traitors which in darkness lie
We Are only brought into the light to dye.
3.
In dreams things are not as they seem,
Elce, what is fruition but a dream,
When the possessions past
Alas! to say, we were, we had,
Is poor content and even as bad
As if w' had never had taste.
Fire in great Frosts, small time possessed
Produces pain instead of rest.
So does the short enjoyment of such bliss
And till restored, continual torment is,
SONG.
THose tricks and bows
And amorous vows,
I defy and never will need 'em
For he that is taken with Puppet shows
Never new the price of freedom.
2.
I defy the thoughts of loving
Approving
It Is a crime
For my fancies always moving
To the vain expense of time.
3.
All the wisest count it folly,
Nor shall I
Be so mad,
To ruled by Melancholy,
Or any effect as bad.
But I Will have my mind,
Still unconfined
And my thoughts as free as fire,
My humor still rove with the wind,
And never know Lovers care,
SONG
.1
SInce it is now become a fashion,
To court all with equal passion
And admires now do prove,
There is as well in love
As in blood, a circulation.
2.
I Am resolved to stand the sally,
Of the sutlest Lovers volley,
And when his vows are out,
To let him move about,
To his other Kate or Molley.
3.
Though I can allow his courting,
For my present fancies sporting,
Yet I never will admit
A Passion, Love or wit
Without some years supporting.
4.
If his humor sympathizes,
With the same that mine advises,
Be he pleasant as he will,
I Will answer it but still
Keep a guard against surprises.
A SONG.
1.
Whilst Alixis lay pressed
In her arms he loved best,
With his hands round her Neck,
And his head on her breast.
He found the fierce pleasure too hasty to stay,
And his soul in the tempest just flying away.
2.
When Coelia saw this,
With a sigh and a kiss,
She cr'yd, oh my dear, I am robbed of my bliss;
It Is unkind to your love, and unfaithfully done
To leave me behind you, and dye all alone.
3.
The youth though in have,
And breathing his last,
In pity died slowly, whilst she dyed more fast;
Till at length she cried, now my dear, now let us go,
Now dye my Alixis, and I will dye too.
4.
Thus in tranc'd they did lie,
Till Alixis did try,
To recover new breath that again he might dye,
Then often they did; but the more they did so,
The Nymph did more quick, and the shepherd more flow.
A SONG.
HAng the trade of versifying,
It Is lying.
But in tune,
For some will be denying,
That a Rose is fresh in June.
2.
Besides the brother Poets,
Or show Wits,
Are some firce,
That one can pretend to no wit;
Without the exchange of a Verse.
3.
They aim at praise,
And write for the Bays:
Yet all they mention's, a story,
And old Ben himself in the best of his days,
Never knew such a thing as Glory.
4.
To make up their Rhimes,
They Will change our times,
And make what is old seem new,
They Will tell you a tale, in a moddle of Chimes.
But the Devil a bit it is true
To his Mistress with a pair of Turtles.
DO happy Birds my Suit renew,
Let her perceive that I like you,
Excel in constancy,
But you each other do possess,
Mine Is an inferior happiness,
She pays no love to me.
My constancy may greater then be thought,
Since I to love a cruel Nymph, am taught.
You do but pay each others Love with Love:
But I by loving scorn, do kinder prove,
If then more love then you I boast,
Why should I more in love be crossed.
Or not with hers be blessed,
It is the height of my desire,
That I might but perceive my fire
Had warmed my Coelia's Breast.
Oh could you speak, you certainly would prove,
That 'twere but justice to give love for love;
Which though I cannot expect, I Will outvie
You Turtle Doves, in matchless constancy.
A rural Dance at a Shrop shire Wake.
Well met Joan; let us have to the Wake,
For our honor lies at Stake.
Did thou see Tom, when he went to the Green,
In gay clothes, as ere were seen.
With Nan and Doll
Kate and Moll,
Lads and Lasses that are brave Dancers,
Will and Dick
Hodge and Nick;
All these are the next advancers.
Trust me Joan thou dancest best,
And art fairer then the rest:
Thou shall now the Garland wear,
Else I Will nere be seen at Fair.
There be stree
And to thee
I will plight my faith to love she,
Say then Joan
Shall my moan
Or Vows have power to move thee.
Grant me that I Will sigh and vow,
Till thou say I Will love thee now.
I Will give thee Ale and sugar Cakes,
And carry thee to all our wakes.
Pipeing Will
Singing Sill,
Shall be summoned, to our Wedding.
Andrew Tit
Wat and Kitt,
Shall eat Posset at our Bedding.
Now Joan, I find to my content,
That thy silence gives consent;
Let us married be to day,
For I can no longer stay,
Pris and Hodge
James and Madge,
Come a long to this our Feasting,
Smile not Joan
You Are to blame,
For you will find it is no jeasting.
To his Mistress grown common. A SONG.
What Empire (Coelia) equaled mine,
When I alone reigned ore all thine;
When all thy glories did as aptly wait,
On my Devotion, as my heart would have it
When both thy heart and eyes,
All other objects did despise.
And like a sacred Votaress did make,
Me thy dear Saint, and hence thy Bliss did take.
Then in what pride I lived, to know that thee,
Whom the world adored, were ruled by me.
.2
But now like Foreigners, thine Eyes,
Do gaze on all, to take a Prize.
That beauty which once centered upon me,
Is now diffused, and like the Sun, shine free.
My vows and tears pass by,
Yet know vain Coelia! that I
Can quietly into my self retire,
Without the danger of a second fire:
And scorn thy partial Love, it is seldom known,
A Prince admits a sharer to his Throne.
To his Mistress in Love with another. SONG.
DIsdainful Chlona, can thou despise
That flame which had its rise
From thy fair Eyes;
Or which is crueller
Can thou to mine prefer,
Another dull flame.
Will thou dispense thy love or hate,
Unequally, like partial Fate.
Who, though it be most rigorous to some,
For others yet reserves a milder Doom.
2.
If loving most, may from you most obtain,
Consider with what pain.
And envious care
I often have beheld,
What you did my Rival yield,
Keeping my fire
Oh if you partially proceed,
Think, how you make your Offspring bleed;
When natures dictates, do the Mother bind,
Equally to her Children to be kind.
To his formerly scornful Mistress, though now kind, as applying himself to his
Study.
NO proud Insultress, know my love,
Is now fixed rightly far above
The reach of fortunes frown or thine
Nor may thou hope 'twill ere decline:
On thee again,
Here 'twill remain.
Secure from folly to reward,
With like contempt this disreguard:
For here as on Olimpus placed, I spy
The giddy World mislead by foolery.
2.
My love, this will never dye,
Since here I have variety:
Then hope not it will so debase,
It self to dote upon thy face,
It was thine hate
That did create.
To me this happyness, and so
Thy form at first did prove my foe;
For gazeing like an harmless Forreigner,
On thy bewitching features, I did err.
3.
But to my self, returned thy pride,
Deservedly, I do deride.
And seated here I do defy,
The wanton glaunces of thine Eye,
Then mourn and chide,
The excess of pride.
That made thee lose that heart which now,
With all thy Arts thou cans't not bow;
Since now with more delight I daily prove
The pleasures of revenge, then those of love.
A SONG.
CLoris I burn behold and view,
And cool me with a sigh from you;
I Fry in flames and still Consume,
Although the Pill be all Perfume.
2.
To be in Oil of Roses drowned
Or Water, where is the difference found,
Both bring one death, and death will be,
Unwelcome any way to me.
3.
Then gentle Maid some pity show,
Distroy not him, that loves you so:
A lass I call, but ah, I see
There is no hope in store for me.
SONG.
SO closly, closly pressed,
In his Clymena's Arms young Damon lay,
Panting in that transport so over blessed:
He seemed just ready, just to dye away:
Clymena beheld him with amourous Eyes,
And thus betwixt sighing and kising she cries.
Oh make not such have to begone,
It Is too much unkind,
While I stay behind*
For you to be dying alone.
2.
This made the youth now drawing to his end,
The happy moment of his death suspend:
But with so great a pain,
His flying Soul he did retain;
That with himself he seemed at strife,
Whether to let out Love, or keep in Life.
Then she who already was hasting to Death,
Said softly, and trembleing, and all out of breath:
Oh! now my dear let us go,
Dye with me Damon, for now I dye too;
Thus dyed they but 'twas, of so secret a death,
That so to dye again, they took new breath.
SONG.
AWay with this legal Fruition,
The penance of Phlegmatic love,
Devised by some old Politician:
Whose sinews, no longer could move.
Since wenching is modest, and beauties is common
Why should we wed the defects of a woman.
2.
The Husband has all the vexation,
The quarrels and care of the Sheets,
Fair Perriwigs and Fops, in'th Fashion;
For nothing enjoy all the sweets.
Since, etc.
3.
If the Wife has wit, beauty or portion,
Fine clothes and Gallants must be had,
She follows the Court for Promotion!
And high for the new Masquerade.
Since, etc.
4.
When the Chaos was made a Creation,
And all things in order did move,
The wisest in every nation
Went into all they did love.
Since, etc.
5.
Each bout is a feast of new pleasure,
To those that may any where feed,
The Bees have all natures sweet treasure
But Drones are confined to a weed.
Since wenching is modish and beauties is common
Why should we wed the defects of a woman.
The Willow-wearing Lovers disconsolate Complaint.
1.
When first I beheld my fair Philomels face,
She appeared like an Angel to me,
But ^hen her dear love
She vouchsaf't me to prove,
I was blessed with what mankind could be.
2.
She has toy'd and has talked, when abroad we have walked
And at home all delights have expressed
Her discourse and her parts,
Would have ravished all hearts
That ever with her had conversed.
3.
When we were alone, then I gazed on her face,
And the more I did gaze I admired
No words I could speak,
Least my heart it should break
But with sigh's it told what I desired.
4.
Her frown's would sometimes put me into despair,
But her smiles did create me new bliss,
Though my death had me seized,
Yet if she were but pleased:
She could give me new life with a kiss.
5.
In fine all perfections that ever were seen,
(In all beauties,) in her did abound,
With Loves sweets most divine,
Did my Philomell shine;
Oh! her Parrallel's not to be found.
6.
But mark what false fortune unto me has done,
My delights were too great long to stay,
For those sweets which she swear,
Should increase ever more:
In one moment all vanished away.
7.
For her faith she has broak; and denies me those joys
Which in freedom, I often have possessed,
By her scorn's I Am betrayed,
And alas I am made;
The most wretched who was the most blessed.
8.
With melancholy sighs I am tormented each day,
My discontents, hourly increase,
My mind is perplexed,
And my heart sore oppressed!
And my soul will never be at peace.
9.
Therefore oh you gods, I am firmly resolved,
Your power shall not my passion control,
I Will dye for her sake,
And in death I make;
A Love offering to her of my Soul.
Prologue To the Knight of the burning Pestle.
IF any here have ancient Records seen,
Of Amadis, or doughty Palmerin,
Of Squire, and Dwarf, and of enchanted wood,
And taken true delight in Giants blood.
Such we invite with confidence, to laugh
At the stout Acts and Monuments of Ra'ph;
Of Ralph, who humbly does each Lady greet,
And lays his Burning Pestle at her feet.
This to the Learned; it does now remain,
We descend upward to the vulgar swain;
And gravely tell him, that our Fletchers wit,
Has here burlesqu'd all he himself had writ.
Burlesqu'd, that is has turned to ridicule,
As one would say, has wisely played the fool.
Mock-love, Mock passion, that is still to say,
He, as it were, has farcifi'd a Play.
This, Gallants, is that Play, which for your sake,
We now revive, and doubt not it will take.
For in our virtuous Age,
Not only every wit, Lampoons his brother,
But men are all burlosque to one another.
In Burgundy and Mant, the great ones rail.
But then blind sides are found in Mum and Ale.
Therefore laugh on, and rally all you can,
For there is no fop like to your absent man:
The world will laugh at all you do or say,
Then laugh you, for a clubs an equal lay,
As good fall on, since you are sure to pay.
Epilogue.
THe Prologue durst not tell, before 'twas seen,
The Plot we had to swinge the Maiden Queen,
For had we, then, discovered our intent,
The Fop, who writ it, had not given consent.
Or the new peaching trick at least had shown,
And brought in others faults to hide his own.
That wit he has been by his betters taught,
When he is accused to show another's fault,
When one wit's hunted hard, by joint consent
Another claps betwixt and does prevent,
His death; for many Hares still foyl the scent.
Thus our poor Poet would have escaped to day,
But from the heard I singled out his Play.
Then Heigh along with me --
Both great and small you Poets of the Town,
And Nell will love you, or to run him down.
Prologue to Horace, spoken by the Duchess of Munmouth, at Court.
When Honor flourished ere for price 'twas sold'
When Rome was poor, and undebauch'd with gold,
That virtue which should to the world give law
First under Kings, its Infant breath did draw:
And Horace, who, his Sovereigns Champion fought
Its first example to republiques taught.
Honor and Love, the Poets dear delight,
The field in which, all Modern Muses fight;
Where gravely Rhyme, debates what is just and f
And seeming contradictions pass for wit.
Here in their native purity first grew,
E're they the Adulterate arts of Stages knew.
This Martial story, which through France did come,
And there was wrought in great Corneliu's Toom.
Orinda's matchless Muse to Britain brought,
And Foreign Verse, our English Accents taught;
So soft that to our shame we understand,
They could not fall, but from a Ladies hand.
Thus while a Woman, Horace did translate,
Horace did rise above a Roman Fate.
And by our Ladies he mounts higher yet,
While he is spoke above, what he is writ.
But his tryumphant Honors, are to come
When, mighty Prince, he must receive your Doom;
From all besides our Actors have no fear,
Censure, and Wit, are beauties Vassals here:
And should they with Rebellion, tempt their rage,
Our Basilisks, could shout 'em from the Stage!
But that their Fate, would be two great to dye,
By bright Sabina's, or Camilla's Eye.
SONG.
SInce Cloris you my passion know,
And every look my Love does show;
Since Intrest, which so long did Sway,
To your soft Rule, at last gives way.
A Slave to all the motions of your will,
Why would you have me Pine and Languish still.
I know you cannot love to see,
The many pains that torture me:
When at your Feet my self I lay,
You always turn your Eyes away.
Beauty a softness from its nature takes,
Which cannot look upon the Wounds it makes.
In scorn you can no pleasure find,
For constant Love perverts your mind:
Nor do you think, while thus to one,
You give your charming self alone.
Much of your youth and beauty needs must wast,
For there is no one can half their sweetness taste.
When you hereafter wiser grow,
And further joys in Love shall know;
With what regret will you repent,
The time you have in unkindness spent!
Trust me, a thousand times you will wish in vain,
To call those slighted Minutes, back again.
Prologue to a revived Play.
OLd Plays, like Mistresses, long since enjoyed,
Long after please, whom they before had cloyed.
For fancy schews the Cudd on past delight,
And cheats it self to a new appetite.
But then this second fit comes not so strong,
Like second Agues, neither fierce nor long;
What you have known before, grows sooner stale,
And less provokes you, then an untold tale.
That but refreshes what before you knew,
But this discovers something which is new:
Hence it is, that at new Plays you come so soon.
Like Bride-grooms, hott to go to bed ere noone!
Or, if you are detaind some little space,
The stinking Footman's, sent to keep your place.
But, when a Play's revived, you stay and dine,
And drink till three, and then come dropping in;
As Husband after absence, wait all day,
And desently for Spowse, till bed time stay!
So, ere the brethren's liberal fit was spent,
The first wise Nonconformist, under went
With ease, and battend in imprisoment.
For greater gains his zeal refused the less,
Each day to him was worth a Diocese.
But he who now in hopes of equal gain,
Will needs be Prisoner, tryes the trick in vain,
He melts in durance half his Grease away,
To get, like us, poor twenty Pounds a day.
To my friend, Master Tho. St. Serf.
BEfore we saw thy Play, dear Tom, we thought,
No Scottish Merchandise, was worth the fraught.
But we will trust thy Countrymen no more,
For you, we see, grow rich, as we grow poor:
You get the Bays, while we get only Mocks,
As you got Prizes, while we got but Knocks.
We thought none Plays, but what were English made,
That wit like Wool had been our staple trade;
But thou have found the trick, (as others do,)
Us with our own materials to undo.
Henceforth we will have a privy search decreed,
For every errant Muse* that passes Tweed:
A file of Covenanters, shall stop thee there,
And search thy Pack, for Anti kirkall ware.
Once, like a Peddler, they have heard thee brag,
How thou did cheat their sight, and save thy crag;
When to the great Montross, under pretense
O^ godly bakes, thou broughtst intelligence.
But, hear ye, as a friend, let me advise,
Trust not too far, that national disguise.
If thou art caught no wit Grotisque can bribe em,
They Will never spare a man, that so can gibe em:
Nor is it the interest, of us English Poets,
To suffer any but our selves to grow wits;
To show great Nature in Heroique story,
Or in the Comique, Power, and Flame, and Glory*
Once and a way, we let you make us merry,
With the rare virtues, of the Coffee Berry;
But shall grow jealous of your Muse, and hate her,
When we are hectored on our own Threater.
And if a second time, you tread our Stage,
We, with the Kirk against you must engage:
As two weak States, when they have struggled long,
Unite against a third, that grows too strong.
Epilogue, spoken by the Lady Mary Mordont, before the King and Queen, at
Court, to the faithful Shepheardess.
When Princes in distress, would peace implore,
They first take care to chose th'Ambassadour.
And think him fittest for a charge so great,
Who best can please that King with whom they treat*
Our Play they threatened with a tragique Fate,
I, Sir, am chose for this affair of State.
And, hope, what ever errors we confess,
You Will pardon to the young Ambassadress.
If not though now these little Ladies are,
In no condition, to maintain a War:
Their beauties will in time grow up so strong,
That on your Court, they may revenge the wrong.
Prologue to Alburnazar.
TO say this Commedy pleased long a go,
Is not enough to make it pass you now:
Yet gentlemen your Ancestors had wit,
When few men censurd, and fewer writ.
And Johnson, of those few, the best chose this,
And the best model of his master piece;
Subtle was got by our Albumazar,
That Alchamist by this Astrologer.
Here he was fashioned, and I should suppose,
He likes my fashion well, that wears my Clothes.
But Ben made nobly his, what he did mould,
What was anothere's Lead, became his Gold;
Like an unrighteous Conqueror he raigns,
Yet rules that well, which he unjustly gains.
But this our age such Authors does afford,
As make whole Plays, and yet scarce write a word:
Who in this Anarchy of wit, rob all,
And what is their Plunder, their Possession call.
Who like bold Padders scorn by night to prey,
But Rob by Sunshine, in the face of day;
Who scarce the common Ceremony use,
Of stand, Sir, and deliver up your Muse.
But knock the Poet down; and, with a grace,
Mount Pegasas before the owners Face.
Faith if you have such Country Toms, abroad,
It Is time for all true men to leave that Road.
Yet it were modest, could it but be sed,
They stripped the living, but they rob the dead:
'Twill with the mummey of the Muses Play,
And make love to 'em, the Egyptian, way.
Or as a Rhyming Author would have sed,
Join the dead living, to the living dead.
Yet such in Poetry may claim some part,
They have the License, though they want the Art.
Such as in Sparta weight for Laurels stand,
Poets, not of the head, but of the hand;
They make their benefit of others studying,
Much like the meals of Politic, Jack Pudding:
Where Broth to claim, there is no one has the courage,
It Is all his own, after he has spit in the Porredge.
But Gentlemen, you are all concernd in this,
You are in fault for what they do a miss:
For they their thefts will undiscovered think,
And durst not steal unless you please to winck.
Now should we Letters of reprizall seal,
These men write that, which no man else would steal,
A SONG.
UPon yon pleasing plain,
Alexis thought, fair Cloris heart to gain;
And therefore he unto her every day,
Did sing, and on his Pipe would sweetly play:
Most pleasing Tunes to give delight,
Unto this beauteous Nymph so bright,
She that had wounded him with her fair sight.
2.
But the obdurate Maid,
Naught but unkindness to his sufferings paid;
For when of love, he unto her did speak,
And's passion sighed as if his heart would break.
Nothing prevailed 'twas all in vain,
She slew from him in proud disdain,
And left Alexis, sadly to complain.
3.
Then to the neigbouring Grove,
Poor Swain he went, and there his hopeless Love.
Alone he mourned, and in that gloomey shade,
Did grieve that he her hate and scorn was made;
With pensive Looks and Arms a cross,
In Tears he did lament her loss,
To whom all beauties in the world are Dross.
4.
Perplexed a while he sat,
Upon the Ground, complaining of his Fate:
Against a Tree, he gently laid his head*
In hope to sleep, but rest from him was fled.
He then start up, and once more went,
To her who caused his discontent,
To try if she would yet his Death prevent.
5.
Hard hearted Maid, said he,
Why do thou hate him, that so doats on thee
My flock's I Have brought, to feed with thine all day,
And we the while in harmless sports did play.
But when my love I did make known,
Then all my hopes too soon were gone,
A lass, you left me to lament alone.
3.
Cruel, but yet most fair,
Once more hear him whom you have made despair.
Will your severity never daign to give,
One kind return of Love, and let me Live:
Here at your Feet behold I lie,
And here by Heaven I vow to dye,
If you my passion still with hate deny.
7.
But all his plaints were vain,
She proudly scornd, to ease him of his pain;
Which when he saw nor Tears nor Prayers could mo
Her heart with Pity, ere to yield him Love.
He sighed much more and naught could speak,
But Cloris with a voice so weak,
That as he called on her, his heart did break.
8.
When Cloris saw him dead,
She stood a mazed, her frighted spirits fled:
Over him she wept, and weeping she did say,
Stay dear Alexis, Cloris bids thee stay.
Then fetched a sigh, and faintly cried,
Alexis, I will be thy Bride,
And as she spoke these words, fair Cloris died.
A SONG.
I Led my Silvia to a Grove,
Where all the Boughs did shade us,
The Sun it self, though it had strove,
It could not have betrayed us;
The place securd from humane eyes,
No other fear alows,
But when the winds do gently rise:
And kiss the yielding Boughs.
Down there we sat upon the Moss,
And did begin to play,
A thousand wanton tricks to pass,
The heat of all the day.
A many kisses I did give,
And she returned the same,
Which made her willing to receive:
That which I dare not name.
My greedy eyes no ayds required,
To tell their Amorous Tale,
On her that was already fired;
'Twas easy to prevail.
I did but kiss and claspe her round,
Whose they my thoughts expressed,
And laid her gently on the ground:
Oh! who can guess the rest.
A Song to a Scottish tune.
COme my Phillis, let us improve,
Both our joy of equal love,
Whilst we in younder shady Grove.
Count Minutes by our kisses.
See the flowers how sweetly they spread,
And each displayes his colored head,
To make for us a fragrant Bed.
To practice ore new blisses;
The Sun it self with love does conspire,
And sends abroad his Ardent fire,
And kindly seems to bid us retire.
And shade us from his Glory;
Then fairest come and do not fear,
All that your Slave desires there,
Is Phillis, what you love to hear
Him say; that he does adore you.
2.
Ah! Phillis, if you love me so,
As you persuaded me long a go,
Why should you now refuse to do,
What you so often have vowed me;
Did I ere your bounty abuse,
Or your our severest Commands refuse,
Nay rather chose to Languish then to lose.
The perfect respect I owed you,
Yet Phillis, some reward is due,
To him who daily does renew.
The passion which he has for you,
Is a faithful Lover,
Then come my dearest be not shy,
Thou know my heart, and my secrecy
Wait not this oppertunitie,
When none can our joys, discover.
3.
Phillis, in vain you shed these tears,
Why do you blush, which speak your fears,
There Is none but your Amyntas hears,
What means this pretty passion
Can you fear your fancies will cloy,
Those that the blessings do enjoy,
Oh, no such needless fears destroy.
This niceties out of Fashion,
When thou have don by Pan I swear,
Thou will unto mine eyes appear,
A thousand times more charming and fair,
Then thou weart to my first desire.
That smile was kind: and now you are wise,
To throw away that coy disguise:
And by the vegor of thy eyes,
Declare thy youth and fire.
Song to a Schotish tune.
When Iemmy, first began to Love,
He was the finest Swain:
That ever yet a flock had dorve,
Or danced upon the Plain:
'Twas yea that I, way's me poor heart,
My freedom threw a way,
And finding sweets in every smart;
I coud not say him nay.
And ever when he spoke of Love,
He would his eyes decline.
And every sigh, would take a heart,
Gued faith and why not mine:
He Would press my Hand, and kiss it often,
His silence spoke his flame,
And whilst he treated me thus soft:
I wished him more to blame.
Sometimes to feed my flocks with him,
My Iemmy would invite me,
There he the gayest Songs, would sing;
On purpose to delight me.
And Iemmy every grace displeased,
Which were enough I trow,
To conquer any princely Maid,
So did he me I vow.
But now for Iemmy must I mourn,
Who to the Wars must go,
His sheephook to a sword must turn;
A! lass what shall I do.
His Bag-pipe into warr-like sounds,
Must now exchanged be,
Instead of Garlands, fearful Wounds;
Then what becomes of me.
Damon being asked a reason for Loveing.
PHillis, you ask me why I do pursue,
And Court no other Nymph but you;
And why with eyes, and sighs, I do betray,
A passion which I dare not say:
His cause I love, and if you ask me why,
With women's answers, I must make reply.
You ask what Arguments I have to prove,
That my unrest proceeds from Love.
You Will not believe my passion till I show,
A better reason why it is so;
Then Phillis let this reason serve for one,
I know I love, because my reasons gone.
You say a love like mine must needs declare,
The object so beloved, not fair;
That neither wit nor beauty in her dwell,
Whose lover can no reason tell:
Why it is he does adore, or why he burns;
Phillis, let them give such that have returns.
For by the self same reason, which you use,
Damon might justly, you accuse:
Why do you scorn and with a proud disdain,
Receive the Vows, but slight the Swain;
You say you cannot love, yet know no cause,
May I not prove my love, by your own Laws,
Am I not youthful, and as gay a Swain,
As ere appeared upon the Plain:
Have I not courted you withal t'adress,
An amourous Shepherd could profess;
To add to this, my Flocks and Herds, are great,
Yet this will scarce my happyness complete.
Thus you no reason for your coldness give,
And it is but just, you should believe;
That all your beauty unadorned by art,
Have hurt, and not obliged my heart.
Be kind to that, return my passion too,
And I Will give reason why I love you so.
SONG.
When reason ore my heart did sway,
Then subject passions did obey:
And freedom, still I most did crave,
Not thinking e're to be Loves slave;
Till he most cunning, by surprise,
Stole in, and fixed my wandering eyes.
2.
My reason then by passion led,
With pleasing joys, my fancy fed;
Which for a time, did so transcend,
I thought they never could have an end:
And nothing then, did grieve me more,
Then that I had not loved before.
3.
When at my freedom I did range,
My joy uncertainly did change!
My pleasures still methoughts were scant,
And still my joys did something want;
Till in her center fixed by love,
Satiety of sweets I prove.
4.
Blessed with loves chains, I thus did live,
But for it could no reason give:
My pleasures were too sweet to last,
And by disdain were soon over cast.
Another flame her heart assaults,
Which proved her love to me was false.
5.
My love then scorned, died with disgrace,
And reason once again took place;
When reason comes, love must depart,
Both never at once, lived in a heart:
Strange that I should so foolish prove,
And thus to be mislead by love.
SONG.
LOng did fair Phillis love a Swain,
Who as 'twas thought repaid again:
With interest her kindness
Their love's but flocks, not equal were,
The only cause of all their fear:
This proved god Cupids blindness.
2.
With equal flames, a while they burn,
When one, both did rejoice or mourn;
Their hearts so were fettered
Yet a new love did him succeed,
Which proved the first, was but for need,
Though may be 'twas not bettered.
3.
A Gallant comes, Gallants can do,
Much with young Maids, and old ones too;
And lovingly accost her,
The unjust Nymph, did court his flame,
More eagerly then e're the Swain;
Did hers before he left her.
4.
The Swain forgot, the match is made,
With the new love, though as 'twas said;
He had no mind to marry,
Hymen to light his Torch they call,
The Nymphs and Swains invited all,
To see him reach his Quarry.
5.
But providence the Marriage crossed,
Just at the time the Bride-groomes lost;
When he should be a doing,
It cost her many sighs and tears,
With little joy and many fears,
E're Hymen ends the woeing.
6.
This woman's folly plainly shows,
Who still withdraw their smiles from those.
Who love and most affect them,
Which fortune on themselves return,
And commonly does make them burn:
For those that most neglect them.
7.
Some sor^y were, but many smiled,
And said the Nymph the Swain beguild;
Because he did not at her,
Some cried the plains he would desert,
Or that despair would break his heart:
But faith 'twas no such matter.
SONG.
TRuest joy must arise,
From a woman's bright eyes.
For there is the perfectest bliss,
Till we can obtain,
Betwixt pleasure and pain,
The enjoyments that follow a kiss.
2.
For love after scorning,
And joy after mourning;
Are always far better accepted,
Then that love which we gain,
Without trouble or pain:
From a Mis, who us never neglected.
3.
For when with a home-touch,
She is tickled so much;
That it makes her cry oh; it does hurts me,
Oh! oh! then does succeed,
Those true pleasures indeed;
Which what Paradise is' dos instruct me.
SONG.
FOnd man that hopes to catch a face,
Whose every grace
Will strick thy heart, with an amazing terror,
Her beauties shine
So like divine;
That they will convince thee of thy foolish error.
2.
Mark but that glance, which now did fly
From her bright Eye,
And tell me then, can any Mortal draw,
A Line by art
Like that fierce Dart;
Which all the subject world can keep in awe.
3.
Hark to that heavenly voice which can,
Transport a man.
Beyond the raptures of the heavenly Spears,
As soon you may
Create a day:
Or sweet Aurora's beauties Lymn, as hers.
4.
Leave then thy bold attempt to Fate
Who must create,
New fancy which must heavenly power receive,
For grant that here,
Apellis were;
She as his fruits the Birds, would him deceive,
SONG.
NO justice he had, that first did approve,
To cast down high Honor, and set up fond Love.
Though love we confess, has the antienter state
Yet old things we see, grows most out of date.
2.
Love after enjoyment, does seldom prove good,
But Honor, for ever, does reign in the blood;
That just like the Smoke, does quickly expire,
But this does for ever, remain like Fire.
3.
Love must unto Honor, precedence give,
That dies with the Subject, when Honor does live:
It Is that that keeps love out of the Dust,
For love without honor, at best is Lust.
4.
To be scorned in Love, is a most cruel Fate,
And thus we prove Honor, the happier state:
For old things we know, must give place unto new,
Then cast back fond Love, and give Honor her due.
A Country Diologue.
Will. GOod Morrow Dolly, I Salute thee,
After our own Country way,

Doll. Now by my Maidenhead Will, I thank thee;
And good Morrow to thee I say.

Will. Your Maidenhead you pretty Dowdy,
What a simpering look thou have,
M^^hinks thou showst a pretty maiden
In all parts, below thy wast.

Doll. And why below my wast I pray you,
There I Am covered with my Clothes,

Will. I but I once saw something naked;
Made my Teeth hack in my Hose.
Oh Doll I mean my Occilliaries,
Such geer I think thou never did see,
Things that will please thee without measure
And these poor Rogue, I Will give to thee;
For hark thee Doll, I Am come to woe thee,
Thou know my mind and what I mean,
I Will give thee that shall fill thy belly,
Wast thou near so poor or lean;
I Would fain be married, prithee tell me,
When shall be our wedding day,

Doll. First let me know how well you love me:
Then you shall hear what I will say.

Will. I love thee Dolly more and better,
Then our Browny, love's her Calf,
Oh Doll my tongue can never utter;
All my love to thee nor half.
It Is even such my dearest Dolly,
Though I not angry am at all,
That with my Teeth I could tear from thee:
All thy Clothes, thy Smock and all.
Oh love me then, thou pretty Doxcy,
Which am thy true and faithful Lover,
Quench thou my fire which else will burn;
And straight way make my Pot run over.

Doll. Well, if your love be so exceeding,
As you do protest and say;
I can no longer then deny you,
But yield to love without delay.
And we will be married my dear honey,
To morrow morn with all my heart,

Will. I am glad we have agreed so quickly:
And from thee I Will never part.

Doll. Prithee kiss to bind the bargain,
Thou shall be all my love and joy,
I long my dear till we are Married,
That we might always kiss and toy.

Will. Kiss thee my Dolly, I faith will I:
Oh! there is a Breath most sweet*
But yet it is something strong at p^^ting,
And does smell like stinking Feet.

Doll. Kiss me again, again I pray thee,
Oh there, oh there; Oh that, oh that.

Will. Zounds, and she be so mad of Kissing,
She Will run stark mad of you know what.

Doll. What time in the morning will thou fetch me,
O if I shall come to thee;
Name but the time, and I Will wait on thee,
Thou shall not stay one jot for me.

Will. No no, I Will fetch thee but be ready,
Least the time us over-slip,

Doll. Oh! for remembrance let me hug thee,
And take my farewell of thy Lip.
Ah me! that kiss as sweet as Honey,
Makes me long and much desire,
To taste those sweets I often heard on
Which are raised by Cupids Fire.
I Will straight go home and make me ready,
Then will I wait till you do call.

Will. Do for to morrow night, I tell thee,
We will play at uptailes all;
We Will dance a dance, I faith shall please thee:
Up and down, and never miss,
Instead of turning we will keep dancing,
And when we have done then we will kiss;
Thoud'st wish that thou might dance so ever,
Oh 'twill give thee such content,

Doll. I shall not sleep for thinking on thee,
And of our next nights merriment.
But now we know each other's meaning,
Let Us prepare against the night,
I may enjoy those sports thou talkst of,
Which will yield me such delight.

Coridons, Contemplation.
When Sue and Moll a milking went,
Then Will and I hied thither,
And as they milk'd by them we lay,
Making our Love's together.
2.
He complemented his dear Moll,
And so did I my Sue:
Oh! never yet was men so blessed,
With the love of two so true.
3.
For when their milking they had done,
Then did begin our bliss,
We lay upon the Ground and talked,
We tumbled and did kiss.
4.
Till two long hours was quickly spent,
In such sweet harmless pleasure,
As Maids will to their Sweet-hearts give,
When they have time and leisure.
5.
With Sillibubs, with Cake and Cheese,
We eat and drunk our fill,
Which these poor Rogues had brought with them,
For me and honest Will.
6.
Moll, gave to Will a new las'd Band,
She bought it at our Fair,
It Is fellow pretty Sue had got,
And gave it me to wear.
7.
But now poor Maid's they must go home.
No longer durst they stay,
Moll kiss't her Will, and Sue kiss't me,
Then sighing went away.
8.
Oh! such true Love's, was never heard on,
Nor ever yet was seen,
In all the Country far and near,
As they to us have been.
9.
Therefore at the VVake's we will carry them,
Where ere the Fiddlers play,
We Will give 'em Sider, Ale and Cakes,
And dance with none but they.
The Wood-Man's Song.
THis way, this way, come and hear,
You that hold these pleasures dear;
Fill your ears with our sweet sound,
Whilst we melt the frozen Ground.
2.
This way come, make have, oh fair,
Let your clear eyes guild the Air:
Come and bless us with your sight,
This way, this way, seek delight.

