CARMEN DEO NOSTRO, TE DECET HYMNVS SACRED POEMS, COLLECTED, CORRECTED,
AVGMENTED, Most humbly Presented. TO MY LADY THE COVNTSSE OF DENBIGH BY Her
most devoted Servant. R. C. IN heaty acknowledgment of his immortal obligation
to her Goodness and Charity.

AT PARIS, By PETER TARGA, Printer to the Archbishope of Paris, in S. Victors
street at the golden sun. M.DC.LII.

CRASHAWE, THE ANAGRAMME. HE WAS CAR.
WAS CAR then Crashawe; or WAS Crashawe CAR,
Since both within one name combined are?
Yes, Car's Crashawe, he Car; it is love alone
Which melts two hearts, of both composing one.
So Crashawe's still the same: so much desired
By strongest wits; so honored so admired
CAR WAS but HE that entered as afriend
With who^ he shared his thoughts, and did commend
(While yet he lived) this work; they loved each other:
Sweet Crashawe was his friend; he Crashawes brother.
So Car has Title then; it was his intent
That what his riches penned, poor Car should print.
Nor fears he check praising that happy one
Who was beloved by all; dispraysed by none.
To wit, being pleased with all things, he pleased all.
Nor would he give, nor take offense; befall
What might; he would possess himself: and live
As dead (deuoyde of interest) t'all might give
Desease to his well composed mind; forestal'd
With heavenly riches: which had wholly called
His thoughts from earth, to live above in'th air
A very bird of paradise. No care
Had he of earthly trashe. What might suffice
To fit his soul to heavenly exercise.
Sufficed him: and may we guess his heart
By what his lips brings forth, his only part
Is God and godly thoughts. Leaves doubt to none
But that to whom one God is all; all is one.
What he might eat or wear he took no thought.
His needful food he rather found then sought.
He seeks no downs, no sheets, his bed's still made
If he can find, a chair or stool, he is laid,
When day peepes in, he quitts his rest less rest.
And still, poor soul, before he is up he is dres't.
Thus dying did he live, yet lived to dye
In the virgins lap, to whom he did apply
His virgin thoughts and words, and thence was styld
By foes, the chaplain of the virgin myld
While yet he lived without: His modesty
Imparted this to some, and they to me.
Live happy then, dear soul; enjoy the rest
Eternally by pains thou purchacedest,
While Car must live in care, who was thy friend
Nor cares he how he live, so in the end,
He may enjoy his dearest Lord and thee;
And sit and singe more skillful songs eternally.
AN EPIGRAMME Upon the pictures in the following Poemes which the Author first
made with his own hand, admirably well, as may be seen in his Manuscript
dedicated to the right Honorable Lady the L. Denbigh.
Twixt pen and pensill rose a holy strife
Which might draw virtue better to the life.
Best wits gave votes to that: but painters swore
They never saw pieces so sweet before
As these: fruits of pure nature; where no art
Did lead the untaught pensill, nor had part
In th'-worke.
The hand grown bold, with wit will needs contest.
Does it prevail? ah woe: say each is best.
This to the ear speaks wonders; that will try
To speak the same, yet louder, to the eye.
Both their aims are holy, both conspire
To wound, to burn the heart with heavenly fire.
This then is the Doom, to do both parties right:
This, to the ear speaks best; that, to the sight.
THOMAS CAR.

NON VI.
It Is not the work of force but skill
To find the way into man's will.
It Is love alone can hearts unlock.
Who knows the WORD, he needs not knock.

TO THE Noblest and best of Ladies, the Countess of Denbigh. Persuading her to
Resolution in Religion, and to render her self without further delay into the
Communion of the Catholic Church.
WHat heau'n-intreated HEART is This?
Stands trembling at the gate of bliss;
Holds fast the door, yet dares not ve^ture
Fairly to open it, and enter.
Whose DEFINITION is a doubt
Twixt life and death, twixt in and out.
Say, lingering fair! why comes the birth
Of your brave soul so slowly forth?
Plead your pretenses (o you strong
In weakness! why you choose so long
In labor of your self to ly,
Nor daring quite to live nor die?
Ah linger not, loved soul! a slow
And late consent was a long no,
Who grants at last, long time tried
And did his best to have denied,
What magic bolts, what mystic Bars
Maintain the will in these strange wars!
What fatal, yet fantastic, bands
Keep The free Heart from it is own hands!
So when the year takes cold, we see
Poor waters their own prisoners be.
Fettered, and locked up fast they ly
In a sad selfe-captiuity.
The astonished nymphs their flood's strange fate deplore,
To see themselves their own seuerer shore.
Thou that alone can thaw this cold,
And fetch the heart from it is strong Hold;
All mighty LOVE! end this long war,
And of a meteor make a starr.
O fix this fair INDEFINITE.
And amongst thy shafts of soueraign light
Choose out that sure decisiue dart
Which has the Key of this close heart,
Knows all the corners often, and can control
The self-shutt cabinet of an unsearched soul.
O let it be at last, love's hour*
Raise this tall Trophee of thy Power;
Come once the conquering way; not to confute
But kill this rebell-wotd, IRRESOLVTE
That so, in spite of all this peevish strength
Of weakness, she may write RESOLVED AT LENGTH,
Unfold at length, unfold fair flower
And use the season of love's shower,
Meet his well-meaning Wounds, wise heart!
And have to drink the wholesome dart.
That healing shaft, which heaun till now
Has in love's quiver hid for you.
O Dart of love! arrow of light!
O happy you, if it hitt right,
It must not fall in vain, it must
Not mark the dry regardles dust.
Fair one, it is your fate; and brings
Aeternall worlds upon it is wings.
Meet it with wide-spread arms; and see
It Is scat your soul's just center be.
Disband dull fears; give faith the day.
To save your life, kill your delay
It is love's seege; and sure to be
Your triumph, though his victory.
It Is cowardice that keeps this field
And want of courage not to yield.
Yield then, o yield. that love may win
The Fort at last, and let life in.
Yield quickly. Lest perhaps you prove
Death's prey, before the prize of love.
This Fort of your fair self, if it be not won,
He is repulst indeed; But you'are undone.
TO THE NAME ABOVE EVERY NAME, THE NAME OF JESUS A HYMN.
I Sing the NAME which None can say
But touched with An interior RAY:
The Name of our New PEACE; our Good:
Our Bliss: and Supernatural Blood:
The Name of All our Lives and Loves.
Hearken, And Help, ye holy Doves!
The highborn Brood of Day; you bright
Candidates of blissful Light,
The HEIRS Elect of Love; whose Names belong
Unto The everlasting life of Song;
All ye wise SOVLES, who in the wealthy Breast
Of This unbounded NAME build your warm Nest.
Awake, MY glory. SOUL, (if such thou be,
And That fair WORD at all referr to Thee)
Awake and sing
And be All VVing;
Bring hither thy whole SELF; and let me see.
What of thy Parent HEAVEN yet speaks in thee.
O thou art Poor
Of noble POWERS, I see,
And full of nothing else but empty ME,
Narrow, and low, and infinitely less
Then this GREAT mornings mighty Busynes.
One little WORLD or two
(Alas) will never do.
We must have store.
Go, SOUL, out of thy Self, and seek for More.
Go and request
Great NATVRE for the KEY of her huge Chest
Of Heauns, the self inuoluing Set of Spears
(Which dull mortality more Feels then hears)
Then rouse the nest
Of nimble ART, and trauerse round
The Aerie Shop of soul-appeasing Sound:
And beat a summons in the Same
All-soueraign Name
To warn each several kind
And shape of sweetness, Be they such
As sigh with supple wind
Or answer Artfull Touch,
That they conuene and come away
To wait at the loue-crowned Doors of
Thas Illustrious DAY.
Shall we dare This, my Soul? we will do it and bring
No Other note for it, but the Name we sing
Wake LVTE and HARP
And every sweet-lipp't Thing
That talks with tunefull string;
Start into life, And leap with me
Into a hasty Fitt-tun'd Harmony.
Nor must you think it much
To Obey my bolder touch;
I have Authority in LOVE's name to take you
And to the work of Love this morning wake you
Wake; In the Name
Of HIM who never sleeps, All Things that Are,
Or, what is the same,
Are Musical;
Answer my Call
And come along;
Help me to meditate mine Immortal Song.
Come, ye soft ministers of sweet sad mirth,
Bring All your household stuff of Heaun on earth;
O you, my Soul's most certain Wings,
Complaining Pipes, and prattling Strings,
Bring All the store
Of SWEETS you have; And murmur that you have no more.
Come, nere to part,
NATVRE and ART!
Come; and come strong,
To the conspiracy of our Spacious song.
Bring All the Powers of Praise
Your Provinces of well-vnited WORLDS can raise;
Bring All yours LVTES and HARPS of HEAVEN and EARTH;
What ere cooperates to The common mirthe
Vessels of vocal Joys,
Or You, more noble Architects of Intellectual Noise,
Cymballs of Heaven, or Humane spears,
Solliciters of SOVLES or EARS;
And when you'are come, with All
That you can bring or we can call;
O may you fix
For ever here, and mix
Your selves into the long
And everlasting series of a deathlesse SONG;
Mix All your many WORLDS, Above,
And loose them into ONE of Love.
Cheer thee my HEART!
For Thou too have thy Part
And Place in the Great Throng
Of This unbounded All-imbracing SONG.
Powers of my Soul, be Proud!
And speak loud
To All the dear-bought Nations This Redeeming Name,
And in the wealth of one Rich WORD proclaim
New Similes to Nature.
May it be no wrong
Blessed Heauns, to you, and your Superior song,
That we, dark Sons of Dust and Sorrow,
A while Dare borrow
The Name of Your Dilights and our Desires,
And fit it to so far inferior LYRES.
Our Murmurs have their Music too,
Ye mighty ORBS, as well as you,
Nor yields the noblest Nest
Of warbling SERAPHIM to the ears of Love,
A choicer Lesson then the joyful BREAST
Of a poor panting Turtle-Doue.
And we, low Worms have leave to do
The Same bright Busynes (ye Third HEAVENS) with you.
Gentle SPIRITS, do not complain.
We will have care
To keep it fair,
And send it back to you again.
Come, lovely NAME! Appear from forth the Bright
Regions of peaceful Light
Look from thine own Illustrious Home,
Fair KING of NAMES, and come.
Leave All thy native Glories in their Georgeous Nest,
And give thy Self a while The gracious Guest.
Of humble Souls, that seek to find
The hidden Sweets
Which man's heart meets
When Thou art Master of the Mind.
Come, Iouely Name; life of our hope!
Lo we hold our HEARTS wide open!
Unlock thy Cabinet of DAY
Dearest Sweet, and come away.
Lo how the thirsty Lands
Gasp for thy Golden Showers! with longstretch't Hands
Lo how the laboring EARTH
That hopes to be
All Heaven by THEE,
Leapes at thy Birth.
The'attending WORLD, to wait thy Rise,
First turned to eyes;
And then, not knowing what to do;
Turned Them to TEARS, and spent Them too.
Come ROYAL Name; and pay the expense
Of All this Precious Patience.
O come away
And kill the DEATH of This Delay.
O see, so many WORLDS of barren years
Melted and measured out in Seas of TEARS.
O see, The WEARY liddes of wakefull Hope
(LOVE's Eastern windows) All wide open
With Curtains drawn,
To catch The Daybreak of Thy DAWN.
O dawn, at last, long looked for Day!
Take thine own wings, and come away.
Lo, where Aloft it comes! It comes, Among
The Conduct of Adoring SPIRITS, that throng
Like diligent Bees, And swarm about it.
O they are wise;
And know what SWEETES are sucked from out it.
It is the Hiue,
By which they thrive,
Where All their Hoard of Honey lies.
Lo where it comes, upon The snowy DOVE's
Soft Back; And brings a Bosom big with Loves.
WELCOME to our dark world, Thou
Womb of Day!
Unfold thy fair Conceptions; And display
The Birth of our Bright Joys.
O thou compacted
Body of Blessings: spirit of Souls extracted!
O dissipate thy spicy Powers
(Clowd of condensed sweets) and break upon us
In balmy showrs;
O fill our senses, And take from us
All force of so Profane a Fallacy
To think ought sweet but that which smells of Thee.
Fair, flowery Name; In none but Thee
And Thy Nectareall Fragrancy,
Hourly there meets
An universal SYNOD of All sweets;
By whom it is defined Thus
That no Perfume
For ever shall presume
To pass for Odoriferous,
But such alone whose sacred Pedigree
Can prove it Self some kin (sweet name) to Thee.
SWEET NAME, in Thy each Syllable
A Thousand Blessed ARABIAS dwell;
A Thousand Hills of Frankincense;
Mountains of myrrh, and Beds of species,
And ten Thousand PARADISES
The soul that tastes thee takes from thence
How many unknown WORLDS there are
Of Comforts, which Thou have in keeping!
How many Thousand Mercyes there
In Pitty's soft lap ly a sleeping!
Happy he who has the art
To awake them,
And to take them
Home, and lodge them in his HEART.
O that it were as it was wont to be!
When thy old Friends of Fire, All full of Thee,
Fought against Frowns with smiles; gave Glorious chase
To Persecutions; And against the Face
Of DEATH and feircest Dangers, durst with Brave
And sober pace march on to meet A GRAVE.
On their Bold BREASTS about the world they bore thee
And to the Teeth of Hell stood up to teach thee,
In Center of their inmost Souls they wore thee,
Where Rackes and Torments strived, in vain, to reach thee.
Little, alas, thought They
Who tore the Fair Breasts of thy Friends,
Their Fury but made way
For Thee; And served them in Thy glorious ends
What did Their weapons but with wider pores
Enlarge thy flaming-brested Lovers
More freely to transpire
That impatient Fire
The Heart that hides Thee hardly couers.
What did their Weapons but set wide the Doors
For Thee: Fair, purple Doors, of love's devising;
The Ruby windows which inrich't the EAST
Of Thy so often repeated Rising.
Each wound of Theirs was Thy new Morning;
And reinthron'd thee in thy Rosy Nest,
With blush of thine own Blood thy day adorning,
It was the wit of love oreflowd the Bounds
Of WRATH, and made thee way through All Those WOVNDS.
Welcome dear, All-Adored Name!
For sure there is no Knee
That knows not THEE.
Or if there be such sonns of shame,
Alas what will they do
When stubborn Rocks shall bow
And Hills hang down their Heaun-saluting Heads
To seek for humble Beds
Of Dust, where in the Bashful shades of night
Next to their own low NOTHING they may ly,
And couch before the dazeling light of thy dread majesty.
They that by Love's mild Dictate now
Will not Adore thee,
Shall Then with Just Confusion, bow
And break before thee
IN THE HOLY NATIVITY OF OUR LORD GOD A HYMN SVNG AS BY THE SHEPHERDS. Ton
Createur te faict voir sa naissance,
Daignant souffrir pour toy des son enfance.

Quem vidistis Pastores? etc. Natum vidimus etc.
THE HYMN.
CHORUS. COme we shepherds whose blessed Sight
Has met love's Noon in Nature's night;
Come lift we up our loftyer Song
And wake the SUN that lies too long.
To All our world of well-stoln joy
He slept; and dreamed of no such thing.
While we found out Heaun's fairer ey
And Kis't the Cradle of our KING.
Tell him He rises now, too late
To show us ought worth looking at.
Tell him we now can show Him more
Then He e're showed to mortal Sight;
Then he Himself e're saw before;
Which to be seen needs not His light.
Tell him, Tityrus, where thou have been
Tell him, Thysis, what th-hast seen.

Tityrus. Gloomy night embraced the Place
Where The Noble Infant lay.
The BABE looked up and showed his Face;
In spite of Darkness, it was DAY.
It was THY day, SWEET! and did rise
Not from the EAST, but from thine EYES.

Chorus. It was THY day, Sweet

Thyrs. WINTER chidde Aloud; and sent
The angry North to wage his wars.
The North forgott his feirce Intent;
And left perfumes in stead of scarres.
By those sweet eye's persuasiue powrs
Where he meant frost, he scattered flowrs.

Chorus By those sweet eyes'

Both. We saw thee in thy baulmy Nest,
Young dawn of our aeternall DAY!
We saw thine eyes break from their EAT^
And chase the trembling shades away.
We saw thee; and we blessed the sight
We saw thee by thine own sweet light.

Tity. Poor WORLD (said I.) what will thou do
To entertain this starry STRANGER?
Is this the best thou can bestow?
A cold, and not too cleanly, manger?
Contend, the powers of heaven and earth.
To fitta bed for this huge birthe.

Cho. Contend the powers

Thyt. Proud world, said I; cease your contest
And let the MIGHTY BABE alone.
The Phaenix builds the Phaenix'nest.
Lov's architecture is his own.
The BABE whose birth embraues this morn.
Made his own bed e're he was born.

Cho. The BABE whose.

Tir. I saw the curled drops, soft and slow,
Come houering over the place's head;
Offering their whitest sheets of snow
To furnish the fair INFANT's bed
Forbear, said I; be not too bold.
Your fleece is white But it is too cold

Cho. Forbear, said I

Thyr. I saw the obsequious SERAPHIMS
Their rosy fleece of fire bestow.
For well they now can spare their wing.
Since HEAVEN it self lies here below.
Well done, said I: but are you sure
Your down so warm, will pass for pure?

Cho. Well done said I

Tit. No no. your KING's not yet to seek
Where to repose his Royal HEAD
See see, how soon his new-bloom'd CHEEK
Twixt's mother's breasts is gone to bed.
Sweet choice, said we! no way but so
Not to ly cold, yet slep in snow.

Cho. Sweet choice, said we.

Both. We saw thee in thy baulmy nest,
Bright dawn of our aeternall Day!
We saw thine eyes break from their EAST
And chase the trembling shades away.
We saw thee: and we blessed the sight.
We saw thee, by thine own sweet light.

Cho. We saw thee, etc.

FVLL CHORUS. Welcome, all WONDERS in one sight!
Aeternity shutt in a span.
Summer in Winter. Day in Night.
Heaven in earth, and GOD in MAN.
Great little one! whose all-embracing birth
Lifts earth to heaven, stoopes heaven to earth.
WELCOME. Though nor to gold nor silk.
To more then Caesar's birth right is;
Two sister-seas of Virgin-Milk,
With many a rarely-temper'd kiss
That brearhes at once both MAID and MOTHER,
Warmes in the one, cooles in the other.
WELCOME, though not to those gay flies.
Gilded in the Beams of earthly kings;
Slippery souls in smiling eyes;
But to poor Shepherds, homespun things:
Whose Wealth's their flock; whose wit, to be
Well read in their simplicity.
Yet when young April's husband showrs
Shall bless the fruitful Maja's bed
We Will bring the Firstborn of her flowrs
To kiss thy FEET and crown thy HEAD.
To thee, dread lamb! whose love must keep
The shepherds, more then they the sheep.
To THEE, meek Majesty! soft KING
Of simple GRACES and sweet LOVES.
Each of us his lamb will bring
Each his pair of sylver Doves;
Till burnt at last in fire of Thy fair eyes,
Our selves become our own best SACRIFICE.

NEW YEAR'S DAY.
RIse, thou best and brightest morning!
Rosy with a double Red;
With thine own blush thy cheeks adorning
And the dear drops this day were shed.
All the purple pride that laces
The crimson curtains of thy bed,
Guilds thee not with so sweet graces
Nor setts thee in so rich a red.
Of all the fair-cheek't flowrs that fill thee
None so fair thy bosom strowes,
As this modest maiden lilly
Our sins have shamed into a rose
Bid thy golden GOD, the Sun,
Burnisht in his best beams rise,
Put all his red-ey'd Rubies on;
These Rubies shall putt out their eyes.
Let him make poor the purple east,
Search what the world's close cabinets keep,
Rob the rich births of each bright nest
That flaming in their fair beds sleep,
Let him embraue his own bright tresses
With a new morning made of gemmes,
And wear, in those his wealthy dresses,
Another Day of Diadems.
When he has done all he may
To make himself rich in his rise,
All* will be darkness to the Day
That breaks from one of these bright eyes.
And soon this sweet truth shall appear
Dear BABE, ere many days be done,
The morn shall come to meet thee here,
And leave her own neglected Sun.
Here are Beautyes shall bereave him
Of all his eastern Paramours.
His Persian Lovers all shall leave him,
And swear faith to thy sweeter Powers.
IN THE GLORIOUS EPIPHANIE OF OUR LORD GOD, A HYMN. SVNG AS BY THE THREE KINGS


(1. KING.) BRight BABE! Whose awful beautyes make
The morn incurr a sweet mistake;

(2.) For whom the'officious heauns devise
To disinheritt the sun's rise,

(3.) Delicately to displace
The Day, and plant it fairer in thy face;

[1.] O thou born KING of loves,

[2.] Of lights,

[3.] Of joys!

(Cho.) Look up, sweet BABE, look up and see
For love of Thee
Thus far from home
The EAST is come
To seek her self in thy sweet Eyes

(1.) We, who strangely went astray,
Lost in a bright
Meridian night,

(2.) A Darkness made of too much day,

(3.) Becken'd from far
By thy fair starr,
Lo at last have found our way.

(Cho.) To THEE, thou DAY of night! thou east of west!
Lo we at last have found the way.
To thee, the world's great universal east.
The General and indifferent DAY.

(1.) All-circling point. All centring sphere.
The world's one, round, Aeternall year.

(2.) Whose full and all-vnwrinkled face
Nor sinks nor swells with time or place;

(3.) But every where and every while
Is One Consistent solid smile;

(1.) Not vexed and tossed

(2.) 'Twixt spring and frost,

(3.) Nor by alternate shredds of light
Sordidly shifting hands with shades and night.

(Cho.) O little all! in thy embrace
The world lies warm, and likes his place.
Nor does his full Globe fail to be
Kissed on Both his cheeks by Thee.
Time is too narrow for thy YEAR
Nor makes the whole WORLD thy half-spear.

(1.) To Thee, to Thee
From him we flee

(2.) From HIM, whom by a more illustriously,
The blindness of the world did call the eye;

(3.) To HIM, who by These mortal clouds have made
Thy self our sun, though thine own shade.

(2.) Farewell, the wold's false light.
Farewell, the white
Egypt! a long farewell to thee
Bright IDOL; black IDOLATRY.
The dire face of inferior DARKNESS, kis't
And courted in the pompus mask of a more specious mist.

(2.) Farewell, farewell
The proud and misplac't gates of hell,
Pertch't, in the morning's way
And double-guilded as the doors of DAY.
The deep hypocrisy of DEATH and NIGHT
More desperately dark, Because more bright.

(3.) Welcome, the world's sure Way*
Heaven's wholesome ray.

(Cho.) Welcome to us; and we
(SWEET) to our selves, in THEE.

(1.) The deathles HEIR of all thy FATHER's day*

(2.( Decently Born.
Embosom'd in a much more Rosy MORN,
The Blushes of thy All-vnblemish't mother.

(3.) No more that other
Aurora shall set open
Her ruby casements, or hereafter hope
From mortal eyes
To meet Religious welcomes at her rise.

(Cho.) We (Precious ones!) in you have won
A gentler MORN, a iuster sun.

(1.) His superficial Beams fun-burn't our skin;

(2.) But left within

(3.) The night and winter still of death and sin.

(C^o.) Thy softer yet more certain DARTS
Spare our eyes, but pierce our HEARTS.

(1.) Therefore with HIS proud persian spoils

(2.) We court thy more concerning smiles.

(3.) Therefore with his Disgrace
We guild the humble cheek of this chaste place,

(Cho.) And at thy FEET power forth his FACE.

(1.) The doting nations now no more
Shall any day but THINE adore.

(2.) Nor (much less) shall they leave these eyes
For cheap Egyptian Deityes.

(3.) In whatsoever more Sacred shape
Of Ram, He-goat, or reverend ape,
Those beauteous rauishers oppressed so sore
The too-hard-tempted nations.

(1.) Never more
By wanton heyfer shall be worn.

(2.) A Garland, or a gilded horn.
The altar-stall'd ox, fatt OSYRIS now
With his fair sister cow,

(3.) Shall kick the clouds no more; But lean and tame,

(Cho.) See his horned face, and die for shame.
And MITHRA now shall be no name.

(1.) No longer shall the immodest lust
Of Adulterous GODLES dust

(2.) Fly in the face of heaven; As if it were
The poor world's Fault that he is fair.

(3.] Nor with perverse loves and Religious RAPES
Revenge thy Bountyes in their beauteous shapes;
And punish Best Things worst; Because they stood
Guilty of being much for them too Good.

[1.] Proud sons of death! that durst compel
Heaven it self to find them hell;

[2.] And by strange wit of madness wrest
From this world's EAST the other's WEST.

[3.] All-Idolizing worms! that thus could crowd
And urge Their sun into thy cloud;
Forcing his sometimes eclipsed face to be
A long deliquium to the light of thee.

[Cho.] Alas with how much heauyer shade
The shamefac't lamp hung down his head
For that one eclipse he made
Then all those he suffered!

[1.] For this he looked so bigg; and every morn
With a red face confes't this scorn.
Or hiding his vex't cheeks in a hired mist
Kept them from being so unkindly kis't.

[2.] It was for this the day did rise
So often with blubbered eyes.
For this the evening wept; and we never knew
But called it deaw.

[3.] This daily wrong
Silenc't the morning-sons, and damp't their song

[Cho.] Nor was it our deafnes, but our sins, that thus
Long made th'Harmonious orbs all mute to us

[2.] Time has a day in store
When this so proudly poor
And self-oppressed spark, that has so long
By the loue-sick, world bin made
Not so much their sun as SHADE,
Weary of this Glorious wrong
From them and from himself shall flee
For shelter to the shadow of thy TREE;

[Cho.] Proud to have gained this precious loss
And changed his false crown for thy CROSS.

[2.] That dark Day's clear doom shall define
Whose is the Master FIRE, which sun should shine.
That sable ludgment-seat shall by new laws
Decide and settle the Great cause
Of controuerted light,

[Cho.] And natur's wrongs rejoice to do thee Right.

[3.] That forfeiture of noon to night shall pay
All the idolatrous thefts done by this night of day;
And the Great Penitent press his own pale lips
With an elaborate loue-eclipse
To which the low world's laws
Shall lend no cause

[Cho.] Save those domestic which he borrowes
From our sins and his own sorrows.

[1.] Three sad hour's sack cloth then shall show to us
His penance, as our fault, conspicuous.

[2.] And he more needfully and nobly prove
The nation's terror now then erst their love.

[3.] Their hated loves changd into wholesome fears,

[ Cho.] The shutting of his eye shall open Theirs.

[2.] As by a fair-ey'd fallacy of day
Miss-ledde before they lost their way,
So shall they, by the seasonable fright
Of an unseasonable night,
Loosing it once again, stumble'on true LIGHT

[2.] And as before his too-bright eye
Was Their more blind idolatry,
So his officious blindines now shall be
Their black, but faithful perspectiue of thee;

[3.] His new prodigious night,
Their new and admirable light;
The supernatural DAWN of Thy pure day.
While wondering they
(The happy conuerts now of him
Whom they compelled before to be their sin)
Shall henceforth see
To kiss him only as their rod
Whom they so long courted as GOD,

[Cho.] And their best use of him they worshiped be
To learn, of Him at lest, to worship Thee.

[2.] It was their Weakness wooed his beauty;
But it shall be
Their wisdom now, as well as duty,
To'injoy his Blott; and as a large black letter
Use it to spell Thy beautyes better;
And make the night in self their rorch to thee.

[2.] By the oblique ambush of this close night
Couch't in that conscious shade
The right-ey'd Areopagite
Shall with a vigorous guess invade
And catch thy quick reflex; and sharply see
On this dark Grouud
To dscant THEE.

[3.] O prize of the rich SPIRIT! with that feirce chase
Of this strong soul, shall he
Leap at thy lofty FACE,
And scize the swift Flash, in rebound
From this ohsequious cloud;
Once called a sun;
Till dearly thus undone,

[Cho.] Till thus triumphantly tamed (o ye two
Twinne SVNNES!) and taught now to negotiate you

[1.] Thus shall that reverend child of light,

[2.] By being scholar first of that new night,
Come forth Great master of the mystic day;

[3.] And teach obscure MANKIND a more close way
By the frugall negatine light
Of a most wise and well-abused Night
To read more legible thine original Ray,

[Cho.] And make our Darkness serve THY day;
Maintaining t'wixt thy world and ours
A commerce of contrary powers,
A mutual trade
'Twixt sun and SHADE,
By confederat BLACK and WHITE
Borrowing day and lending night.

[1.] Thus we, who when with all the noble powers
That (at thy cost) are called, not vainly, ours
We vow to make brave way
Upwards, and press on for, the pure intelligentiall Prey;

[2.] At lest to play
The amorous Spies
And peep and proffer at thy sparkling Throne;

[3.] In stead of bringing in the blissfull PRIZE
And fastening on Thine eyes,
Forfeit our own
And nothing gain
But more Ambitious loss, at lest of brain;

[Cho.] Now by abased liddes shall learn to be
Eagles; and shutt our eyes that we may see.

The Close.
Therefore to THEE and thine Auspitious ray
(Dread sweet!) lo thus
At lest by us,
The delegated EYE of DAY
Does first his Scepter, then HIMSELF in solemn
Tribute pay.
Thus he vndresses
His sacred vnshorn treses;
At thy adored FEET, thus, he lays down
[1.] His gorgeous tire
Of flame and fire,

[2.] His glittering ROBE,

[3.] his sparkling CROWN,

[3.] His GOLD,

[2.] his MIRRH,

[3.] his FRANKINCENCE,

[Cho.] To which He now has no pretense.
For being showed by this day's light, how far
He is from sun enough to make THY starr,
His best ambition now, is but to be
Something a brighter SHADOW [sweet] of thee.
Or on heaun's azure forhead high to stand
Thy golden index; with a duteous Hand
Pointing us Home to our own sun
The world's and his HYPERION.

TO THE QVEEN'S MAJESTY.
MADAME.
Amongst those long rows of cownes that guild your race.
These Royal sages sue for decent place.
The daybreak of the nations; their first ray;
When the Dark WORLD dawned into Christian DAY.
And smiled in the BABE's bright face. the purpling Bud
And Rosy dawn of the right Royal blood;
Fair first fruits of the LAMB. Sure KINGS in this;
They took a kingdom while they gave a kiss.
But the world's Homage, scarce in These well blown,
We read in you (Rare Queen) ripe and full-grown.
For from this day's rich seed of Diadems
Does rise a radiant croppe of Royalle stemms,
A Golden harvest of crowned heads, that meet
And crowd for kisses from the LAMB's white feet.
In this Illustrious throng, your lofty flood
Swells high, fair Confluence of all highborn Blood!
With your bright head whose groves of scepters bend
Their wealthy tops; and for these feet contend.
So swore the LAMB's dread sire. And so we see it.
Crowns, and the HEADS they kiss, must court these FEET.
Fix here, fair Majesty! May your Heart never miss
To reap new CROWNS and KINGDOMS from that kiss.
Nor may we miss the joy to meet in you
The aged honors of this day still new.
May the great time, in you, still greater be
While all the YEAR is your EPIPHANY,
While your each day's devotion duly brings
Three KINGDOMS to supply this day's three KINGS.
THE OFFICE OF THE HOLY CROSS
Tradidit Semetipsum pro nobis oblationem, et hostiam. Deo in odorem
Suauitatis. ad Ephe. 5

THE HOURS FOR THE HOVR OF MATINES.
The Versicle.
LORD, by thy Sweet and Saving SIGN,
The Responsory.
Defend us from our foes and Thine.
. Thou shallt open my lips, O LORD.
. And my mouth shall show forth thy Praise.
. O GOD make speed to save me.
. O LORD make have to help me.
GLORY be to the FATHER,
and to the SON,
and to the H. GHOST.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

THE HYMN.
THe wakefull Matines have to sing,
The unknown sorrows of our king,
The FATHER' word and wisdom, made
MAN, for man, by man's betrayed;
The world's price set to sale, and by the bold
Merchants of Death and sin, is bought and sold.
Of his Best Friends (yea of himself) forsaken,
By his worst foes (because he would) beseig'd and taken.
The Antiphona.
All hail, fair TREE.
Whose Fruit we be.
What song shall raise
Thy seemly praise.
Who broughtst to light
Life out of death, Day out of night.
The Versicle.
Lo, we adore thee,
Dread LAMB! And bow thus low before thee;
The R^sponsor.
'Cause, by the covenant of thy CROSS,
Thou'hast saved at once the whole world's loss.
The Prayer.
O Lord IESV-CHRIST, son of the living GOD! interpose, I pray thee, thine own
precious death, thy CROSS and Passion, betwixt my soul and thy judgment, now
and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to grant unto me thy grace and
mercy; unto all quick and dead, remission and rest; to thy church peace and
concord; to us sinners life and glory everlasting. Who live and reignest with
the FATHER, in the unity of the HOLY GHOST, one GOD, world without end. Amen.

FOR THE HOVR OF PRIME.
The Versicle.
Lord by thy sweet and saving SIGN.
The Responsor.
Defend us from our foes and thine.
. Thou shall open.
. And my mouth.
. O GOD make speed.
. O LORD make have.
Glory be to.
As it was in.
THE HYMN.
THe early PRIME blushes to say
She could not rise so soon, as they
Called Pilat up; to try if He
Could lend them any cruelty.
Their hands with lashes armed, their toungs with lies.
And loathsome spittle, blott those beauteous eyes,
The blissfull springs of joy; from whose all-chearing Ray
The fair stars fill their wakefull fires the sun himfelfe drinks Day.
The Antiphona.
Victorious SIGN
That now do shine,
Transcribed above
Into the land of light and love;
O let us twine
Our roots with thine,
That we may rise
Upon thy wings, and reach the skies.
The Versicle.
Lo we adore thee
Dread LAME! and fall
Thus low before thee
The Responsor.
'Cause by the Conuenant of thy CROSS
Thou'hast saved at once the whole world's loss
The Prayer.
O Lrod IESV-CHRIST son of the living OOD! interpofe, I pray thee, thine own
precious death, thy CROSS and Passion, betwixt my soul and thy judgment, now
and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to grant unto me thy grace and
mercy; unto all quick and dead, remission and rest; to thy church peace and
concord; to us sinners life and glory everlasting. Who live and reignest with
the FATHER, in the unity of the HOLY GHOST, one GOD, world without end. Amen.

THE THIRD.
The Versicle.
Lord, by thy sweet and saving SIGN
The Responsor.
Defend us from our foes and thine.
. Thou shall open.
. And my mouth.
. O GOD make speed.
. O LORD make have.
. Glory be to.
. As it was in the.
THE HYMN.
The Third hour's deafen'd with the cry
Of crucify him, crucify.
So goes the vote (nor ask them, Why?)
Live Barabbas! and let GOD die.
But there is wit in wrath, and they will try
A HAIL more cruel them their crucify.
For while in sport he wears a spiteful crown,
The serious showers along his decent
Face run sadly down.
The Antiphona.
CHRIST when he died
Deceiud the CROSS;
And on death's side.
Threw all the loss.
The captive world awak't, and found
The prisoners loose, the Ialyor bound.
The Versicle.
Lo we adore thee
Dread LAMB, and fall
thus low before thee
The Responsor.
'Cause by the conuenant of thy CROSS
Thou'hast saved at once the whole word's loss.
The Prayer.
O Lord IESV-CHRIST, son of the living GOD! interpose, I pray thee, thine own
precious death, thy CROSS and Passion, betwixt my soul and thy judgment, now
and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to grant unto me thy grace and
mercy; unto all quick and dead, remission and rest; to thy church peace and
concord; to us sinners life and glory everlasting. Who live and reignest with
the FATHER, in the unity of the HOLY GHOST, one GOD, vorld without end. Amen.

THE SIXTH.
The Versicle.
Lord by thy sweet and saving SIGN,
The Responsor.
Defend us from our foes and thine.
. Thou shall open.
. And my mouth.
. O GOD make speed.
. O LORD make have.
. Glory be
. As it was in
THE HIMN.
NOw is The noon of sorrow's night,
High in his patience, as their spite.
Lo the faint LAMB, with weary limb
Bears that huge tree which must bear Him.
That fatal plant, so great of fame
For fruit of sorrow and of shame,
Shall swell with both for HIM; and mix
All woes into one CRVCIFIX.
Is tortured Thirst, it self, too sweet a cup?
GALL, and more bitter mocks, shall make it up.
Are NAILS blunt pens of superficial smart?
Contempt and scorn can send sure wounds to search the inmost Heart.
The Antiphona.
O dear and sweet Dispute
'Twixt death's and Love's far different FRVIT!
Different as far
As antidotes and poisons are.
By that first fatal TREE
Both life and liberty
Were soldand slain;
By this they both look up, and live again.
The Versicle.
Lo we adore thee
Dread LAMB! and bow thus low before thee;
The Responsor.
'Cause by the conuenant of thy CROSS.
Thou'hast saved the world from certain loss.
The Prayer.
O Lord IESV-CHRIST, son of the living GOD! interpose, I pray thee, thine own
precious death, thy CROSS and Passion, betwixt my soul and thy judgment, now
and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to grant unto me thy grace and
mercy; unto all quick and dead, remission and rest; to thy church peace and
concord; to us sinners life and glory everlasting. Who live and reignest with
the FATHER, in the unity of the HOLY GHOST, one GOD, world without end. Amen.

THE NINTH.
The Versicle.
Lord by thy sweet and saving SIGN.
The Responsor.
Defend us from our foes and thine.
. Thou shall open.
. And my mouth.
. O GOD make speed.
. O LORD make have.
Glory be to.
As it was in.
THE HYMN.
THe ninth with awful horror hearkened to those groans
Which taught attention even to rocks and stones.
Hear, FATHER, hear! thy LAMB (at last) complains.
Of some more painful thing then all his pains.
Then bows his all-obedient head, and dies
His own lou's, and our sin's GREAT SACRIFICE.
The sun saw That; And would have seen no more
The center shook. Her vselesse veil the in glorious Temple tore,
The Antiphona.
O strange mysterious strife
Of open DEATH and hidden LIFE!
When on the cross my king did bleed,
LIFE seemed to die, DEATH died indeed.
The Versicle.
Lo we adore thee
Deard LAMB! and fall
thus low before thee
The Responsor.
'Cause by the conuenant of thy CROSS
Thou'hast saved at once the whole word's loss.
The Prayer.
O Lord IESV-CHRIST, son of the living GOD! interpose, I pray thee, thine own
precious death, thy CROSS and Passion, betwixt my soul and thy judgment, now
and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to grant unto me thy grace and
mercy; unto all quick and dead, remission and rest; to thy church peace and
concord; to us sinners life and glory everlasting. Who live and reignest with
the FATHER, in the unity of the HOLY GHOST, one GOD, world without end. Amen.

EVENSONG.
The Versicle.
Lord, by thy sweet and saving SIGN
The Responsor.
Defend us from our foes and thine.
. Thou shall open.
. And my mouth.
. O GOD make speed.
. O LORD make have.
. Glory be to.
. As it was in the.
THE HYMN.
But there were Rocks would nor relent at This.
Lo, for their own hearts, they rend his.
Their deadly hate lives still; and has
A wild reserve of wanton wrath;
Superfluous SPEAR! But there is a HEART stands by
Will look no wounds be lost, no deaths shall die.
Gather now thy Greif's ripe FRVIT. Great mother-maid!
Then sit thee down, and sing thine Eu'niong in the sad TREE's shade.
The Antiphona.
O sad, sweet TREE!
Woeful and joyful we
Both weep and sing in shade of thee.
When the dear NAILS did lock
And graft into thy gracious Stock
The hope; the health,
The worth, the wealth
Of all the ransomed WORLD, thou had the power
(In that propitious Hour)
To poise each precious limb,
And prove how light the World was, when it weighd with HIM.
Wide may thou spread
Thine Arms; And with thy bright and blisfull head
O'relook all Libanus. Thy lofty crown
The king himself is; Thou his humble THRONS.
Where yiedling and yet conquering he
Proved a new path of patient Victory.
When wondering death by death was slain,
And our Captivity his Captive taken.
The Versicle.
Lo we adore thee
Dread LAMB! and bow thus low before thee;
The Responsor.
'Cause by the conuenant of thy CROSS.
Thou'hast saved the world from certain loss.
The Prayer.
O lord IESV-CHRIST, son of the living, etc. 42.

COMPLINE.
The Versicle.
Lord by thy sweet and saving SIGN,
The Responsor.
Defend us from our foes and thine.
. Thou shall open.
. And my mouth.
. O GOD make speed.
. O LORD make have.
. Glory be
. As it was in
THE HIMN.
THe Complin hour comes last, to call
Us to our own LIVE's funeral.
Ah hartlesse task! yet hope takes head;
And lives in Him that here lies dead.
Run, MARY, run! Bring hither all the BLESSED
ARABIA, for thy Royal Phoenix'nest;
Pour on thy noblest sweets, Which, when they touch.
This sweeter BODY, shall indeed be such.
But must thy bed, lord, be a borow'd grave
Who lend'st to all things All the LIFE they have.
O rather use this HEART. thus far a fitter STONE,
'Cause, though a hard and cold one, yet it is thine own. Amen.
The Antiphona.
O save us then
Merciful KING of men!
Since thou would needs be thus
A SAVIOVR, and at such a rate, for us;
Save us, o save us, lord.
We now will own no shorter wish, nor name a narrower word.
Thy blood bids us be bold.
Thy Wounds give us fair hold.
Thy Sorrows chide our shame.
Thy Cross, thy Nature, and thy name
Advance our claim
And cry with one accord
Save them, o save them, lord.
EXPOSTVLATIO IESV XPI. CVM UNDO INGRAT^
SVM pulcher: at nemo tamen me diligit.
Sum nobilis: nemo est mihi qui seruiat:
Sum dives: a me nemo quicquam postulat.
Et cuncta possum: nemo me tamen tinet.
Aeternus exs^: quaeror a paucissinus.
Prudensque sum: sed me quis est qui consulit?
Et sum via: at per me quotusquisque ambulat?
Sum veritas: quare mihi non creditur?
Sum vita: verum rarus est qui me petit.
Sum vera lux: videre me neme cupit.
Sum misericors: nullus fidem in me collocat.
TV, si poris, non id mihi imputes, Homo:
Salus ^ibi est a me parata: hac vtere.
(...) ^^cud.
THE RECOMMENDATION.
These Hours, and that which houer's over my END,
Into thy hands, and heart, lord, I, commend.
Take Both to Thine Account, that I and mine
In that Hour, and in these, may be all thine.
That as I dedicate my deuoutest BREATH
To make a kind of LIFE for my lord's DEATH,
So from his living, and life-giuing DEATH,
My dying LIFE may draw a new, and never fleeting BREATH
UPON THE H. SEPVLCHER.
Here where our LORD once laid his Head,
Now the grave lies Buried.
VEXILLA REGIS, THE HYMN OF THE HOLY CROSS.
I.
LOok up, languisting Soul! Lo where the fair
BADG of thy faith calls back thy care,
And biddes thee never forget
Thy life is one long Debt
Of love to Him, who on this painful TREE
Paid back the flesh he took for thee.
II.
Lo, how the streams of life, from that full nest
Of loves, thy lord's too liberal breast,
Flow in an amorous flood
Of WATER wedding BLOOD.
With these he washed thy stain, transferred thy smart,
And took it home to his own heart.
III.
But though great LOVE, greedy of such sad gain
Vsurp't the Portion of THY pain,
And from the nails and spear
Turned the steel point of fear,
Their use is changed, not lost; and now they move,
Not stings of warth, but wounds of love.
IV.
Tall TREE of life! thy truth makes goo
What was till now never understood,
Though the prophetic king
Struck loud his faithful string.
It was thy wood he meant should make the TRHONE
For a more then SOLOMON.
V.
Larg throne of love! Royally spread
With purple of too Rich a red.
Thy crime is too much duty;
Thy Burden, too much beauty;
Glorious, or Greiuous more? thus to make good
Thy costly excellence with thy KING's own BLOOD.
VI.
Even balance of both worlds! our world of sin.
And that of grace heaun way'd in HIM,
Us with our price thou weighed'st;
Our price for us thou payed'st;
Soon as the right hand scale reioyc't to prove
How much Death weighed more light then love.
VII.
Hail, our alone hope! let thy fair head shoot
Aloft; and fill the nations with thy noble fruit.
The while our hearts and we
Thus graft our selves on thee;
Grow thou and they. And be thy fair increase
The sinner's pardon and the just man's peace.
Live, o for ever live and reign
The LAMB whom his own love has slain!
And let thy lost sheep live to'inherit
That KINGDOM which this CROSS did merit.
AMEN.
TO OUR B. LORD UPON THE CHOICE OF HIS Sepulcher.
How life and death in Thee
Agree!
Thou had a virgin womb,
And tomb.
A JOSEPH did betroth
Them both.
CHARITAS NIMIA. OR THE DEAR BARGAIN.
LOrd, what is man? why should he cost thee
So dear? what had his ruin lost thee?
Lord what is man? that thou have ouerbought
So much a thing of naught?
Love is too kind, I see; and can
Make but a simple merchant man.
'Twas for such sorry merchandise.
Bold Painters have putt out his Eyes.
Alas, sweet lord, what were to thee
If there were no such worms as we?
Heaven never the less still heaun would be,
Should Mankind dwell
In the deep hell.
What have his woes to do with thee?
Let him go weep
Over his own wounds;
SERAPHIMS will not sleep
Nor spheres let fall their faithful rounds.
Still would The youthful SPIRITS sing;
And still thy spacious Palace ring.
Still would those beauteous ministers of light
Burn all as bright,
And bow their flaming heads before thee
Still thrones and Dominations would adore thee
Still would those ever wakefull sons of fire
Keep warm thy praise
Both nights and days,
And teach thy loved name to their noble lyre.
Ler froward Dust then do it is kind;
And give it self for sport to the proud wind.
Why should a piece of peevish clay plead shares
In the Aeternity of thy old cares?
Why should you bow thy awful Breast to see
What mine own madnesses have done with me?
Should not the king still keep his throne
Because some desperate Fool's undone?
Or will the world's Illustrious eyes
Weep for every worm that dies;
Will the gallant sun
E're the less glorious run?
Will he hang down his golden head
Or e're the sooner seek his western bed,
Because some foolish fly
Grows wanton, and will die?
If I were lost in misery,
What was it to thy heaun and thee?
What was it to thy precious blood
If my foul Heart called for a flood?
What if my faithless soul and I
Would needs fall in
With guilt and sin,
What did the Lamb, that he should die?
What did the lamb, that he should need?
When the wolf sins, himself to bleed?
If my base lust,
Bargained with Death and well-beseeming dust
Why should the white
Lamb's bosom write
The purple name
Of my sin's shame?
Why should his unstained breast make good
My blushes with his own heart-blood?
O my SAVIOVR, make me see
How dearly thou have paid for me
That lost again my LIFE may prove
As then in DEATH, so now in love.
SANCTA MARIA DOLORVM OR THE MOTHER OF SORROWS. A Patheticall descant upon the
devout Plainsong OF STABAT MATTER DOLOROSA.
SANCTA MARIA DOLORVM.
I.
IN shade of death's sad TREE
Stood Doleful SHE.
Ah SHE! now by none other
Name to be known, alas, but SORROW's ANOTHER*
Before her eyes
Here Is, and the whole world's joys,
Hanging all torn she sees; and in his woes
And Pains, her Pangs and throes.
Each wound of His, from every Part,
All, more at home in her one heart.
II
What kind of marble than
Is that cold man
Who can look on and see,
Nor keep such noble sorrows company?
Sure eu'en from you
(My Flints) some drops are due
To see so many unkind swords contest
So fast for one soft Breast.
While with a faithful, mutual, flood
Her eyes bleed TEARS, his wounds weep BLOOD.
III.
O costly intercourse
Of deaths, and worse
Divided loves. While son and mother
Discourse alternate wounds to one another;
Quick Deaths that grow
And gather, as they come and go:
His Nails write swords in her, which soon her heart
Pays back, with more then their own smart
Her SWORDS, still growingt with his pain,
Turn SPEARS, and straight come home again
IV.
She sees her son, her GOD,
Bow with a load
Of borrowd sins; And swim
In woes that were not made for Him.
Ah hard command
Of love! Here must she stand
Charged to look on, and with a steadfast ey
See her life die:
Leaving her only so much Breath
As serves to keep alive her death.
V.
O Mother turtle-doue!
Soft sourse of love
That these dry lidds might borrow
Something from thy full Seas of sorrow!
O in that breast
Of thine (the nobest nest
Both of love's fires and floods) might I recline
This hard, cold, Heart of mine!
The chill lump would relent, and prove
Soft subject for the seige of love.
VI.
O teach those wounds to bleed
In me; me, so to read
This book of loves, thus writ
In lines of death, my life may copy it
With loyal cares.
O let me, here, claim shares;
Yield something in thy sad praerogatiue
(Great Queen of greifes) and give
Me too my tears; who, though all stone,
Think much that thou should mourn alone.
VII.
Yea let my life and me
Fix here with thee,
And at the Humble foot
Of this fair TREE take our etertall root.
That so we may
At least be in loves way;
And in these chaste wars while the winged wounds flee
So fast'twixt him and thee,
My breast may catch the kiss of some kind dart,
Though as at second hand, from either heart.
VIII.
O you, your own best Darts
Dear, doleful hearts!
Hail; and strike home and make me see
That wounded bosoms their own weapons be.
Come wounds! come darts!
Nailed hands! and peirced hearts!
Come your whole selves, sorrow's great son and mother!
Nor grudge a vonger-Brother
Of greifes his portion, who (had all their due)
One single wound should not have left for you.
IX.
Shall I, set there
So deep a share
(Dear wounds) and only now
In sorrows draw no Dividend with you?
O be more wise
Is not more soft, mine eyes!
Flow, tardy founts! and into decent showers
Dissolve my Days and Hours.
And if thou yet (faint soul!) deferr
To bleed with him, fail not to weep with her.
X.
Rich Queen, lend some releife;
At least an alms of grief
To'a heart who by sad right of sin
Could prove the whole su^me (too sure) due to him.
By all those stings
Of love, sweet bitter things,
Which these torn hands transcribed on thy true heart
O teach mine too the art
To study him so, till we mix
Wounds; and become one crucifix.
XI.
O let me suck the wine
So long of this chaste vine
Till drunk of the dear wounds, I be
A lost Thing to the world,, as it to me.
O faithful friend
Of me and of my end!
Fold up my life in love; and lay't beneath
My dear lord's vital death.
Lo, heart, thy hope's whole Plea! Her precious Breath
Powered out in prayrs for thee; thy lord's in death.
UPON THE BLEEDING CRVCIFIX A SONG.
I.
Jesus, no more! It is full tide*
From thy head and from thy feet,
From thy hands and from thy side
All the purple Rivers meet.
II.
What need thy fair head bear a part
In showers, as if thine eyes had none?
What need They help to drown thy heart,
That strives in torrents of it is own?
III.
Thy restless feet now cannot go
For us and our eternal good.
As they were ever wont. What though?
They swim. Alas, in their own flood.
IV.
Thy hands to give, thou can not lift;
Yet will thy hand still giving be.
It gives but o, it self's the gift.
It gives though bound; though bound'tis free.
V.
But o thy side, thy deep-digg'd side!
That has a double Nilus going.
Nor ever was the pharian tide
Half so fruitful, half so flowing.
VI.
No hair so small, but pays his river
To this red sea of thy blood
Their little channells can deliver
Something to the General flood.
VII.
But while I speak, whither are run
All the rivers named before?
I counted wrong. There is but one;
But o that one is one all ore.
VIII.
Rain-swoln rivers may rise proud,
Bent all to drown and ouerflow.
But when indeed all is ouerflow'd
They themselves are drowned too.
IX.
This thy blood's deluge, a dire chance
Dear LORD to thee, to us is found
A deluge of Deliverance;
A deluge least we should be drowned
N'ere wast thou in a sense so sadly true,
The WELL of living WATERS, Lord, till now.
UPON THE CROWN OF THORNS TAKEN DOWN From the head of our Bl. LORD, all
Bloody.
Know thou This, Soldier? It Is a much-chang'd plant which yet.
Thy self did set.
O who so hard a Husbandman did ever find;
A soil so kind?
Is not the soil a kind one, which returns
Roses for Thrones?
UPON THE BODY OF OUR BL. LORD, NAKED AND BLOODY.
THey' have left thee naked, LORD, O that they had!
This garment too I would they had denied.
Thee with thy self they have too richly clad;
Opening the purple wardrobe in thy side.
O never could there be garment too good*
For thee to wear, But this, of thine own Blood.
THE HYMN OF SANITE THOMAS IN ADORATION OF THE BLESSED SACRAMENT.
Ecce panis angeloru^

ADORO TE
WIth all the powers my poor Heart has
Of humble love and loyal Faith,
Thus low (my hidden life!) I bow to thee
Whom too much love has bowed more low for me.
Down down, proud sense! Discourses die.
Keep close, my soul's inquiring ey!
Nor touch nor taste must look for more
But each sit still in his own Door.
Your ports are all superfluous here,
Save That which lets in faith, the ear.
Faith is my skill. Faith can believe
As fast as love new laws can give.
Faith is my force. Faith strength affords
To keep pace with those powrfull words.
And words more sure, more sweet, then they
Love could not think, truth could not say.
O let thy wretch find that releife
Thou did afford the faithful theife.
Plead for me, love! Allege and show
That faith has farther, here, to go
And less to lean on. Because than
Though hidd as GOD, wounds writ thee man,
Thomas might touch; None but might see
At least the suffering side of thee;
And that too was thy self which thee did cover,
But here even That Is hid too which hides the other.
Sweet, consider then, that I
Though allowed not hand nor eye
To reach at thy loved Face; nor can
Taste thee GOD, or touch thee MAN
Both yet believe; And witness thee
My LORD too and my GOD, as loud as He.
Help, lord, my Hope increase;
And fill my portion in thy peace.
Give love for life; nor let my days
Grow, but in new powers to thy name and praise.
O dear memorial of that Death
Which lives still, and allows us breath!
Rich, Royal food! Bountyfull BREAD!
Whose use denies us to the dead;
Whose vital gust alone can give
The same leave both to eat and live;
Live ever Bread of loves, and be
My life, my soul, my surer self to me.
O soft self-wounding Pelican!
Whose breast weeps Balm for wounded man.
Ah this way bend thy benign flood
To'a bleeding Heart that gaspes for blood.
That blood, whose least drops soueraign be
To wash my worlds of sins from me.
Come love! Come LORD! and that long day
For which I languish, come away.
When this dry soul those eyes shall see,
And drink the vnseal'd sourse of thee.
When Glory's sun faith's shades shall chase,
And for thy veil give me thy FACE.
AMEN.
LAVDA SION SALVATOREM. THE HYMN. FOR THE BL. SACRAMENT.
I.
RIse, Royal SION! rise and sing
Thy soul's kind shepherd, thy hart's KING*
Stretch all thy powers; call if you can
Harpes of heaun to hands of man.
This soueraign subject sitts above
The best ambition of thy love.
II.
Lo the BREAD of LIEE, this day's
Triumphant Text, prouokes thy praise.
The living and life-giuing bread,
To the great twelve distributed
When LIFE, himself, at point to die
Of love, was his own LEGACY.
III.
Come, love! and let us work a song
Loud and pleasant, sweet and long;
Let lips and Hearts lift high the noise
Of so just and solemn joys,
Which on his white brows this bright day
Shall hence for ever bear away.
IV.
Lo the new LAW of a new LORD.
With a new Lamb blesses the Board.
The aged Pascha pleads not years
But spies love's dawn, and disappeares.
Types yield to TRVTHES; shades shrink away;
And their NIGHT dies into our Day.
V.
But lest THAT die too, we are bid.
Ever to do what he once did.
And by a mindful, mystic breath
That we may live, revive his DEATH*
With a well-bles't bread and wine.
Transsum'd, and taught to turn divine.
VI.
The Heaun-instructed house of FAITH
Here a holy Dictate has
That they but lend their Form and face,
Themselves with reverence leave their place
Nature, and name, to be made good.
By'a nobler Bread, more needful BLOOD.
VII.
Where nature's laws no leave will give,
Bold FAITH takes heart, and dares believe
In different species, name not things
Himself to me my SAVIOVR brings,
As meat in That, as Drink in this;
But still in Both one CHRIST he is.
VIII.
The Receiving Mouth here makes
Non wound nor breach in what he takes.
Let one, or one THOUSAND be
Here Diuiders, single he
Bears home no less, all they no more,
Nor leave they both less then before.
IX.
Though in it self this SOVERAIN FEAST
Be all the same to every Guest,
Yet on the same (life-meaning) Bread
The child of Death eats himself Dead.
Nor is it love's fault, but sin's dire skill
That thus from LIFE can DEATH distill.
X.
When the blessed signs thou broke shall see,
Hold but thy Faith entire as he
Who, howsoever clad, cannot come
Less then whole CHRIST in every crumme.
In broken forms a stable FAITH
Untouched her precious TOTAL has.
XI.
Lo the life-food of ANGELS then
Bowed to the lowly mouths of men!
The children's BREAD; the Bridegroom's WINE.
Not to be cast to dogs, or swine.
XII.
Lo, the full, final, SACRIEICE
On which all figures fixed their eyes.
The ransomed ISACK, and his ram;
The MANNA, and the PASCHAL Lamb.
XIII.
IESV MASTER, Just and true!
Our FOOD, and faithful SHEPHARD too?
O by thy self vouchsafe to keep,
As with thy self thou feed'st thy SHEEP.
XIV.
O let that love which thus makes thee
Mix with our low Mortality,
Lift our lean Souls, and set us up
Convictors of thine own full cup,
Coheirs of SAINTS. That so all may
Drink the same wine; and the same WAY.
Nor chang the PASTVRE, but the PLACE;
To feed of THEE in thine own FACE.
AMEN.

DIES IRAE DIES ILLA.
THE HYMN. OF THE CHVRCH, IN MEDITATION OF THE DAY OF IVDGMENT.
I.
HEars't thou, my soul, with serious things
Both the Psalm and sybyll sings
Of a sure judge, from whose sharp Ray
The world in flames shall fly away.
II.
O that fire! before whose face
Heaun and earth shall find no place.
O those eyes! whose angry light
Must be the day of that dread Night.
III.
O that trump! whose blast shall rnn
An even round with the circling Sun.
And urge the murmuring graves to bring
Pale mankind forth to meet his king.
IV.
Horror of nature, hell and Death!
When a deep Groan from beneath
Shall cry we come, we come and all
The caves of night answer one call
V.
O that Book! whose leaves so bright
Will set the world in severe light.
O that Judge! whose hand, whose eye
None can endure; yet none can fly
VI.
Ah then, poor soul, what will thou say?
And to what Patron choose to pray?
When stars themselves shall stagger; and
The most firm foot no more then stand.
VII.
But thou give leave (dread Lord) that we
Take shelter from thy self, in thee;
And wi^h the wings of thine own dove
Fly to thy scepter of soft love.
VIII.
Dear, remember in that Day
Who was the cause thou cams't this way.
Thy sheep was strayed; And thou would be
Even lost thy self in seeking me.
IX.
Shall all that labor, all that cost
Of love, and even that loss, be lost?
And this loved soul, judged worth no less
Then all that way, and weariness?
X.
Just mercy then, thy Reckning be
With my price, and not with me
'Twas paid at first with too much pain,
To be paid twice; or once, in vain.
XI.
Mercy (my judge) mercy I cry
With blushing Cheek and bleeding ey,
The conscious colors of my sin
Are red without and pale within.
XII.
O let thine own soft bowels pay
Thy self; And so discharge that day.
If sin can sigh, love can forgive.
O say the word my Soul shall live.
XIII.
Those mercyes which thy MARY found
Or who thy cross confes't and crowned,
Hope tells my heart, the same loves be
Still alive; and still for me.
XIV.
Though both my Prayres and tears combine,
Both worthless are; For they are mine.
But thou thy bounteous self still be;
And show thou art, by saving me.
XV.
O when thy last Frown shall proclaim
The flocks of goats to folds of flame,
And all thy lost sheep found shall be,
Let come ye blessed then call me.
XVI.
When the dread ITE shall divide
Those Limbs of death from thy left side,
Let those life-speaking lips command
That I inheritt thy right hand.
XVII.
O hear a suppliant heart; all crush't
And crumbled into contrite dust.
My hope, my fear! my Judge, my Friend!
Take charge of me, and of my END.
S. MARIA MAYOR. Dilecius meus mihi et ego illi* qui pascitur inter lilia.
(...).

THE HIMN O GLORIOSA DOMINA.
HAil, most high, most humble one!
Above the world; below thy SON
Whose blush the moon beauteously marres
And stains the timorous light of stares.
He that made all things, had not done
Till he had made Himself thy son
The whole world's host would be thy guest
And board himself at thy rich BREAST.
O boundles Hospitality!
The FEAST of all thing feeds on the.
The first Eve, mother of our FALL,
E're she bore any one, slew all.
Of Her unkind gift might we have
The inheritance of a hasty GRAVE;
Quick burye'd in the wanton TOMB
Of one forbidden bitt;
Had not a Better FRVIT forbidden it.
Had not thy healthful womb
The world's new eastern window bin
And given us heaven again, in giving HIM.
Thine was the Rosy DAWN that sprung the Day
Which renders all the stars she stole away.
Let then the Aged world be wise, and all
Prove nobly, here, unnatural.
It Is gratitude to forgett that other
And call the maiden Eve their morher.
Ye redeemed Nations far and near,
Applaud your happy selves in her,
(All you to whom this love belongs)
And keep't alive with lasting songs.
Let hearts and lips speak loud; and say
Hail, door of life: and sourse of day!
The door was shutt, the fountain sealed;
Yet LIGHT was seen and LIFE reueald.
The fountain sealed, yet life found way.
Glory to thee, great virgin's son
In bosom of thy FATHER's bliss.
The same to thee, sweet SPIRIT be done;
As ever shall be, was, and is.
AMEN.
IN THE GLORIOUS ASSVMPTION OF OUR BLESSED LADY. THE HYMN.
HArk! she is called, the parting hour is come
Take thy Farewell, poor world! heaun must go home.
A piece of heavenly earth; Purer and brighter
Then the chaste stars, whose choice lamps come to light her
While through the crystal orbs, clearer then they
She climbes; and makes afar more milkey way.
She Is called. Hark, how the dear immortal dove
Sighs to his silver mate rise up, my love!
Rise up, my fair, my spottlesse one!
The winter's past, the rain is gone.
The spring is come, the flowrs appear
No sweets, but thou, are wanting here.
Come away, my love!
Come away, my dove! cast off delay,
The court of heaven is come
To wait upon thee home; Come come away!
The flowrs appear.
Or quickly would, were thou once here
The spring is come, or if it stay,
It Is to keep time with thy delay.
The rain is gone, except so much as we
Detain in needful tears to weep the want of thee.
The winter's past.
or if he make less have,
His answer is, why she does so.
If summer come not, how can winter go.
Come away, come away.
The shrill winds chide, the waters weep thy stay;
The fountains murmur; and each lofty est three.
Bows low'st his heavy top, to look for thee.
Come away, my love.
Come away, my dove etc.
She Is called again. And will she go?
When heaun bidds come, who can say no?
Heaun calls her, and she must away.
Heaun will not, and she cannot stay.
GO then; go GLORIOUS.
On the golden wings
Of the bright youth of heaun, that sings
Under so sweet a Burden. Go,
Since thy dread son will have it so.
And while thou go, our song and we
Will, as we may, reach after thee.
HAIL, holy Queen of humble hearts!
We in thy praise will have our parts.
Thy precious name shall be.
Thy self to us; and we
With holy care will keep it by us.
We to the last
Will hold it fast
And no ASSVMPTION shall deny us.
All the sweetest showers
Of our fairest flowers
Will we strew upon it.
Though our sweets cannot make
It sweeter, they can take
Themselves new sweetness from it.
MARIA, men and Angels sing
MARIA, mother of our KING.
LIVE, rosy princess, LIVE. And may the bright
Crown of a most incomparable light
Embrace thy radiant brows. O may the best
Of everlasting joys bath thy white breast.
LIVE, our chaste love, the holy mirth
Of heaun; the humble pride of earth.
Live, ctown of women; Queen of men.
Live mistress of our song. And when
Our weak desires have done their breast,
Sweet Angels come, and sing the rest.
SANITE MARY MAGDALENE OR THE WEEPER.
Lo where a WOVNDED HEART with Bleeding EYES conspire.
Is she a FLAMING Fountain, or a Weeping fire!

THE WEEPER.
I.
HAil, sister springs!
Parents of syluer-footed rills!
Ever bubling things!
Thawing crystal! snowy hills,
Still spending, never spent! I mean
Thy fair eyes, sweet MAGDALENE!
II.
Heavens thy fair eyes be;
Heavens of euer-falling stars.
It Is seed-time still with thee
And stars thou sow'st, whose harvest dares
Promise the earth to counter shine
Whateuer makes heaun's forhead fine.
III.
But we'are deceived all.
Stars indeed they are too true;
For they but seem to fall,
As Heaun's other spangles do.
It is not for our earth and us
To shine in Things so precious.
IV.
Upwards thou do weep.
Heaun's bosom drinks the gentle stream.
Where th'milky rivers creep,
Thine floates above; and is the cream.
Waters above th'Heauns, what they be
We'are taught best by thy TEARS and thee.
V.
Every morn from hence
A brisk Cherub something sippes
Whose sacred influence
Adds sweetness to his sweetest Lips.
Then to his music. And his song
Tastes of this Breakfast all day long.
VI.
Not in the euening's eyes
When they Red with weeping are
For the Sun that dies,
Sitts sorrow with a face so fair,
No where but here did ever meet
Sweetness so sad, sadness so sweet.
VII.
When sorrow would be seen
In her brightest majesty
(For she is a Queen)
Then is she dressed by none but thee.
Then, and only then, she wears
Her proudest pearls; I mean, thy TEARS.
VIII.
The deaw no more will weep
The prim rose's pale cheek to deck,
The deaw no more will sleep
Nuzzel'd in the lilly's neck;
Much reather would it be thy TEAR.
And leave them Both to tremble here.
IX.
There Is no need at all
That the balsom-sweating bough
So coyly should let fall
His med'cinable tears; for now
Nature has learned tos'extract a deaw
More soueraign and sweet from you.
X.
Yet let the poor drops weep
(weeping is the ease of woe)
Softly let them creep,
Sad that they, are vanquished so.
They, though to others no releife,
balsom maybe, for their own grief.
XI.
Such the maiden gemme
By the purpling vine put on,
Peeps from her parent stem
And blushes at the bridegroomes sun.
This watery Blossom of thy eyn,
Ripe, will make the richer wine.
XII.
When some new bright Guest
Takes up among the stars a room,
And Heaun will make a feast,
Angels with crystal violls come
And deaw from these full eyes of thine
Their master's Water: their own Wine.
XIII.
Golden though he be,
Golden Tagus murmures tho;
Were his way by thee,
Content and quiet he would go.
So much more rich would he esteem
Thy silver, then his golden stream.
XIV.
Well does the May that lies
Smiling in thy cheeks, confess
The April in thine eyes.
Mutual sweetness they express.
No April ere lent kinder showers,
Nor May returned more faithful flowers.
XV.
O ckeeks! Bedds of chaste loves
By your own showers seasonably dash't
Eyes! nests of milky doves.
In your own wells decently washed,
O wit of love! that thus could place
Fountain and Garden in one face.
O sweet Contest; of woes.
With loves, of tears with smiles disputing!
O fair, and Freindly Foes,
Each other kissing and confuting!
While rain and sunshine, Cheeks and Eyes
Close in kind contrarietyes.
XVII.
But can these fair Floods be
Friends with the bosom fires that fill you!
Can so great flames agree
Aeternall Tears should thus distill thee!
O floods, o fires! o suns o showers!
Mixed and made friends by love's sweet powers.
XVIII.
It Was his well-pointed dart
That dug these wells, and dressed this wine;
And taught the wounded HEART
The way into these weeping Eyn.
Vain loves auant! bold hands forbear!
The lamb has dipp't his white foot here.
XIX.
And now where're he strayes,
Among the Galilean mountains,
Or more vnwellcome ways,
He Is followed by two faithful fountains;
Two walking baths; two weeping motions;
Portable, and compendious oceans.
XX.
O Thou, thy lord's fair store!
In thy so rich and rare expenses,
Even when he showed most poor,
He might provoke the wealth of Princes.
What Prince's wanton'st pride e're could
Wash with Silver, wipe with Gold.
XXI.
Who is that King, but he
Who calls't his Crown to be called thine,
That thus can boast to be
Waited on by a wandering mine,
A voluntary mint, that strowes
Warm silver shoures where're he goes!
XXII.
O precious Prodigal!
Fair spend-thrift of thy self! thy mea^ure
(merciless love!) is all.
Even to the last Pearl in thy threasure.
All places, Times, and objects be
Thy teare's sweet opportunity
XXIII.
Does the day star rise?
Still thy stars do fall and fall
Does day close his eyes?
Still the FOVNTAIN weeps for all.
Let night or day do what they will,
Thou have thy task* thou weepest still.
XXIV.
Does thy song lull the air?
Thy falling tears keep faith full time.
Does thy sweet-breathed pair
Up in clouds of incense climb?
Still at each sigh, that is, each stop,
A bead, that is, A TEAR, does drop,
XXV.
At these thy weeping gates,
(Watching their watery motion)
Each winged moment waits.
Takes his TEAR, and gets him gone.
By thine Ey's tinct enobled thus
Time lays him up; he is precious.
XXVI.
Not, so long she lived,
Shall thy tomb report of thee;
But, so long she greiued,
Thus must we date thy memory.
Others by moments, months, and years.
Measure their ages; thou, by TEARS.
XXVIII.
So do perfumes expire.
So sigh tormented sweets, oppressed
With proud vnpittying fires.
Such Tears the suffering Rose that is vexed
With ungentle flames does shed,
Sweating in a too warm bed.
XXVIII.
Say, the bright brothers,
The fugitive sons of those fair Eyes
Your fruitful mothers!
What make you here? what hopes can tice
You to be born? what cause can borrow
You from Those nests of noble sorrow?
XXIX.
Whither away so ^^st?
For sure the sordid ^^^th
Your Sweetness cannot ta^^^
Nor does the dust deserve their birth,
(...) whither have you then? o say
Why you trip so fast away?
XXX.
We go not to seek,
The darlings of Auroras bed*
The rose's modest Cheek
Nor the violet's humble head.
Though the Feild's eyes too WEEPERS be
Because they want such TEARS as we.
XXXI.
Much less mean we to trace
The Fortune of inferior gemmes,
Preferred to some proud face
Or pertch't upon feared Diadems.
Crowned Heads are toys. We go to meet
A worthy object, our lord's FEET.
A HYMN TO THE NAME AND HONOR OF THE ADMIRABLE SANITE TERESA, FOVNDRESSE of the
Reformation of the Discalced CARMELITES, both men and Women; A WOMAN for
Angelical height of speculation, for Masculine courage of performance, more
then a woman. WHO Yet a child, out ran maturity, and durst plott a Martyrdom;
Le Vray portraict de S.te Terese Fondatrice des Religieuses* and Religieux
refermez de l'ordre de N. Dame du mont Carmel. Decedee le 4^ Octo. 158^.
Canonisee le 12^. Mars, 1622.

(...) excudit

THE HYMN.
Love, thou art Absolute sole lord
OF LIFE and DEATH. To prove the word.
We Will now appeal to none of all
Those thy old Soldiers, Great and tall,
Ripe Men of Martyrdom, that could reach down
With strong arms, their triumphant crown;
Such as could with lusty breath
Speak loud into the face of death
Their Great LORD's glorious name, to none
Of those whose spacious Bosoms spread a throne
For LOVE at larg to fill, spare blood and sweat;
And see him take a private seat,
Making his mansion in the mild
And milky soul of a soft child
Scarce has she learned to lisp the name
Of Martyr; yet she thinks it shame
Life should so long play with that breath
Which spent can buy so brave a death.
She never undertook to know
What death with love should have to do;
Nor has she e're yet understood
Why to show love, she should shed blood
Yet though she cannot tell you why,
She can LOVE, and she can DIE.
Scarce has she Blood enough to make
Aguilty sword blush for her sake;
Yet has she'a HEART dares hope to prove
How much less strong is DEATH then LOVE.
Be love but there; let poor six years
Be posed with the maturest Fears
Man trembles at, you staight shall find
LOVE knows no nonage, nor the MIND.
It Is LOVE, not YEARS or LIMBS that can
Make the Martyr, or the man.
LOVE touched her HEART, and lo it beats
High, and burns with such brave heates;
Such thirsts to die, as dares drink up,
A thousand cold deaths in one cup.
Good reason. For she breathes All fire.
Her what breast heaues with strong desire
Of what she may with fruitles wishes
Seek for amongst her MOTHER's hisles.
Since it is not to be had at home
She Will trauail to a Maryrdom.
No home for hers confesses she
But where she may a Martyr be.
Sh'el to the Moors; And trade with them,
For this unvalued Diad^m.
She Will offer them her dearest Breath,
With CHRIST's Name in it, in change for death.
Sh'el bargain with them; and will give
Them GOD; teach them how to live
In him: or, if they this deny,
For him she will teach them how to DIE.
So shall she leave amongst them sown
Her LORD's Blood; or at lest her own.
FAREWELL then, all the world! Adieu.
TERESA is no more for you.
Farewell, all pleasures, sports, and joys,
(Never till now esteemed toys)
MOTHER's arms or FATHER's knee
Farewell house, and farewell home!
She Is for the Moors, and MARTYRDOM.
SWEET, not so fast! lo thy fair Spouse
Whom thou seekst with so swift vows,
Calls thee back, and bidds thee come
To Embrace a milder MARTYRDOM
Blessed powers forbid, Thy tender life
Should bleed upon a barborous knife;
Or some base hand have power to race
Thy Brest's chaste cabmet, and uncase
A soul kept there so sweet, o no;
Wise heaun will never have it so
THOU art love's victime; and must die
A death more mystical and high.
Into love's arms thou shall let fall
A still-suruiuing funeral.
His is the DART must make the DEATH
Whose stroke shall taste thy hallowed breath;
A Dart thrice dip't in that rich flame
Which writes thy spouse's radiant Name
Upon the roof of Heaven; where ay
It shines, and with a soueraign ray
Beats bright upon the burning faces
Of souls which in that name's sweet graces
Find everlasting smiles. So rare,
So spiritual, pure, and fair
Must be the immortal instrument
Upon whose choice point shall be sent
A life so loved; And that there be
Fit executioners for Thee.
The fairest and firstborn sons of fire
Blessed SERAPHIM, shall leave their quire
And turn love's soldiers, upon THEE
To exercise their archerie.
O how often shall thou complain
Of a sweet and subtle PAIN.
Of intolerable JOYS;
Of a DEATH, in which who dies
Loves his death, and dies ag^in.
And would for ever so be slain.
And lives, and dies; and knows not why
To live, But that he thus may never leave to DIE.
How kindly will thy gentle HEART
Kiss the sweettly-killing DART!
And close in his embraces keep
Those delicious Wounds, that weep
Balsom to heal themselves with thus
When These thy DEATHS, so numerous,
Shall all at l^st die into one,
And melt thy Soul's sweet mansion;
Like a soft lump of incense, hasted
By too hott a fire, and wasted
Into perfuming clouds, so fast
Shall thou exhale to Heaun at last
In a resolving SIGH, and then
O what? Ask not the Tongues of men.
Angels cannot tell, suffice,
Thy self shall feel thine own full joys
And hold them fast for ever there
So soon as you first appear,
The MOON of maiden stars, thy white
MISTRESS, attended by such bright
Souls as thy shining self, shall come
And in her first ranks make thee room;
Where amongst her snowy family
Immortal well comes wait for thee.
O what delight, when revealed LIEF shall stand
And teach thy lips heaven with his hand;
On which thou now may to thy wishes
Heap up thy consecrated kisses.
What joys shall seize thy soul, when she
Bending her blessed eyes on thee
(Those second Smiles of Heaven) shall dart
Her mild rays through thy melting heart!
Angels, thy old friends, there shall greet thee
Glad at their own home now to meet thee.
All thy good WORKS which went before
And waited for thee, at the door,
Shall own thee there; and all in one
We^ue a constellation
Of CROWNS, with which the KING thy spouse
Shall build up thy triumphant brows.
All thy old woes shall now smile on thee
And thy pains si^t bright upon thee
All thy SVFFRINGS be divine.
TEARS shall take comfort, and turn gemms
And WRONGS repent to Di^demms.
Even thy DEATH shall live; and new
Dress the soul that erst they slew.
Thy wounds shall blush to such bright scarres
As keep account of the LAMB's wars.
Those rare WORKS where thou shall leave writ*
Love's noble history, with wit
Taught thee by none but him, while here
They feed our souls, shall cloth THINE there.
Each heaunly word by whose hid flame
Our hard Hearts shall strike fire, the same
Shall flourish on thy brows* and be
Both fire to us and flame to thee;
Whose light shall live bright in thy FACE
By glory, in our hearts by grace.
Thou shall look round about, and see
Thousands of crowned Souls throng to be
Themselves thy crown. Sons of thy vows
The virgin-births with which thy soueraign spouse
Made fruitful thy fair soul, go now
And with them all about thee bow
To Him, put on (he will say) put on
(My rosy love) That thy rich zone
Sparkling with the sacred flames
Of thousand souls, whose happy names
Heaven keep upon thy score. (Thy bright
Life brought them first to kiss the light
That kindled them to stars.) and so
Thou with the LAMB, thy lord, shall go;
And whereso'ere he setts his white
Stepps, walk with HIM those ways of light
Which who in death would live to see,
Must learn in life to die like thee.
AN APOLOGY. FOR THE FOREGOING HYMEN as having been writ when the author was
yet among the protestants.
THus have I back again to thy bright name
(Fair flood of holy fires!) trans fus'd the flame
I took from reading thee, it is to thy wrong
I know, that in my weak and worthless song
Thou here art set to shine where thy full day
Scarce dawnes. O pardon if I dare to say
Thine own dear books are guilty. For from thence
I learned to know that love is eloquence.
That hopeful maxim gave me heart to try
If, what to other tongues is tuned so high,
Thy praise might not speak English too; forbid
(By all thy mysteryes that here ly hid)
Forbid it, mighty Love! let no fond Hate
Of names and words, so far praeiudicate.
Souls are not SPANIARDS too, one freindly flood
Of BAPTISM blends them all into a blood.
CHRIST's faith makes but one body of all souls
And love's that body's soul, no law controwlls
Our free traffic for heaven we may maintain
Peace, sure, with piety, though it come from SPAIN.
What soul so e're, in any language, can
Speak heaven like here is is my souls countryman.
O'tis not spanish, but'tis heaven she speaks!
It Is heaven that lies in ambush there, and bre^ks
From thence into the wondering reader's breast;
Who feels his warm HEART into a nest
Of little EAGLES and young loves, whose high
Fli^hts scorn the lazy dust, and things that die.
There are now whose draughts (as deep as hell)
drink vp^l SPAIN in sack. Let my soul swell
With thee, strong wine of love! let others swim
In puddles; w^ w^ll pledge this SERAPHIM
B^wles full of richer blood then blush of grape
Was ever guilty of, Change we too 'our shape
(My soul,) Some drink from men to beasts, o then
Drink we till we prove more, nor less, then men,
'And turn not beasts, but Angels. Let the king
Me ever into these his cellars bring
Where flows such wine as we can have of none
But HIM who trod ^he wine press all alone
Wine of youth, life, and the sweet Deaths of love;
W^ne of immortal mixture; which can prove
I^'^ Tincture from the rosy nectar; wine
That can ex^l weak EARTH; and so refine
O^r dust that at one draught, mortality
May drink it self up, and forget to die.
THE FLAMING HEART UPON THE BOOK AND Picture of the seraphicall saint, TERESA,
(AS SHE IS VSVALLY EXpressed with a SERAPHIM biside her.)
WEll meaning readers! you that come as friends
And catch the precious name this piece pretends;
Make not too much have to'admire
That fair-cheek't fallacy of fire.
That is a SERAPHIM, they say
And this the great TERESIA.
Readers, be ruled by me; and make
Here a well-plac't and wise mistake
You must transpose the picture quite,
And spell it wrong to read it right;
Read HIM for her, and her for him;
And call the SAINT the SERAPHIM.
Pa^nter, what did thou understand
To put her dart into his hand!
See, even the years and size of him
Sh^wes this the mother SERAPHIM.
This is the mistress flame; and duteous he
Her happy fireworks, here, comes down to see
O most poor-spirited of men!
Had thy cold Pencil kissed her PEN
Thou could not so unkindly err
To show us This faint shade for HER
Why man, this speaks pure mortal frame;
And mockes with female FROST love's manly flame.
One would suspect thou meant'st to print
Some weak, inferior, woman saint.
But had thy pale-fac't purple took
Fire from the burning checks of that bright Book
Thou would on her have heap't up all
That could be found SERAPHICALL;
What e're this youth of fire wears fair,
Rosy fingers, radiant hair,
Glowing cheek, and glistering wings,
All those fair and flagrant things,
But before all, that fiery DART
Had filled the Hand of this great HEART.
Do then as equal right requires,
Since HIS the blushes be, and here is the fires,
Resume and rectify thy rude design;
Undress thy Seraphim into MINE.
Redeem this injury of thy art;
Give HIM the vail, give her the dart.
Give Him the vail; that he may cover
The Red cheeks of a riuall'd lover.
Ashamed that our world, now, can show
Nests of new Seraphims here below.
Give her the DART for it is she
(Fair youth) shootes both thy shaft and THEE
Say, all ye wise and well-peire't hearts
That live and die amidst her darts,
What is it your tastfull spirits do prove
In that rare life of Her, and love?
Say and bear wittnes. Sends she not
A SERAPHIM at every shot?
What magazins of immortal ARMS there shine!
Heaun's great artillery in each loue-spun line.
Give then the dart to her who gives the flame;
Give him the veil, who gives the shame.
But if it be the frequent fate
Of worst faults to be fortunate;
If all is praescription; and proud wrong
Hearkens not to an humble song;
For all the gallantry of him,
Give me the suffting SERAPHIM.
His be the bravery of all those Bright things,
The glowing cheeks, the glistering wings;
The Rosy hand, the radiant DART;
Leave HER alone THE FLAMING HEART.
Leave her that; and thou shall leave her
Not one loose shaft but love's whole quiver,
For in love's field was never found
A nobler weapon then a WOVND.
Love's passiues are his actiu'st part.
The wounded is the wounding heart
O HEART! the aequall poise of lou'es both parts
Big alike with wound and darts.
Live in these conquering leaves; live all the same;
And walk through all tongues one triumphant FLAME
Live here, great HEART; and love and die and kill;
And bleed and wound; and yield and conquer still.
Let this immortal life wherere it comes
Walk in a crowd of loves and MARTYRDOMES.
Let mystic DEATHS wait on it; and wise souls be
The loue-slain witnesses of this life of thee.
O sweet incendiary! show here thy art,
Upon this carcass of a hard, cold, heart,
Let all thy scattered shafts of light, that play
Among the leaves of thy larg Books of day,
Combined against this BREAST at once break in
And take away from me my self and sin,
This gracious Robbery shall thy bounty be;
And my best fortunes such fair spoils of me.
O thou undaunted daughter of desires!
By all thy dowr of LIGHTS and FIRES;
By all the eagle in thee, all the dove;
By all thy lives and deaths of love;
By thy larg draughts of intellectual day,
And by thy thrists of love more large then they;
By all thy brim-fill'd Bowls of feirce desire
By thy last Morning's draught of liquid fire;
By the full kingdom of that final kiss
That seized thy parting Soul, and sealed thee his;
By all the heavens thou have in him
(Fair sister of the SERAPHIM!
By all of HIM we have in THEE;
Leave nothing of my SELF in me.
Let me so read thy life, that I
Unto all life of mine may die.
A SONG.
LORD, when the sense of thy sweet geace
Sends up my soul to seek thy face.
Thy blessed eyes breed such desire,
I die in love's delicious Fire.
O love, I am thy SACRIFICE.
Be still triumphant, blessed eyes.
Still shine on me, fair suns! that I
Still may behold, though still I die.
Second part.
Though still I die, I live again;
Still longing so to be still slain,
So gainful is such loss of breach.
I die even in desire of death.
Still live in me this loving strife
Of living DEATH and dying LIFE.
For while thou sweetly slayest me
Dead to my self, I live in Thee.
PRAYER. AN ODE, WHICH WAS Praefixed to a little Prayer Book giuin to a young.
GENTLEWOMAN.
LO here a little volume, but great Book!
A nest of newborn sweets;
Whose native fires disdaining
To ly thus folded, and complaining
Of these ignoble sheets,
Affect more comely bands
(Fair one) from the kind hands
And confidently look
To find the rest
Of a rich binding in your BREAST.
It is, in one choice handful, heauenn; and all
Heaun's Royal host; incamp't thus small
To prove that true schools use to tell,
Ten thousand Angels in one point can dwell.
It is love's great artillery
Which here contracts il self, and comes to ly
Close couch't in their white bosom: and from thence
As from a snowy fortress of defense,
Against their ghostly foes to take their part,
And fortify the hold of their chaste heart.
It is an armory of light
Let constant use but keep it bright,
You Will find it yields
To holy hands and humble hearts
More swords and sheilds
Then sin has snares, or Hell has darts.
Only be sure
The hands be pure
That hold these weapons; and the eyes
Those of turtles, chaste and true;
Wakefull and wise;
Here is a friend shall fight for you,
Hold but this book before their heart;
Let prayer alone to play his part,
But o the heart
That studyes this high ART
Must be a sure housekeeper;
And yet no fleeper.
Dear soul, be strong.
MERCY will come e're long
And bring his besom fraught with blessings,
Flowers of never fading graces
To make immortal dressings
For worthy souls, whose wise embraces
Store up themselves for HIM, who is alone
The SPOUSE of Virgins and the Virgin's son.
But if the noble BRIDEGROOM, when he come,
Shall find the loytering HEART from home;
Leaving her chaste abode
To gadde abroad
Among the gay mates of the god of flies;
To take her pleasure and to play
And keep the deuill's holyday;
To danceth' sunshine of some smiling
But beguiling
Spheres of sweet and sugared Lies,
Some slippery Pair
Of false, perhaps as fair,
Flattering but forswearing eyes;
Doubtless some other heart
Will get the start
Mean while, and stepping in before
Will take possession of that sacred store
Of hidden sweets and holy joys.
WORDS which are not heard with EARS
(Those tumultuous shops of noise).
Effectual wispers, whose still voice
The soul it self more feels then hears;
Amorous languishments; luminous trances;
SIGHTS which are not seen with eyes;
Spiritual and soul-peircing glances
Whose pure and subtle lightning flies
Home to the heart, and setts the house on fire
And melts it down in sweet desire
Yet does not stay
To ask the windows leave to pass that way;
Delicious DEATHS; soft exalations
Of soul; dear and divine annihilations;
A thousand unknown rites
Of joys and rarefy'd delights;
Ahundred thousand goods, glories, and graces,
And many a mystic thing
Which the divine embraces
Of the dear spouse of spirits with them will bring
For which it is no shame
That dull mortality must not know a name.
Of all this store
Of blessings and ten thousand more
(If when he come
He find the Heart from home)
Doubtless he will unload
Himself some other where,
And pour abroad
His precious sweets
On the fair soul whom first he meets.
O fair, o fortunate! O rich, o dear!
O happy and thrice happy she
Selected dove
Who ere she be,
Whose early love
With winged vows
Makes have to meet her morning spouse
And close with his immortal kisses.
Happy indeed, who never misses
To improve that precious hour,
And every day
Seize her sweet prey
All fresh and fragrant as he rises
Dropping with a baulmy Shower
A delicious dew of spices;
O let the blissfull heart hold fast
Her heaunly arm-full, she shall taste
At once ten thousand paradises;
She shall have power
To rifle and deflour
The rich and roseall spring of those rare sweets
Which with a swelling bosom there she meets
Boundles and infinite
Bottomless treasures
Of pure inebriating pleasures.
Happy proof! she shall discover
What joy, what bliss,
How many Heavens at once it is
To have her GOD become her LOVER.
TO THE SAME PARTY COUNCEL CONCERNING HER CHOICE.
DEar, heaun-designed SOUL!
Amongst the rest
Of suitors that beseige your Maiden breast,
Why my not I
My fortune try
And venture to speak one good word
Not for my self alas, but for my dearer LORD?
You'aue seen already, in this lower sphere
Offroth and bubbles, what to look for here.
Say, gentle soul, what can you find
But painted shapes,
Peacocks and Apes,
Illustrious flves,
Gilded dunghills, glorious LIES,
Goodly surmises
And deep disguises,
Oaths of water, words of wind?
TRVTH biddes me say, it is time you cease to trust
Your soul to any son of dust.
It Is time you listen to a brauer love,
Which from above
Calls you up higher
And biddes you come
And choose your room
Among his own fair sons of fire,
Where you among
The golden throng
That watches at his palace doors
May pass along
And follow those fair stars of yours;
Stars much too fair and pure to wai^ upon
The false smiles of a sublunary sun.
Sweet, let me prophesy that at last it will prove
Your wary love
Laves up his purer and more precious vows,
And means them for a far more worthy SPOUSE
Then this world of Lies can give ye
'Eun for Him with whom nor cost,
Nor love, nor labor can be lost;
Him who never will deceive ye.
Let not my lord, the Mighty lover
of souls, disdain that I discover
The hidden art
Of his high stratagem to win your heart,
It was his heaunly art
Kindly to cross you
In your mistaken love,
That, at the next remove
Thence he might toss you
And strike your troubled heart
Home to himself; to hide it in his breast
The bright ambrosiall nest,
Of love, of life, and everlasting rest.
Happy Mystake!
That thus shall wake
Your wise soul, never to be won
Now w^^h a love below the sun.
Your first cho^ce fails, o when you choose again
May it not be amongst the sons of Men.
ALEXIAS THE COMPLAINT. OF THE FORSAKEN WIFE OF SANITE ALEXIS.
THE FIRST ELEGY.
I ^^te the roman youth's loved praise and pride,
Whom long none could obtain, though thousands tried,
Lo here am left (alas), For my lost mate
Tembrace my tears, and kiss an unkind FATE.
Sure in my early woes stars were at strife,
And tried to make a WIDOW ere a WIFE.
Nor can I tell (and this new tears does breed)
In what strange path my lord's fair footsteppes bleed.
O knew I where he wandered, I should see
Some solace in my sorrow's certainty
I Would send my woes in words should weep for me.
(Who knows how powrfull well - writ praires would be?)
Sending's too slow a word, my self would fly.
Who knows my own heart's woes so well as I?
But how shall I steal hence? ALEXIS thou
Ah thou thy self, alas, have taught me how.
Love too, that leads the, would lend the wings
To bear me harmless through the hardest things.
And where love lends the wing, and leads the way,
What dangers can there be dare say me nay?
If drowned; sweet is the death endured for HIM,
The noted sea shall change his name with me;
I, amongst the blessed STARS a new name shall be.
And sure where lovers make their watery graves.
The weeping mariner will augment the waves.
For who so hard, but passing by that way
W^ll take acquaintance of my woes, and say
Here' was the roman MAID found a hard fare
While through the world she sought her wandering mate.
Here perish't she, poor heart, heauns, be my vows
As true to me, as she was to her spouse.
O live, so rare a love! live! and in thee
The too frail life of femal constancy.
F^rewell; and shine, fair soul, shine there above
Firm in thy crown, as here fast in thy love.
There ^hy lost fugitive thou' have found at last.
Be happy; and for ever hold him fast.
THE SECOND ELEGY.
THough All the joys I had fleed hence with Thee,
Unkind! yet are my TEARS still true to me
IN am wedded ore again since thou art gone;
Nor could thou, cruel, leave me quite alone.
ALEXIS' widow now is sorrow's wife.
With him shall I weep our my weary life.
Welcome, my sad sweet Ma^e! Now have I got
At last a constant love that leaves me not.
Firm he, as thou art false, Not need my cries
Thus vex the earth and tear the skies.
For him, alas, n'ere shall I need to be
Troublesome to the world, thus, as for thee.
For thee I talk to trees; with silent groves
Expostulate my woes and much wronged loves.
Hills and relentlesse rocks, or if there be
Things that in hardness more allude to thee;
To these I talk in tears, and tell my pain;
And answer too for them in tears again.
How often have I wept out the weary sun!
My watery hour-glasse has old time out run.
O I am le^^ned grown, Poor love and I
Have studied over all astrology.
I Am perfect in heaun's st^te* w^^h every starr
My skillfull grief is grown familiar.
Rise, fairest of those fires; what e're thou be
Whose rosy beam shall point my sun to me.
Such as the sacred light that erst did bring
The EASTERN princes to their infant king.
O rise, pure lamp! and lend thy golden ray
That weary love at last may find his way.
THE THIRD ELEGY.
RIch, churlish LAND! that hid'st so long in thee,
My treasures, rich, alas, by robbing me.
Needs must my miseryes ^we that man a spite
Who e're he be was the first wandering knight.
O had he nere been at that cruel ^ost
NATVRE'S virginity had nere been lost.
Seas had not bin rebuk't by s^way oars
But ly'n locked up safe in their sacred shores.
Men had not spurned at mountains; nor made w^rrs
With rocks; nor bold hands struck the world's strong bars.
Nor lost in too larg bounds, our little Rome
Full sweetly with it self had dwell't at home.
My poor ALEYIS, then in peaceful life,
Had under some low roof loved his plain wife
But now, ah me, from where he has no foes
He flies; and into wilful exile goes.
Cruel return. Or tell the reason why
Thy dearest parents have deserved to die.
And I* what is my crime I cannot tell.
Unless it be a crime to' have loved too well.
If Heates of holyer love and high desire
Make big thy fair breast with immortal fire,
What needs my virgin lord fly thus from me,
Who only wish his virgin wife to be?
Witness, chaste heauns! no happyer vows I know
Then to a virgin GRAVE untouched to go.
Love's truest Knott by venus is not tied;
Nor do embraces only make a bride.
The QVEEN of angels, (and men chaste as You)
Was MAIDEN WIFE and MAIDEN MOTHER too.
CECILIA, Glory of her name and blood
With happy gain her maiden vows made good.
The lusty bridegroom made approach young man*
Take heed (said she) take heed, VALERIAN*
My bosome's guard, a SPIRIT great and strong,
Stands armed, to shield me from all wanton wrong.
My Chastity is sacred; and my sleep
Wakefull, her dear v^wes vndefil'd to keep.
PALLAS bears arms, forsooth, and should there be
No fortress built fortrue VIRGINITY?
No gaping gorgon, this. None, like the rest
Of your learned lies. Here you will find no such jest.
I Am yours, O were my GOD, my CHRIST so too,
I Would know no name of love on earth but you.
He yields, and straight Baptized, obtains the grace
To gaze on the fair soldier's glorious face.
Both mixed at last their blood in one rich bed
Of rosy MARTYRDOM, twice Married.
O burn our hymen bright in such high Flame.
Thy torch, terrestrial love, have here no name.
How sweet the mutual yoke of man and wife,
When holy fires maintain love's Heaunly life!
But I, (so help me heaun my hopes to see)
When thousand sought my love, loved none but Thee.
Still, as their vain tears my firm vows did try,
ALEXIS, he alone is mine (said I)
Half true, alas, half false, proves that poor line.
ALEXIS is alone; But is not mine.
DESCRIPTION. OF A RELIGIOUS HOUSE AND CONDITION OF LIFE (OVT OF BARCLAY.)
NO roofes of gold over riotous tables shining
Whole days and suns devoured with endless dining;
No sails of tyrian sylk proud pauements sweeping;
Nor iuory couches costlyer slumbers keeping;
False lights of flairing gemmes; tumultuous joys;
Halls full of flattering men and frishing boys;
What e're false shows of short and flippery good
Mix the mad sons of men in mutual blood.
But WALKS and vnshorn woods; and souls, just so
Vnforc't and genuine; but not shady tho.
Our lodgings hard and homely as our fare.
That chaste and cheap, as the few clothes we wear.
Those, course and negligent, As the natural locks
Of these loose groves, rough as th'vn polish't rocks.
A hasty Portion of praescribed sleep;
Obedient slumbers? that can wake and weep,
And sing, and, and sigh, and work, and sleep again;
Still rolling a round spear of still-returning pain.
Hands full of hearty labors; do much, that more they may,
And work for work, not wages; let to morrow's
New drops, wash off the sweat of this daye's sorrows.
A long and dayly-ding life, which breaths
A respiration of reviving deaths.
But neither are there those ignoble stings
That nip the bosom of the world's best things,
And lash Earth-laboring souls.
No cruel guard of diligent cares, that keep
Crowned woes awake; as things too wise for sleep.
But reverent discipline, and religious fear,
And soft obedience, find sweet biding here;
Silence, and sacred rest; peace, and pure joys;
Kind loves keep house, ly close, make no noise,
And room enough for Monarchs, while none swells
Beyond the kingdoms of contentfull Cells.
The self-remembring SOUL sweetly recouers
Her kindred with the stars; not basely houers
Below; But meditates her immortal way
Home to the original sourse of LIGHT and intellectual Day.
AN EPITAPH UPON A YOUNG MARRIED COVPLE DEAD AND BVRYED TOGETHER.
TO these, whom DEATH again did wed,
This GRAVE'S their second Marriage Bed*
For though the hand of fate could force
'Twixt SOUL and BODY a Divorce,
It could not sunder man and WIEE,
'Cause They Both lived but one life.
Peace, good Reader. Do not weep.
Peace, The Lovers are asleep.
They, sweet Turtles, folded ly
In the last knott love could ty.
And though they ly as they were dead,
Their Pillow stone, their sheets of lead,
(Pillow hard, and sheeres not warm)
Love made the bed; They Will take no harm
Let them sleep: let them sleep on.
Till this stormy night be gone,
Till the 'Aeternall morrow dawn;
Then the curtains will be drawn
'And they wake into a light.
Whose day shall never die in Night.
DEATH'S LECTVRE AND THE FUNERAL OF A YOUNG GENTLEMAN.
DEar Relics of a dislodged SOUL, whose lack
Makes many a mourning paper put on black!
O stay a while, ere thou draw in thy head
And wind thy self up close in thy cold bed.
Stay but a little while, until I call
A summons worthy of thy funeral.
Come then, YOVTH BEAVTY, and blood!
All the soft powers.
Whose sylken flatterves swell a few fond hours
Into a false aeternity. Come man;
Hyperbolized NOTHING! know thy span;
Take thine own measure here down, down, and bow
Before thy self in thine idaea; thou
Huge emptynes! contract thy self; and shrink
All thy Wild circle to a Point. Osink
Lower and lower yet; till thy lean size
Call heaun to look on thee with norrow eyes.
Lesser and lesser yet; till thou begin
To show a face, fit to confess thy Kin,
Thy neigbourhood to NOTHING.
Proud looks, and lofty eyliddes, here putt on
Your selves in your vnfaign'd reflection,
Here, gallant ladies! this impartial glass
(Though you be painted) shows you your true face.
These death-seal'd lips are they dare give the ly
To the loud Boasts of poor Mortality
These curtain'd windows, this retired eye
Outstares the liddes of larg-look't tyranny.
This posture is the brave one this that lies
Thus low, stands up (me thinks,) thus and defies
The world. All-daring dust and ashes! only you
Of all interpreters read Nature True.
TEMPERANCE. OF THE CHEAP PHYSICIAN UPON THE TRANSLATION OF LESSIVS.
Go now; and with some daring drugg
Bait thy disease. And whilst they tugge,
Thou to maintain their precious strife
Spend the dear treasures of thy life.
Go, take physic Dote upon
Some big-nam'd composition.
Th'Oraculous DOCTOR'S mystic bills;
Certain hard WORDS made into pills,
And what at last shalt' gain by these?
Only a costlyer disease.
That which makes us have no need
Of physic, that is PHYSIC indeed.
Hark hither, Reader! will thou see
Nature her own physician be?
Wilt' see a man, all his own wealth,
His own music, his own health;
A man whose sober soul can tell
How to wear her garments well.
Her garments, that upon her sit
As garments should do, close and fit;
A well-cloth'd soul; that is not oppest
Nor choked with what she should be dressed.
A soul sheathed in a crystal shrine;
Through which all her bright features shine;
As when a piece of wanton lawn
A thin, aeriall veil, is drawn
Over beauty's face seeming to hide
more sweetly shows the blushing bride.
A soul, whose intellectual beams
No mists do mask, no lazy steames.
A happy soul, that all the way.
To HEAVEN rides in a summer's day.
Wouldst' see a man, whose well-warm'd blood*
Bathes him in a genuine flood!
Aman, whose tuned humors be
A seat of rarest harmony?
Wouldst' see blithe looks, fresh cheeks beguil
Age? would see december smile?
Wouldst' see nests of new roses grow
In a bed nf renerend snow?
Warm thoughts, free spirits flattering
Winter's self into a SRING.
In sum, would see a man that can.
Live to be old, and still a man?
Whose latest and most leaden hours
Fall with soft wings, stuck with soft flowers;
And when life's sweet fable ends,
Soul and body part like friends;
No quarrels, murmurs* no delay;
A KISS, a SIGH, and so away.
This rare one, reader, would thou see?
Hark hither; and thy self be HE.
HOPE.
HOpe whose weak being ruined is
Alike if it succeed or if it miss!
Whom ill or good does equally confound
And both the horns of fate's dilemma wound.
Vain shadow; that do vanish quite
Both at full noon and perfect night!
The stars have not a possibility
Of blessing Thee.
If things then from their end we happy call,
It Is hope is the most hopeless thing of all.
Hope, thou bold Taster of delight!
Who in stead of doing so, deuourst it quite.
Thou bringst us an estate, yet leau'st us poor
By clogging it with legacyes before.
The joys which we entire should wed
Come deflour'd-virgins to our bed
Good fortunes without gain imported be
Such mighty custom's paid to Thee
For joy like wine kep't close, does better taste;
If it take air before his spirits wast.
Hope fortun's cheating lottery
Where for one prize, an hundred blankes there be.
Fond archer, hope. Who take thine aim so far
That still or short or wide thine arrows are
Thin empty cloud which th-ey deceiues
With shapes that our own fancy gives.
A cloud which gilt and painted now appears
But must drop presently in tears
When thy false beams over reason's light preuail,
By IGNES FATVI for north stars we sail.
Brother of fear more gayly clad.
The merryer fool oath two, yet quite as mad.
Sire of repenrance, child of fond desire
That blow'st the chymick and the louer's fire.
Still leading them insensibly' on
With the strong witchcraft of Anon.
By thee the one does changing nature through
Her endless labyrinth's pursue,
And the other chases woman; while she goes
More ways and turns then hunted nature knows.
M. COWLEY.

M. CRASHAWS. ANSWER FOR HOPE.
DEar hope! earth's dowry, and heaun's debt!
The entity of those that are not yet.
Subtlest, but surest being! Thou by whom
Our nothing has a definition!
Substantial shade! whose sweet allay
Blends both the noones of night and day.
Fates cannot find out a capacity
Of hurting thee.
From Thee their lean dilemma, with blunt horn,
Shrinkes, as the sick moon from the wholesome morn
Rich hope! love's legacy, under lock
Of faith! still spending, and still growing stock!
Our crown-land lies above yet each meal brings
A seemly portion for the sons of kings.
Nor will the virgin joys we wed
Come less unbroken to our bed,
Because that from the bridal ckeek of bliss
Thou steal'st us down a distant kiss.
Hope's chaste stealth harms no more ioye's maidenhead
Then spousall rites preiudge the marriage bed.
Fair hope! our earlyer heaven by thee
Young time is taster to eternity
Thy generous wine with age grows strong, not sour.
Nor does it kill thy fruit, to smell thy flower.
Thy golden, growing, head never hangs down
Till in the lap of loves full noone
It falls; and dies! o no, it melts away
As does the dawn into the day.
As lumpes of sugar loose themselves; and twine
Their supple essence with the soul of wine.
Fortune? alas, above the world's low wars
Hope walks; and kickes the curld heads of conspiring stars.
Her keel cutts not the waves where These winds stir
Fortune's whole lottery is one blank to her.
Sweet hope! kind cheat! fair fallacy by thee
We are not WHERE nor What we be,
But WHAT and WHERE we would be. Thus art thou
Our absent PRESENCE, and our future Now.
Faith's sister! nurse of fair desire!
Fear's antitode! a wise and well-stay'd fire!
Temper twixt chill despair, and torrid joy!
Queen Regent in young love's minority!
Though the vexed chymick vainly chases
His fugitive gold through all her faces;
Though love's more feirce, more fruitless, fires assay
One face more fugitive then all they;
True hope's a glorious hunter and her chase,
The GOD of nature in the feilds of grace.
VIVE IESV.

