AN ABSTRACT of some late CHARACTERS.

OR, How the principal means appointed for our Reformation is become the maine
fuel of our Wickedness.

Laid down in Sundry Characters of L. Bishops. Dumb Dogs. Non-Residenciaries.
Men-Pleasers. Unpreaching Ministers, that Edify to damnation,
By their Scandalous Living. False wresting The Scripture.
Mis-applying The Scripture.




So turning the Truth of GOD into a Lie, that they may Discourage the Godly;
Encourage the Wicked.



In which the Blind world may see, to their shame, how Satan guls them with a
multitude of Misprisions, and false surmises against the Godly; That so he may
Barricado their hearts against all Good.

Necessary to be known in these times of Discovery.

LONDON, Printed for James Crumpe, and are to be sold at his house in Little
Bartholomews, in Well-yard 1643.

1 For L. B. WOe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites! For ye shut up the
Kingdom of heaven against men; For ye neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye them, that are entering, to go in. Ye have taken away the key of
knowledge, etc. Luke 11. 52. Mat. 23. 13. See more, v. 4, 5, 6, 7. 23, 24, 25.
27, 28. to 36. Joh. 11. 47, 48. 53. and 12. 10, 11. 3 John 9. 10. 2 For D. D.
Her watchmen are blind. They are Shepherds that cannot understand. They are all
ignorant. They are all Dumb-Dogs, they cannot bark. They are greedy dogs that
can never have enough. Isa 56. 10, 11. See more Heb. 13, 17. Ezekiel. 3. 17, to
22. and 33. 6, 7. and 34. 10. Luke 16. 2. 10. to 16. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4. 3 For.
N. R. Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel, that do feed themselves! should not
the Shepherds feed the flocks? ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the
wool: ye kill them, that are fed: but ye feed not the flock. The diseased
have ye not strengthened; neither have ye healed that which was sick; neither
have ye bound up that which was broken; nor brought again that which was
driven away; nor sought that which was lost. But with force and with cruelty
have ye ruled them. They were scattered because there was no Shepherd. They
became meat, etc. Ezekiel. 34. 2. to 2^. See more, Prove. 27. 23. Ezekiel. 3. 17. to
22. and 33. 6, 7. and 34. 10. Mat. 13. 25. Luke 16, 2. 10. to 16. Joh. 10. 1.
3, 4, 5. 10, 12, 13. Act. 20. 28. Heb. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4. 4 For M. P.
Prophecy no more at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings
Court, etc. Amos 7. 13. We preach not our selves: but CHRIST JESUS the LORD,
etc. 2 Cor. 4. 5. My speech and my preaching was not with the enticing words of
man's wisdom: but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power. That your faith
should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of GOD, 1 Cor. 2. 4,
5. See more 2 Cor. 2. 17. and 4. 2. and 10. 4, 5. Joh. 5. 43. Phil. 1. 15, 16.
1 King. 22. 13. 5 For S. M. Thou, which teach another, teach thou not thy
self? Thou, that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal: Thou,
that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? etc.
Romans 2. 21, 10 25. From the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth
into all the Land. Jerem. 23. 15. Look Levit. 10. 3. Psalm. 50. 16, 17. 6 For
U. M. They justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of
the righteous from them Isai. 5. 23. Ye slay the souls, that should not dye;
and save the souls alive that, should not live; by your lying to my people,
that hear your lies. With your lies, you have made the hearts of the righteous
sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked; that
he should not return from his wicked way; by promising him life. Ezekiel. 13.
19. 22. The leaders of my people cause them to err; and they that are led by
them are destroyed. Isai. 9. 16. Look more 1 King. 22. 23. Jer. 5. 31. and 8.
10. 11. and 9. 3. and 14. 14. and 23. 2, 3. 9 10, 11 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21,
22. 26, 27, 28, 29. 32, 36. Act. 20. 29, 30. 7 For the People. Believe not
every Spirit: but try the Spirits, whether they are of GOD. Because many false
Prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4. 1. Beware lest any man spoil
you through Philosophy and vain deceit; after the Tradition of men; after the
Rudiments of the world; and not after CHRIST, Colos. 2. 8. See more Joh. 5. 43.
and 7. 17. Mat. 24. 11. 24. Romans 16. 17, 18. 1 John 4. 5, 6.
Characters of L. Bishops, Dum Dogs, Non-residenciaries, Men-pleasers,
Unpreaching Ministers, etc.
IT is the Abstract of Religion, To imitate him, whom we worship. Neither are
we worthy to be called Christians, except we imitate CHRIST, and square our
lives, according to the Rule of his Word. Whence Linacre, reading upon the New
Testament the 5, 6* and 7. Chapters of Saint Matthews Gospel; and comparing
those rules with Christians lives, he threw down the Book, and burst forth
into this Protestation. Either this is not GODS Gospel: Or we are not
Christians. And certainly, if the Tith of us be Christians, who call our selves
so; there are abundance of Christians in Hell. For what eyes can but run over,
to see, for the most part, what lives men lead?

Now what should be the reason of this? For it may move wonder to astonishment,
since we cannot be ignorant of what GOD requires in his Word: For every house
has a Bible, which plainly shows, that we need no other ground of our last
and heavyest doom, then, Ye have not given: ye have not visited, etc. Mat. 25.
41. to 46. And CHRIST has continued his Gospel among us now above fourscore
years, with such supply of Able Ministers, that no Nation under heaven may
compare with us.

Having often and seriously thought of it, I find, that the only cause, why so
few are Reformed, is The many advantages, which Satan's instruments have, in
tempting to lewdness, above GODS servants, in persuading to holiness. Some
whereof are these, which I can but name, being enjoined to contract a large
Volume, within the compass of a sheet or two of Paper. Oh! that we could mind
them so much as they concern us!

First, Satan's instruments are far more in number. For, whereas few have the
courage to exhort others unto holiness, Satan, (who is styled in Scripture,
The God of this world; The Prince that rules in the air; and that Spirit
which works in all the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.) has his
tempters in every corner. As Where shall a man come, and not find seducers,
namely Drunkards, ot Swearers, or Adulterers, or Idolaters, or Sabbath
breakers, or scoffers at Religion, or persecuters of the godly, and the like:
who seduce both by voice, and by example, and are set on work by Satan, as
Apprentises by their Masters; yea, he fills their hearts, Joh. 13. 2.
stretches forth their hands, Revel. 2. 10. and opens their mouths, Mat. 16.
23. speaking in, and by them, as once he did by the Serpent, Genesis 3. 1. 4.

2. As Satan has many tempters to set upon us: so he has diverse and sundry
ways (through men's help) to beguile us: many strings to his bow, that, if
some break, the rest may hold. Yea, like a cunning Engineer, he can invent new
Instruments, according to the present occasion; and he inventeth all he can,
and puts in practice all that he inventeth

3. Satan's servants are more bold, subtle and industrious in tempting to
lewdness, than GODS people are, in persuading to holiness.

4. If they cannot win men to hell by fair means, they will use foul: If
they cannot entice, they will seek to enforce men to sin with them.

5. An evil suggestion is more ready at hand, than a good.

6. We are more prone by nature, to follow evil counsel than good.

7. The world (like Jael) begins with milk, and ends with an hammer, whereas
CHRIST keeps back the good wine until afterward, and makes his servants
break their fast with the rod. Luk 9. 23.

8. The devil and his instruments can so delude the judgments of natural
men, that they shall neither see any thing desirable in a Religious life, nor
give credit to any thing, that the godly affirm. Yea, they shall esteem
Religion no better than foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 18.

9. They can so forestall them with prejudice against GODS people and
goodness, by their slanders and aspersions, that they shall resolve never to
be religious, so long as they live.

10. Whereas they that turn to GOD, bar themselves of all sinful delights
and pleasures, yea are restrained in their very thoughts: Their Disciples may
satisfy themselves and their lusts to the full, and be applauded for it.

11. Satan's servants have far more peace with him than the godly: for he
fights not with his own subjects or soldiers.

12. They are at peace with the world: for the world loves her own, but hates,
^^outs, and persecutes all that are chosen out of it, Joh. 15. 19.

13. They have far more peace with their own hearts than the godly: for
their Consciences, being brawned with the custom of sin, are cast into a dead
sleep by Satan; they never check them, do they what they will: nor are they
ever troubled in mind, as many scrupleous fools are.

14. Satan's servants are better proficients under him, and thrive more in sin,
than GODS servants can do in grace; because,

First, He so blindes their eyes, that the light of the glorious Gospel cannot
shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. Secondly, When he sets upon
any poor soul, he shows the bait, hides the hook; letting nothing appear
to the eye, but pleasure, profit, and seeming happiness. Thirdly, Custom
brings sin to be so familiar, that the horror of it is turned into delight.
15. Whereas CHRIST has instituted as a remedy, to prevent the spreading of
sin, and a means of conversion from sin, That all notorious offenders (when
neither admonition, nor reprehension will serve to reclaim them) should first
be separated from the company of Believers; and in case they still remain
obstinate, should be delivered unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the LORD JESUS, Mat. 18. 15 to 19. 1
Cor. 5. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. Which was the practice of the primitive Church: Now
by an equal bounty to the godly and wicked, there is an equal encouragement
to godliness and iniquity; which is a greater advantage to Satan, than any of
the former.

Object. But you will say, CHRIST has his Ministers in every Parish, to preach
for him: whereas Satan has none.

Answ. This is the mistake that undoes us: For, did we, according to our
Saviors rule, judge righteous judgment, and not after the appearance only,
John 7. 24. We should find, that as once in Israel, 1 King. 18. 22. and 22. 6,
7. 22, 23, 24. So now in England, Satan has a more numerous Clergy than
CHRIST himself: and that they edify more to damnation, than CHRIST'S faithful
Ministers can do to salvation. Neither is Satan so much beholding to any men
alive, as to them. For, although all wicked men are seed of the same old
Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. And children of the Devil, Job. 8. 44. And so resemble
and imitate him in tempting to sin, and drawing to perdition: yet none have so
helped to fill hell, and to people that infernal Kingdom, like false prophets
in seducing, either by their vicious lives, and serpentine preaching; or in
betraying by their not Preaching, or fruitless. and unprofitable Preaching.
And therefore, when Satan would appear disguised, he transformes himself into
one of these Angels of light, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. And always chooses them to
be his instruments to tempt, rather than other men, because they in regard of
their parts and eminency, are more fit for it than any other; as of all the
creatures, which GOD made, Satan chose the Serpent to be his instrument to
tempt Eve, because It was more subtle than any beast of the field, Genesis 3. 1.
But first take a view of them, and then say, whether Satan be so much beholding
to any men alive, as to his Chaplains, whether he has any servants, that do
him such faithful service; any Factors that make him such a return of souls;
any Generals that subdue so many soldiers to him; any Advocates, that plead so
hard for him, as his Ministers of the Clergy; which may be marshalled into Two
Bands, viz.

Ministers. 1. Non-preaching 2. Vn-preaching

Of which severally: But with a difference. For, as touching the first sort;
because they are less principal (in that starving the people seems not
altogether so bad, as poisoning them) I will only deal with them, as our
Reverend Judges do with seditious Atturnies; call them to the Bench; Pitch
them over the Bar; Put out their names from the Roll, and let them go.

Now non-preaching Ministers are either

1 Dumb Dogs. 2 Non-Residenciaries, and Double-Beneficedmen, or 3 Men-pleasers.
As for Lord Bishops, I hold them fit rather to be ranked with unpreaching
Ministers, though they are the principal of both kind.

First, Dumb Dogs be such, as are Tongue-tyed, and (for the most part)
hand-tyed also; and cannot Preach for insufficiency. Their place has set them
to charge: but they have neither powder nor shot. Perhaps they can snarle
against such as do; and brow-beat GODS people: but that is all. Indeed they
are skillful in Fleecing, though unskilful in feeding the Flock; as it was
said of Geffery Bishop of Lincoln; being, as the Prophet styles them, Greedy
dogs, that can never have enough, Isay 56. 10, 11. Now these barren trees, that
occupy the room, where better trees might grow, are not only liable to a
fearful curse, Luke 13. 7. But have made themselves guilty of the blood of
the LORDS people, in taking upon them to be their Captains and Conducters, and
yet have no skill at all, in managing of Martial affairs. But why should I
speak to these? Commonly when men are Dumb, they are deaf too. And admit they
be more then ordinarily sensible of their bellies: yet the belly has no ears.
And therefore I will leave them to their Judge, who has already pronounced
their doom, Ezekiel. 22. 31. Zach. 11. 17. Jer. 23. 12. 15, 19, 20. 34. Only I
will afford them the privilege, to lead the Troop, as Judas led the Soldiers.

Secondly, for Non-Residenciaries and Double-benefic'd-men, (whose number is
very great; some of them attending about the Court, some in Bishops houses;
some lying in London, and some in the Universities) they can, and (lest they
should lose their livings) do Preach: But, withal they are so idle and
negligent, that it is but about once a Quarter, or once a Month: And then, to
little, or no purpose. For, as they neither aim at GODS glory, nor the
edification and conversion of their hearers, but their own credit, profit, and
preferment: So their people are neither instructed in the mysteries of
salvation, nor any whit reformed in their Lives.

Indeed, That may seem to make them more excusable than the former: But in
truth they are more criminal; as the servant, which knows, and is able to do
his Masters will, if he do it not, is worthy of double stripes. Neither are
they less guilty of the peoples blood, who are committed to their charge. For
what difference between Not-Saving, and Destroying? Not to water a Plant, when
it is dry, is to kill it: And the fire is as well put out by the Subtraction of
sewell, as by Pouring Water upon it. The Advocate, that is retained to plead,
betraies the cause, by his Voluntary Silence.

But Can they, or Can they not Preach oftener? If they Can; They are Traitors to
the people. The Watchman, that does not ring the Allarme-Bell, at the approach
of danger, betraies the City to the enemy. If they Cannot; They are Traitors to
CHRIST. He that will take upon him to be a Leader, when he cannot instruct the
people of GOD in the Spiritual Warfare, betraies the trust that was committed
to him, and gives great advantage to Satan, and his ministers, who are far
more industrious in their generation, Esaias 5. 18. Matthew. 13. 25. Rev. 14. 11.
Indeed it is most probable they Can, but Will not preach oftener, out of policy:
For as Demosthenes had a greater fee for being Silent in a Cause; so many of
them have gotten preferment, by their Rarity, or rather Nullity of preaching.

Object. But they have Curates, that preach for them; to whom they allow means.

Answ. They allow them means, either because they cannot help it; or to
fulfill the Proverb, Steal a Goose, and stick down a Feather.

As for their preaching by a Substitute; It is as good a Discharge of their
Charge, as if one should marry a wife, under hope to obtain Issue of her, by
another man. Besides; The Hireling cares not for the Sheep, Joh. 10. 13. They
are not his own. And what minds he, whether they be Fat, or Lean? A mercenary
Advocate looks only to his Fee; let his Clients Cause stand or fall, it is
all one to him; so long as he has his money. Wherefore these, that feed their
flocks, by their Deputies, may justly fear, that GOD will serve them
hereafter, as they serve him now. They shall be saved by their Deputies, but
damned in their own persons. And is it not just that they serving GOD
altogether by another, should be saved altogether by another? But this point of
Non-Residency being so common, and withal so gainful, is over-hard to be
conccocted: Yea Pallas, with all the Graces, may call Briareus with his hundred
hands, to bind this Jupiter, and all in vain. For, should CHRIST in his own
person, admonish them as he did the covetous Pharisees, they would laugh him to
scorn, Luke 16. 14.

3. The next in order are Men-pleasers, which are of fundry sorts.

1. Some whereof only affect curiosity of matter: As it is the foolish
ambition of unblest understandings, to be most prying into things that are
secret, and to slight that which they are enjoined to teach; whose
Metaphysicall Speculations, Frothy Inferences, Curicus, Idle, Absurd,
Brain-sicke, Vain, Unprofitable, and Aenigmatique Questions and Intricasies,
so swarm in their brains, and boil out of their unscummed wits, that they
are without measure or end. But by this means, in teaching their people
Mysteries, before they know Principles, both Pastor and People presuming to be
wise above sobriety, become Fools, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 22.

2. Others are no less addicted to singularity. And these, as they can devise
new and unheard of Principles, Doctrines not once mentioned in the Scripture:
So their brains are still traveling to bring them forth; knowing that a new
fashion does not more take with your proud Gallants, then a new Opinion does
with many ignorant hearers. But it is the humility of the best judgments to
apply their studies to the confirmation of received truths, and the meekness
of blessed understandings to disaffect singularities.

3. A third sort, are your Antinomian Preachers, who are all for Faith and
assurance, without once doubting nothing for Prayer, Repentance, and new
Obedience. These so preach CHRIST and the Gospel, that they make the Law to be
of no use; and labor so much to set up Justification, that they preach down,
and quite overthrow Sanctification.

4. Another sort are all for Order and Decency: (though themselves live most
disorderly) For the maintenance whereof, they bestow their whole Talents of
Time and Study. Now these also are wise above sobriety: But another way: For,
as the Jews were not content with such Rulers as GOD had appointed them, but
they would have a King like the Gentiles: so these are not content with such
Laws as CHRIST has appointed them, but they will have Traditions like the
Jews. Yea, they can devise better Orders, better Laws, better titles, better
callings, better discipline, etc. then CHRIST has devised himself. But what
says our Savior? Every Plant, which my heavenly Father has not planted,
shall be rooted up, Matthew. 15. 13

Now, if you note it: These Ministers instead of pleading GODS cause, plead
only the Bishops: and in lieu of feeding their flocks with the substantial
food of the Word, they only preach for Ceremonies and humane inventions. And
the reason is: They gape for preferment; and this is the way to it. Indeed as
Judas would have his Covetousness taken for Charity, John 12. 5, 6. And the
Pharisees their Cruelty thought Piety, Matthew. 23. 14. So these Hypocrites
pretend only their great zeal of the Churches good.

Nor is this kind of preaching more general and gainful then it is popular.
For the multitude much applaud them for it; which is all the use they make of
such Sermons. Only it edifies them in their superstitious formality, and
stirs them up with great zeal, to rail against all, that are better
informed; which is the only mark, at which those Sophisters aim.

5. Others there are, that preach nothing to their people, (what ever their
auditory be) but Controversy, that only pleases themselves, and some itching
ears. Therefore, if it please not others, they may turn the buckle of their
girdle. For to preach against sin and ignorance, to discover Satan's stratagems,
and the like, were to thwart the bent of their peoples wills, and their own
studies. I blame not the preaching of it, but the preaching of it only. But
what is the effect of this their preaching? Their simple hearers so lust after
fruitless knowledge (for so it is comparatively) that they seldom find any
room for that which they should know; as Repentance, Regeneration, Faith, and
the like. Yea, in busying their heads about the highest matters, their aspiring
wits mount so high, that they fall again, like Babel, and run into Doubts,
whiles they seek for Resolutions, reeling from Religion to Religion; like a
drunken man, from wall to wall, they go to and fro seeking and seeking which is
the true Church; like them which sought after Elias his body, and found it not;
or like those blind Sodomites which wearied themselves to find Lots door, yet
could not find it. As I know some, who have spent all their time in reading of
Controversy, yet have at this hour their Religion to choose.

6. Another sort of Men-pleasers, are such as preferring Abana and Pharpar
before the River of Jordan, choose rather to feed their people with he Onions
and Melons of humane speculations, then with the spiritual Manna of GODS Word.
Which is the cause their hearers have such lean and hunger starved souls.
There be a world of unhallowed Divines, that being sent to sue for GOD, woo
for themselves. For all their aim and end is, To set out their Learning and
Reading, and to breed admiration of their wit and worth. Whence their Sermons
are so richly compounded of all Arts, and Daplod so full of Authorities from
Poets, Orators, and Philosophers; and so stuffed with rich, magnificent, pompous,
and painted words, well-couched phrases, Oratory Figures, and Patheticall
Metaphors: (For they run all upon Metaphors; and by their good wills, speak
not without a Figure.) Together with Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Sentences; That
no Room can be afforded for Scripture. Yea, they Scorn the Grave Elequence,
the Stately Plainness, the Rich Poverty; that Humble Majesty, that shines in
the Simplicity of the Scripture. The Contemptible Coursnesse of
Scripture Phrase grates their Delicate Ears, and offends their Queasie
stomachs. For they are not able to Peise, (and so not to Praise) how in
Fewness of words, there is Fullness of Matter: That they are Thick and Short,
Pithy and Patheticall; Brief, and yet Full; Concise, and yet Clear;
Careless, and yet Accurate. Which men, if they cannot instruct GOD, how to
deliver his mind better: yet they are not so Well-pleased with the SPIRITS way
of Expression, as with their Own; when delivering their Words by Weight, and
Drawing their Notions into Knots, and Borders; placing them like Checquer, or
Fretworke; driving their Clauses to so Even a Cadency, that they fall in a
Iust-measure and sound.

And to give them their Due; Their Discourses are so Curiously Couched, so
Neatly Starched and set: Their Words so Ranked, and meetly Marshalled, as if
they were a Kin to Him, whose Name is, Six-Hundred-Sixty-Six.

And yet excel they never so much in wit, learning, order, elegancy and
phrase: Admit they deliver their words in Wax, with a Soring-sublimity, of
high Strains, and Choice Composures; Though it move Great Delectation of
affection; Suppose they transport their hearers with the wind of words, and
floods of eloquence: yet they are but Frothy and Vain Preachers: yea they
preach no more in reality, then Harpocrates the Egyptian, who was always
painted with his finger in his mouth: For as every sound is not Music: so
every Sermon is not Preaching. A maine end of Preaching is Converting, as the
end of Fishing is Catching. But their Sermons tend to no such end. Well may
these Cobwebs of wit and learning be curious and admirable for their finenesse
of thread and work: but they are of no substance or profit to the soul. As
for their converting of a sinner, or building up of a Christian, they know not
what it means. As let me appeal to their own Consciences, whether in all
their lives they have so much as Civilized, or Philosophized one drunken,
debauched, and vicious liver, by this their manner of preaching. Or can any one
of their Applauders say: Such a man has made me an Hater of vice, and a Lover
of virtue? No: for their Sermons do not more please the ear, then they starve
the soul; being like that Golden Banquet, which Caligula set before his guests,
which only delighted the eye, but neither pleased the palate, nor satisfied the
stomach. So that to speak rightly, They Cosen the world with Copper for Gold;
with Glass for Pearl; with Seeming for substance; and sell us breath, for the
bread of life, to strengthen us; and froth in stead of Cordial and Celestial
water to comfort us. The Prophet that has my word, let him speak my word
faithfully. What is the Chafe to the Wheat, says the LORD? Jer. 23. 28. Or if
the hungry soul finds any thing in their Sermons to feed upon, it is but like
a meal of Crafish, where is much picking, very little meat; or as a banquet of
Kickshawes, which neither makes good blood, nor begets spirits; neither
strengthens the sinews, nor increases the marrow; but only procures lust,
makes the belly flatuous and swells the body.

I need not stand to amplify it. You find in your own observation and
experience a great difference between these Speculative Preachers, and
experimental Divines. As hear the one, that speaks spiritual things in
spiritual words, with spiritual devotion and zeal; and you will be ready to
say with those Disciples going to Emmaus: Did not our hearts burn within us,
whiles he spoke? Luke 24. 32. Or with those, Matthew. 7. 29. He speaks with
authority, and not as the Scribes: Or with him the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor.
14. 24, 25. who hearing the secrets of his heart made manifest, being
convinced, falls down and worshippeth, saying, God is in him of a truth. Whereas
hear one of these Speculative Divines preach, perhaps like a discourse of
Philosophy read, the Invention, the Eloquence, and the Pertinency does
presently move you, and tickle your spirit: But there is nothing moves or
pricketh your Conscience: For it is not to it they speak.

I know nothing pleases the carnal ear more then variety: And that stomachs
which within one month are weary of Manna, set more by Sallats, and Sauces,
and Kickshawes, flashes of wit, then Substantial food, the Word of GOD. And
let such a Corinthian Preacher speak the Abortive sigments of his own brain:
yet their superstitious applause shall be [Vox Dei] The voice of GOD, and not
of man, Acts 12. 22. For it is strange to see how such an Orpheus by his
Melodious harping will draw these stones, Birds, and Beasts after him; it being
their manner to arrogate to the Instrument, and derogate from the Agent.

Indeed, they have small cause to joy in it: For, though they gain this
applause from men as carnal and graceless as themselves, who are spiritually
blind: yet the solid and more judicious know, that a Minister with a female wit
is the worst Hermaphrodite; and that these are no more like Sermons, then
Michals image of Goats-haire was like David.

Which yet is to be understood of the best of their Sermons. For it is possible
some of them may be harmless, though unprofitable, resembling the herb John,
which being put into pottage, gives no taste at all, good or bad, but an
excellent color; whereas too often, in stead of discovering of and rebuking
for sin: Lam. 2. 14. (which is the first step tending to edification and
conversion) they flatter the people in their sins, as those Confederates of
Corah did Israel. The Congregation is holy enough, Number. 16. 3. Or preach peace
unto them, as the Serpent to Eve. Ye shall not die at all, Genesis 3. 4, 5. Or
promise them good success in an evil way, as those four hundred Prophets to
Ahab. Go up and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into thine hand, 2 Chronicles. 18. 11. Which the Holy GHOST calls, Dawbing with untempered mortar, Ezekiel.
22. 28. Yea, they will tax another of indiscretion, that preaches the plain
truth, and applies it home: So that sin is rather increased, then curbed; and
their hearers rather infected, then instructed by their preaching: being good
only to insect young men's wits, as Plutarch speaks of the Poet Tirteus. For as
Spiders, with a wonderful Art, spin out of their breasts, curious threads and
cobwebs: So these beget and weave subtle snares with their wit, whereby their
people fare, as one that whets his knife upon a chalkstone, which does not
sharpen it, but rather make it more dull, and blunt. True; They perceive it
not, because these Melodious preachers, like some curious Cook that (by variety
of sauces to please the taste,) marres wholesome meats, and helps unwholesome.
They can please sensual hearers better with flattery, then others can do with
truth: Who, of all enemies, are the deadliest. For,

1. Either in furthering sin, or in smoothering it, they betray the peopl^^
souls. Or,

2. In stead of edifying to salvation, they edify to damnation, being very
rhetorical to discourage the godly, and encourage the wicked: For all their
excellency of eloquence is used, not in adorning good, but in coloring that
which is evil; in putting hateful matter into good language: for the same
discourse, like the same meat, may be delicious to the palate, and to the
stomach deadly: and wit and learning, if it be not seasoned with humility and
love, is but Armata Injustitia, as Aristotle speaks: like a sword in a mad
man's hand, or like a flowing Edde, or high-spring tide, without banks to limit
the water.

And do not many of these Preachers resemble Curio, who was most wittily
wicked, and most singularly eloquent in mischief, against the good; being like
an Over-grown-Toad, which carries a jewel in her head, but poison in her heart;
which makes their mouths so overflow with pride and choler against the good.

3. Or, if they preach not wickedly, in flattering, or furthering of sin;
yet, as before, they preach unprofitably: as if they were resolved to connive
at sin, as feeding their flocks rather with words, then matter: as caring
only to please, not to inform; forming their voice to the liking of their
hearers, not their hearers judgment to the voice of CHRIST, in the Gospel; and
striving more to make them in love with the Teacher, then with the Lesson.
Because they stand more upon their own credit, then their peoples benefit.

4. Or, if they labor to fill the head with knowledge, they leave the heart
empty of grace; spending their time either in Curious Questions, and vain
speculatious; which kind of preaching tends rather to mirth, then godly
edification; as it is observable, that that age of the Church, which was most
fertile in Nice Questions, was most barren in Religion. The reason is: It makes
people think Religion to be only a matter of Wit; as Tying of Knots, and
unlying them. Wherein the brains of men given this way, are usually hotter
then their hearts.

5. Or, if their preaching be more solid, they rove altogether in Generalities:
which are no more ayding to practice, th^^ an Ortelius Universal Map is to
direct the way between London and York.

6. Or, in case they descend to Particulars, They pass over the Grounds of
Religion, the most useful part of all Divinity. For this lays the Foundation,
the other raises the Walls and Roof. This informs the Judgment, that stirs
up the Affections. And what good use is there of those Affections, which run
before the Judgment?

7. Or lastly, If they give you the Grounds of Religion, and preach wholesome
truths, yet they bring forth their Doctrines as some women do their Children
Still-borne, for want of application: without which the former seems to be no
better then a Fair Image, or Statue, which is beautiful to Contemplate, but
is without Life and Motion: It being the soul of preaching, when the Word is
brought home to men's Consciences, and applied close. For, whereas those other
Divine discourses enrich the brain and tongue; This settles the heart, changes
the will, and works upon the affections. But the Devil is wise: In the time
of superstition, he put out Verbum Aedificatum; the Word preached; that men did
scarce know sin in general. In these days of Profaneness, he puts out
Verbum Applicatum; the Word Applied; that few consider what sin is in
practice. But neither Doctrine without Application, nor Application without
Doctrine makes a Christian. And so long as the soul is not converted, Satan
ears not how, or how many men preach. And so you have the several kinds of
Non-preaching Ministers, That you may the better discern, how GODS people are
gulled, and Satan advantaged thereby, who deals with the Church, as Vespasian
dealt with Rome, who intending to invade the Empire, first made sack of
Alexandria, where were all the Granaries; That so he might make them yield, for
want of food, and become his vassals.

Wherefore take but a serious view, First, of the Number of these Fruitless
Preachers, all the Land over. Secondly, Then of the Mischief they do. For,
though they seem to be Neuters, in comparison of those which remain to be
spoken of (as doing neither good nor hurt:) yet they are Traitors to GOD and
his Kingdom, and guilty of the peoples blood, whom CHRIST the chief Shepherd
has committed to their charge. Yea, They are the sole Cause of all the
ignorance and profaneness in the Land. As tell me, If a man will take upon him
the office of a Pastor, and yet not Feed his people, that depend upon him: To
be a Watchman, and yet not give the people Warning of ensuing Danger: To be a
Leader, and yet not Instruct GODS people, in the spiritual Warfare: To be an
Ambassador, and yet not Declare GODS Message to the people: To be their
Physician, and yet not See to the peoples Health: Does he not make himself
Guilty of their Miscarriage, and Betray the Trust, which was committed to him?
It cannot be denied. Neither is there much difference between the Shepherds
destroying the Sheep with his own hands, or leaving them to the mercy of the
Wolse: Or of a Captains giving up a Castle, or not defending it against the
enemy, when it is besieged. But I have far Worse then these, viz. Unpreaching
Ministers, to acquaint you with; and must therefore go forward.

Secondly, Unpreaching Ministers do Edify to Damnation, and by their
scandalous living, or by their Serpentine preaching, do pull down and destroy
more, then GODS Faithful Preachers build up.

1. Great are the Number (even of those that preach well) whose Lives are most
Vicious and Abominable; Though one of them were enough to stagger a whole
Nation; considering how conversant they are in and about those Divine and
Heavenly Mysteries contained in the Word: That their whole trade and profession
is holiness; That they are his Ambassadors, and represent his person, who in
Scripture is called The Holy-One; yea Thrice, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the LORD of
Hosts, Esaias 6. 3. whose Law is Holy, whose Spirit is Holy, whose Will is Holy,
whose Word is Holy: who is Righteous in all his ways, and Holy in all his
works, Psalm. 145. 17. making us also, which are his servants, an Holy people,
Deuteronomy. 7. 6. An Holy Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2* 5. His Holy Temples, 1 Cor. 6. 19.

Yea, when they are appointed Patterns of Holiness, and have undertaken by
their holy conversation, and zealous exhortation, to draw others to Holiness;
and yet no whit partake of holiness themselves, but remain without the least
tincture thereof, in their hearts and lives, what can men think of it?

There was a Woman much spoken of in some parts of this land, that lived in a
professed doubt of the Dei^y. Yea even after illumination and repentance she
could hardly be restored or comforted. She often professed, that the vicious and
offensive life of a great learned man in the town where she dwelt, did
occasion those damned doubts in her mind. How may it then stagger poor
Christians, that hear of an hundred such? yea, when they shall perceive them
so much the worse, by how much the more they are conversant in the word? when
the very means of their reformation (for want of a good and honest heart)
becomes the Fuel of their wickedness, when they shall verify and fulfill
that Spanish proverb: Come Sancto, caga Diabolo; They have eaten down Saints,
and void forth Devils. As that Viper is the deadliest which feeds the sweetest.

It was the saying of a Bishops Cook, That all the Noble men's houses that he
had ever lived in were rank Puritans to his masters. I wish we could not apply
it to hundreds of the Ministry, who justify that proverb, The nearer the
Church, the further from God. As it fared among the Jews; the nearer they were
to the Sanctuary, the further they were from Sanctity. Or as one gives
testimony of the Roman Clergy: That Of all Christians Italians are the worst;
Of all Italians the Romans; Of all Romans the Priests; Of all Priests the
Cardinals, and commonly the most lewd Cardinal is chosen Pope.

Not that the word of GOD (which is holy, and just, and good, Romans 7. 12.) is
the proper cause of their being the worse; no more than the Sun shining upon a
Dunghill, is the cause of greater stink; or its heat reflecting upon venomous
and banefull objects, the b^eeder of horrid Serpents. Well may it prove an
occasion thereof; or at least make manifest that, which lay hid in the heart
before, (as a furious Mastiffe dog is the madder for his chain,) because it is
so powerful and operative, that it will either quicken, or kill: either prove
the sweet savor of life unto life: or become the savor of death unto death, 2
Cor. 2. 16. 2 Pet 3. 16. For none ever heard it but they were either the
better, or the worse by it. It is like a fructifying Dew, or rain, which falls
not upon any ground in vain, but will produce either the Herbs, Flowers, and
fruits of Faith and good Works; Or the weeds and briars of impiety and
profaneness. And still the more of this rain falling upon Clay, the dirtier
it will be. Briefly, as a Choleric stomach will convert all meats into
Choler, and as Spiders will suck poison from the most fragrant flowers: So a
wicked heart will make a Temptation of every thing; and the frequency of
distempers will weaken the virtue of any receipt. He that shall eat but a
Grain of Opium, and increase the quantity every day, shall be able at length
to devour it as Bread, and digest that, which would kill twenty others.

Again, Take the dead carcass of a man, and cloth it with a thousand
garments: you shall never make it warm; because it wants the natural heat
within, which those adventitious helps might cherish; So, if a soul be dead
to goodness, though you feed it with a thousand precepts, till it become a
quick Library of learning, a Magazeen of knowledge; yet you cannot put the heat
of holiness into it: because the living Principle is wanting, Grace divine.
But let that spark be first in it; and then all these helps will blow it into
a flame, as experience proves abundantly, blessed be GOD: For although these
degenerate, yet the story of GOD makes other Ministers no less good, than wise.

But (which is the misery) one of the former will do more harm, and give more
deadly wounds to the Church, by his scandalous life, and wicked example, than
twenty of the latter can do good, or heal again, by their conscionable
Preaching, and pious example.

Indeed, they may seem to build up no less, with their good Preaching, (for
those who in their acts are fools, may in their words be Philosophers) then
they pull down by their ungodly living. But it is otherwise; For

First, Who will regard the words of a known dissembler, that shroud; an
Egyptian heart under the habit of an Israelite? who like Ethiopians, are white
in teeth only, every way else cole-blacke: when, resembling the Devil in
Samuels mantle, they are Christians in skin, Atheists at Coare: Have Jacobs
voice, Esaus hands, and head: GOD in their mouths, and Satan in their hearts:
whose life and profession is a continual incongruity; and his works Antipodes
to his words: when his hand and tongue give each other the lie: like some
foolish minstrell, that sings one thing with his mouth, and harps another with
his finger. When they shall speak like Angels in the Church, live like fiends
abroad. Teach the words of God, and do the works of the devil.

Secondly, Who will not loath the good light of such candles, for the stink
which the tallow yields? As it fared with the Cardinal of Cremona, and Popes
Legate sent from Rome to London, especially for this end, to remove married
Clergy men, from their Cures* who, after he had made a long speech in disgrace
of honorable marriage, was found the same night committing folly with an
whore. And Honorius the second, Pope of Rome, who condemned of adultery all the
English Clergy, that had Wives; and was taken himself the same night
committing adultery. Which made him scorned of the meanest, as Jupiters
adultery did discredit his thunder, even among children. The Romans laughed
Sylla to scorn, for that he, being a man most intemperate, did notwithstanding
exhort and compel others to sobriety, temperancy, and frugality. And the
Venetians their Cardinal, when, in the time of their troubles, he would
earnestly exhort them in the Pulpit to Peace, and concord; but, when out of the
Church, he sowed nothing but sedition, and strife. If we hear a Mountebanke
undertake to cure the distempered heat of the liver, whiles himself has a
fiery face; will we believe him? when one forewarnes others of that pit,
whereinto himself runs headlong. Points others the way to Heaven, but will not
move a foot in that path himself, excessively loves the world, while he
teaches others to contemn it. Commends the cross to others, which himself
abhorres. What can we think but that he exhorts others to contemn riches and
pleasures, that he might be rich and voluptuous alone? As the Fox dispraised
the Grapes, he would keep for his own tooth. Yea,

Thirdly, Who will not both twit the man, and scorn his counsel, as that
Citizen of Rome did Pope Innocent the third, who perceiving him to make fair
weather with Otho the fourth, and Frederick the second contending for the
Empire; and in a solemn and eloquent Oration, hearing him speak much of the
agreement and unity, which ought to be among Christian Princes; when privately
he labored nothing but to make enmity and strife between them: Answered him
boldly thus. Holy Father; Your words seem to be of GOD, but your deeds are
thereto so contrary, that they surely proceed from the Devil. We may spend our
spirits, and Preach our hearts out, to dissuade men's affections from the love
of this world; if we embrace it our selves, they will never believe us. For
thus they will argue: Certainly, If these Ministers did speak as they think,
they would do as they speak. If they did think their doctrine were true and
good; they that preach it would live thereafter. Wherefore in vain do we
rebuke those sins abroad, which we tolerate at home. That man only makes
himself ridiculous, that leaving his own house on fire, runs to quench his
neighbors; For which read, Romans 2. 19. to 24. 1 Cor. 9. 27.

I know these men have a distinction (a scurvy one) to help themselves
withal. For if you seem to mislike their doings, they will answer: You must
do as we say, and nor as we do. Which is a bad excuse fit for so bad a
cause. As if they should say. We would have you to be Godly; but we will not
be godly: we would have you to be saved; but we our selves will not be saved.
An Argument more like to confirm them in Atheism, then to clear their
doubts. For what will they think? These and many more pretend, it is good
being religious and holy, and press others to it. But they have some other
by-ends in it: for they are not ignorant of what they do. Therefore,
whatsoever they say, we will not believe them. But as they do, so will we do;
and we hope to speed as well as they.

Not that it ought to be so: For simply considered, the confession of virtue is
of no less consequence in his mouth that hates the same; for as much as truth
by force does wrest it from him: And though he will not admit it in him, at
least to adorn himself, he will sometimes put it on.

Secondly, neither are the people more prone to despise what they say, then to
imitate what they do. Like sheep we are apt of our selves to err, Esaias 53.
6. But if the Bell-Weather or Leading-Sheepe takes a vagary, all the flock
will follow him. Whence it has ever been the dangerous policy of Satan to
assault principal men, both in Church and State; knowing the multitude (as we
say of Bees) will follow their Master. The facts of eminent persons become
Examples; Those Examples Laws: and it is natural to men to follow the Law of
fact, before the Law of says: A visible pattern rather then a mere audible
Doctrine. Yea, we refuse to be led by precepts, but are easily overled by
presidents. My people (says GOD) are lost like Sheep, Jer. 50. And what
follows? Their Shepherds have caused them to go astray: they have turned
them away from me, verse. 6. From the Pastors example they all take fire, as one
Torch lights many. Thus the multitude took fire from the chief Priests and
Elders, to Crucify CHRIST; and the soldiers likewise, Matthew. 27. 20. etc.
That many-headed Monster, the Mutinous rout resemble Claudius the Emperor;
who, as Tacitus observes, did neither Love nor Hate, but as he was provoked and
induced thereunto by others. Dee any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe
on him? John 7. 48. Pastors are the Glass, the School, the Book,
Where peoples eyes do learn, do read, do look.


GOD sets them for Copies of Sanctification unto their flock; wherein every
fault is both notable and dangerous: For what scholar will not think himself
excused, in following his copy? If the Rule or Square be crooked, it cannot be
expected, the things, that are applied to them, should be straight, 1 Cor. 8.
10. 11. 13.

But we need no better proof of this, then our own experience* Do not we see
in most Parishes; especially in the Country, that of the Prophet fulfilled;
Like Priest like People, Hos. 4. 9* and 6. 9. Esaias 24. 2. Does it not commonly
fare, between the Pastor, and his Congregation, as it does between the
Figtree and the Vineyard wherein it is planted? which, if it be fruitful it
self, all the whole Vineyard is fruitful too: but if it be barren, it makes
all the Vines barren with it. If the blind lead the blind both fall into the
ditch, Luke 6. 39. that is: If the wicked lead the wicked, both go to hell
together. The vicious life of a Pastor is like an excessive Rheum, which
rising from the stomach to the head, doops down upon the Lungs, and fretteth
the most noble and vital parts, till all the members languish into corruption.
Men will follow their guides, until they have lost themselves.

3. Neither is this all the mischief these Ministers do: for the people will
not only think their Pastors hypocrisy a sufficient warrant for their
profaneness, nor alone condemn such as they know vicious; but think all the
rest (Ministers and Christians) are such: Save, that they dissemble their
hypocrisy, and carry it more closely: for they will argue, as that strumpet
did. I wot not what books are, nor what they mean by Wisdom and Philosophy:
(quoth the Curtezan Lais) but sure I am, these kind of people knock as often at
my gates, as any other men. Yea, they make the way of truth evil spoken of; as
Peter has it, 2 Pet. 2. 2. For simple people will not only condemn all good
men for the faults of a few, that are bad, but their Religion too; As the
foulness of the glass may cause men to dislike the good wine. Read we not,
that the people abhorred the Service of GOD, and became despisers of his
worship, because those profane sons of Eli were wicked and scandalous? Nor
was it the case of a few: for Thirty Thousand and Four Hundred of the people,
being scandalized thereby, were destroyed, 1 Samuel 2. and 4. chap. From whence
observe, If Two scandalous Priests proved the ruin of so many, what will a
Thousand do? As there are not fewer in this Land, if their number were taken.
You have another example in David, whose sin and scandal, as it stumbled the
good, so it caused the enemies of GOD to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12. 14. Thus, by
reason of them, the Saints are not only reproached, the truth disgraced, and
Religion it self scandalized: but they give occasion to others to Blaspheme
GOD; and to doubt whether all Divinity be not mere Policy, and the Scriptures
a Fable, wherein GOD himself and his Word suffers.

I confess, it ought not to be so. No man's sins should bring the service of
GOD into dislike: For this is to make holy things guilty of our profaneness;
and to offend GOD because he has been offended: Yea, to give him just cause
to abhor us, because we abhor his service unjustly. Cannot the faults of
men displease us, but we must needs fall out with GOD? But we see it is so. The
LORD pity us!

And thus you see, That vicious and scandalous Ministers (admit they be Good
Preachers, whiles they are Ill Christians) do the Devil service, under a
color of serving CHRIST: and destroy souls, under a pretense of saving them;
that they sin more by example, then by act; and, with Samson, pull down
those Pillars of Goodness, that shall not only quash themselves, but be the
ruin of many others. Yea, that they are such pernicious creatures; that to
damn their own souls is the least part of their mischief: For, without Gods
infinite mercy and goodness, one of them will draw vengeance upon thousands;
as in the example of Eli his sons. What their punishment will be, may be
collected from Exodus 19. 22. Levit. 7. 20. and 10. 1, 2, 3. and 22. 3. Luke
11. 28. and 12. 47. John 13. 17. Rom 2. 1. Luke 19. 22.

What hope of pardon there is, for a sin of this nature, may be gathered
from, 1 Samuel 3. 14 where GOD even swore unto Eli, that the Iniquity of his
house should not be purged with Sacrifice, nor Offering for ever.

And how GOD abhors, that a Drunken beast should be a Soule-keeper, who is not
worthy to be an Horse-keeper: Or an Unclean person, or a Covetous wretch* or
any other Unhallowed Divine of Uncircumcised lips, and Unwashed hands; and that
Hates to be reformed; should Represent his Person, administer his Sacraments,
and Preach his Holy Word; we may easily discern, by his strict charge to the
contrary, and his heavy and severe judgments upon such as have presumed to do
it; both under the Law, and since the Gospel. For which turn to Levit. 21.
Ezekiel. 44. 9. Exodus 37. 23. and 28. 30. Psalm. 50. 16. 17. and 26. 6. Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
7. Jerem. 15. 19. Dan. 12. 3. Levit. 7. 20. and 10. 1. 2. 3. and 22. 3. 1 Samuel
3. 14. In the Old Testament. And in the New, to, 1 Timothy 3. 2. to 13. and 4. 12.
16. and 5. 9. 10. Romans 2. 1. 19 to 24. 1 Cor. 5. 11. and 8. 10. 11. 13. Phil.
2. 15. and 4. 9. Tit. 2. 7. 8. Matthew. 11. 4. Luke 1. 16. 17. and 12. 47. and
22. 32. 1 These. 5. 12. 13. Which Scriptures the Bishops might do well to
mind, who admitted them into the ministry: (for they never came into it, of
GODS sending) and who have many souls to answer for, in that they do not cut
them off, as rotten members, and throw them out of the Church like dirt into
the street, by Excommunication, (when they will Honester men, for not paying of
Three Pence at Easter) being as excrements, and bad humors in the body of the
Church, that will never be at ease, until it be disburdened of them. For which
read, Romans 16. 17. 2 These. 3. 6. 14. Ephesians. 5. 5. 7. 1 Cor. 5. 5. 11. 1 Timothy 1.
20. In the mean time they ought not, by Saint Paul's rule, to be admitted the
fellowship of the faithful, neither ought we so much as to eat with them, 1
Cor. 5. 11. And so much of the First sort of Unpreaching Ministers.

2. There are another Sort of Ministers, (for so they are called, though no
otherwise then the Heathen Images were called GODS,) that Edify to Damnation,
by their false wresting and misapplying the Scriptures. And these do far
more harm then the former. Yea, one of them will Vnpreach and pull down
faster then many good Preachers can build up. Which they effect, by imitating
the false Prophets of old; who in all ages withstood and contraried whatsoever
doctrine the True Prophets were commanded by GOD to deliver. As you may see, 1
King. 22. 6. 23. 24. Jerem. 5. 12. 13. 31. and c. 14. 15. and 8. 11. and 14.
13. to 19. and 26. 8. 9. Acts 13. 7. to 12. And 17. 18. to 21. and 20. 29, 30.
Ezekiel. 22. 25, 26. 28. Deuteronomy. 13. 3. Matthew. 7. 15. and 24. 5. 11. 24. 2 Timothy 3.
8. 2 Cor. 11. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, Phil. 3. 18. The sum whereof is this.
Usually the Children of Israel were mavelous wicked, walking in all kind of
vice, despising the holy word of GOD, etc. And, when the LORD sent his Prophets
unto them, calling upon them to forsake their wicked ways, and to turn unto
him; threatening the judgments and vengeance of GOD against them, unless they
did return: The false Poophets labored as fast, on the other side, to flatter
them in their sins, and make them believe they were in good case. For
instance. The LORD complains often and grievously, in these and the like
words. They strengthen the hands of wicked doers, that none does return from
their wickedness. They say still unto them, that despise me; The LORD has
said, Ye shall have peace, and to every one, that walks after the imaginations
of his own heart; None evil shall come unto you, Jer. 23. ver. 16. 17. They
have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people with sweet words, saying,
Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace, Jer. 8. 11. Ye have wearied me with your
words, In that ye say: Every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the
LORD, and he delights in them, etc. Mal. 2. 17. They prophecy out of their
own hearts, and follow their own spirits; having seen nothing from the LORD:
they seduced the people, by sewing pillowes under their arms, and rocking them
asleep, with promising them Peace, when there was No Peace. And that as one of
them built up a wall, so others Daubed it with untempered mortar. Whom he
compares to the Foxes in the Deserts, not only for their Craft, but also for
their Number: For there were many of them, that could see visions of peace for
the people; when the LORD pronounced a curse, Ezekiel. 13. And likewise for their
Diligence. For (says the LORD) I have not sent these Prophets: yet they ran.
I have not spoken to them: yet they prophesied, Jer. 23. 21. And then
complains; That From the Prophets of Jerusalem was profaneness gone forth
into all the Land, verse. 13. 14, 15. Whereas says GOD: If they had stood in my
Counsel, and had caused my people to hear my word; Then they should have
turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings, verse. 21.
22.

2. And as they Encouraged the Wicked: So they did what they could to
Discourage the Godly. And of this the LORD complains; saying to the Foolish
Prophets, that prophesied out of their own hearts, and followed their own
spirits, having seen nothing from the LORD: Woe unto you: for ye pollute me
among my people, for handfuls of Barley, and for pieces of Bread; ye hunt the
souls of my people to make them flee, with your lies. Ye have made the hearts
of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and strengthened the hands of
the wicked, Ezekiel. 13. 22. Ye slay the souls, that should not die: and save
the souls alive, that should not live, by your lying to my people, that hear
your lies, verse 18. 19. And by Isaiah he complains, That they called Evil
Good, and Good Evil, put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness: Bitter
for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter, Isa. 5. 20. 23. That They justified the wicked
for a reward, and took away the righteousness of the righteous from them,
etc. Where their doom is also pronounced. For therefore says the LORD, As the
fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the chafe: So their root
shall be rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as the dust, because,
etc. verse. 24. And the like by Malachi, the Prophet; who complains, That Their
words were stout against the LORD of Hosts, saying; It was in vain to serve
GOD; and what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinances, and that we have
walked mournfully before him? Calling the Proud happy: Because they, that
wrought wickedness, were set up; and they that tempted GOD, were delivered,
Mal. 3. 13. to the end.

Thus they were so far from discerning between the righteous and the wicked;
between him that serves GOD, and him that serves him not: That either they
made the Good and Bad in one Condition, as if there were no profit in serving
the LORD: Or else they justified the wicked, and condemned the just; as Solomon
has it, Prove. 17. 15. And who does not see, That this kind of false Prophet is
every where among us. As mark well their resemblance.

1. For Encouraging the wicked. Does not wickedness every where abound most
horribly? And, when the godly Ministers do vehemently threaten vengeance,
unless men return: Are there not, by and by, others that step up, and find
fault, That men should be threatened with GODS judgments? saying, GOD is
Merciful: we must preach the Gospel: Or thus in effect. You may go to the
Alehouse, and drink and be merry together. You may Dance and Play at Cards,
Bowls, and other Pastimes, upon the Sabbath Day. You may keep your Wakes;
have your May-Poles, and recreate your selves. You have Freedom in CHRIST.
Thus they flatter the people in their sins; yea thus they seduce, and bewitch
men's souls unto destruction. And is not this To strengthen the hands of the
wicked, that they should not turn from their wickedness? to beat them in
hand, That they be Good Christians, and shall do well enough? For, under a
color of preaching the Gospel; That All are Sinners, and shall be Saved by
CHRIST, they do utterly abolish Sanctification. For so they say. They Believe
in CHRIST; It is enough; Howsoever they live in blindness, and all kind of
ungodliness; their consciences must not be troubled.

But if this be so, what means our Savior, who wills men To enter in at the
strait gate: showing that Few shall find it. For, if a man may follow his
lusts, and walk in the blindness of his heart, all his life* And then a Little
Calling upon GOD at the last would serve: what hardness were in it? But the
truth is, They overthrow all the Doctrine of Regeneration, and all the
Precepts, which CHRIST and his Apostles give, for Walking worthy the Gospel.
But you may guess, why they teach thus. They are commonly of a loose and
dissolte life themselves; and therefore they bear with the wickedness of the
people; that the people may bear with them.

It is GODS express charge, to every one, whom he sends; That they tell the
people of their sins, and wa^ne them of the danger they are in, by reason of
them. As hear what himself says, Ezekiel. 3. Son of man: I have made thee a
Watchman unto the house of Israel. Therefore hear the word at my mouth, and
give them warning from me. When I shall say unto the wicked: Thou shall surely
die, and thou give him not warning, nor speak to admonish the wicked of
his wicked way, that he may live: The same wicked man shall die in his
iniquity: But his blood will I require at thine hands, etc. ver. 17. 18. 19.

And, as this is an Everlasting rule for all: So it has been the constant
practice of all GODS faithful Ambassadors, and CHRIST himself; as the whole
current of Scripture shows; If I were permitted to enlarge my self.

Nor can there be a more worthy improvement of love and faithfulness, then a
servent opposition to the sins of those whom we pretend care of. Whereas no
Enemy can be so mortal to us, as those officious Guardians, whose flattery
sooths us up in wickedness: For these are Traitors to the soul; and, by a
pleasing violence, kill the best part eternally. All which laid together: The
Command of GOD: The Constant Practice of all his faithful Ambassadors: and
the Great Evil, that comes of omitting the same; shows the Desperateness of
these Preachers; whom Martin Luther, Vrsine, and many others bitterly reprehend
and justly complain of: For, whiles they lay bolsters of Down under men's
elbows; Sooth and smooth them up in their faults; promising to bad attempts,
good events; in stead of reproving and punishing vice, they cherish it: and in
lieu of correcting and convering their hearers, they corrupt and pervert them:
As the Pharisees were wont to serve their Prosylites: making them Twofold more
the Children of Hell, then themselves, if it were possible. For this hardens
them in sin, rather then reclaimes them from it. Yea, by flattering the
guilty, and forbearing to reprove even the foulest crimes, they Authorize their
defects, and sooth up their vices, not only by approbation, but also by
imitation. Their principal care being how to dawbe with the world, and their
own consciences.

But chiefly does this appear, when they have to do with Great Ones, that
are Graceless, (as often they have. For, when Judas is the Patron, Simon-Magus
must be the Priest.) For their sins they will be sure to hide by
concealment, (as the Painter hid the Scarre in Agamemnons face:) to which
purpose they have salves for every sore. I mean, to Hide them, not to Heal
them. And it is a very foul clout, which they will not help to wash: For as
that shameless Sycophant licked up the Emperors Spittle: So these will lick
the sores and ulcers of their Maintainers, by flattery.

Neither do they more stroke them with fair promises of peace, then they
humor them with invectives against the godly: being Chaplains of Amaziahs
humor; That with blanching vices, and branding graces at the table, spoil
their grace, before dinner: dealing with their Patrons or Benefactors, as those
Foure-hundred False Prophets, which fed at Jezabels table, did with Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 18 Who cared not so much to inquire, what GOD would say, as what Ahab
would have them say. They saw what way the Kings heart was bent, and that way
they bent their tongues. Neither is there any so great misery in Greatness, as
this; That it conceales men from themselves; except they consult more with GODS
Word and good books, then their Chaplains; whose best service is either to
further guiltiness, or smoother it. For as the herb Heliotrophium, or the
Planet Mercury, always moves and turns after the Sun: So which way soever
their Patrons incline, thither they bend their wits. Whereas every true Nathan,
or faithful Micajah, or holy John. Baptist, or zealous Paul, without fearing
the faces of any, will faithfully discharge their consciences, in speaking home
against sin, whatsoever shall come of it; be their hearers never so great:
well knowing that whether they be Commoners, or Commanders, high, or low: none
so mean, that is Less not are any so Mighty that are More then a Subject to
GOD, and his Ordinances. Nor should any obligation so inthrall us, as that our
tongues should not be free, to reprove faults, where we sinde them. They are
Base and Servile spirits, that will have their tongues tied to their teeth; And
were their Patrons wise, in stead of being taken with, they would even break
those false-glasses that present them faces, not their own.

We know what Fig-leafe-defenses are made by Meal-mouthed Ministers, in this
behalf; and how they can allege Scripture for it; drawing conclusions
thence, which the Spirit of GOD never imtended.

But what place do they cite? Acts 2. 2, 3. where the Holy GHOST descended
from Heaven, in the likeness of Cloven Tongues, and of Fire, with the sound of
a rushing and mighty wind, To signify a zealous and hot preaching Ministry?
No. But 1 King. 19. 11. 12, 13. where (say they) when GOD himself appeared to
Elijah, and spoke to him; He was neither in the Wind, nor in the Earthquake,
nor in the Fire: but in the Still, and Small voice. A solid proof! like those
the Pope gives, for the warrant of his actions; (whereof one instance or two.)
GOD made Two Great Lights. That is, says Innocentius, Two Great Dignities; The
Papal, to rule the Day of the Spiritualty: And The Imperial, to rule the Night
of the Laity. And, as the Sun is Greater* then the Moon, by Fifty-seven
degrees: (as says a Glosser) So the Pope, (forsooth!) far exceeds the Emperor
in Greatness.

Again, Peter said unto CHRIST: Here are two Swords: and CHRIST said: It is
enough. Hence Boniface the Eighth argued thus. CHRIST said: It is enough: He
said not* It is Too much. Ergo, The Pope, which is Saint Peter's Successo^^, may
manage both the Swords; and be a Temporal Prince, as well as a spiritual
Pastor.

Again, A voice from Heaven (Acts 10. 13.) said to Peter, Kill and Eat. Ergo,
The Pope may design the Killing of any Prince; Depose them; and Dispose of
their Scepters. With an hundred the like.

But as these Scriptures will not free the Pope from being That Great
Antichrist; no more will the former free these from being Little Antichrists.
There be Many Antichrists says Saint John, 1 John 2. 18.

There is nothing easier, then to persuade men well of themselves. Even the
best men are apt to believe, they are better then they be; But when a man's
self-love meets with another flattery, in such as are strangers to GODS Word;
They cannot be persuaded to the contrary; but they are good, and in GODS
savor. Experience teaches, that be men never so wicked, They can apply CHRIST'S
Passion, and GODS me^cy as a warrant for their Licen^i^usnesse; or at least,
live they how they list, they Can Repent at the last hou^e, as the Theife did.
Therefore adjourne they their Repentance, from Youth to Age; and from Age to
Sickness. Yea, it is the general case of all Libertines, never to prepare for
their End, till Death assaults them; Conscience ^ings them; Sin accuses them,
the devil seares them and GOD forsakes them. How much more, when their
Ministers shall Preach this dangerous liberty, whereof they too too freely
carve themselves?

It is the fashion of our bold nature, upon an Inch given to challenge an Ell.
If the Minister from GOD allow an handful, men are apt and bold to fathom an
Armefull. Briefly, natural men are so encouraged by these Preachers, that
whereas at first, they knew not when they sinned; now they know to justify
their sins, and defend that, wherein they offended. And yet you must take
them for merciful Preachers, who thus spate and forbear their flocks.

Indeed, there is a cruel mercy. And the mercies of the wicked are cruel,
Prove. 12. 10. Most of all this, which proceeds from false Prophets; when they
shall deal by their people, as a Physician by his Patient, when in the
Symptoms of a Plurisie, or Lunacy, he will not be so hard hearted as to let
him blood; which is the only way to recover him: But gives him Iulebs to
drink, or Cordials to comfort him: whereby he suddenly dies, or which is
little better, falls starke-mad. Which is mercy with a witness; like that of
Hazael to his Master: who having fed the hopes of his Sovereign with
expectation of recovery, the next day smothers him with a wet cloth, 2 King. 8.
15.

Secondly, and as they imitate the false Prophets of old, in encouraging the
wicked: So no less in discouraging the Godly; whether, 1 Ministers, or 2.
People.

1. They use their utmost to discourage all godly Ministers, both by flighting
their Sermons, and slandering their persons.

1. Touching their Sermons. A godly Minister, especially if he be a zealous and
powerful Preacher, any whit famous, or much followed: (as many had been more
secure, if they had been more obscure:) He shall not be able to Pray or
Preach, upon any point of Doctrine, but they will (being disposed to cavil,)
find some thing to carpe at, at least, as they will wrest his words. And then
cut his thtoate, with his own knife: As the Fowler in the Fable wounded the
Eagle, with that shaft which was feathered with her own quill. And its easy
to censure, or contradict a truth; for truth is but one: seeming truths are
many.

Besides, judgments are from every tongue a several. No man can think that
the Prophets, Apostles and CHRIST himself delivered false Doctrine: For they
were moved by the HOLY GHOST, and spoke as the SPIRIT gave them utterance, Act.
2. 4. Yet we know the Baalites continually busied themselves, in finding fault
with Elijahs Doctrine, 1 King. 22. 11. Zidkiah, and the rest of those 400.
false Prophets most fiercely opposed Micayahs preaching. Neither could out
Savior CHRIST be able to deliver the truth so safely, but the Pharisees will
find fault with him, and except against many particulars.

If Philip labor to convert the Samaritans by preaching the Gospel, there
will be a Simon-Magus as earnest in bewitching them with sorceries, Act. 8.

And lastly, where a zealous Paul is, there will be false Apostles, malicious
Priests, Epipicurean and Stoic Philosophers, Elymas the Sorcerer, Alexander
the Copper-Smith; and eloquent Tertullus to oppose him; whereof some mock him:
Others say, He is a Babbler, a Preacher of Sedition and Schism, and a setter
forth of strange Gods, now Doctrins, etc. doing him much evil, and
withstanding his preaching sore, on purpose to turn away his hearers from the
faith, Act. 13. 7, 8. and 17, 18. to 21. and 24. 5. 2 Timothy 4. 14, 15.

In like manner, a zealous Minister of CHRIST cannot so preach, as to escape
the forked tongues of venomous detraction: nor so deliver the truth, but it
shall meet with exceeding opposition, from these false teachers foretold of by
CHRIST and his Apostles: That what the right hand of the LORD does raise, the
left hand of Satan may destroy. That wicked one the Devil will ever be sowing
Tares in the field of the Church, among the Wheat, as it is, Matthew 13. 24. 25.
Against which sowers the Minister may well take up those words of Paul to
Elymas, Act. 13. 10 O full of all subtilty, and all mischief* The child of the
Devil, and enemy of all righteousness will thou not cease to pervert the
straight ways of the LORD? And those other words to Alexander the
Copper-Smith, 2 Timothy 4. 14.

2. Their next stratageme is to slander their persons. For, as the malicious
Priests and false Prophets slandered Jeremiah, of telling lies to the people,
Jer. 26. 8, 9. and 18. 18. and 36. Chapt. Or as the Priests and Pharisees
slandered John Baptist, our Savior CHRIST, Saint Paul, and all the Apostles,
Matthew 9. 34. Luke 11. 15. Or lastly, as those of the Synagogue, Act. 6.
slandered Steven, who (when they were not able to resist the wisdom, and the
Spirit, by which he spoke) affirmed, he had spoken blasphemous words against
Moses, against GOD, and his Law, Verse. 11. 13. So deals Satan's Ministers at
this day, with CHRIST'S messengers. As let any knowing man take notice of the
several foul slanders which Baals Priests have raised upon most of the godly
Ministers of note, about London, now these discovering times; and he cannot but
wonder, that the Devil himself should be so impudent, as to broach them;
there being no color of truth in any one of them.

I have my self offered to many of the reporters ten pounds for twelve pence,
if they were able to make proof of any one word, which they affirmed, upon
their own knowledge to be true. And have used my best endeavor to sift things
out, whether there were any ground or pretense for the rise of such a report,
and in the upshot found them like that, which the foul mouthed Watermen for
these twelve years, have mocked a godly discreet neighbor of mine with; viz.
That he killed his Cat, and knocked out the head of his Kilderkin on a Monday. The
one for killing of a mouse; the other for working upon the Sunday before.
Saying, O lewd Cat! O profane Beer! Without once taking notice that the first
Deviser of this Jeere did both rot and stink, and die in a most fearful and
unusual manner; as if GOD intended the party, for a dreadful spectacle of his
wrath and vengeance, to make all scoffers and slanderers beware of abusing his
poor servants, because they faithfully serve him. The remembrance whereof (one
would think) should strike their hearts and souls with terror and amazement.
But wicked men are flint unto GOD, wax to the Devil. And (which is the
mischief) true, or false, the common people, that ignorant Fry, or
Superstitious swarm (for in respect of their aptness to believe, and tell
lies, I cannot give them a term odious enough) will not once question it; and
few are so wise, as not to suspect the men, whereby their Ministry becomes
almost ineffectuall: For thousands hereby are either hindered in good, or
hardened in evil. As lop off the arm of a tree, and it brings down a great
number of small branches with it.

To which slanders they always add, that they are ignorant sots, no scholars,
not worthy top each in a Pulpit. Who may answer them, as John Barbevile did
some Friars, that called him ignorant Ass. Admit we were so: yet shall our
preaching witness against such Balaams as you are.

Neither do some of them speak more falsely then others write; for its
strange to see how these un preaching-Ministers sharpen their pens, and how
deep they dip them in the gall of the Red Dragon, that they may write bitter
things against the faithful Ambassadors of JESUS CHRIST: not forbearing to
name them. Which were not sufferable, were the accusations true. For he, who
hates not the person, but the sin, cares only to mention the sin, not the
person. And though it is justice to prosecute the vice: yet it is mercy in this
case, to spare the offender.

Thus they deal by the primest men: As Timocreon a Rhodian Poet did, by noble
Themistocles, who at the request of the Athenians, that envied him for his
vernies, made report in his verses. That he was a covetous person, a violater
of his faith, and no keeper of Hospirality. Yea, out of malice, and to please
great ones, they will do, as Vlpian the Lawyer did by the Christians of his
time: Who wrote a book, to instruct the Emperors, how they should Torment, and
Punish them: As Lactantius has *

Now if you ask, why they thus slander and slight them.

I answer. It is a chief principle in the Art of Flattery, (which these men
mostly study,) to wind themselves into favor, by working the more worthy into
disgrace. And this they effect; not so much by spying faults, and causes of
dislike in the favored; (wherein these men are as quicksighted as Eagles.) As,
by making use of all occasions, that may multiply suspicions in the party
favoring. So they deal with godly Ministers, as Julian the Apostata did by
their Lord and Master; who took down his Image in contempt, that he might
set up his own in the same place.

2. Neither do the people (I mean the Religious) fare better at their hands.
For they load them also with a world of Reproaches, even out of the Pulpit, on
putpose to flout them out of their faith; and forestall others with prejudice
against them. I need not tell you, that in all ages, it has been the custom
of false Prophets, which daub with untempered mortar, to brand the Religious
with some odious name or other; that so they might persecute the truth
themselves, with the less danger and opposition; and make it hateful unto
others; who look no further, then upon the outside, or visard which they have
put upon it. The Scripture and Ecclesiastical history abounds with instances.
As 1 King. 18. 17. Psalm. 35. 11. Job 4. 6. to 11. Nehem. 6. 6. Act. 6. 13. and
17. 6, 7. 18, 19. and 24. 5, 6. and 28. 22. 1 Cor. 4. 10. 13. 2 Cor. 6. 8. And
many the like, which would be tedious to relate. Neither were they thus dealt
withal, by a few, or in some one place: but the people of GOD, and the
Doctrine of CHRIST were every where thus used, Act. 28. 22. And if it be not so
now, let the Reader judge.

Is it not the manner of all Court-Chaplaines, Episcopal Preachers, double
beneficed men, Scandalous Ministers, and the like, upon as false and scandalous
grounds, to tell the people, yea and the King too, That we are movers of
Sedition, Troublers of the State; Rebels, Doers against the Decrees of Caesar,
Publishers of new, Factious, and strange Doctrines; Ringleaders of Sects and
Schisms; Contentious Persons, Hypocrites, Puritans, Brownists, Anabaptists?
And that we preach in Tuhs? With infinite suggestions of this nature, able (as
they are plausibly urged) to shake an ungrounded judgment. Which terms favor
of nothing but pure malice and venomous rancor against all grace and goodness.
Under which names devised by them, and taken up from them; how are the
Religious hated, persecuted, reviled, and scoffed at? Neither matters it, how
just their accusations be; but how spiteful. Yea, under color of inveighing
against Puritans, how do these unpreaching Ministers load the Persons and
Doctrines of the honest hearted with reproaches? What a multitude of slanders
and calumniations do they asually belch out against them? To make them
loathsome to the world? Which Sermons, a man would think were studied for the
Whetstone: yet believe them you must, or they I take you for a Puritan too.

Thus like Samsons Foxes, or Solomon's Madman, their tongues throw Firebrarnds,
and are enough to set the whole field of the Church on a flame. Yea, the Hill
Aema does not wherle out fire more furiously, then such a Preacher throws
poison out of his mouth: For he accuses even all the Religious, not only of
what he has seen and heard to have been done by the worst of men, but also
of what he dreameth. What one says of the Papists; namely, that they never
sound any error spued out by the ancients, but they have licked it up
superstitiously to abuse the same, is appliable to these Ministers of Satan:
They never hear any scoff, slander, or devilish invective formerly devised,
but they lick it up, that they may spirit our again, in the faces of
professors.

Briefly, they so bark at the Religious, with reproaches, and so bite them
with mischief (when it is in their power; and none have been so potent with
Bishops as they) That they merit no other respect, then that of Aristogiton the
Athenian Orator; who, for his lewd railing, was called a Dog. And I could
heartily wish that Authority would muzzle them.

Thus they take away the Righteousness of the righteous from them: as Isaiah
speaks of the false Prophets, in his time, Isa. 5. 23. And make them accounted
as the very filth of the world, and offscouring of all things; as the false
Apostles did the Christians in Saint Paul's time, 1 Cor. 4. 10. to 14. Yea, as
once those mockets, Act. 2. imputed the true work of the SPIRIT to
drunkenness, so these even traduce all the Graces of GOD in his children.
Only they spoke it ignorantly: these I fear, knowingly and maliciously. Which
makes it no less then Blasphemy; like that of the Scribes, and Pharisees,
Matthew. 12. 24. For Blasphemy is a Witting and malicious speech of Derogation,
either against the truth of GOD, or against the GOD of Truth; or against the
Friends of GOD and Truth. However, they are the enemies of the Cross of
CHRIST, spoken of Phil. 3. 18. Unto whom those words of the Psalmist may fitly
be applied. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and with thy tongue thou forgest
deceit: Thou sit and speak against thy brother, thou slandrest thy own
mothers Son, Psalm. 50. 19, 20. And again, Psalm. 120. 3. 4. Thy lying and
deceitful tongue is as the sharp arrows of the mighty, and as the Coals of
Juniper (which raked up (as they say) will keep fire a Twelvemoneth.) And
those other words, Psalm. 52. Thy tongue imagines mischief, and is like a
sharp Rasor, that cutteth deceitfully. Thou do love evil more then good,
and lies more then to speak the truth. Thou love all words that may destroy;
O deceitful tongue! So shall God destroy thee for ever. He shall take thee,
and pluck thee out of thy tabernacle, and root thee out of the land of the
living, Verse. 1. to 6.

Quest. But why (may some say) do they preach thus?
Answ. For sundry Reasons.

1. One Reason is, Covetousness. They know, that if the Doctrine of JESUS
CHRIST should be preached purely; it would quite cut down worldly pomp,
covetousness and idleness in the ministry. And fear also, that if it should
take place, they must part with one or more of their livings; and put
themselves out of all hope of ever rising higher. Again, they know the way to
please the Bishops is, to preach against the Puritans. And the way to
Preferment is, by pleasing of them. So their ambition of advancing their Own
house, blows out their zeal to GODS house I could confirm this, by many
examples. But I am forced to maime the original in every part, that it may
suit with the short breatht, and with the times. Only take Ezekiels testimony,
Cap. 22. They destroy souls for their own covetous lucre, Verse. 27. 28.

2. Another reason is, Their envy and malice against the men, and their graces.
Some (says the Apostle) preach CHRIST even of envy and strife; and some also
of good will. The one part preach CHRIST of contention, and not purely:
Supposing to add more affliction to my bonds, Phil. 1. 15. 16. The envious
emulate, what they cannot imitate. The seed of the Serpent mortally hates the
seed of the Woman: And the world, that only loves her own; inveterately hates
them that are not of the world.

We read, that Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury so spleened godly Ministers,
and such as heard them; that he not only inveighed against them in the Pulpit,
but swore at the Table, He would not leave one slip of professors in this land.
And Solomon gives the reason, Prove. 29. He that is upright in his way, is
abomination to the wicked, Verse. 27. Which envy and malice so steepes their
tongues in Gall and Vinegar, that nothing can proceed from them, of the parties
envied, but bitter and sharp words. Yea, their hearts are so full of the
Serpents enmity, that if they should not vent themselves this way, their
uncontainable malice and envy would soon burst them, as Seneca thought. And
yet in this they hurt themselves more then us, like the Fly who sings her
own wings, and torments her self in the flaming light, which she labors to
extinguish and put out. How these Nadabs and Abihu's will answer GOD for
offering this strange fire upon his Altar, I know not; only this I say;
Hereafter it will be too late to dispute the matter, when GOD will give no
other reason of their damnation, but this: I will be sanctified in them that
come near me, Levit. 10. Verse. 3.

3. Another reason is; Having made try all of a contrary way of preaching, and
missing to be fed with such broth as he loves; as finding-neither the applause
nor preferment he looked for, and thought himself worthy of; (though no body
else thought so) he doubts not, but to have it this way. Whereupon he inveighs
most leudly and loudly against them, that (as he thinks) scorn him, and
screene his hopes from him. Wherefore now the Trumpet of Moses is made a Trunk
to shoot Pellets at Truths, and Moses his friends. And the Characters of
slander must be drawn in the oil of the Tabernacle; to the abomination of GOD
and man. Arius driving ambitiously at a Bishopric was prevented by Alexander
his Competitor the worthier man; though not esteemed his match for some
natural parts. Upon the missing his suit he pursued his spite, by broaching an
heresy. That after the repulse he might seem some body, and draw a world of
Disciples after him: As Theodoret observes. Which is much the condition of
these men. They know they are no way gifted to further the Gospel with credit
and gain to themselves: Therefore resolve to have it, by bending their wits
another way. As you have heard, what a little man said once to his
Chamber-fellow in the University: who taking the same course, came afterward
to Great preferment, and has sped thereafter. And having sound out how this
way of preaching takes with natural men, and how they are applauded, (as I
shall show afterward) they thirst after nothing more then to excel in this
kind; and so proceed from bad to worse. As the praise that Sylla gave to Cinna
made him commit perjury.

Now let go all kind of preaching that may profit; let go truth, let go the
glory of God, he is resolved to become famous though it be for infamy. Like
Herostratus, who burnt with wild fire the famous Temple of Diana, to get
himself perpetual fame. And that the birth may answer the conception, he
turns all his stock into four or six Sermons, which shall serve his whole
life at the Court, University, Paul's Cross, and as he travels abroad the
Country; resembling some Needy flanting Goldsmiths, who has nothing in the
inner room, but all on the Cupbord. Not that he saves by it: For perhaps the
meanest of them shall be Elephanti Partum, a years Bird, or a child of two
years breeding: one whereof is spent in the conception, another in fashioning
the members. In which Sermons their principal care is, how to bewitch and
spoil their hearers, through a kind of Philosophy and vain deceit, or beguile
them with enticing words; which shall have a show of humane wisdom and
bumblenesse of mind, or voluntary Religion in will worship; and a pretense of
men's traditions and rudiments of the world, Col 2. 8. And (to give them their
due) they are such ingenious sophisters, that by recreating the sense they can
delude the understanding, and make good seem evil, and evil good. For they
give Dragons Gall in a Crystal Glass, or with the Whore in the Apocalypse,
Poison in a Golden Cup: So killing souls with poisoned doctrine wrapped up in
sugared and sweet words. Yea, these Sophisters have such a singular
transcendency this way, and are so gifted in the Art of deception, that like
their Holy Father the Pope, they can make every thing of any thing. Or like the
Sophisters of Greece with their eloquence and copiousnesse of wit can make of a
Mouse an Elephant, and a Mountain of a Molehill. For they only exercise their
wits, how to bastardize and corrupt the very essence of things by subtle
distinctions; turning false matters into true Syllogismes, or the like. Wherein
they fall not short of subtle Carneades, of whom wise Cato confessed, that
whiles he disputed, scarce any man could discern which was the truth. Whence
it is Saint Bernard calling good Preachers the Light of the world, compares bad
ones to Fogs and Mists, which keep the people from seeing the light of the
Gospel, and receiving the Grace of GOD.

Thus they preach, but it is backward as Arithmeticians write: And creep into
the Church for the same end, that the Serpent crept into Paradise; That like
Hananiah, Jerem. ^8. they may seduce in the place of the Sanctuary. Neither
sail they of their purpose: For by this means, one of them edifies more to
damnation then many of the best Preachers in the land can do to salvation; and
bring more to hell then they can do to Heaven: for many souls receive from
their Sermons those lessons of darkness which lead them steadily unto
eternal darkness. And (^o give them their due) they have learned to handle
the sensual so sweetly that they think it a pleasure to be seduced. For as a
lustful person prefers a painted Harlot before a modest and chaste Woman: So it
is not hard for the Affection to Cosen the Judgment. And he is worthy to be
Deceived, that either values things, as they seem; or loves falsehood better
then truth. And so you have their Reasons: at least so many of them, as time
will permit.

In the next place, Observe their Serpentine subtilty. For, lest their Slanders
should not he Believed, and the hook of their false doctrine swallowed; In the
first place they use to guild over their counterfeit metal with Scripture;
that so it may pass current. Even as Physicians sheath their Bitter Pills with
Sugar, that they may be taken with Delight: Though with nothing so honest a
Guile. And, that the Word of GOD may seem guilty of their invectives, and not
the Serpents Enmity; These White Devils in their Sermons, will so fit
Scriptures to their purpose, and make them so suite with their passion, that
Malice it self shall Unsuspected rail in the very Phrases of the Holy GHOST:
And they will beat their enemies, (though GODS friends) with Divinity; And
think they may speak what they will, so it be in the words of Scripture; though
falsely wrested and applied. Let them have a Seeming opposition of Vice, though
indeed it be a Virtue; They care not how they rage. Their reproves shall be no
other then Libels, and their Sermons then Philippicks: So the Abuse of
Divinity, shall be maintained by Divinity; and she miserably forced to
justify, and continue her own wrongs; and GOD forced to speak for Baal: the
SPIRIT for the flesh; Even fathering lies on the Father of Truth, and teaching
the Bastards of their own brain, to call the Wisdom of Heaven Father.

Indeed some that have not observed this deepnesse of Satan, will hardly think
it possible they should allege the Word of GOD so, as to serve their turns,
in this their way of preaching. But they have learned in the College of
Cardinals, and in the University of Rome no less then Eight Several ways of
corrupting the Word of GOD, and deluding the world. Which I, out of my Slender
Abilities, and small reading, can trace them in. As will appear, when these
Characters shall come forth at large, which I cannot stand to amplify, in this
Abstract.

I confess, the most common and usual way, that these profane Belshazzers
have, to Drink Carnal Carouses in the Spiritual Vessels of the Temple, is,
by Mis-Application. For, if they cite not a Text, with Mutilation, nor with
Distortion, the Beginning without the End, or the End without the Beginning; by
wronging the words, nor wresting the sense; by maiming, nor perverting it: Yet,
by Mis-applying it, they will turn the Truth of GOD into a Lie.

As put the case they preach against Straining out Gnats, and Swallowing
Camels: Or Making a Glorious Profession without Practice: Against Singularity,
Censoriousnesse, and Rashjudging; Or such as are Pure in their own eyes;
Crafty and unjust in their dealings; Against Rebellion, and Disobedience to
Magistrates, etc. Or, if their humor lead them to Extol Sincerity, Humility,
Charity, peace, patience, Brotherly-love and Fellowship, GODS Mercy, and the
like: As these (if you mark it) are the usual theames they make choice of
(except they cry up Praying, and praise Diligence in our Callings; that they
may cry down Preaching, and condemn so much Hearing, and busying our selves
so much about Religion) And wherein they most excel, whether in praising, or
dispraising: It is strange to see, how they will lay load upon the Religious
under some disgracefu^l name, or other; applying the Excess, or Defect to
none, but them, whose only care indeed is, if they were rightly considered,
without prejudice, to live, as if there were no Gospel; and to die, as if there
were no Law. When indeed, if they did apply them to the right parties, that are
most guilty, in committing those sins, or omitting those duties; namely All
Carnal and Unhallowed Divines, who profess themselves Ministers of CHRIST,
and GODS mouth to the people: yea, who profess Holiness and Innocence in
their very Vestures, profane people and ignorant persons; As I could both
easily and fully prove, If I might stand to answer these, and the like their
Serpentine Subtilties in particular; They could not but confess, (as once
David to Nathan) that They, and They only are The men Guilty of those crimes,
which they so severely condemn in others.

But, if they were not cunning Plaisterers, how should they be fit to Daub with
untempered mortar. Ezekiel. 13. 10. Only hence we may note, who are False
Apostles. And, that, in Personal Application great heed must be taken: For
otherwise a man may be a False Prophet in speaking the truth, if it be not a
truth to the Person, to whom he speaks it. It was a truth which Jobs Three
Friends spoke to him, being considered apart from the Person, and Case: But, as
they spoke it to him, and applied it, it was Utterly False; And GOD detested it
in them. One man's meat may be another man's bane. And so I have given you some
instances, how these Juglers in Divinity, wrest and pervert the Scriptures, and
make Truth it self maintain and justify their Falsehood. The time and my
memory would sail me, if I should undertake to set down all that I have heard
and read, in this kind. For there is not a Text in the Bible, but Ministers,
that I could name, will draw Inferences from it, either to Discourage the
Godly, or Encourage the Wicked. Whom I cannot enough admire, though I honor
them not at all.

In deed, For the most part you shall find, if you mark it, that all the
testimonies, which they allege for their own ends; are either Tropes, or
Figures, or Allegories, or Parables, or Allusions, or Dark speeches: which,
when they presume to expound, without conference of other Scriptures, they
wander and stray from the mark: For, if they did not wrest and pervert the
word, it is impossible the Truth should maintain Error. Therefore we see, that
Eve never erred, until she corrupted the Text, Genesis 3. 3.

And upon this file hang all those Dusty Cobwebs of Rome, as Purgatory, the
Real-Presence, the Doctrine of Merit, in Blowing up States, and Murdering of
Princes, etc. Wherein they catch souls like Flies, and prey upon them with
their poisonous breath. But as we should not draw more from them, then there is
in them: So every place of Scripture is so to be expounded, as it may agree
with all, and cross none. Besides, it is an Axiom received in their own
Schools, That we may not fetch an Argument in Divinity from Allegories and
Metaphors, unless we can elsewhere show, that the same thing is taught in a
Literal sense.

True. There is not a Leaf in the Sacred Volume, that makes either for
Voluptuousness, or against Holiness, and Purity. For to Please Flesh and
Blood is the Doctrine of Devils. Yea, as it is well observed, There is not One
Obscene word in all the Hebrew tongue: which is one reason, why it is called, The
Holy Language. Neither will these Eagles plumes brook the blending with common
feathers. This heavenly gold scorns the mixture of base and sophisticate
metals. Yet these men will make it a nose of wax, and with their wicked hearts
decoct the very Goodness of GOD to Venom.

By these few instances you may see, how, that under the color of alleging
Scripture, they delude the people, as the Egyptian Juglers, by counterfeiting
Moses miracles deceived Pharaoh. That, when they allege it, saying with those
False Prophets, Ezekiel 22. 28. Thus says the LORD: It is other, of otherwise
then ever the Author meant it; sometimes taking the words against the meaning:
Often making a meaning against the words: Either suppressing some of the words,
or not expressing the true sense. As if they would conveigh away the Gold, and
throw us the Bag. That, to utter their Damned Commodities, they deal as some
Tradesmen about their badde Wares; Put out the True lights, and set up False in
their stead. That they wound the truth in her own coat. And, as Jacob put on
the garments of Esau his Brother, to deceive Isaak his Father: So these, in the
apparel of their Elder Brother CHRIST, seek to beguile the Church their
Mother. That they have not the Scripture so much for a Text, as for a Pretext.
In choosing whereof they e^re also, by inverting the order. For they first make
their Sermons, and then look for a Text; which they take out too with the left
hand. Though indeed there is not a Text of Sacred truth, which their Gloss
corrupts not: For as GOD brings Good out of Evil: so these bring Evil out of
Good. Wherein they come so far short of Paul; who, comparing himself with
the false Apostles, 2 Cor. 4. 2. says: We walk not in craftiness; neither
handle we the word of God deceitfully: But in declaration of the truth we
approve our selves to every man's conscience, in the sight of GOD. That they are
worse then Balaam; who, (when Balaak said, What have thou done! I took thee to
Curse mine enemies: And behold, Thou have Blessed them altogether,) answered,
(Though he had as good a mind to Curse the Children of Israel, as these the
people of GOD) and said, Must I not take heed to speak that, which the LORD
has put in my mouth? Numb. 23. 11, 12. Being such false teachers as Saint
Peter foretells of, that Bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2. 1,
2. And Saint Jude, Jud. verse. 4. Being ungodly men crept in unawares; who turn
the Grace of GOD into Lasciviousness, being before of old ordained to
Condemnation.

It is said, Revel. 22. which is the Closing up of the Bible. If any man shall
add unto these things, GOD shall add unto him the Plagues that are written in
this book. And, if any man shall take away from the words of this book, GOD
shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy City,
and from the things that are written in this book, verse 18. 19. I wish these
men would mind it, and what a fair business they make of it, so wresting the
Book of Grace, that they quite wrest themselves out of the Book of Life.

Yea, Destruction is threatened to every Prophet that shall but Conceal the
truth: or forbear to Reprove Sin sharply, Ezekiel. 3. 17. 18, 19. and 23 8. 1
Cor. 9. 16. and other places. How much more in this Case? For alleging
Scripture to maintain thy sin, and to revile holiness is to presume to
wrest GODS weapons out of his hand; and as it were, to wound him with his own
Sword. And I wonder how they dare climb up into the Pulpit, with such a
purpose, for fear, lest Thunder should strike them down again. But to speak
to them, who have sworn allegiance to the Prince of darkness, is labor in
vain.

2. Another slight of theirs, is this. Knowing that if the Cup of their poison
were not rubd with Honey, it would not down: And that their base Coin would
not pass, except they mix it with a considerable quantity of good money: They
will not vent their devilish Doctrines without a mixture of some wholesome
Truths: like as Gardeners will sow among the herbs, that are wholesome and
pleasant, others noisome and venomous. Or rather Hannibal; who, to entrap his
enemies, mixed their Wine with Mandrakes, whose operation is betwixt Sleep and
Poison. Or as Avicen was made away, by Annoynting the book with poison, which
he was to read. Or rather like the Devil, who, as Lactantius says, many times
spoke truth in Oracles, to the intent he might shadow his falsehoods the more
cunningly. These men are the Servants of the most-high GOD; which show unto us
the way of salvation, Acts 16. 17. Who would look for the Devil, under the
habit of such good counsel? But what is his reason? He makes a show of
under-propping the truth, but he meant to undermine it.

This old Fox, like the Fox in the Fable, never praises the Law, but when it
may make away for his booty. Wherefore Paul cast out the soul Spirit, that
confessed him. For though he spoke true, he knew to what hellish purpose he spoke
it. And our Savior another, who worshipped him, and confessed him to be the
Son of the most-high GOD. Mark 5. 7. 8.

Deceit gets credit in small matters, that it may cosen in things of greater
weight. The Dequoy will suffer the simple man to win for a while, till he
has whetted him on: Then he foists in false Dice, and after leaves him in the
lurch. If fraudulent Merchants had not some Good Wares, their Base ones would
not be saleable: But the Good must help away with the Bad. So, if these spoke
nothing but true, they could not deceive us: if nothing but false, we would not
believe them. Therefore they mingle the one with the other, as men mingle
poison, with good and savory meat; when they intend to destroy.

And this their crafty and deceitful kind of wresting and mis-applying the
Word they have immediately learnt from the Devil him self, whose Chaplains
they are. For he has used this kind of handling the Scripture, ever since Adam
was in the state of Innocence; as appears by Genesis 3. 4, 5. and many other
instances, 1 King. 22. 21, 22. 1 Samuel 28. 19. Psalm. 91. 11. Matthew. 4. 6. Mar.
1. 24. etc.

Yet, (to give the Devil his due,) I do not find Satan, in all the Scripture,
to be so injurious against GOD, as these men: For what is recorded of him worse
then this, uttering it by the month of that Assyrian Monarch? I will Ascend,
and be like the most-High, Isa. 14. 13, 14. It was great blasphemy for the
Devil to say so But it is greater blasphemy to Personate GOD, and bring him in,
saying; I will Descend, and be like the Prince of Darkness. And what is it
better, to make the Scripture, GODS own Oracles to Descend to the Disgracing
of Verme and true Religion? And to the Magnifying of Vice and Impiety? The
Discouraging of the Good, and Encouraging of the Wicked? Surely this is to make
GOD like the Devil. CHRIST like Anti Christ: and to bring down the Holy GHOST
in stead of the Likeness of a Dove, in the shape of a Vulture or Raven. So
that however, these Beasts, (like tha^ other Beast, Rev. 13. 11.) have Horns
like the Lamb: would seem to deliver nothing but Scripture: yet they Speak
like the Dragon. Yea worse then the Dragen. And it is hard for ignorant people,
who are unacquainted with these kind of wiles, not to be deceived by these
Horns of the Lamb. For there is no temptation so dangerous, as that which
comes shrouded under a Veil of Holiness, and pretends Authority from GOD. The
Holy Prophet himself was deceived by Such a Devil, under another Prophets
vizard, 1 King. 13. 18. to 24. Yea Satan made no doubt, but he should Cosen
CHRIST himself, when he came to him with a Scriptum est. It is written, Matt.
4.

If Hushai had not said, I am for Absalom; And whom Israel chooses, his will I
be; he had not disappointed the counsel of Achitophel: which was then like the
Oracle of GOD; nor re-established David in his Kingdom, 2 Samuel 16 18. So, if
these false Doctors should not say: We are for CHRIST; they could not withstand
the True Ministers, that deliver the words of GOD: nor enthrone Antichrist in
the Seat of CHRIST.

But (besides Alleging of Scripture, and mixing Truth with Falsehood,) they
have other Great Advantages, as

3. These Preachers are usually men of Extraordinary Parts; being for the most
part, Exceeding witty, subtle, and eloquent, (did they employ these gifts
accordingly) And still the Better their wit, the Worse, As the Earth, the more
fruitful it is, the more and more Pestilent are the Weeds in it, if it be not
sown with good seed. The sweetest Wine turns to the sharpest Vinegar. The
fairer the Stone is in the Toads head, the more pestilent is the Poison in her
Bowels. And it is commonly seen, that a wicked man endowed with wit and
learning, is like a Spider and her Web: wherein is more Venom then A^^, as
these verify. For what Desperate advisements do they give us, in a Fine-filed
Phrase: And with what Powerful and Partinent Expressions? How do they, by
their Elequence or Ornament of the tongue, spread Sweet Snares, and allure the
hearts of men? For they win not by Battery, but by Undermining, which is as
secret as wicked.

So that, what is wanting in the Goodness of the cause, is supplied not only
in the Greatness of the Fees, as I showed before: But also by the cunning of
the Advocate. And what they cannot perform by the Evidence of truth, they
seek to attain by the Eloquence of A^^; which they improve to the utmost;
knowing that false things have need of foistings: and filthy and foul things
of ornaments and coverings. In the mean time we have the same cause, that Job
had to say: Our Enemies speak Eloquently against us: But ^^^ ^y^s ^ou^e o^^
t^ares unto God, Job. 16. 20.

Not that we need be discouraged: For more likely to be the Truth; and we GODS
Chosen* because the wits of the world dispute against it, and us.

Wit and Learning is like the Unicorns horn, which, being in a skillful man's
hand, is very precious, and of admirable use: But when in the Beasts head, no
less hurtful and pernicious. As the Church has always sound to her grief.
How many learned and witty Heretics do we read of: who were admired for their
Fine Conceits, and Elegant Expressions, which fell from them, whiles their
Opinions, and secretly-couched Doctrines, were Dangerous and Mortal. So that
we may say of their Doctrines, as Es^p said of his Tongues, or Jeremy of his
Figs, Ier. 24. 3. Then the good, and true, nothing can be spoken better: Then
the bad and false, nothing more perilous and vile Such an one was Balaam: where
he spoke well never any Prophet spoke more Divinely: where he spoke ill, there
was never any Devil spoke more Desperately. He could not make Israel cursed by
his Prophecy, therefore he tries to effect it, by his Policy. He sends a Troop
of Meabitish Whores among thom, that so they might be tempted to offend GOD,
and GOD might cease to defend them. He had confessed before, Numb. 23. 23 That
there could be no Enchantment, nor Witchcraft against Israel. No Devils, but
those Shee-Devils could do it, Numb. 25.

4. As they are men of Extraordinary parts; So they have Extraordinary
Assistance from Satan: which is another Prime Advantage.

That Satan is their Tutor, to prompt and assist them, to speak in, and by
them; no man can doubt, that believes Micajah the Prophet, who relates before
Ahab, that there Came forth a Spirit, and stood before the LORD, saying, I will
go forth, and be a false Spirit in the mouths of all his Prophets. To whom the
LORD answered. Thou shall persuade Ahab, and also prevail. Go forth, and do
so, 1 King 22. 20. 21. and 1 Chronicles. 18. 18. to 23. Or that Scripture, Matthew.
13. 25. where speaking of the Envious man sowing Tares among the Wheat. Our
Savior tells them plainly: That the said Envious man was the Devil, v. 39. Or
lastly, Our Saviors words to Peter, Matt. 16. 23 Get thee behind me Satan. But
their Practice sufficiently proves it. For needs must that be a Serpentine
Exposition, which Gnaweth ou^ the Bowels of the Text.

Now if it be Satan's Heart in their lips: and that he does prompt and assist
them: it must likewise be granted that he has more knowledge, learning, and
experience, then any man alive. Yea, put all the wits in the world together,
and then add Satan's thereunto: The last (like figures in Arithmetic) will
more improve the same, then all that went before it. So that whatsoever a man's
own Mother-wit is; he, that has Satan's wit superadded, is able to do more
mischief, then many other men. And it may be said of such an one, as it was of
Caesar. There were in him Ten such as Marius. Yea, If it be true, as it is
reported, That a Serpent having swallowed a Serpent, becomes a Dragon: what
must his Subtilty be, that has the Subtilty of this old Serpent infused into
him? We have known possessed men speak languages, they were never taught; and
we have had experience, that Ma^i^ians (through the permission of GOD) were
able to do whatsoever the Devil himself could do. So that, as an Ape is like
a Baboone: only a Baboone is Bigger: So these Little Seducers are like the
Great Seducer; only he is the Elder and more experienced, having used this Art
now near upon Six Thousand Years. No marvel then, that Falsehood has more
wit to devise, then Truth. For He must needs go, that is Devil-driven. As when
any one goes about an Evil Business; It is strange to see, how ready the
Devil is to set him forwards: how careful that he should want no furtherances.
So, that if any man would but be Leudly-witty, he shall be sure to be furnished
with store of profane jests, jeeres, and scoffs: wherein a loose heart has
double advantage of the conscionable. But more especially does he assist his
Clergy; by whom, and in whom he speaks; as sometimes Clients do by their
Advocates.

When David had heard the Subtle woman of Tek^a, how cunningly she had
contrived her speech touching Absalom: he presently perceived, that Joab had an
hand i^ it. The which she ingenuously confesses, saying: Thy servant Joab bade
me speak this. And he put all these words into my mouth. Even so, when we hear
such a Sermon; and find it to excel their accustomed Orations, in a Subtle
kind of sophistry: (as, though the Sea be in perpetual agitation: yet the
Spring-tides rise higher then their fellows) We may presently conjecture, or
rather conclude, That Satan has a special hand in this business. And, I
doubt not, (if they would, with her, acknowledge the truth, and neither Turn
to the right hand, nor to the left) but they would confess the same.

However; Their zeal and fervency to defend the Devils cause proves it
sufficiently, 1 J^^n 3. 14. when in preaching for him, or against the good and
goodness, they are like C^assus, who even burst his sides in pleading for
Pompey. Or, if neither of these, It is enough we hear Saint James affirm;
That this Tongue (full of deadly poison, issuing from a Corrupt heart, fraught
with Bitter envy and strife) is set on fire from Hell. And that this Wisdom is
not alone Earthly and Sensual, but Devilish, Jam. 3, 6. 8. 14, 15.

Now put all together: First, Their Alleading GODS Word. Secondly, Their Mixing
of truth with Falsehood. Thirdly, Their Excelling in Wit, and Learning.
Fourthly, The Great Help and Supply they have from Satan: And you will no whit
marvel that their preaching so takes with men of the world: who count that
Preaching which saves souls, no better then Foolishness.

For otherwise, were not the danger more in the Men, then in their Cause: Had
not these Two Great Curtizans of the world (Profaneness and Antichristianisme)
so Cunning Pandors; I could not but wonder how they should get any but Foolish
Customers; where the Gospel (in many Parishes) is so purely taught.

But these false Prophets, as they use the matter, are able to seduce, (if it
were possible) the very Elect, as our Savior shows, Mark 13. 22. As let
there be Two Ministers in the same Parish: One a Simon-Magus, that is, Parson;
or Curate put in by the Bishop; the other a Simon-Peter, that is, by a Special
providence chosen Lecturer. What Is the issue? The one comes in CHRIST'S name:
Therefore him they receive not. The other comes in His own name; and him they
receive, John 5. 43. The Fore-noons man is Of the World, and therefore speaks
of the World; And these men of the World Hear him, 1 John 4. 5. The Afternoons
man is Of GOD; and they Hear him not; because they are not of GOD, verse 6.

Simon-Magus his Sermons are made to Please: But withal to Kill: As All
Poisons Kill not, with Griping Torments: Some cast into a sleep, Or make men
Laugh, till they fall down Dead.

Simon-Peters, to Profit. Of whom the LORD speaks, Jer. 3. 15. I will give you
Pastors according to mine own heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding. The Doctrine of the former being like the Angels Book: Sweet in
the Mouth, but Bitter in the Bowels, Revel. 10. 9. That of the latter like
Mithridate: Bitter to the Flesh, but Sovereign for the Soul. Well knowing
that a Mortal wound must be Thoroughly Searched, ere it can be soundly healed.
And that no Purgative Medicine can bring Health, without some Griping.

And where the LORD is pleased to place such an one: It is the Greatest
Blessing he can give to that Parish. And the people are no less bound to him,
for the virtues he teaches them, then to their Parents, for the life they gave
them.

Yet, woe is me! Natural and fleshly men are so blockish, and withal so
ungrateful; That they are not only better pleased with the former, for his
flattery, then with the latter for speaking the truth: But commonly they
requite their faithful Minister, as Ahab did Micajah; the False Prophets,
Jeremiah; Herod, John-Baptist; and Demetrius Paul: whiles they think nothing
Too much, for their Vn-preaching-minister.

It is not the Searching, but the Soothing Ministry, that carries away the
peoples applause: Because they had rather have their Itch clawed, then Cured.
Counsels are like Faces, That which is Fair, pleases. Yea, for the most part,
it fares with Doctrines, as it does with meats. Those that are least wholesome,
are most requested. That pleases us, which is sweet to the sense: not that
which is Wholesome to the Conscience.

Neither do the common people like these Wasps so much for the Honey in their
Combs, as for the sting in their Tails, wherewith they gall the godly. For as
their Memory is like the Boulter, which casts out all the Flower, keeping
only the Branne: And themselves like the Egyptians, who behold the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars, all the Glories of Nature, without Admiration; yea, without
Common Regard, until they espy a Crocodile, an ugly Serpent; and then down on
their Knees to worship it: so they will pass over all wholesome Instructions,
applying whatsoever they hear (especially Bitter Invectives, and fearful
threatenings) to others; As, This belongs to Puritans: That to such, and such an
one; not to themselves. Even as one Monkie looking in a glass, things he sees
another Monkies face, and not his own.

In a word; These men will make no other use of what they hear, then Spiders
do, of what they receive. Suck out all the Poison, and leave the rest. And it
is just with GOD it should be so. Because they forsake my Law, which I set
before them; and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein: but have
walked after the imagination of their own heart, and after Baalim, which their
Fathers taught them. Therefore thus says the LORD of Hosts, the GOD of Israel:
Behold I will feed them, even this people with Wormwood, and give them waters
of Gall to drink, Jer. 9. 13. 14, 15. Again, more expressly, 2 These. 2.
Because they received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved: For
this cause GOD shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe Lies.
That they all might be damned, which believe not the Truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, verse. 10, 11, 12. This is a Sure, but a Sore Judgment. Will
they not adhere to the GOD of Truth? They shall be turned over to the Father of
Lies. Because Ahab will not believe Micajah; Therefore a Lying Spirit shall
deceive his Prophets, to deceive him. The Jews had forbidden the Sober
Prophets to prophecy: Therefore they shall have Drunken Prophets, that shall
Propkesie of Wine and strong drink; and walk in the Spirit of Falsehood, Mica.
2. 11. Jer. 5. 30, 31. Isa. 30. 10. 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. Such a people, such a
Prophet am I speaking of. For,

2. In stead of Converting, he Perverteth his Hearers; dealing with them, as an
Ill Physician with his Patient; that purges away the Good Humors, and leaves
the Bad behind them. Or as Vermin do by Poultry; that suck out the best blood
from them, and leave only the refuse. His Sermons being worse then so many
infectious bits of meat: For, as that causes all the wholesome food a man has
eaten, to be vomited up; so it self is vomited up with all: Whereas his
Doctrines drive out the Truth, as one nail drives out another, and sticks fast
in the room. Falsehood after Truth is like Aloes strawed upon Honey, a little
whereof takes away all the former sweetness.

Yea, such a seducing Preacher shall be able with one Sermon to pull down,
undo, and make void whatsoever a faithful and powerful Minister has built
up and established in the hearts of his hearers, with great pains, in many
years. And no marvel. If we consider how averse we are from Good, and how
prone we are to Evil, by nature; As having the wind of Satan's temptations, and
the tide of our own affections to drive us forward. A Ship at Sea is not
carried on her voyage, without great force of the wind; whereas a little urchin
fish called a Remora, by sticking her horn into it, will stop her, though
under sail, in her full Careere. Great trees, which are long in growing, may
be rooted up in an instant. Herostratus an Obscure and Base fellow could easily
in one night burn the Temple of Diana at Ephesus; which was 220. years in
building, of all Asia, at the cost of so many Princes, and beautified with the
labor and cunning of so many excellent workmen.

Indeed: what things this Un preaching Minister has planted, are like to last:
For he so rankles and festers the affections of his hearers, that he leaves no
possibility of their amendment. They hatch Cochatrice eggs (says the Prophet)
and weave the Spiders web. He that eats of their eggs dies; and that
which is trodden upon, breaks out into a Serpent, Isa. 59 5.

His Sermons, like Circes Potions, are Too strong for all Antidotes: And their
condition like the Kings-Evill: that none but GOD himself can cure: For the
parties hereby are so Metamorphos'd, that either they become Stupid and Blind
to all spiritual Objects (like the spectators of Perseus, when he put on
Medusa's head; for the redeeming of Andromeda) resolving to cast off all care
of their souls, and never to hear other Preachers. Forgetting that they vowed
themselves to CHRIST in their Baptism, To be his Faithful Soldiers and
Servants, unto their lives end. And that, if they keep not their Vow, in doing
their Utmost, their Sin is no less then perjury.

Or else in the next place, they have the Tead of prejudice against all good,
engendered in their brains, which makes them see, hear and take all things
with the left eye, ear and hand, Act. 2. 13. and 20. 9. Isa. 5. 20. And then
like a man out of his way: The faster they run, the farther off. And it
becomes a greater work to unteach them that, then to teach them the whole duty
of a Christian besides.

And indeed how should better cloth be made of such yarne? Our blood cannot
be good, if our diet be unwholesome. Neither can our hearts or affections, our
words, or our works be good unless the milk be wholesome whereupon we seed.
However their hearers learn this lesson from their Sermons, to practice what
they teach. And Satan has his aim, which is, to make Sanctification an odious
thing, by fastening upon it, out of the pulpit, some vile reproach; that men may
be ashamed to serve GOD, and be saved. As for example. Let a man but abandon
his former foul sins, live more circumspectly and warily then his neighbors
about him: Instantly this his holiness grows very offensive to them, and
appears to be but hypocrisy, or at least idle scrupulosity. Whereupon they
brand him for a Puritan. And this being the verdict of those, who count
themselves honest men, and their neighbors think no less: (to whom civil
men are almost Puritans:) like a Kennell of dogs they run away with the cry,
and bark out this term, against every good man they meet.

Whereby it fares with Religion, and the professors thereof, as it did with the
Land of Canaan, Numb. 14. 36. Some wicked Ministers, like the ten spies, have
brought up an ill name and report upon the way of truth; and many of the people
following their example, increase the scandal, See 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 3.
3. So that the godly may take up David's words against such a Minister, and say.
Thou have made us a strife unto our neighbors, and our enemies laugh at us
among themselves, Psalm. 80. 6. And this is a sport to Satan, who delights
himself in setting us together by the ears. Though indeed none but dogs by
clapping of hands will be animated to fight.

Neither are these false teachers only the cause of the peoples censuring and
slandering the good: But by their Serpentine preaching, or not preaching
faithfully, they are the Sole cause of all the ignorance and profaneness in
the Land. As it has fared in all former ages. It is the LORD complaint by Isa.
9. 16. And by Jeremiah 6. 13, 14, 15. and again, Chap. 8. 10, 11, 12. and
Chap. 23. 9. to 22.

Nor can we expect other in reason. For when the Fountain is troubled, the
streams will be muddy. If the Spring be poisoned, the waters are deadly. He
that would see whether a fish be corrupted, does look upon the head: For this
does first putrefy. So to know the state of the Flock, look upon the Pastor.
And miserable is that people, whose leaders (in stead of discouraging and
reproving) plot and encourage wickedness. When a distillation of evil falls
from the Head upon the Lungs of any parish, there must needs follow a deadly
Consumption. What should direct the body, but the head? And what should direct
the head but the eye? Before Ahab would go to Ramoth-Gilead to fall there, he
gathered of the Prophets four hundred men, who spoke according to his own
heart, 2 Chronicles. 18. 5. So, when Herod thought to make fools of the wise men,
and overreach GOD himself, he gathered all the chief Priests and Scribes
together to hear their advice, Matthew. 2. 3. 4. The tides of the people move up
and down, are rough or still, according as the winds stir more or less.
They have no other edge, but what is given them by the whetstone of their
Priests tongues. And, as from the heart all members have their life: So from
the ministry, the people have their devotion. The common people are so
tractable, that they will follow their leaders blindfold. They practice an
undiscreet surrendering of themselves up to the command of their superiors. If
Corah but kindle the fire of conspiracy, two hundred and fifty others will
bring sticks to increase it, Numb. 16. 2. 3. If Sheba but blow a Trumpet, the
rest are suddenly up in arms. Like those beasts, Deuteronomy. 14. They swallow and
never chew the Cud. Therefore when Diogenes met a fellow that behaved himself
^udely; he gave his Tutor a wherit on the care.

The kingdom is all overspread with Ignorance, Atheism, and all manner of
profaneness, from the Court to the Cottage; from the Robe to the ragged Coat.
Scarce one in ten of any degree or profession that is not Covetous, or
profane, a cursed swearer or a beastlike drunkard: An unclean person, an
oppressor, an idolater, a Sabbath-breaker. Or, if notoriously none of these, He
is a bitter Malignant against reformation, and cannot endure him, that walks
strictly according to Rule. Yea, he so lates to be reformed, that he cannot so
much as endure the name of Reformation. Like L^wis the eleventh, who fearing to
die, gave command, That none should dare to name death within his Court*

This is so plain, that it needs no proof. For as in Jerusalem there were
Factions, by which (as Josephus reports) more of the natives and Citizens were
slain within the walls, then without by the common enemy: So it is now in every
City and Town in England. Did not GOD in his goodness cross their
confederacy, and carry on the work by an invisible aid.

But suppose I should omit all men of quality: And mention only the Rabble,
that like beasts know no other end of their creation, but recreation, but to
eat and drink and sleep; what an Army of these might be mustred out of our
Suburbs, and so all the kingdom over? whom idleness has disabled to any
service, and who are neither fit for GOD nor man. And yet did they but like
Worms and Insects, spend up the corruption of the land, and leave us the less,
it were somewhat: but they are worse; even diseases and unwholesome Aires to
breed infection among us.

Now whom may we thank for all, but the Ministry? Either in their not using
or abusing the Keys: Or else in their not preaching, or Serpentine preaching:
whereby a Flood-gate of iniquity is set wide open. Yea, if the devil himself
should be consulted withal, to know which were the readiest way to throw down
the Gospel: I doubt not but he would say this, if he should choose. Send a
great number of those Preachers which are already sent. Yea, (now I remember)
when he was once so consulted with: These were his words, I will go out, and
be a false spirit in the mouths of all his Prophets. To whom this answer was
made. Thou shall entice, and shall also prevail, 1 King. 22. 20, 21, 22.

What Pyrrhus once said of Cineas his Counselor: Namely, That he more esteemed
his eloquence, then the valor of all his Captains, may be affirmed of them.
Satan more esteems the sophistry of his Preaching Ministry (perhaps of some
one of them) then all his Layservants; for such an one will let in more
wickedness in one day, then the Magistracy can throw out in many years.
Nevertheless, let Authority look to their castigation, and these men's too: or
answer for their mischief.

But who are they, with whom these false Prophets are thus prevalent?

Take this for a rule. They are either;

1. Ignorant* Persons, or 2. Wicked men: bear with the distinction though he
that is one is both.
1. For the first of these Saint Paul gives testimony; who speaking of these
times and persons, says; That with fair speech and flattering, they deceive
the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 18. And it is a sufficient argument of these
men's simplicity, when they are like the Horse, which neighed at the Picture of
an Horse, as if it had been a true horse. And like the Calfe in the Epigram,
which went to suck the Teates of a painted Cow. Sin is strong, when it meets
with a weak resister.

How easy is it for error to domineere over ignorance? They lead captive
simple women, led away with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3. 6: Silly women are easily
led captive by subtle men. Now no marvel that Jacob took Leah for Rachel,
when it was in the dark; or that Isaac took Jacob for Esau, when he was blind.

2. And to the second, Solomon speaks home, Prove. 17. The wicked gives heed
to false lips, and a liar hearkneth to the naughty tongue, Verse. 4.

And again, Prove 28. They that forsake the Law, praise the wicked, Verse. 4.
Though you need but look upon their lives, being like such as have a disease
called the Woolfe, which is always eating, yet keeps the body lean. See, 1 Timothy
4. 1. 2 Timothy 4. 4. Exodus 23. 1. For I must be brief.

As for wise and good men; who have the mind of CHRIST, 1 Cor. 2. 16. And are
acquainted with GODS word: They are so far from being taken with them, that
they will not vouchsafe to hear their Sermons. They are not ignorant; That
there are many false prophets gone forth; That either speak out of their own
hearts, Matthew. 24. 5. 11. 24: Act. 20. 29, 30, 31. Phil. 3. 18, 19. 1. Joh. 4.
1. Or else corrupt the word of GOD, 2 Cor. 2. 17. On purpose to deceive. And
therefore are the more careful, with those Noble Bereans, to try what they
hear, by the touchstone of GODS word. As a man will be more wary to try every
piece of Gold, when he hears of many counterfeits. And it behooves men, in this
case to be wise as Serpents, that the subtle Serpent may not deceive them.
And, upon trial they find them to speak Lies in CHRIST'S name, Jer. 23. 25.
And, as they are moved by Satan and their corrupt affections: in which case the
HOLY GHOST pronounces them (be they Angels in appearance) Accursed, Gal. 1. 9.

As when they flatter sin, and flout holiness, their end must needs be, To
make our souls drunk with the wine of their Fornications, Revel. 17. 2. For
both exceedingly savor of the Serpent. As touching the one; they knew, that if
a man, a Minister, a Prophet; yea, If an Angel tell them, that CHRIST can be
too much obeyed; he were not to be believed, since the Judge of heaven and
earth has said to the contrary. Heb. 12. 14. And for the other; They are not
to learn, that a Parasite is the worst Traitor, Prove. 26. 22.

It is not sufficient to a wise man, that they allege Scripture. For so the
Devil can do, Matthew. 4. 6. Nor is it enough, that they deliver some truth
from the word. Our Savior would not give Satan audience even when he spoke
true. Because that truth was but, to countenance error. There is ever true
corn strawed under a Pit-fall: yea, Those ears are full and weighty, which
are dressed with Lime, to deceive the poor Birds in a Snow.

3. Neither will their Wit, or learning win the wise to hear them: Well
remembering, that our first parents beggerd themselves by harkening after false
riches: and infamated themselves, by listening after false knowledge. Every
moisture is not a preserver of the Lamps light: For though Oil maintain the
same, yet Water quenches it. And he that expects profit from such a Sermon,
resembles him, that seeking to light a Link, puts out the Lamp.

Alas! They have more of the Serpent to beguile, then we naturally have to
beware. Therefore if our own preservation be but as sweet to us, as our
destruction is to them: It behooves us not to trust them. In the Millars hand we
lose but our Meal, in the Farriers hand but our Mule in the Lawyers hand but
our Goods, in the Physicians hand but our Life. But in the hands of a bad
Divine, we lose that which surpas^^^h all; Our Soul. So that let their notions
be never so many and tare, the beam of a Good judgment will be able to
determine; that if the benefits be laid in one Scale, and the inconveniences in
the other; that the evil will overweigh and sway down the good.

True, a mighty same goes of the Transcendent gifts of these Loadstones, which
draws an Iron heart even from White Chapel to White Hall. But the poor
soul speeds like Darius; who finding on a Gravestone this Epitaph [Who digs
this ground shall treasure find] greedily dig'd there, but found nothing but
stink only. Error has always most words; like a rotten house that needs
most props and crutches to uphold it. Simple truth evermore requires least
cost; like a beautiful face, that needs no painting: or a comely body; which
any decent apparel becomes. We Plaster over rotten posts and ragged walls;
Substantial buildings are able to grace themselves. Why does the Hare use so
many doublings, but to frustrate the sent of the hounds? A great deal of
Oratory bestowed upon an ill Subject, is but like an Onion, when you have taken
off all the Pills, there is nothing left. A wise man that regards the good of
his soul, will prefer a plain, powerful Sermon preached out of GODS Word,
before the most learned and eloquent Oration preached on purpose to deceive; how
specious and spangled soever it be, with depth of devilish learning. And indeed
it is better to drink good wine out of an earthen pot, then unwholesome liquor
in a Golden cup.

4. Nor will a show of gravity in their deportment, or of purity in their
habit, or a zeal of the ceremonies serve. It is not Lawne sleeves, or a white
Surplice, or cringing at the Name of JESUS, or kneeling at the Sacrament will
prevail with them.

Indeed ignorant people are beguiled with glosses and colors, as Boys with
Babies, and Indians with Rattles, But wise men will examine further, for fear
of a counterfeit commodity. Alas! Satan himself seems fair, when he is
dressed up like an Angel of light, and a Woolfe cunningly appareld in a
sheepskin cousens the poor lambs. That damnable Heretic Pelagius was a man of
Austere conversation. And false Prophets come with ^ rough garment next their
skins, like a Gibeonite in his old shoes. Therefore we must learn to
distinguish between Samuel and the Devil, which the Witch of Endor suborned
in his likeness. And we may easily do it, by his ascending out of the earth.
Hypocrites think as Brutus said, when he was dying; That virtue it self was
but a name, that all Pity is but a name: And that name they get. Who were they
that opposed Paul's Sermon, at Antioch? Act. 13. 50. Devout and honorable women,
and the chief men [Devout!] That they were honorable persons, no wonder. That
they were wise after the flesh, no wonder; that they were mighty, no wonder.
For, 1 Cor: 1. 26. Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called. But that devout, Religious, zealous persons should resist the
truth! This is strange, yet true. Corah, Dathan and Abiram, those three
resisters of Moses, were the most famous and eminent men in the Congregation.
And who more zealous of the Traditions of the Elders, or more unrebukeable in
his life, then Saint Paul when he was a persecutor?

The Ministers of Satan turn themselves into all shapes to make Proselytes.
But wise men will not be carried away with a blast of words, nor with some show
or color of matter, which ungodly men never want against the good. In vain is
the net spread in the eyes of that which has wings, Prove. 1. 17. And shall men
like fools, suffer themselves, like Pitchers, to be held by the ears, by such
as study to cheat them?

5. Nor do they sorbeare to hear such only, because they conceive it best:
(though that were enough to weigh down the contrary opinions of carnal
hearers. As when Emilius Scaurus was accused by Varius, he made this answer.
Ye Romans, Varius affirms the crime laid against me to be true: And Scaurus
denies. Whom will you rather believe?) But they are commanded to turn their
backs upon such a Preacher.

It is the LORDS express charge that we should not hearken unto them, Jerem.
23. 16, 17, 36. and 29. 8, 9. and 27. 9, 10. Romans 16. 17, 18. Matthew. 7. 15. 2
John 10. Esaias 8. 11. Deuteronomy. 13 5. 9. 10.

Hear them so long as their doctrines are canonical, but no longer; And
whiles they sit in Moses chair: but when they sit in the seat of the
scornful; then (as the Apostle speaks) Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness. A wise man will not be hurt of a Serpent,
because he keeps himself far from him. But a fool either by gazing on, or
playing with it, is bitten. Will thou then avoid danger? vouchsafe not to hear
them. Ulysses had no way to escape the Sirens enchantments, but by stopping his
ears with wax. Besides it may prove advantageous to the Minister also. For
there is no reproof so sharp, as such a silent contempt.

Or admit an experimental Christian do hear such a Preacher, (as it may so
fall out) He will not easily by caught by the hook of his false doctrine. A
good hearer will be able to take the honey and the milk, and beware of the
sting and the hammer; being like a glass window* which lets in the light,
but shuts out the wind and rain. Or like a good stomach, that extracts all
things fit for nourishment, and casts out the residue as excrement.

An Auditor should not be like the Sponge, that holds all waters both good and
bad. Nor like the Sieve, that holds no water, neither good nor bad: Nor like
the Boulter, that keeps in the course Branne, and throws out the sine Flower:
But like the Scry, that keeps in the good Seed, and casts out the dust and
unprofitable darnell. Indeed sensual hearers are worse then the very Beasts,
yea then the Plants; For the very Plants have such a natural virtue, that they
draw unto themselves the good juice, and reject the bad. And the Beasts can
take those things which are properly good for them; and reject the evil; as the
poisoned Apple, in the Indies. But these men are ignorant, what is good, and
what is hurtful to their Precious Souls. Yea, whatsoever the Sermon be, they
will pick something out of it, to Poison themselves withal.

Wise Christians go to a Sermon, as to a Garden: where, if they meet with
variety of sweet flowers, they will pluck what best likes them, to carry in
their hands, to smell to, when they are away. If there be nothing good; yet,
with the Be, they will work that to Honey, which the putrid Spider would
convert to poison. And all, by making use of the Scripture; which, (like
Ariadnes thread to Theseus) directs and keeps them both from error and danger.

And, as Believers, being expert in the Word, are not easily taken with their
false doctrine* So they will much less be flowted out of their says, by their
preaching. The righteous will hold on his way: and he, whose hands are pure,
shall increase his strength, Joh. 17. 9. The Taunts of Ismael shall never make
an Isaac out of love with his Inheritance. Eliab could not Frump David out of
his Zeal: He persists in his forwardness, until he was brought to Saul, and
had killed the Philistin. Sanballat and Tobiah thought to scoff Nehemiah and
the Jews our of their Building. But the Barking of those Dogs could not
hinder them from walking on their way: Nehemiah shakes off their impotent
malice, and goes on cheerfully.

How does it concern us then, to Have the Word ^f GOD dwell in us Richly, in
all Wisdom? Col. 3. 16. since without it we can neither know what to choose, or
refuse: nor he able to hold fast that which is good. He that touches Gold, and
does not weigh it: Or he that weighs it, and does not touch it, may perchance
be deceived in his receiving it. Wherefore, as we Taste our meat before we Eat
it; and Try our Gold, before we Treasure it: So let us lay each Doctrine to the
Rule, before we Entertain it. And then, as CHRIST Tasted the Vinegar, but
would not Drink: So, when we Taste False Doctrine, let us Reject it: le^t,
whiles we follow our Guides, we lose our selves.

Object. But what if all the Parish like and commend his preaching?

Answ. It should make us more careful, as to Discern, so to be Confirmed in
the Truth. Not more Credulous of Error, as it made Erasmus more Studious; by
seeing the Monk^ such Illiterate Dunces. Or as the good knife is made sharp by
the Dull Whetstone.

The Christian will be wise and devout like Daniel, though Alone.

Object. But CHRIST alleges Scripture: and the Devil Alleges it. What
shall we do? which way soever we take it, it may be wrong.

Answ. Not, as some, that lie down* (like Isachar) between both the burdens;
and Sue out a Writ of Ease for their consciences; thinking it best, To let all
alone.

Nor yet, with the Seduced Prophet, 1 King. 13. 18. Take a private Spirits
Counsel, before the express Word of GOD: which may easily be known. For that
only is the Truest and Best way of Expounding, which so interpeteth the
Scriptures, that one Scripture may agree with another, and cross none: For One
Absurdity being granted, Infinite will follow, Ephesians. 5. 6: Gal. 1. 8.

Indeed, they that will understand to purpose, and rightly know, Whether a
Minister speaks from GOD, or Of Himself, must become Spiritual. For the
Natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of GOD: But He that is
Spiritual, understands all things, 1 Cor. 2. 14. 15.

He must resolve to Practice what he knows: and not be like Lepidus; who Lay
in Harvest under the Cool shade, saying, O that this were to work! If any
will do GODS will, (says our Savior) He shall know the Doctrine, whether it
be of GOD; or whether I speak of my self, John 7 17. The fear of the LORD is
the beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1. 7 and 9. 10. And, A good understanding have
all they that keep his Commandments, Psalm 111. 10.

And so much to prove, That they ought not to be heard. Especially by such as
are not able, by their acquaintance with the word, to spy out their Serpentine
subtilty.

Where note, by the way; How they befoole themselves. The Principal End, why
they Preach thus, is, To get Applause and Credit, as I showed before: Or to
Redeem that Credit, they have formerly lost. But it fares with them, as it did
with the Builders of Babel: who, striving to Get them a Name, Lost their
Reputation and their Language too, Genesis 11. Or as it fared with Seriphus that
Old Drudg in Naples: who coveting to mend his Bleered eye, Put it out Or, as it
usually fares with Gamesters, who to Repair their Losses, lose more: So
casting the Helve after the Hatchet, as the saying is. For, though in their
Sermons they seem Glorious, and Brave, in their own, and Ignorant men's eyes:
Yet to the more Judicious they appear most Misshapen and Ridiculous. And none,
that bear any good will to the truth, but account them the very Basest of men.
Whereby that Scripture is fulfilled. A Backbiter is like the waves of the Sea,
which fometh out her own shame. And again, Prove. 24. 24. He, that says to
the wicked, Thou art Righteous, Him shall the people curse, and the multitude
shall abher him.

I grant; They keep up their credit with Satan, as well as with his Servants:
For the more creditlesse, the more fit and ready they are for his service. As
Cyrus said, that his Poor Soldiers were his Best Soldiers: For they had
nothing to Lose: but there was something they hoped to gain (which may be
applied also to our Cavaliers.) Or, if these have a little Credit; a small
loss is easily recovered. If Codrus his house burn, he even warmes his hands
at the flame: The loss never troubles him: Because in two days he can build
himself another as good.

Besides, Malice does much mitigate their loss. The Be will lose her sting,
to mischief another; though she remain a Drone ever after: So they are
willing to discredit themselves, to discredit others. As Thamar defiled her
self, to be Revenged of her Father-in-Law Judah.

I acknowledge there may be more in it, then All this. Peradventure they Hope
for no Pardon. And therefore they care not, what mischief they do. As a
Desperate Malefactor, that fears not to multiply villainous acts; because he
knows he shall be hanged, whenever he is taken. However; They have small
cause to hope; except they amend. For their End is Destruction, whose Glory is
their shame, Phil. 3. 19.

But to forbear hearing them is not all. For they should not be suffered to
Preach. Are they to be permitted Physicians, who in stead of administering
proper physic to Cure their Patients; give them poison to Kill them? Were it
not a grievous thing, That in Each Country there should be Twenty or Thirty
Allowed Midwives, who were Subo^^ed to Destroy those Children, whom they are
hired to bring forth? That they, whose office is, to help the Birth, should
murder i^? Was it not a Devilish plot, when in the year, 1320. Certain Lepers
covenanted with the Jews, To lay poison in the Wels, Springs, and Pits: that
so they might destroy all the Christians in Europe? For which there were many
burnt. The Case is the same: or rather in this comparison there is no
comparison: For they had but Killed Bodies: whereas these murder Souls. You
understand me. I need not further apply it.

It is hardly years, since there was great care and pains taken, To silence
and suppress Ministers. And they did it to purpose. No less then thirty or
forty in a Shire, were put out of their ministry at a time. But who, and what
were they? Dum-Dogs? Or Non Residenciaries? Or Men-Pleasers? Or Scandalous
Ministers? Or these Serpentine-Preacherst No. Not One of them. But such as were
too Zealous, and painful: That Preached twice upon a Sabbath day: That had
Tender-Consciences, and would not Read, and Allow of sporting upon the
Lord's Day: That were more Obedient to GODS Laws, then to the Bishops Canons:
Preferring an innocent and Holy Life, before a White Surplice: Such as were
Flockt after. As I have heard a Bishop, at the High-Commission-Board, Chafe at
the Chaplains, in these, and the like words.

Is it fit, that such a one should be suffered to preach, when all the Town
follows him? He meant; When so many souls were converted by him. As who did
feel the smart of their Censures so much, as those Ministers, who, by their
faithful and powerful preaching made their Hea^ers, of Natural men, to
become Christians? Indeed such Courts were appointed for the Correction of
Vices: But now they Cherished Vice, and corrected Virtue. I may now (blessed be
GOD) call A Spade, a Spade. Four years since this Gall was so impatient of
spurring, that a Minister could not Speak the Truth, without Hazarding the
Pillory, Whipping Post, Loss of Ears, slitting of Nostrils, and Branding in
the face: The case of Doctor Layton for a Book: that, if wise men may be
believed, has a world of worth in it. As for Mr. Prynne, Dr. Bastwicke and Mr.
Burton, they are fresh in memory.

And, having silenced these; Whom did they place in their rooms? But such;
(most of them) that Even the Devil himself (if he did make, and send forth
Ministers) Could not find worse upon the earth: For, if he would have worse,
he must bring them from hell.

The Synod of Constantinople, out of experience, did find, that in those times,
among fifty Catholic Priests, hardly one could be found, that was not a
Notorious Fornicator: And that there was great want of Ministers; only for the
Prohibition of Matrimony. Which made Pius the second, a Learned Pope, (contrary
to his former practice) leave this behind him in writing. There is great cause
why the Clergy should be deprived of Marriage: But greater cause, why they
should be suffered to marry. And do not we, in these times, find by
experience, That among fifty of these Bishops-Priests, hardly one can be found,
that is not a bitter Malignant to Holiness? and a Despiser of them that be
good? If he be not also a Rank-Whoremaste^, or a Common Drunkard. And that, by
this means, there is great want of Good Ministers. As has been plentifully
proved to This Parliament, and may be found upon Record, Even such, that if
Holy David were now alive, he would not admit A Man of them to be his Chaplain.

I grant, their wicked hearts help them to P^^tences, that carry a Fair show,
why they Silence so many Precisians, and put in so many profane ones: But their
Consciences cannot but tell them of more and weightier Reasons, why these
should rather be Cashired; and the Number of the other increased; The Godly
cherished, and the profane curbed, and utterly restrained. But because they
want honesty and ingenuity, to confess what they think, I will declare them
unto you.

1. They ought to be Silenced. First, Because (as I have shown) They are false
Prophets; and teach Lies, in CHRIST'S name. Now, if a man be opinionated against
the Truth, it is not Answerable. Si quis docuerit: But, if a man teach such a
Doctrine, It is Abominable.

Or, if they Preach not false Doctrine; they will so sophisticate the Truth,
with the Leaven of maliciousness; that there shall be no difference. Like, as
if they should break the bread of life to the people, and throw in Crooked
Pins, to Choke them.

Or we may say of them, as Luther of the Popes. They hold us out Bread, on the
point of a Sword: And, when we come nigh, they beat us with the Hilt.

Or lastly; If they deliver nothing but the wholesome Truth, They will Turn it
into a lie; by misapplication. And he is not worthy to be a Physician, who
gives Vomits, in place of Cordials: And Cordials in stead of Vomits.

2. Because they infect almost all that hear their Sermons, and make them as
Bitter Malignants to Religion, and scoffers at Holiness, as themselves; as I
have shown. And so in stead of becoming* Instruments of their peoples
Salvation; they become (as far as in them lies) Authors of their Damnation.
Now, if one Break the Law, that is a Personall-sin: But if he Teach so, that is
a Pestilent sin.

3. For that the Gospel, and the Name of GOD is Blasphemed, and an Evil
scandal raised upon the Godly, by reason of their slandring them, and
disgracing Goodness in their Sermons. And how unsufferable this is, in such as
are GODS Ambassadors, and have the charge of souls, may be seen in the
example of Eli's sons, 1 Samuel 3. and 4. chap. And in GODS dealing with Nadab,
and Abihu, when he sent out Fire, and devoured them, for offering strange fire
upon his Altar: Giving no other ^eason, but this: I will be sanctified of them
that draw near me, Levit. 10. 2. 3.

Are such fit to succeed the LORD Jesus? and have the charge of souls, who
preach lies in his Name? even forcing GOD to speak for Baal: the Spirit for the
Flesh? Or, if they be connived at; How fearful shall their Reckoning be, when
they shall be summoned to appear before That High Judge, at the great day of
Accounts.

4. Because so long as he supplies the Room of a Minister, he keeps out
another that would Preach better: and perhaps save those poor souls, whom he
destroys.

An ill man in the Church is but like some Shrubby-Tree in a Garden, whose
shade not only keeps better plants from growing; but draws away the
nourishment from the rest; that would bear us fruit. Or as a great Oak in a
Greve, which not only pines all the underwoods near it: but spoils the Grass
that should feed the Cattle. So that it were better for the Perish to have no
Minister at all, then such a one. For though it be miserable to want food for
the soul: yet better nothing, then only poison. A Blank does far better in
a Room, then an ill filling.

5. It is most just, equal, and proper; That having so much abused their
tongues, they should, in some sort, lose the use of them. We read, That when
Tiberius the Emperor past sentence at the bar, upon a Great Talker, and
Railer with his Tongue: he commanded, that for part of his punishment, he
should not speak a word for the space of one whole year after: but ponder upon
what he had formerly spoken, and study better how to speak when it came again
to his turn.

True. Our Worthies in Parliament have (Blessed be GOD) taken the like course,
with many of them. And I hope their many Eyes will find out the Rest in time.
Though it is great pity they have been suffered so long: For these Serpents
would be crushed in the Beginning, even in the Egg, to prevent their Hissing,
Stinging, and Poisoning. So should their people be preserved.

The way to suppress a Schism is, to Cut off the head. For it will be hard
for a Body to move Headless. Yea, the Head being cut off, the Members Die: the
General being slain, the Army perishes.

6. This cuorse would prove very profitable both to Themselves, and to their
Hearers.

1. It were Profitable for Themselves to be Silene'd. For the Fewer they
Seduce, the Fewer souls they shall answer for. And, with such, as to Do Evil
is common, even to Do nothing Profitable is, and in a manner Commendable. Yea
rather then go on in their Course, It were an Happy turn for Themselves, if
GOD would do by them, as he did with the Emperor Justinian; who continuing
obstinate in the Heresy of Pelagius, was suddenly deprived of his Senses, and
became a Fool. For by this means they should Do Less Evil here; and
consequently Suffer Less Evil hereafter.

2. It were Happy also, for their Hearers: whom for the present they serve no
otherwise, then Busiris (whom Hercules slew) served the poor people: who
killed such as came to him for hospitality. Or Magnus Episcopus the Bishop of
Mentz: who burned an innumerable company of poor people, that cried to him for
help, in a famine; calling them Rats. Or Theodosius the Prince, who
fraudulently called together at Thessalonica, seven thousand innocent persons,
as it were, to See Plays; and then sent in Sculdiers among them, and slew
them. For, under a color of Feeding and Curing their souls, they Impoyson,
and Kill them. Their Sermons resembling a Poisoned Fountain, in the way, which
the innocent and thirsty passenger seeing, is glad to drink of: but in drinking
is Sure to die for it.

Or in case they be less cruel, and do answer the hunger and thirst of an
empty soul: It shall be no otherwise, then the Jews did our Saviors: who
gave him Gall for his Meat, and in his thirst Vinegar to drink, Psalm. 69. 21.

But Woe is me! How many ways have these last times helped the Devil? And how
near was Satan to a Full Principality on earth; when he had not only his
Ministers, and that of diverse kinds, to preach for him: But his Prelates also
to put down them, that did preach for CHRIST* Yea, when he had not only a
Greater and more Numerous Clergy: but far more Lay-servants also, then GOD
himself; even in this Noontide of the Gospel; and in this Land, the Glory of
Christendom. As I could tell you how Satan hare sway in the Magistraoy, and
Courts of Justice, in the Commonwealth, as well as in the Church. For, (to
pass by the many Justices of Peace, and other inferior officers, all the Land
over, who were not only Vicious themselves, but Cherishers of Vice, in the
several places of their abode.) What Court was there almost in the Land, where
Justice was not bought and sold? Or admit Bribery would not do, but Justice
would punish a malefactor: Might not the Protection of some Great one be
procured to deliver him? So that the Law might put up his Dagger. For, by this
means, a lewd person need not fear to offend, that had a Great man to his
friend: or had not a Great man to his enemy. Tegunteum Vmbrosa nemora
umbraculis suis: The shady trees cover him with their shadows. The Robber
rifles a passenger, is apprehended and indicted: The booty he gives to some
Mighty one, to procure his Pardon; and escapes. Thus the poor Traveller is
robbed doubly, both of his money, and all relief of the Law: and the protector
of the lewd person is become the greater thief.

But, in speaking of these I have stepped out of my way, as once a Grave Divine
stepped out of his Text, to enveigh against swearing; that so he might meet with
a Great Personage, that had rid as far out of his way to hear him. Only I
mention it, because my words may happen to reach to some, whom it concerns. If
so; In the bowels of CHRIST let me (the most unworthy) be hold to move your
Wisdoms, and your Care, to Go on to Redress it; as you have (blessed be GOD)
begun.

Oh! It were special news to be told in Gath, and would sound terribly in the
streets of Askalon: It would go Cold to the heart of the Devil, and shake the
gates of hell: That none might hear sway, either in Church, or Common wealth,
but such as fear GOD, and seek his glory. In the mean time the Church were
happy, if she had escaped the ingenious solicitations of these Fiends; who
have not only troubled the waters of our comfort: but poisoned the very Spings
of Life. They have brought into GODS Sanctuary, in stead of Levites to divide
the Word, Gibeonites not worthy to divide Wood. They have brought them in. The
LORD of his mercy cast them out!

It is said, Rev. 18. That the Merchants of that great City Babylon (by which
Expositers understand Rome) traded not only in Gold, Silver, and precious
stones, fine Linen, and Purple, Silk and Scarlet, Cinnamon and odours,
Ointments, and Oil, and Wine, etc. but also in souls of men, verse. 13. Our
Prelates have affirmed in open Court, That they have their Ordination from the
said Rome. And, without controversy, Their Principal Traffic has been in
the Souls of men. For, as if they had conspired the death of the Church; and
plotted together to famish and starve the people of GOD, they have labored to
suppress and diminish the true Shepherds; and to set up Wolves in their
stead. And whereas, in most places they had no teaching at Home, they would not
suffer them to seek abroad: but would keep them still in ignorance and
blindness. And, under pretense of Order, their Souls must perish. So serving
faithful Ministers and their people, as the Priests and Pharisees served
CHRIST and his Hearers: forbidding him to preach; and restraining the people
from hearing him. For what say they? If we let him thus alone, all men will
believe in him, John 11. 48. Or as the Jews dealt with Saint Paul, and his
Hearers. Of whom he thus speaks. They persecute their own Prophets, and forbid
us also to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved. To fill up their
sins; That the wrath of God might come on them to the uttermost, 1 These. 2.
16.

Oh! Woeful times! Oh! Cursed Merchants! That Traffic in the Blood of Souls.
But, seeing they are content to venture themselves upon GODS vengeance, I leave
them to their Judge. In the mean time, let it rejoice all good hearts, That
our Grave Senators have, in some measure, shortened their arms, and broken
their horns. Yea, let it be our constant prayer to GOD, that the Keys (which
they counterfeited) may never more be committed to such Cerberean-Porters, as
shut the gates upon CHRIST'S friends, and entertain his foes: To such as only
measure their Right by their Power: And therefore will do injury, because they
can do it: To such Hypocrites, as look to small things, (as the Cross,
Surplice, Holy Days, etc.) And over-looke the Great, as the Sabbath, the
second Commandment, the due administering of the Word, and Sacraments. For
certainly it cannot be said of them, as our Savior said of the Ass. The LORD
has need of them. Yea, have we not found by experience; That whiles these
Mermaids dance and play; It portends nothing but Destruction to the Mariners:
For, though they call themselves the chiefe-Priests, they are indeed CHRIST'S
chiefe-enemies.

And is there any reason, that those should stand at the Stern, or be
appointed the Champions of the LORDS battles, who have embraced this present
world, and seek after nothing but Gain and Glory? They fight for their
Bellies, and not for the LORD.

Once in Israel there were three Garrisons of enemies, alarmed with all manner
of weapons for offense yet against all these, the Israelites had but two Swords
for defense. Yet it pleased GOD, that those two were enough. So we have in our
Land a world of enemies armed with all the strength and policy of hell. If we
have but two Swords: One the Sword of the Spirit; that is, Doctrine: The other,
the Sword of the Church; that is, Discipline: (I mean of CHRIST'S own
institution) We need not fear, but they will be enough to keep sin, and GODS
enemies from domineering, as they have done hitherto. Which GOD grant, for his
CHRIST'S sake.

7. And lastly, Their Craft is so great, and their Number so many, that
(unless they be Silenced) CHRIST'S faithful Ministers shall do little good,
or that good will little appear.

1. For their Number. I suppose our times outstrip all former ages. For though
among the Jews there were always false Prophets, 1 King. 22. 6. 11. to 17.
and 18. 22. to 42. 2 King. 10. 19. 25. Jer. 14. 15. 17. and 6. 14. and 23. 25
to 35. 2 Chronicles. 18. 5. Ezekiel. 13. 4. and 22. 25. Micah 2. 11. Isa. 30. 10. Zeph
3. 4. And in the Primitive times of the Gospel, false Apostles, and false
Teachers, who were enemies to the Cross of CHRIST Phil. 3. 18. 19. And
although most of the Fathers and Saints of GOD, which have writ; have in their
several times, much complained of false and unprofitable teachers: Yet the
Holy GHOST speaks chiefly of these last and worst times. Many shall come in
my Name (says our Savior, Matthew. 24. 5.) And many false Prophets shall arise,
and shall deceive many, verse. 11. And again, There shall arise false-Christs,
and false Prophets, that, (if it were possible) they should deceive the very
Elect, verse. 24. And no wonder there be false Apostles, and false Prophets,
when there are False-Christs I know (says Saint Paul) that after my departure
grievous Wolves shall enter in among you, not sparing the flock, Acts 20. 29.
And Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things; to draw
Disciples after them, verse. 30. 31.

But the better to know their Number, I wish there were a Survay made
throughout the Kingdom, and Dominion of Wales; and a view taken first of such
as have Great Titles, and Rooms in the Church; As Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, etc. And yet feed not any flocks of Sheep or Lambs.

2. Of such as apply all their great learning to get Livings, and to Heap
Benefice upon Benefice; not at all caring for Souls.

3. That you would number, if you can, those, that go under the Names of
Preachers: And do either so unprofitably, or so slenderly and unskilfully
teach; that their people are never the better.

4. Add to these Dumb Dogs, Barking Curres, Scandalous Ministers, that pull
down either with one, or both hands: (that is to say, with their Lewd Lives,
or by their Devilish Doctrine.)

5. And lastly, Such Serpentine Preachers, as we are now upon: whereof some are
possessed with a Dumb-Devill; others with a Witty-Devill; a third sort, with a
Flattering-Devill: a Fourth, with a Railing or Slandering-Devill; a Fifth, with
a Foul and Vnclean-Devill: a Sixth, with a Lasie and Ambitious-Devill: Some
being able to preach; but withal to Negligent, that they will not: Some would;
but are so Ignorant, that they cannot, or not to purpose: Some neither Will,
nor Can; for want of using their gifts: Some are so Fearful to Offend their
Benefactors, that they Dare not: Some are so Wicked, that they Should not, etc.
Let these, I say, be Numbered. And then you shall see, that we may not only
Complain, as Jude of the Primitive Church. That there are certain men crept
in, which were before ordained to condemnation: But many thousands of them
crept in.

Secondly, Set these aside, and compare the Great Number of them, with those
few, that remain; who faithfully labor to discharge their Trust, and feed
their people with wholesome doctrine, and good life: whom they term [Paritans]
And you shall see a miserable and lamentable face of a Church: and be forced to
acknowledge, that The Harvest is Great: but the laborers Few, Matthew. 9. 37.
38. And so few, that there was small need, that thirty or forty, in a Shire,
should be taken away, and suspended, at a clap; Be cause they taught their
people diligently: and as many of the former put in their rooms.

But I would ask these Lordly Prelates, that suspended them, a Question or two.

1. Is it fit, that one should have the Provender of (it may be) fifty
laboring Oxen, for lying like a Dog in the Manger: both hindering the Pastors
to feed, and the Hunger-starved souls to eat: Yea they Muzzle up the mouths of
the Oxen, and tie up the tongues of the faithful laborers, both from treading
out the Corn, and eating of the Corn.

2. I would know of them, Whether the palpable ignorance of many Millions in
this Land, does not arise from the want of means, and removal of GODS
faithful miniders: placing such over people as are not worthy to be set with
the Dogs of the Flock, Job. 30. 1. For Alliance, Favor, Simony, etc. have
brought a thousand men of bad learning, and worse living into the ministry.

3. Let them tell me, whether it will be a Good Plea, at the day of Judgment:
when CHRIST shall ask them, Why did you forbid my messengers to deliver my
message? Why did you silence such, as converted my people; and set up others in
their stead, that perverted them: when I had so plainly declared in my word, 1
These. 2. 16. That this forbidding to preach the Gospel, was the very filling up
of the sins of the Jews, (as Oh the horror of this sin! And the fearful
evils ensuing on it!) To Answer: They would not conform to every Ceremony: Or
rather, they had tender consciences. Will this, I say, be a good Answer:
Indeed, here your Arguments are infallible: For, if Popery will not satisfy, a
Prisen shall. But There, Truth and innocence shall take place; whether
Plaintiff, or Defendant; Petitioner, or petitioned speaks it.

Now, If their Number be so many, their Cunning so great, as I have declared;
and their industry so much, to disturb our peace; or to pervert our faith; or
to corrupt our manners; or to wound our consciences; or to destroy our souls.
To which they have an hundred ways, as the City Thebes had an hundred Gates
into it: Or as so many lines, that do all meet in one point. And, seeing
wheresoever God has his Church, the Devil has his Chapel: Yea, for the most
part, where CHRIST had his minister in the Afternoon, to build up: In the same
Church had Satan his Chaplain in the Forenoone, to pull down: And, that the
multitude are more apt to be carried away with the Doctrine of Liberty, then to
be won with that which commands Restraint: What probability, that Piety should
thrive like Profaneness:

Solomon says, Of a Prince, that hearkeneth to lies, all his servants are
wicked, Prove. 29. 12. It is more true of such a Preacher. And Saint Paul says
that of false Prophets, which we find too true, by experience: They shall draw
a world after them: whereas Goodness has but few Adherents; because the gate
is narrow that leads to life.

Which being so, I would feign know, how a few despicable Ministers, whom all
this great Number set themselves against, and seek by all means to disgrace;
should thrive in their labors: But that their work should be as well fruitless
as endless: like that which is fained of Sisypus, a great Robber in Attica, and
slain by Theseus; who, (as Poets feign) Rowleth a stone to the top of an hill
in hell; which stillfalleth down again, and makes his labor continual.

There is but one right way of preaching. That is, when Sound Doctrine and
Home-Application go together: Many indirect ways. GOD charge his Ministers
to refuse all ways but One. Satan bids them refuse that One, and take which
way they Please.

I have laid open and delineated sundry ways, that they preach; (and they
alone may serve as Spectacles, to see the Devil and his works by, in the
Prelates, and their Creatures) But they have an Hundred ways.

O that there were some Severe Correction appointed by the Laws, against both
wicked and unprofitable Preaching; As there is against Murder and Felony; sins
less heinous. I do not wish they were put to Death, as Elijah served four
hundred and fifty of Baals Prophets, 1 King 18. 19. 40. Nor Cut off; as Saint
Paul wished the false Apostles were, Gal. 5. 12. but I wish they were silenc't.
For so should thousands be Banished the ministry, and Christians multiply in
our Land, as Corn did in Egypt, in the Seven plentiful years, Genesis 41. 47.
49. Whereas now the people hear many Sermons; and yet like those seven
illfavoured and lean fleshed kine, verse. 20. 21. It cannot be known, that
they have heard them: for they are still as lean, and illfavoured Christians,
as they were before they heard them.

Or, if this will not be: My next desire of God is; That these Preachers last
laid open' (who run like Familiars up and down the earth: from the
University into the Country: from the Country to the City: from the City to
the Court: from the Court to Cathedrals: And from one Church to another, To Do
the Devils Errands) may be Totally Silenced. For one of these Subtil-Flattering
Sinons will do that, which Ten years Siege of Satan and all his other forces
cannot effect, toward the destruction of Our Troy, the Church.

But admit those, whom GOD has entrusted, to execute his judgments upon
earth, should connive at them; and so make their sin of Soule-murder their
Own: Yet Severe will be their Doom at the great day of accounts; if they do
not in the Interim, use their utmost, by a change to the contrary, to Sue out
their Pardon, in the Blood of CHRIST. Which day of accounts, if they did but
think of; when GOD shall set all their sins in order before them; and CHRIST
shall pronounce that fearful sentence: Depart from me ye Cursed, into ever
lasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; (which is an Everlasting
Departure; not for a Day nor for Years of Days, nor for Millions of Years:
but for Eternity: and that from CHRIST, and the Fullness of joys at his right
hand, and pleasures for evermore; To the Damned, to the Devils, to Hell; there
to remain in a Bed of unquenchable Flames, without either Intermission, or
End, or Ease, or Patience to Endure it) Then I should not need to admonish
them. The Worst of men love their ease dearly. But (Alas! Poor Souls!) the
Devil so blinds them, that they never think of their Latter End.

And this is the cause they go on in so desperate a Course, and fear no more
then Adam did, when he eat the Apple. When the Prophet had reckoned up all the
calamities and sins of the Jews: At the last he imputed all to this. She
remembered not her end. And, when Solomon had spoken of all the Vanities of man,
at last he opposes this Memorandum as a Counterpoise against them all.
Remember, that for all these things, GOD will bring thee to judgment. But let
me tell thee: Or rather Hear GOD in his Word Telling thee: That, to Lie for
Ever in a Bed of Quenchlesse flames, is not All.

For as, in sin, there be Sundry Steps and Degrees, whereby one and the same
Evil is Lessened or Increased; and so becomes More or Less heinous before GOD:
So, as thy sins have exceeded, thy sufferings shall also exceed, the number and
measure of thy Torments shall be according to the multitude and magnitude of
thine offenses. As thou have been a Mighty Sinner: So thou sahlt be Mightily
punished. For GOD will reward every man according to his works. As our works
are Better or Worse: So shall our joys in Heaven, or pains in Hell be More or
Less. See Rev. 20. 12, 13. and 22. 12. Luke 12. 47, 48. Matthew. 10. 25. Which
being so, (viz.) That every man shall be more wretched, as he has been more
wicked. What will become of thee! Surely, thy sins are so Prodigious, that
they scome any proportion, under a whole volume of Plagues.

It remains that I should spread thy sins in order before thee; and show
thee wherein they Exceed other men's, that shall go to the same place of
torment: And how they are greatned, and receive weight, and increase, in regard
of Cirtumstances, which mightily aggravates them; and makes them Out of Measure
sinful. But the particulars are so many, That, if I should insist upon them,
they would overmuch swell the heap, and perhaps tire the reader. Besides, what
is alleged would be confirmed fully. He, which throws his Dagger at a
thief; let him be sure to hit him. Otherwise he disarmes himself, and
strengthens his adversary. Wherefore take notice only in general: That all
Pastors shall so give account for their peoples souls, Heb. 13. 17. That were
thou but One of the former Number, viz. of Non-preaching Ministers; (who come
far short of thee, and have much less to answer for) whenever thou
should hear the Bell toll for a wicked man; Thou might cry out: There is
a Soul going to Hell, whose blood will be required at my hands; because I was
not faithful, and did not give him warning, Ezekiel. 3. 18, 19. and 33. 7, 8, 9.

Whereas Thou have preached Lies in CHRIST'S name, and sought to win as many
to hell as thou could: Consider of it I beseech you. Thou art appointed a
Spiritual Nurse, to seed the people of GOD with the Two Breasts of the Old and
New Testament, and have thy wages to that end. Now, if a Nurse should for Wages
take in hand to nurse but one Child; who having either no Milk, or having Milk
enough; should give it None: In so doing she were a Murtheresse: much more if
she should give it Poison, which yet would but Kill the Body: But thou give
thy whole Flock Poison, in stead of Milk: which is enough (without GODS
overruling Providence) to poison all their souls. Thou art appointed by GOD,
the Spiritual Physician of their Souls. Now a Physician, that takes charge of
a sick Patient, may be guilty of his death; either by giving him No Physic; or
Improper Bhysick; or Poison: Every of which ways thou art guilty; though
principally in the Last, and Worst of them. Yea, thou give Two sorts of
poison; that, if the one should not speed, the other may. The one is Flattering
men in sin; a sweet poison: The other is Bitter Girding at holiness; the
best and mildest whereof, is Bad enough; aad so thou will find one day: For in
that thou Soothest them up, in their sins, thou make them all thy own,
Isa. 9. 16. Heb. 13. 17. Beatificant populum istum, Psalm. 10. 3. Nay: That
evil can scarce be named, which thou art not the occasion of, by thy thus
preaching; Yea, which thou thy self do not, or have not a will to do; were
it in thy power. For thou have the same Heart-Burning against all the
Religious, that Haman had against the Jews: who would have cut them off, from
being a people. Or Caligula against the Romans; who wished, that They All had
but one Head, that so he might cut it off at a blow.

I have laid open some part of thy will, and endeavor. Satan, who will one day
be thy accuser, knows much more. GOD, that Searches the heart, and tries the
reins, knows all, who measures what we do, by what we desire to do: and
punishes the Action according to the Affection, or Intention. For Good, or
Evil Thoughts and Desires, in GODS account are Good, or Evil Works. If thou
want power; it is enough thou Would; As I could largely prove. But I am
prompted to contract many things. Only take notice of this, That every Sermon
thou preachest will become one day, a Bill of Enditement against thee: And
every soul that perishes, by means of thy Flattering sin, and Flouting
holiness, will add to the Pile of thy unspeakable torments. For, in that thou
damnest many souls, besides thine own, thou Super-erogatest of Satan, and he
shall give thee a Treble Portion of Hellfire for thy pains. They shall Perish
for yielding: But thou for Tempting shall be Punished far above them. As we
read, that when John A Camber was executed at York, it was in great stare: For
he was Hanged upon a Gibbet raised a Stage higher in the midst of a square
Gallows, as a Traitor Paramount; and a number of his men, that were his chief
Compl^ces, were Hanged upon the Lower Story round about him.

True it is. The Seed of the Woman is able to Bruise this Serpents head. And we
are in the hand of a Cunning Workman, that of the Knottiest and Crookedst
Timber, can make Rafts and Sieling for his own house: That can square the
Marble, or Flint, as well as the Freeststone. Yea, the GOD, whom thou have thus
provoked, is so abundant in grace, and so great in Power, and so expert for
skill: That, as with a word of his mouth, he Can create in thee a new heart
(for it is as easy with him to make a man righteous, as to bid him be such) So
he is no less Willing. As his entertaining of the Prodigal Son, in the
Gospel shows, Luke 15. 20.

If thou can see how Desperate thy condition is; Accuse and Condemn thy
self; Seriously Repent what thou have done; and never more do, what thou have
repented.

If thou can lay hold upon CHRIST, by a lively faith, and manifest the same,
by a change to the contrary, Isa. 55. 7. Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22, 23. 27, 28. and 33.
11. Luke 15. 20. Joel 2. 12. 13. 14. which Scriptures show; That, if the
Summons of vengeance shall waken us to repentance: we shall no sooner change
our minds, but GOD will change his sentence. And, though I read not of One like
thee (except Manasses) that ever returned home by Repentance: Yet it may be
presumed, That, as many a man sends others to Heaven, and yet goes to Hell
himself: So not a few, having drawn others to Hell, yet themselves return, by
a late repentance, to life.

So that there is a fair possibility of thy escaping that judgment, which thy
sins have deserved; and nothing can hinder, but thy want of accepting the
free offer of mercy, upon the conditions before expressed. Which is worth thy
speedy resolving. For how justly might GOD have bereaved thy body of a soul?
thy soul of understanding? thy understanding of all possibility of comfort,
long before this? That thou have space to repent; a Tongue and Time to Call
upon GOD for Mercy, is a Blessing, and far more then he owes thee.

Which being so, (and that a Plaster is of no use, unless it be Applied) Let
my counsel be acceptable (as Daniel said to Nabuchadnezzar) And be entreated
by the Mercies of GOD, as Paul speaks, Romans 12. 1. (As you would please him,
and pleasure your self) to redeem the time past, with Serious Repentance: the
time present, with Religious Diligence: the time to come, with Careful
Providence. And, when the LORD shall have accepted thee, thou shall have no
cause to repent, that thou took'st my counsel, in preferring Heaven to Hell.
Otherwise, when that fearful hour comes, which I before spoke of: then you
would feign go to Heaven by CHRIST. But, Alas! as that Despairing Pope said,
The Cross could do him no good, because he had so often sold it away: So, How
should CHRIST do you good, who have Railed him away? You have Vexed him so
long as you lived; and his justice shall Vex every vein of your heart, when
you are dead.

The next to Not doing wrong, is To make Amends: And the only Amends, we can
make to GOD, when we have not had the grace to avoid sin, is, To confess and
Forsake the sin, we have not avoided: To be as True servants to GOD, as we
have been Enemies: and perform as zealous obe-dience to him hereafter, as we
have done to Satan formerly. Which is the way to Cheat the Devil.

And thus did Paul; who, (when his zeal was turned the right way) did not so
much hurt before, as now he did good.

Indeed; Notorious offenders may not think to sit down with the task of
ordinary services: but the retributions of their obedience must be
proportionable to their crimes. As was that of Saint Paul's. Who as he had done
more evil to the Saints, then all the rest of the Apostles: So He Labored
more then they all, in adding to the Church such as should be saved. Yea, says
our Savior, (speaking of him to Ananias,) I will show him how many things he
must suffer for my names sake, Acts 9. 16 Which was much the case of
Archbishop Cramner; who could never satisfy his conscience after his
Recantation, till he had burnt that hand to ashes, with which he had
subscribed: So taking an holy revenge of himself, by suffering in a manner,
Two Martyrdomes; one whereof he put himself to, by burning his right hand; the
other which the Papists put him to, by burning his whole body.

True, It is one of the Mad Principles of wickedness; that it is a weakness
to relent: And rather to die, then yield: yea even the worst causes once
undertaken must be upheld, to the Death: But a Gracious heart, when it shall
find its own mistaking, will not only remit an ungrounded displeasure, but
studies to be revenged of it self, and to give satisfaction to the offended.
Wherefore art thou a Wise man, or a Fool? Yea, a Man, or a Beast: For shame
either be a Man: or confess thy self to be a Beast. A Wise man, or
acknowledge thy self a Fool. If thou be a Wise man, it will be seen by
this. He that is Wise (says Solomon) is wise to himself; He is not Wise
against himself; as thou have been hitherto. And in another place. A prudent
man sees the Plague, and hides himself: that is, Flies to GOD for succor.
But the foolish go on still, and are punished, Prove. 22. 3. Thou have deferred
it too long already.

Thus having made a Discovery of thy sin, together with the infection and
dispersion of it: I should proceed to the Means of thy Recovery. But I spare
my Reader. Besides, should Suada the reputed Goddess of persuasion never so
much admonish thee: It were in vain: For thou art like the Deaf Adder, that
stops her ear, and will not hearken to the voice of the Charmer, though he be
most excellent in charming, Psalm. 58. 4. 5. And thy heart is like a stone,
which being thrown up ten thousand times, will never learn to ascend: Or Iron
quenched often in Vinegar, which will not yield to the hammer, nor be forged to
any good use, or once change its fashion.

Saul was so eager in the pursuit of David; and thirsted so after his blood,
that having sent first one company to apprehend him; then a second; after that
a third: It being told him, That GOD had changed every of their hearts, and
turned them into Prophets, that he might be prevented: He could not cease; but
goes himself, 1 Samuel 19. 20. 23. The Jews would not Believe in CHRIST, after
so clear predictions of the Prophets; after so miraculous demonstrations of
his Divine power; after so many graves ransackt; Dead raised; Devils ejected;
limbs and eyes new created; after such testimonies of the Star, Sages, Angels,
GOD himself; after such triumphs over death, and hell: But obstinately reject
him for their Messiah. So should thou see some of thy fellows struck dead in
the Pulpit, as they are belching out their spleen against Religion and
goodness, as it sared with Nitingall Parson of Crondall in Kent: All were one.
As when the neighboring Ammonites heard of GODS fearful vengeance upon the
Philistims, they could not be warned: but must be taking up the quarrel
against Israel, 1 Samuel 7. and 11. chap.

Nothing but Grace can teach us to make use of others judgments. And should
thou, like those Sodomits, be struck blind in thy pursuit of some Lot; thou
would still persist Though they gnaw their tongues for pains: yet they
repent not of their Deeds, Revel. 16. 8. 9 So Hard a Task is Repentance. And
the reason is. Custom is not only a Grave to Bu^y the Soul in: But a Stone
rolled to the mouth of it, to keep it down. Wherefore I leave this Moth
laboring to extinguish the light of other men's goodness. I know in the end he
will singe his own wings.

Only remember, that Warning not taken is a certain Presage of Destruction. A
Man that hardneth his neck, when he is rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy, Prove. 29. 1. and 1. 24 to 32. The sons of Eli would
not hearken unto, nor obey the voice of their Father. Why? Because (says the
Text) The LORD was determined to destroy them, 1 Samuel 2. 25. I know (says the
Prophet to Amaziah) That GOD has determined to destroy thee; Because thou have
done this, and have not obeyed my counsel, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. 20.

But in the mean time many suffer; the Godly are discouraged, the wicked are
hardened by thy false wresting, and misapplying the Scriptures. Wherefore GOD of
his goodness grant, that all false Prophets may be either inwardly Lambs; (as
they are not) or appear outwardly Wolves, as they are. Either to turn their
hearts from their Wolvish condition; or to pull their Sheepskin over their
ears; That no Juglers may privily by their mists and mysteries pervert the
flock of JESUS CHRIST.

Nor let any, that fear GOD, or care for the welfare of his Church, in the
least measure further their bringing in; nor hinder their Casting out of the
Ministry: Be they Brethren, Children, or Nephews. No, vouchsafe not to open
thy lips for these Marble-hearted, and Savage-minded men, saying, How shall
they and theirs live, if they be turned out of their Livings? For better
Starve, then be Fed with the Blood of Souls. Neither did the Prelates think
this Argument of either Force or Weight, when they turned GODS Faithful
Ministers out, and put these Ministers of Satan in.

Besides, there is no Safety for the Lambs; but by the Death, or Removal of
the Wolves. And, when the Seed of the Serpent fight against the Seed of the
Woman. That which helps the one, must needs hurt the other. He Threatens the
Innocent, who Spares the Delinquent. Which made GOD to reject Saul, and take
away his Kingdom; for showing mercy to Agag, 1 Samuel 15.

I know, it is not honest to use arms, as the Bishops did, where the
controversy may be ended with Treaties. But there is no hope of their
reclaiming, or amendment, as we have found since the Parliament by an hundred.
For you can hardly name one of the generation that have changed their minds,
though they feared every day, to lose their means. I confess they have a
Strong Hope; that, if they stand out the loss of a Vicarage, the Bishops, when
they prevail (which I hope will never be) will Prefer them to a Parsonage
worth Five of it.

Indeed some, (And those no Small Fools) at the beginning of the Parliament
(when they had not the hopes they have now) have been so Sofined, that they
have preached Recantation-Sermons, and professed with tears in their eyes; that
(should the times change never so) they would now be honest. But they have
presently Hardened again, and Fied to Oxford. Such are the
Parliaments-Converts. Well may they turn to flat Popery, and there stay, if
the times should turn: but never to the Truth. For they bend their tongues
like Bows for lies: but they are not valiant for the Truth, Jer. 9 3.

Object. But you will say: Peradventure these Anti-Puritan Preachers, (I call
them so, Because they think themselves so, though I could easily prove
themselves Arch-Puritans, if time would permit) have something to plead for
themselves. And it were good to hear their defenses, before we cashiere them.

Answer. I confess, they will help themselves very handsomely with a
Distinction. Yea, they have devised a world of fleshly Reasons, to maintain
and uphold corruptions: For they beat their brains and spend their wits, to
Deface GODS Ordinances, and Establish their Own Traditions. And, if ever there
were any time, in which our Savior CHRIST'S words were verified, where he
says, If it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect, It is now;
There be such Goodly Colors and Shows made and set upon matters, to hold the
people contented in their ignorance. So that all is good which they do.

As, why do they thus preach and rail against the Godly, and their precise
walking? For sooth, for the Public utility, and the Churches sake: for the
Peace of the Church; and for Obedience and Good Order. When they have as great
a Care of the Church (unless you call Episcopacy the Church) as Judas had a
Care of the Poor. For is it likely, That the Enemies of the Cross of CHRIST
should. Take care for the Church of CHRIST? Even as likely, As that The Irish
Rebels, The English Traitors, A Popish Army, And all the Thieves and
Cut-purses, that are now risen up against the Parliament; should Fight for the
Laws, and the Protestant Religion.

I am sure, Saint James argues otherwise. Whose words are. Does a Fountain
send forth, at one place, sweet water and bitter? Can the Figtree, my Brethren,
bring forth Olives? Either a Vine Figs? So can no Fountain make both salt
water and sweet, Jam. 3. 11. 12.

But every age has had many such Hypocrites. The Scribes and Pharisees cry,
The Temple of the LORD, The Temple of the LORD; whiles they Despi^ed and
Crucified the LORD of that Temple. The Jews color their Envy against CHRIST,
with their Duty to Caesar. And many the like And the reason is this:

Error is so foul an Hagge, that if it should come in the Own Shape, Nuda
Facie: A man would Loath it. If Jezabel had not painted her face, she had not
gotten so many Doting Adulterers. These Wolves come evermore in Sheeps
clothing, Matthew. 7. 15. Sub Pello Ovina, Lupus Rapax; As the Fowler, by the
benefit of his Stalking-horse, murders the Fowls. Many (says CHRIST) shall
come in my Name. Nomine meo, non Suo. Not in their Own Name: For then their
words would not be taken.

Every man is an Hearty Patron of his own Actions. And it is a Desperate
Cause, that has No Plea. Yea the more Foul any Project is, the Fairer Vizor
it still seeks. Come see my zeal for the LORD of Hosts, says Jehu. His Words
were for the LORD: But his Project was for the Kingdom. And Comets make a
greater blaze, then Fixed Stars. Those Monopolists, that undo the
Commonwealth, have the most Colorable Pretenses to Benefit it. But, as CHRIST
said, Qui vos recipit: So in effect. Qui vos Decipit, me Decipit. Even the
Cutpurse, when one found his hand in his Pocket, and asked, what it did there,
answered. If I had not had more Care of your Purse, then your self, it might
have been gone. But if Sanballat and Tobiah put in for building of the Wall;
they will Daub with untempered mortar; And it will prove but a rotten piece of
work: For they consult to Cast down CHRIST from his Dignity: They bless with
their mouths: but curse with their hearts, Psalm. 62. 4.

Object. But in preaching against Puritans, they speak not against any that are
Religious: But against Non-conformists, which deserve to be blamed, being a
people, that Disturb the Peace of the Church; Weaken the Sinews of Discipline.
Are Over-Fiery, and stir up Contention.

Answ. Why then do they Cast the Same Aspersion upon those that have nothing
to do with Subscription; As Noblemen, and Gentlemen: Yea upon the Great
Council of Parliament? So that (however they fit Scriptures to their passion,
and pretend fair) It is a sure sign, that their Hearts are full of nothing
but Pure Malice, and Venomous Rancor against All Grace and Goodness.

It is true. They will neither acknowledge their Own Faults, nor Others
Virtues. And so would be thought to Inveigh against an Error on the Right hand,
Too much Preciseness, Opinion of Righteousness; and the like. But their True
meaning and utmost endeavor is, To Dash all Holiness, and Sincerity out of
Countenance, and to pluck up all Power of Religion by the Roots. A man, that
Truly hates Superstition, will not Presently Cast himself into Irreligion: But
Fix upon the Mean. If Two Mastiffes be jarring between themselves, when the
Bear comes, They forget All Private Strife, To Assail the Common Enemy. So,
if these did not Degenerate from Christians, they would sometimes lay aside
these Particular Differences in judgment, touching Small Matters: and Set upon
foul Sins, and Wicked Practices; as Swearing, Drunkenness, Profanation of
the LORDS Day, etc. But this they never do, or not to any purpose. Whereas
both in their Sermons, and Books, and Discourse, they do (with strong Reasons
drawn from the Wisdom of the Flesh) Defend Non-Residents, Double-Benefic'd
men: Men of no Learning, and worse Living in the ministry: with sundry other
Abominations; as Crosses, Altars, Cringings, and the like. Now I wonder what
could be thought of the Pope, if he, being at Fewd. with England; and seeing
the Turk begin to invade; should be so far from aiding us, that he joined
with the Turk against us: Were he to be thought CHRIST'S Friend? No surely. Even
so it is impossible that they should bear any Love to GOD, or CHRIST, when
they are so far from Aiding the Godly: That they Take Sins Part, the Worlds
Part, and the Devils Part, against GOD, and the Children of GOD.

The truth is. They Pretend the Church, and speak of Peace, and Term us, The
Troublers of the State. But they are the Sole-Cause of all the Ignorance and
Impiety in the Land; and of these woeful Distractions and Distempers now on
foot. Resembling those Infidels in the Primitive Church; who would raise
mutinies, and uprores: And then Father them upon the Christians. Or the
Pouder-Traytors, who decreed to Blow up the State; and then Father it upon the
Puritans.

But this will not serve Another day; when all the False Glosses, which they
put upon things, shall be wiped away.

The Wolf in the Fable (oh, that it were but a Fable!) when he sees the Lamb
drinking at the poole, comes Blundring into the Water, and Troubles it: Then
Quarrels with the Lamb: Quare iurbasti aquam? Why have thou troubled the water?
So Ahab the Wolf told Elijah the Lamb: That He troubled Israel. And thus dealt
Saul with David; who to color his Malice the better, gave him the Epithete of
an Enemy; told the people, That David sought his life; and Jonathan, That He
had chosen the son of Ishai, to his confusion, and the confusion of his house:
When each man knew that Himself Alone was Guilty. He is a Weak Politician,
that knows not how to Guild over the Worst Project, with a Fair Pretense.

Object. But these Puritanicall-Preachers (say they) are like Birds, that
defile their own Nest; in so Rebuking the Sins of the Ministry: whereof
this Character is a sufficient Instance. Who may be answered thus.

Answ. Ye know not how far this Exception reachech: and against Whom ye
shoot this bolt. For did not the Prophets reprove the wickedness of the
Priests? did not our Savior CHRIST lay open the Qualities of the Scribes and
Pharisees? did not the Apostles paint out wicked Teachers, in their Colors? It
is the part of GODS servants, to rebuke ungodliness, in whomsoever they find
it. And in case Ministers would not be Contemned; they must not deserve
Contempt.

But admit these men (who are Thorns in thine Eyes, as Job was in the Devils)
were Faulty, in being Over-zealous, or Over-Scrupulous; (Though the truth is,
we have more need of Wings, then of Lead) It no whit Justifies Thee. Informers
of Penal-Statutes make often just complaints: But because their End is not the
Correction of Faults, but Fishing for the Mulcts, or Wreaking their Spleenes:
They do the office of Devils. Yea, how many False Zibaes are there of You, who
unjustly accuse honest Mephibosheths, To get away their Livings and Places? And
such out-doe Mischief it self.

Again. Put case both thy Aim should be Good, (as that man is Worse then
Mad, who persecutes that as False, which he knows to be True) Although it is
Evident enough. Thou opposest Non-Conformitants either without Conscience, or
against Conscience: And that this thy preaching should produce the same effect
thou desire: yet, in the first place, There is a way (says Solomon) that
seems Right unto a man: But the Issue thereof are the ways of Death: Prove.
16. 25. And, as the Psalmist speaks. He flatters himself in his own eyes,
whiles his iniquity is found worthy to be hated, Psalm. 36. 2.

2. That is the Highest and Chief Reason, that makes for Religion and Piety.
Nor is that which is Evil of it self to be ventured on for the Good, that
comes by Accident. It is a Rule in all Christian Actions. That neither any
Evil is to be done, that Good may come of it: Nor any Good of Obligation to be
Omitted, for fear, that Evil may ensue.

And so much in General, of the Second Sort of Vn-preaching Ministers, that
Edify to Damnation.

I should conclude with an Advertisment to All sorts of Hearers. But I am
Rounded in the Ear, here to Cast Anchor.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Ja. Cranford.

Errata.
Page 35. line 33. leave out and.


