THE SAINTS FULLNESS OF JOY in their fellowship with God: PRESENTED In a Sermon
preached July 21. 1646.

Before the Honorable House of Commons in Margarets Westminster, Being the day
appointed for Thankesgiving for the surrender of OXFORD.

By the least of Saints, and the meanest of the Ministers of the Gospel, W.
Cradock.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, and are to be sold by George VVhittington,
at the blew Anchor near the Royal Exchange. 1646.

THere was an Order from the Honorable House of Parliament to print this
Discourse, such as it is, allowing me the usual privileges vouchsafed in this
kind; in obedience to which Order, I appoint Matthew Simmons and Hannah Allen
to print the same.

W. C.

TO THE HONORABLE House of Commons, ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
PEACE among Brethren is the Pearl that is lost in these days; which many
pretend to seek, and all justly complain is wanting; many outcries there are
for it, in the mouth's of some, whose hearts and principles are full of war
and contention; Their words are Ps. 55. 21.
softer then oil, and yet they be drawn swords; Yea such is the hypocrisy of
this age, that it is become almost the Character of a Malignant, or Atheist, in
all companies, with much seeming zeal and devotion, to pray and desire Peace,
Union, Reconciliation, neglecting the while all means that may conduce to the
same.

Others there are (and those not a few) who long for Peace, and that sincerely,
but not hitting the right way to attain to it, do often cast more Oil into
the flame, and make the breach wider. This following Discourse (though it be
the meanest of any that ever has been presented unto you) points out the
surest and readiest way to find this Jewel, (i.) Fellowship with the Father,
and his Son Jesus Christ. Fellowship with God necessarily begets fellowship
between men. He only is an enemy to Man, that is not upon terms of
friendship with God. God is love, and when we are in him, and walk with him,
we cannot but be like him. Could we fully apprehend God as our Father, Christ
as our Head, all the Saints his members, chosen and beloved, we should no
longer bite, tear, and devour one another: a spirit of Love, Goodness,
Meekness, Long-suffering, that is in God, and dwells in Christ, would run
through all our veins; tempering our hearts, and framing our carriages Euk. 6.
Ephesians. 5.
toward men, as God's in Christ has been toward us. Yea, it would mollify
our spirits toward all, even the worst of men, and make us live peaceably as
much as in us lies with all men. To give no offense to any man. Romans 12. 1
Cor. 10. Titus 3. 1 Cor. 4. Mat. 5.
To speak evil of no man. To bless when we are blasphemed. To give up our
cloakes to him that takes away our coat, etc. And because there is a general
distance grown between men and God, an intermission of spiritual fellowship,
therefore these Scriptures are become now Apocryphal, which were precious
Truths formerly to the Saints, (and it may be still are to a few) who studied
rather to conform themselves to the strictest Rules, then wrest the Rule to
their own carnal senses and corrupt lusts; a practice too common in these
times.

Oh that we could then do as the wise Traveller, who being wilderd in a
Forest, despairing to find the way forward, returns thither where he first
lost his way: We have lost our way, our selves, our God, and all almost, by an
Over-violent contention about Things external: We have cast dirt upon each
other, that will not be wiped off our names in many Ages, opened the mouth's of
the wicked, rejoiced the hearts of Papists, grieved the Spirit of God. Oh how
happy should we yet be, if we would return to our GOD, renewing our
fellowship with him in the Spirit!

Surely it was better with us then when we made our Hos. 2
Fellowship with God, Holiness, Righteousness, our chief study, when
Christianity, and the power of Godliness, was the Cement that united us
together; When we were distinguished from the world, and known to one another
by the style of Saints, Professors of Godliness, Honest-men.

It is one of my firmest Principles, and by Gods Grace shall ever be my
practice, to make union and communion with God my maine work, to study peace
with all men; To Love, Honor, Receive SAINTS qua SAINTS; To receive, I say,
those whom Christ has received. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
bind up every one of your souls in that bundle, and so preserve your whole
spirit, soul and body blameless unto his coming, which shall ever be the
most unfeigned prayer of

Your most humble servant, W. CRADOCK.

A SERMON PREACHED at the late Thankesgiving, before the Honorable House of
COMMONS,
1 JOHN 1. 3, 4. And truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be
full.
THe chief end (Beloved) of your meeting here this day is to rejoice together,
for those manifold mercies, that the Lord has been pleased to bestow (of late
especially) upon you and the whole Kingdom; and I suppose that we (I mean the
Ministers) that are called hither by you, are intended to be (as the Scripture
says) as furtherers of Phil. 1. 25.
your joy. But truly, Beloved, those mercies of themselves that are in your
thoughts, and that have been spoken of here already at large, (I mean those
victories, and surrenders of Garrisons etc.) though I confess they be very
great, and glorious, yet they may in a sort be reckoned among natural things,
they are at best but temporal mercies, and so they can produce but a kind of
natural joy. For as we heard this morning, vide. Mr. Wilkinsons Sermon.
the effect must be, as the cause is. And as it is somewhat beneath a Christian
to insist much upon those natural things, thereby to express natural
affections; so is it much more below the work of a Gospel Minister to stir you
up to such joys as these things do properly produce. Therefore my design at
this time is (as God shall enable me) to raise you up a little above all these
things, to lead you to spiritual joy, which indeed is the only true joy, at
least the fountain of all joy. For take any other joy and abstract it from its
spiritualities, then indeed you may say of it with Solomon, it is but as the
crackling of thorns; Eeles. 7. 6.
it is light, short, superficial, and will undoubtedly end in everlasting
sorrow. Therefore as I would not put you out of your way of rejoicing, so I
wish I could scrue you up to the truest joy, that is, to the most spiritual
joy, which is fully laid down here in my text.

And truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.

The Apostle in this Epistle writes to Saints, though he does not describe, or
decipher them by their names, condition, or the places of their habitation, (as
Paul and Peter and other Apostles do) yet he styles them by a glorious title,
viz. Beleivers, as you may see 1 John 5. 13. These things have I written unto
you that believe on the name of the Son of God etc.

And in writing thus to beleivers, his scope as I conceive was twofold, or he
aims principally at two things, as you may clearly see if you peruse the
whole Epistle.

First, to build them up in their holy faith, to raise their faith to an higher
pitch, or degree, whereby they might have, and enjoy, more fellowship with God
the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ; and so by consequence be more joyful,
holy, and obedient. This you shall see if you compare 1 John 5. 13. with this 1
John 1.

The other thing that the Apostle aims at is, to increase Christian and
spiritual love between one beleiver and another. And this he speaks much of
throughout the Epistle, especially in the 3. and 4. chap. I shall not at all at
this time meddle with this latter, my business lies wholly in the former.

Now the only means and way that the Apostle here takes to attain to this his
aim is by discovering, or laying open Jesus Christ clearly and fully unto
them, as we see ver. 1, 2, 3. That which was from the beginning, which we have
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our
hands have handled of the word of life etc. He takes this as the chief means,
to build them up in faith, joy, love, and holiness; a discovery (I say,) or
laying open of Jesus Christ unto them: and that not simply or carnally, but in
his spirituality and glory. And therefore he uses an elogie for his person
which of all other is the most comprehensive that I know in Scripture, he calls
him the Word: and then (...).
withal he sets him out with his graces, and the privileges we have by him,
comprehending them all in the word Eternal life. For as of all the titles that
do express the personal excellencies of the Lord Christ that is the most
glorious (...) the word: so of all that hold forth the privileges that we
have by him, there is not one word that expresses them so fully as this of
Eternal life; for it contains, and comprehends all the grace and glory we
have with him. This is the course and means that he takes to wind up the
Saints to a higher pitch of faith, holiness etc.

Neither does he propose Christ to them (though in his glory) as a thing
uncertain, but he sets him forth with a great deal of evidence and assurance;
therefore he says, That which was from the begininng, which we have HEARD,
which we have SEEN with our eyes, which we have looked upon etc. The meaning is
not properly, that John having been an Apostle with Christ, did sometimes
handle him, and sometimes lay in his bosom, and so this to be understood in a
corporal way; but the meaning I conceive is this, we have known Jesus Christ,
he has been so revealed to us, with that fullness of assurance, with that
perspicuity and clearenesse; that as in natural things, you have many senses
concur together, to discover them, as eyes, ears, hands, etc. these things are
very sure and certain: so (Brethren) says John, that I may build you up in
faith etc. I would lay open Jesus the word of God, that has eternal life with
him, as a thing that is as sure, and certain, as if ye had seen him, and
tasted him, heard him, and handled him, as we our selves have done; for as
Jesus Christ by the Spirit of God had been made known in that clear manner
with that certainty to John, so he goes about to clear him with the same
assurance also to other beleivers, that they also might have fellowship with
the Father, and with Jesus Christ, as he had. I will detain you no longer in
the coherence of the words.

In the words themselves there are three things to be observed.

First, an Assertion, our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son Jesus
Christ. It is a glorious one, as any I know in this blessed book.

Secondly, an Asseveration (if I may so call it,) to this blessed Assertion,
TRVLY says he, and truly our fellowship is with the Father etc. though I
confess the Greek word (...) is not so emphaticall as our word [truly] in
English, yet as it stands here in its coherence comparing it with the beginning
of the chapter, and observing the vehemence of his expression, we have seen and
tasted and handled the word of life, we may well call [truly] a kind of
Asseveration to this Assertion.

Thirdly, the end that the Apostle has to speak thus highly of this his
fellowship, is not out of pride, or vainglory, as the Pharisee Luke 18. I
thank God I fast twice in the week, I am not as other men. John did not
speak thus out of pride of spirit when he says, Truly our fellowship is with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: as if he should mean all others
are punyes or carnal people in comparison of himself: no, but with humility
and love, out of a desire to do my brethren good; these things I write unto
you that your joy may be full; I write not these things to boast of, and make a
show, but I am forced to write these things because I see with so much
certainty the excellency that is in Jesus Christ, and do taste so much
sweetness in communion, and fellowship with him, that I cannot choose but write
thus unto you that you also may have fellowship with him. I will stand no
longer upon the explication and division of the words, there is enough already
said to lead us to many wholesome blessed truths that lie in and about these
words, if God give us his Spirit, and we had time to look into them; there are
many truths (I say) that well become John the Divine, as he is called; they
are all divine, transcendently divine and spiritual: I will only touch 3. or
4. Observations, and then pitch upon one.

The first is this.

The more spiritual or divine Christians are, the more they will be taken up and
employed about spiritual work.

John is called John the Divine, not as we call Divines from Office, but from
the excellency of Grace, and the clearenesse of divine manifestations,
therefore the Ancients compare him to an Eagle; now John in his whole Epistle
medleth not with controversies, (especially about outward and external
things,) but being wholly spiritual, he writes altogether spiritually, about
spiritual substantial things from the beginning to the end. Mistake me not, I
do not say that it is not lawful, and sometime convenient, for Ministers and
others to have to do with such things but this is that I only aim at; whereas
diverse conceive that it is their spiritualnesse, the excellency of their grace,
that they are carried on in Pulpits and Presses so vehemently in wrangling and
striving about external things, it is to be feared that much of that zeal,
violence, and labor is fleshly; and were we more spiritual, hundreds (I
believe) of those Questions would be removed, that lie now like stumbling
blocks in our way, according to that in the 2. of this Epist. ver. 10. He that
loves his brother abides in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling
in him. And were we filled with the knowledge of God, the love of Christ,
humility and self-denial, preferring each other before our selves; certainly
a world of these controversies would soon vanish away: As those that are
spiritual can speak by experience.

A second thing I would have you to observe, is this:

The best way to bring either a Sinner to God, or to build up a Saint, in any
grace, or in any point of godliness whatsoever, is the spiritual
promulgation, manifestation or declaration of Jesus Christ in his person,
excellencies and Privileges, doings and sufferings etc.

This is the best means; therefore John uses only that, he lays down Jesus
Christ as one that had been seen, heard, and felt, (as it were) to be the
(...), the eternal word that brought eternal life, and he expects that this
should work in the soul faith, joy etc. I beseech you bear with me beloved,
I fear we spend a great deal of our time almost in vain, and waste much of
our labor, when we would bring our own hearts, or others to a duty, or stir
up a grace, we use and urge so many moral Motives and Means; not that I say
but we may use motives and means spiritual and moral, but if we did study
to open Jesus Christ fully to the soul, John 3. 14.
if we did lift up the Brazen Serpent so as poor people might behold him, we
should not need the tenth part of those means, exhortations, and pains that
we now take: For in the Gospel we shall see (and it is our wisdom to follow
the scripture; the nearer that, the better) the Apostles when they went forth
to preach they told them a story (if I may so speak with reverence) of one
Jesus Christ that was the word of God, and that was become man, and how he was
crucified at Jerusalem, and how he was raised from the dead, and all this in a
plain, simple, spiritual way and manner, and while they were telling these
blessed stories, the Spirit fell upon people, and they believed, and had faith
wrought in them. Faith is not wrought so much in a rational way, (I mean in a
way of ratiocination) as by the Spirit of God coming upon the souls of people
by the relation, or representation of Christ to the soul; and this our Lord
himself hintes. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so
must the Son of John 3. 14.
man be lifted up, that whosoever beleiveth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. You know the very beholding of the brazen Serpent, when
people were stung, God so ordered it that the very beholding should bring help
(though we know not how) to those that were wounded, and stung by those
Serpents: so God has ordained in his blessed wisdom that the discovery of
Jesus Christ, the beholding of him, the eying of him by faith, should be that,
which shall transform us into his image, and so conform us to any duty, as
the Apostle says, we are transformed while we behold him with open face to
his glory. Hence it is that in Scripture 2 Cor. 3. 18.
all godliness and every point of godliness, is often called the knowledge of
Christ. For instance, justification in Scripture is called the knowledge of
Christ; By his knowlede shall my righteous servant justify many. So also
sanctification, Esaias. 53.
2 Pet. 3. 18. Grow in grace and in the knowledge of Christ. After that by the
knowledge of Jesus Christ they were cleansed from their sins etc. Truly,
Beloved, every grace is 2 Pet. 2.
comprehended in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, did we know Jesus Christ
aright, savingly, spiritually, effectually, we should be full of faith, full of
godly fear, full of humility, full of self-denial, full of diligence, and
readiness to every good word and work, so that our maine defect is in that, but
I pass by that also.

A third thing be pleased to observe from the coherence of these words, that

Divine objects, seen by faith (if it be a saving and right faith,) carries
with them as much evidence, certainty, and assurance, as any natural thing
that we apprehend by any, or all our natural senses.

We have seen, heard, and tasted, the more of our senses are employed to
apprehend a thing, the more assurance, confidence, and evidence it carries with
it. Put the five senses together to discover any natural object whatsoever,
that cannot be more sure and certain to us, then all spiritual objects
apprehended by a spiritual Christian, through a lively faith, are to him:
therefore it is said that faith is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1.
of things invisible; he does not say that faith is an opinion, a probability,
a conjecture or a wild guess, but faith (says he) is the evidence of things
not seen, that is, of things that by natural reason you cannot see, yet making
them as real and as evident as any thing we do see by reason, sense, and all.

And thence (Beloved) you see that godly men in all ages have been so free to
part with their credit, to renounce their profit, to lay down their lives, for
spiritual things sake: now did they not apprehend a reality and certainty in
them, surely they were no less then mad men, to forgo substances for
shadows. It were no less then madness for a man to give himself up to be a
prisener, when he might be free, to be a fool when he might be accounted wife,
to be poor when he might be rich, if he did not see a reality in spiritual
things for which he willingly forsakes and leaves all these other.

The Saints in all ages have done so, we read in the Epistle to the Hebrew of
Moses and Abraham how Heb. 11.
they forsook all, Abraham forsook his country, Moses forsook Pharaohs
house, and they were no children; for Moses was forty years old, says the
Scripture, when he refused the pleasures of Pharaohs house to embrace
afflictions with the poor Saints. Whence was this think you? Moses saw him
that was invisible, how? by faith, for all that chapter has reference to, and
is but an illustration of the first verse: Faith is the Heb. 11.
evidence of things not seen, and all the rest are examples of the same. He saw
him that is invisible, and by the same eye that he saw God, he saw all that
belonged to God, and therefore saw that it was better to endure afflictions
with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

And that is the reason on the other side why we see all carnal men, and
Hypocrites whatsoever, some time or other (when in any special manner God
would have them deny themselves etc.) to faulter, and flagg, and at last fall
utterly, which indeed are to be pitied, rather then censured by us men, in the
flesh. For here is the case, there comes a command to a carnal hearted
professor (that professes godliness, but has not learned Christ, as the
truth is in Jesus) requiring him to forsake his credit, and undergo shame, to
forsake his wealth, and be poor etc. this carnal heart having not the
Prospective-glasse of faith; he sees not any reality in spiritual things to
counterpoize this loss, then does he basely leave Christ, and throw off all
his profession. Therefore I said we should pity them, as Christ did the young
man when he bid him sell all, he was sorrowful, Mat. 19. 22.
says the text. If he had seen riches in Christ, he would have sold all and
rejoiced, and thought he had made a very good bargain: but I wave these things.

I had another thing, I will only mention it, because happily the Lord may do
some good by it; with all humility I commend it to my brethren, as the
unworthiest Minister of the Gospel.

We that are Ministers should in all our Ministerial works, propose some
solid spiritual scope, or end to our Ministry, and to every part of it; as
John did here, and the Apostles in every Sermon and Epistle.

Beloved, I have known in my observation (which it may be has been too
critical in the works of others) many learned, godly (and otherwise able)
Ministers, who took much pains, preached solidly, and yet in the end reaped
some of little little, some no appearing fruit at all, of all their sweat, and
labor: some of them professing in their old age they knew not that soul that
ever was brought home to Christ by their Ministry. And this to my apprehension
seemed to be the chief reason, (as to the work of man) they never did propose
any particular end, or distinct scope to their work, which indeed they could
not well do as having no spiritual acquaintance with the estates and
conditions of their Auditors. He that would convert sinners, or edify Saints,
ought to study souls, as well as books. And those Ministers I have observed
to work most excellently, and labor most succesfully, who have been
accustomed to converse most with their hearers. I have also always thought (in
reference principally to the discharge of my own work) that the mere
preaching of two Sermons a week as it does not reach the practice of the
Apostles, so is Act. 20. 26.
it not one half of the work of a Gospel Minister. As our frequent, familiar
spiritual converse with our hearers does furnish us with more skill to deal
with the souls of others, so it conduces much to the quickening of our own,
without which we shooting (as it Romans 1. 11. 22.
were) at rovers must often miss the mark, if ever we aimed at any: without
which we are as expert Smiths that make curious keys and never consult with
the wards of the lock, whereas a rude ilshap'd key that is fitted to the lock
is of much use, the other of none at all. This surely (might I crave leave to
speak) is a common neglect in us, and a considerable defect in most of our
Ministries, which makes many of us labor as it were in the fire. Neither is it
sufficient for us to say, when Gods work does not prosper in our hands, that
yet our judgemnet is with the Lord etc. unless we have in Isa. 49. 4.
all things done the work of a Minister, which as I said before, is not half
done till we have attained to some complete measure of acquaintance with the
souls of our people, nor at all will be done till we have the skill of
speaking to their very hearts, and particular estates. It was once a speech of
a reverend Minister, Mr. W^oth that blessed Apostle of South -wales.
who (because of the multitude of his hearers was often necessitated to preach
in the Chapter yard) That there was not one person in that Congregation whose
spiritual estate he did not fully know; and the success of his work was
answerably, exceeding great and glorious: neither (said he) is there any Sermon
I preach, wherein I teach them not at least one lesson more then any one of
them all knew before, and yet I learn from them throughout the week, as much
or more then they do of me on the Lords Day. But (Reverend and beloved) I
acknowledge with all sincerity it becomes me rather to learn, then to teach,
only I beseech you bear with me thus far.

Now to come lastly, to the lesson that I shall insist on; from the words
themselves: the other lessons lay but about the words of my text, and were
raised only from the coherence. And truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ* And these things write we unto you, that your
joy may be full. The lesson that I would observe from these words is this.

Fullness of joy, is a fruit or consequent of our fellowship with the Father,
and his Son Jesus Christ.

Now what this fellowship is; to open it at large is not possible to be done at
this time: I will pitch upon one thing only therein, and that is a great
piece, if not the chief in our fellowship with God, and Jesus Christ: that is,
our oneness or union with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ: For there can
be no communion, where there is no union; there can be no fellowship between
God and us, if we be not one with him.

And though fellowship with God and Jesus Christ, are not separated in
themselves, and are seldom mentioned in Scripture apart; yet because I would
not lay the foundation of my discourse larger and wider, then I have time to
build thereon; I must therefore crave leave for this time to lay aside with all
reverence, one blessed person in the Trinity, and speak of our fellowship, to
wit, our union with Christ, and so contract the doctrine to a little narrower
compass, thus:

Fullness of joy is a fruit of our union with Jesus Christ.

I contract it to this, as for the times sake, so also because I desire rather
to go to the bottom of one truth, then to start up many: I will give you two
places of Scripture to prove this.

The first is in Joh. 15. from the beginning to the 12. verse: I am the vine,
and ye are the branches, etc. you know the parable. These things have I spoken
to you (Says Christ) that my joy may remain in you, and that your joy might
be full. Understand this Scripture (briefly) thus. Our Lord Christ was now
going to Heaven from his Disciples, and here in these chapters 14. 15. and 16.
he takes a great deal of pains to comfort them, to make them as cheerful as
he could, in parting with him, and he gives them many blessed words of comfort
chap. 16. 23. chap. 14. 13.
to feed on, as that their prayers should be all answered: And though he did
go to Heaven it should further their prayers, and they should have the Spirit
the sooner, the Comforter: And among the rest, he tells them, I am the vine and
ye are the branches: there is a world of chap. 16. 7.
comfort and joy in that; though we go asunder and are now to part, yet ye
are branches graffed into me, nothing can separate us, I am the vine, and my
Father is the husbandman, he will have a care that I nourish these branches to
everlasting life: and the reason wherefore I tell you all this is, that your
joy may be full, that when I am gone to Heaven, you may for ever remember the
union that is between us, which Heaven and earth and hell shall never break
or dissolve: this is one Scripture for the confirmation of this doctrine.

The other is in Joh. 17. 11. compared with ver. 13. our Savior prays there,
Holy Father keep them through thine own Name, those whom thou have given me,
that they may be one as we are one. Christ Jesus now prays for his in Heaven,
though they know it not but by faith: But here he prays in their very hearing
to comfort them. And as Christ preached to them that he was one with them, so
he prayed to his Father in their hearing, that they might be one, and kept one
as he is one with his Father: whereto is all this? These things I speak in the
world: why so? he might have done it in Heaven; but I do it in the world, that
they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves: as if he had said, I know it is
an exceeding great joy to my poor disciples to hear me preach, that I and
they are one, but it is more to hear me pray thus for them, for they know,
that thou never denyest me any thing, John 11. 42.
and I pray, that they and I may be kept one for ever, as thou and I are one.
So much for the proof of the doctrine. Now I shall endeavor to open, and
explicate this a little to you; which that I might do, there are two or three
Questions, (though I shall not be able to reach them all) that would be
necessary to be resolved:

The first is this, What is meant by fullness of joy?

The second is, What kind of union or oneness is this,

The third is, Wherein does this union stand? whereof

The first Question then is this, what is meant by fullness

You must understand that joy arises always from Good is the object of joy,
whether that good be really good, or seemingly good, whether we enjoy it for
present, or hope to enjoy it hereafter, it works joy in us. There are 4. sorts
of good, and but four in the world worth mentioning, (I mean of general good
things which may cause men to rejoice;) and of those 4, the three first will
not bring in fullness of joy, they have but a little, short, scanty joy with
them; and the fourth does the deed.

The first is outward mercies, as health, wealth, prosperity, victories, peace,
deliverances, etc. Beloved, these are outward mercies, temporal mercies, (as
we call them) and these (I confess) bring in some joy to the soul, but not
full joy; which is true both of the having of them, or being isntrumental in
them.

1. The having of them: it is comfortable to have peace after war, and to
have plenty, and trading, our shops, and highways open etc. we may rejoice
in these things. For godliness does not unman 1 Cor. 7 30.
us, it does not hinder the course of any true natural affection in us:
neither does God blame us for rejoyceing in these things. But surely the having
of these things does not bring in full joy, because it is possible these things
may be curses, as well as blessings: and at the best they are but external
temporal blessings, they sink not to the bottom of the heart, and they last
but for a season.

2. No, nor being isntrumental in procuring them. I confess that as the
Apostle says (citing the words of Act. 20. 35.
our Lord) it is a more blessed thing to give then to receive, so it is a great
deal more happy, and a far more comfortable thing, to be isntrumental to
procure peace, and welfare to others, then the enjoyment of those things our
selves.

And this is for your comfort (without flattery be it spoken) I mean our
Parliament and our Armies, it is much I say for your comfort and it may bring a
great deal of joy to you, that not only you have outward mercies, as peace
etc. but that you have been the chief instruments to procure all our mercies.
And as I said it is a great deal more comfortable to do good, then to receive
it, to be isntrumental in procuring these things, then the mere having or
enjoying of them. For in Scripture you shall find Cyrus, though else (it Esa.
44. 28.
may be) he was a carnal natural man, yet he is called the Shepherd of God,
his Anointed: because he was an instrument, whereby the Saints enjoyed peace
and Esa. 44. 28.
deliverance. You shall never read in Scripture that Esa. 45. 1
men are called Gods Anointed, simply for having worldly things: nay, there is
sonmewhat like the contrary, they are called the men of the world, that have
their portion in this life, and woe to you that are full. But although Psalm.
17. 14. Luke 6. 24. 25.
this latter may bring more joy then the other: yet truly, Beloved, it will not
bring in, full joy: why? because as Paul speaks of preaching, a man may be a
means to save others, and he himself a castaway; a 1 Cor. 9. ult.
man may be as Noah's Carpenters, that helped to build an Arc for him, and
themselves drowned: therefore though it may bring thee joy, yet if Christ be
not in thy soul, if thou have not union and communion with the Father, and his
Son Jesus Christ, it will be but a poor comfort to thee to say, I have saved
a Town, I have won a City, I have subdued such an enemy, reduced such a
Garrison, broken such an Army: this may bring joy, but not full joy.

A second good that men look on as that which produces joy, (which is a
little higher then the former,) is the common gifts and graces of the Spirit of
God, as working of miracles, healing the sick, dispossessing men of Devils,
and those gifts that among us are now extant, as the gift of illumination,
prayer, preaching, expounding the Scriptures: and if you look on these things
as divided from Christ, either the having of them, or the exercise of them,
both these things may bring joy, but not full joy.

The having of them. Judas, Simon Magus and the disciples whom our Lord
compares to the second and third grounds, had these gifts amongst them, some
Matthew. 13.
more, some less: and they rejoiced, says the text, Mat. 13. but you know Job
says that the joy of the hypocrites is but for a moment. And notwithstanding
all these gifts, (yea and the performances or plausible duties which flow from
them) without union with Christ men are but hypocrites, we may call them so,
and so their joy is not full being but for a moment.

Secondly, there is some joy in the acting and exercising of common gifts, and
graces, as we read in Luke where the disciples had been abroad casting out
Devils, and rejoicing therein, our Lord checkes them: In this, says he,
rejoice not that the spirits are subject to you, Luke 10. 20.
but rather rejoice that your names are written in Heaven. The meaning is not,
you shall not at all rejoice, for Christ to have a company of poor fishermen
persecuted in the world, to work on people so as to dispossess them of
Devils, to heal the sick etc. doubtless they were in a sort allowed to
rejoice, but the meaning is this, Rejoice not, that is, expect not complete
joy from these things, take no such great delight and pleasure in these things,
but rather rejoice that your names are written in Heaven, that is, in a manner
the same as if he had said, that you have union and communion with the Father,
and his Son Jesus Christ.

The third good thing we use to rejoice in, is far higher then this, and yet
produces not fullness of joy, that is, the saving graces of the Spirit of God.
I pray Beloved understand me in this warily. There is a great deal of joy
surely in the having or exercising any saving spiritual grace. Therefore the
Apostle says, righteousness, and peace and joy in the holy Ghost. Romans 14. 1
Wheresoever there is righteousness and peace in the heart, there joy in the
holy Ghost follows. And in doing any thing out of a sincere spirit, out of the
power of grace, there is much joy, which God allows us. I meet him (says God)
that rejoices and works righteousness. Esa. 64. 5.
There is no act of righteousness that is done in sincerity, but it is as
meat and drink to us, as our Lord Christ says, John 4. yet for all this,
there is not, there cannot be fullness of joy from the apprehension of any
grace, or the exercise of it in our souls: For if you take grace and abstract
it from our head Christ but in your thoughts, and imaginations, (for so you may
do) it is but as a dead thing, (as blessed Preston says,) it is but a
creature, and would perish as other creatures, were we not united to a
Fountain of grace, he that has most grace in him, his grace would die and be
extinct. Grace is as the beams of the Sun in a house through a window: cut off
the beams from the Sun, shut the window, and they are gone. So I may sum up all
these things, and comprehend them (respectively) in those words of the Prophet;
Behold al ye that kindle a fire, and compass your Esa. 50. ult.
selves about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks
that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in
sorrow. Beloved, all these put together, certainly make many fine sparks of
joy, some more, some less, but if you go no further, yea (if it were
possible) that you, who have saving grace should rise no higher, and seek joy
no where else, all that ye should have at the hand of God in the end would be,
ye should lie down in sorrow.

But lastly, there is a fourth good that brings indeed fullness of joy, and
that is the Good (if I may so say) that is in God himself by Jesus Christ:
(For we cannot think a thought of God but only in Jesus Christ,) and that,
and that only brings fullness of joy.

If you ask how? It brings it especially 3 ways.

First, this good is exceeding full and perfect, the others are scantie, and
imperfect. Things fully good bring full comfort and joy. If a man look on his
own grace, for instance, love, he shall see little of love, but a great deal
of envy and hatred: or if there be a little delight in God, there is withal a
great deal of awkwardnesse, and averseness, but if we look into the fullness
of Christ, we shall see unsearchable treasures, riches that have no end.
Ephesians. 3. 8.


Secondly, the good in Christ has a: perpetuity in it; as David says, in thy
presence is fullness of joy, and in Psalm 16.
the next words, pleasures for evermore. Beloved, there is an end of all the
comforts of this world. As the Apostle says, those that rejoice should be as
though they rejoiced not, they that buy as if they possessed not, for the 1
Cor. 7.
fashion of this world passes away, and there will be an utter end of those
things that are below: But what is in God, and in Jesus Christ, will be full and
fresh to all eternity.

Thirdly, a Saint has a right and interest in all this Good to all eternity,
and here comes in the fullness of joy and not before.

The second Question for the opening of this truth is this: What manner of
union this is, that we have with Jesus Christ, that brings in this fullness of
joy?

For answer to that, take notice of these 4 things.

First, it is a very near union that a poor Saint has with Christ: I say
Saints, because poor sinners, drunkards, enemies to godliness, they have not
yet any share in this union or benefit from it: God may in his time give it
them; but Saints and beleivers, they have a near union with Christ.

You will say how near?

If an Angel were to speak to you he cannot satisfy you fully in this: only
as far as our understanding can reach it, and the creatures can serve to
illustrate these things, thus. Whatsoever by way of comparison can be
alleged, concerning the combination of any one thing with another (whatsoever
it be in the whole Creation of God) that, and much more, may be said of our
union with Jesus Christ. To give instances out of the Scripture: see what one
stick is to another being glewed together, see what one friend is to another,
(as Jonathan and David that are said to be woven and knit each to other) see
how near the Father and the Child are, how near the Husband and Wife are one
to another, see what union is between the branches and the vine, the members
and the head, nay one thing more, see what the soul is to the body, such is
Christ and so near is he and nearer to the person of every true beleiver: as
Paul says, I live not, but Christ lives in me, as if he should say, Jesus
Christ is to my soul and Gal. 2. 20.
body, as the soul is to the body of a natural man, that acts and quickens it
naturally: Beloved, there is a mavelous neerenesse in this union.

Secondly, it is the most real union, these things make for our joy, for it
was not in vain that Christ spoke of these things before he went to Heaven,
that their joy might be full) I say it is a most real union. As there is a
greater neerenesse; so there is a greater reality in our union with Christ,
then is between any natural things whatsoever, they are but shadows of
spiritual things. It is not a notionall union, as some conceive that Christ
and we are united as the object is united to the understanding; for when a man
conceives of any thing, that thing is united in an abstracted metaphysicall way
to the understanding: so hypocrites may have a great deal of union with
Christ, they may go far, and have much knowledge, and light in the
apprehension of spiritual things. You may see the difference of this union, by
comparing that union an husband has with his wife, and that union which his
mind and understanding has with any other person; it is not as when a man's
understanding conceives of another woman, by mere imagination, and thought of
her, there is a kind of union between her and his understanding: But this is
another kind of union that is between a man and his wife, by the bond and tie
of Matrimony, that is a real union, that is conceived by some to be the
meaning of that place Hos. 2. I will marry thee in faithfulness and judgment,
or in truth, as some read it, I will marry thee in truth: I would not have you
think the union between Christ and the Saints is nothing but a poor empty
Notion or imagination, but I will marry thee in truth, (i.) thou shall be my
wise in reality, as much, or rather more really, then man and wife are united
by Marriage.

Thirdly, It is a total union that is between Jesus Christ and his poor
Saints: (Oh, this is full of comfort if you look on it spiritually) that is,
whole Christ is united to the whole believer, soul and body. Thou have all
Christ, whatsoever thou can conceive to be in the Father, or in Jesus Christ,
it is really and wholly thine: as I could give instances had I time out of
Scripture. Thou art one with him in his Nature, in his Name, thou have the same
Image, and grace, and Spirit in thee as he has, the same precious promises,
the same access to God by prayer as he, thou have the same love of the Father,
all that he did or suffered thou have a share in it, all is thine, thou have
his life and death, as the Apostle says; so on thy part he has thee wholly,
thy Cor. 4.
nature, thy sins, the punishment of thy sins, thy wrath, thy curse, thy
shame; so he would have thee all, thy wit, thy wealth, thy strength, all that
thou art, or have, and can do for him, so thou have Jesus Christ: It is a
total union, My Beloved is mine, and I am his, whole Christ from top to toe is
mine, and all that I am, have or can do, for evermore is his, it is total.

Lastly, it is an inseparable union, it can never be broken. I will make (says
God) an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them,
to do them good, I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me Jeremiah 32. This is a glorious word, but the poor Christian
will say, It Is true, thou will not turn away from me, I know thou will not, but
I shall turn away from thee. I turn every day toward sin and Satan. Why,
says God, I will put my fear in thy heart, tbat thou shall not turn away
from me, we shall be kept together for evermore, and never separated. Thence
Paul triumphantly challenges al enemies in heaven, (or rather in Hell,) to do
their worst to break this knot; Who shall separate us from the love of God in
Christ? shall tribulation, Romans 8.
distress, famine etc? come all that can together, and see if that blessed
union between me and Christ, shall ever be broken or dissolved by all that you
can do.

Now (Beloved) a word, or two of Use. I will wave the other Question, that
happily would be necessary for the further opening of this Doctrine, because I
will not weary you: you see what fullness of joy is, and what this union is:
and by what you have heard already you may easily convince your selves, that
fellowship and union with Jesus Christ, will bring fullness of joy to the
soul. The uses are these briefly.

The first is this, you may hence behold (if the Lord Zachary where Jesus
Christ is called Gods fellow. Awake oh sword against my shepherd, Zach. 13. 7.
against the man my fellow, Christ is one with the Father, he is his fellow,
and every Saint is Christ's fellow: he is anointed with the oil of gladness
above his Psalm. 45. 7.
fellows. Christ is Gods fellow, and we are Christ's fellows. There is a
kind of analogicall proportion (not Geometrical of equality, as they call it)
between Christ and Saints in every thing: run them over in your thoughts, and
take a view of all Christ, what he is in his Person, in his glory, in his
Spirit, in his graces, in his Fathers love, and in the access he has to the
Father, in all these with what more you can imagine in Christ, we are in a
sort fellows with him.

Only with this difference (that you may not stumble) Christ has the
pre-eminence in all things, every Col. 1.
thing in its own order, The Father is above all, and we by him: all comes
from the Father first to Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.
and all we have is by Marriage with Jesus Christ, and we must abide in our
union with Christ, as he does abide with his Father. Moreover between him and
the person of the Father, there is an Essential union, and ours is virtuall by
the power of the Spirit of God; he by his union has all good things without
measure, and we by ours in measure: as it pleases him to distribute. But
excepting these things, Jesus Christ and we are fellows, for so God calls us.

Therefore (Beloved) did but the Lord by his holy Spirit unvaile all your eyes,
and give you but one glance of what the estate of a Saint is, that is united to
Jesus Christ, who in this place would not be a Saint? who would not be a
Christian? who would be a drunkard, a swearer, a persecuter of godliness? who,
I say, would be such a one, that knows the treasure, riches, and happiness of
a Saint in Christ? our ignorance of this makes men refuse Christ, and go on in
sin. For every man naturally bargains (as he apprehends) for his gain, and
never for his loss: that is the reason I say, that we bargain not for Heaven
and for Christ, because we think it is for our loss, and this because God
has not opened our eyes to see the unsearchable riches and treasures that are
in Jesus Christ.

Besides, were the happiness of a Saint rightly understood and seriously
considered, who would be a backslider? you hear what a Saint is, he can go
and say to his soul and his fellow Saints, our fellowship is with the Father,
and with Jesus Christ. Who would relinquish Christ and all in him for some base
lust? O says the Author of the Epist. to the Hebrews, let there not be a Heb.
12. 16.
profane man etc. Esau was a profane man, he had godly parents, and was
religiously educated, yet the Apostle calls him profane, why? because for a
little morsel he sold his birthright; and there is a far greater
disproportion between the riches of Christ, and the base lusts that we hanker
after, then between Esaus inheritance and Jacobs pottage; therefore look to
your selves in these things, you that are ancient Professors, who begin to
backslide apace, and take this as a means to help thee when thou go to get
such a ones favor, to make such a one thy friend, to get such an office, and
the like, wherein thou must yield to sin, and join with sinners in their
wicked designs, see what a bargain thou make: Thou relinquishest Christ
Jesus, and all thy portion in him, to purchase these vain frivolous things.

Another Use I will touch but briefly, this is the reason, why the Lord takes
it so well or ill at our hands poor Saints (that are ready to beg at your
doors,) oppressed and wronged, persecuted, etc? because even they are one with
Jesus Christ. That is the reason why on the other side, he takes it so kindly
that we do any thing for them, that we be tender and careful of the good of
his poor Saints, because it is to me, says Christ: He that bestows a cup of
cold water to one of his little ons in the Mat. 10. 42.
name of a disciple, shall not lose his reward. Why so? he that receives you
receives me, that is the reason; so in Mat. 25. I was hungry and you fed me,
naked and you clothed me, thirsty and you gave me drink: When did we see thee
Mat. 25.
hungry or thirsty or naked? In as much as ye have done it to the least of my
members, ye did it to me.

See on the contrary, he that touches a Saint touches the apple of Gods eye.
And the reason he is so angry is, Zach. 2. 8.
because now the Father, and Jesus Christ, and the poorest Saint, are really
and totally one, each with other; strike at one, strike at all. Therefore I
beseech you make this use of it, be kind to the poor Saints, notwithstanding
their meannesse, outward weaknesses and frailties, though they be poor, base,
and vile, yet they have a glorious head and Husband. Thou think it is an
easy thing to suppress a poor Saint, to overthrow him, and overcome him: and
indeed it were so, but that he has a great party in Heaven, greater then all
the world, therefore there is no enchantment Mr. Wilkinsons Sermon.
against Israel, as you heard from the Lord this morning.

Thirdly, I would give you (in these times when every body speaks of
reformation of Religion, (i.) Take heed you do not make any outward external
thing, the maine pillar and foundation of your Church Fellowship, of your
Christian Communion. As (v. g.) if any should conceive the way to constitute a
Church to be by an external Covenant, a formal confession, baptizing this
way, or that way, (I mean by dipping, or sprinkling) or by conjunction of
opinion in some controverted point: (I do not at this time condemn or commend
any of these things for the matter of them, but only this I drive at) if you
build your Christian fellowship and communion upon any one of these things, or
such like, making them the maine pillar of Christian communion; it will be more
like a carnal faction, then a spiritual communion.

Take therefore the Apostles rule in the text, we have fellowship with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. And what follows? these things we write,
tbat you may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. That is the maine and principal ground of
all Church fellowship, of Christian fellowship, of the Saints one with another.
Therefore when I have communion with a Saint, I must not look so much whether
he be of such an opinion, or whether he have taken the Covenant, or have been
baptized I speak not this as if my opinion were for rebaptization or against
the baptizing of the infants of believers, the contrary appears by my
practice: but only, that such difference of opinion should not hinder their
mutual receiving each other to fellowship and communion, who are in fellowship
with God and Jesus Christ.
once or twice or ten times, but see if he have fellowship with the Father, and
with Jesus Christ; if he has, he is one of the body, and a fellow-member, and
we must fall in immediately with him; though withal, I am to use all means,
in love and meekness, to recall him from his error according to the rules of
Scripture.

But you will say, how shall it be known that he is such a one?

I will name but two general rules, the best, and the clearest that I know in
the whole Scriptures to satisfy you in that.

In the first place consult with that in Coloss. 2. 19. not holding the head,
says the Apostle. That is, when a man sees a Christian, for matter of
doctrine, judgment or opinion, to hold the head Jesus Christ to be the Son
of God, and justification by him, sanctification from him, according to the
Scriptures etc. though in external things, it may be he does not as yet see
this or that Government so clear in the word, or any other circumstantiall
truth controverted amongst the Saints, (these and such like things cut him not
off from the head) these things do not un-Saint him, Romans 14. And therefore
woe be to thee if thou reject him.

The second rule is laid down in the words following my text; if ye walk in
the light, says the Apostle you have fellowship: (q. d.) Brethren I would have
you to have fellowship with us: But if we walk in darkness we lie, and do
not the truth: but if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another. What is this light? It is holiness of life and
conversation. If a man does righteousness he is borne of God, 1 John 3. as if
he had said, this is the rule that I go by, he that walks with God, calls on
his name, teaches his family, hates that which is evil, takes pains in that
which is good, etc. him I account to be a man that is borne of God, he walks
in the light, with whom I ought to have fellowship and communion.

Beloved, I had many more Uses, as to examine our selves by what I have said,
whether we have commumunion, and fellowship with Jesus Christ: whether the
Image of Christ be on us: have we his graces? are we like Christ? remember
that word Romans 8. 9. which will sound terrible in thine ears when thou come
to dye, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his: have thou
the Spirit of Christ? did Christ walk, and talk, and plot, and design
against the people of God as thou do? Remember if thou be one with Christ,
thou have the same Image, the same Spirit, the same Grace, the same life, in a
word, thou do not Gal. 2. 20.
live but Jesus Christ lives in thee.

This may comfort us also, (if we apprehend it spiritually) if we be poor,
we are married to one that is rich; if full of wants, there is a fullness in
Christ to supply us; if tempted by Satan, in him we are more then Conquerors,
we shall tread Satan under feet; if trampled on Romans 16. 20.
by the world, yet we are Kings and Queens. The same anointing that is
powered on him the head, runs down to the skirts of his garments.

And it should be an incitement to all of us who profess our selves believers,
to walk in the light, to walk as those that are married to Christ: Does it
become a Son of God, a member of Christ, to be proud, to be froward, to
sharke, to cheat to be a worldling, as many professors in this adulterous
generation are? walk therefore I pray as children of the light. And so I have
done.

But it may be you will say, What is this to Oxford, Farringdon, or Worcester,
the business of the day? Truly Beloved, Jesus Christ is good for all things,
at all times. And as touching the mercy of God in these things to us and the
Kingdom, the Lord has been pleased to teach you this morning more largely and
fully then I am able to do, the Lord sanctify it to you and me: a few words
indeed I had concerning that subject, but they are for the most part, spoken to
you already by our Reverend Brother, therefore I shall but touch upon them.

First, it is a word of information to us all (I am sure I have it from the
Lord, and his word) that we learn from our mercies, (Oxford especially) that
every proud and high thing that exalts it self against Christ and his people,
God will throw down.

I my self was a spectator, an eyewitness, when the Lord delivered that
City, that University, into the hands of our Army: and being there I did study
and strive according to the small portion of grace I had received, to meditate
what I might learn for Gods glory and the good of my soul from that
business; and amongst all the mean thoughts I had, this came in with the
greatest glory into my soul, that beholding that University that I had
formerly known and heard much of lately, I was filled with admiration, to see
how all the pride of that place was brought down in one day. Thought I surely
the design of God in these days, is to bring down one proud thing after
another, that exalts it self against Christ. It was a gallant University; what
a strong impregnable Garrison was it also? There was all the Military art of
the Kingdom, there was the Law, learning, policy, and wit of the Kingdom, and
some conceive the wealth of the Kingdom too had for a long while been there
also, there was line upon line, and Bulwark upon Bulwark, and fence upon
fence; and it was the very Center of all the enemies of God; when they had been
routed abroad, or frighted at home, then presently away to Oxford as to a sure
refuge: yet Oxford though it were never so rich, so learned, so fortified, so
filled with Princes, Nobles, finest witted scholars, and best skilled
soldiers, most experienced Politicians, though it was the very Queen of
England, yet Oxford it must stoop down and fall.

And in these times for my part I apprehend nothing (with more clearenesse and
evidence) of Gods meaning in all his work in these days, then that it is his
glorious design to bring down every high look, and every Oh thou opposer of
God and godliness lay this to heart.
proud thing that exalts it self against Christ. These are the last times,
read Esa. 2. you shall see it at large: and we have seen by experience also
what course God has taken with many. You know four or five years ago, off
goes the head of one great man, then a little afterward some others arose, and
down they go also. And now at Oxford, they had as I said, art, wit, and
strength, policy, nobility, wealth, and what not but Grace? (which were the
very words of some of them,) and where are they? Take it for a truth of God, if
any
start up yet in their room, if any grove grow up to eclipse Gods glory, or
shadow his house, if any thing or person will exalt it self against Christ, I
am confident, it is Gods purpose and glorious design to cut them off, God will
bring them down to the dust.

Learn therefore to walk humbly before the Lord, and do not strive any
longer against the stream; and though the Lord have given you such power and
peace that you have no enemies, yet take heed least any of you step up in their
stead; for be assured, be you never so great, (as God is in Heaven, and we are
on earth,) that man, family, faction, or crew, that will go about to oppose
God or his people, God will throw them down: lie low therefore on the ground,
and give glory to Jesus Christ.

I had also a word of exhortation, but my Brother has prevented me, and spoke
most of my thoughts concerning that already, only if you will give me leave to
mind you, I desire you to take heed of provoking that God, who has done all
this for you. I will instance in two or three things.

First, I am afraid some of you make too much have to be rich, now trading,
Customers, Offices etc. come in; Pro. 28. 20.
Oh pause a while and consider what God has done, and whence he has raised
you, and make a spiritual improvement of that first.

Secondly, oh that you would be exhorted now to hear the cause of the poor,
and the widow, oh that you would be like Job who made the widows heart to
sing: O he is a blessed Magistrate, a blessed Parliament Man, Job. 19. 13.
a Prince, a King, that can say so, I made the poor widows heart to sing, I
did take their Petitions, and would have them read, and did see something done
in the Committees before I gave over, and not trifle out the time; when peoples
livelyhoods and lives were at the state, I have not been of those whose
profession is to give only fair words, and yet do nothing for their relief;
I desire with humility that you would take that, as an admonition from the Lord.

And then take heed of insisting too much upon forms. Truly I am not of their
opinion that would sublimate Religion into airy notions and Chimaraes out of
all form, but yet take heed that you insist not too much: (i.) so as to lose
the power of godliness while you pursue the form. The Saints in England
doubtless heretofore, though they had less beauty by reason of the want of
Discipline and government then other Churches beyond sea, yet they had (as you
were not long since sweetly taught in this place) more fruitfulnes See Mr. Tho.
Goodwins Sermon before the House of Com. Feb. 25. 1645.
and power, then most reformed Churches a broad: and it is much to be feared,
if we our selves now, were compared with our selves heretofore, we should be
found to have more power, holiness, truth, love and diligence in Gods service
heretofore then now we have. Therefore take heed that out of zeal to set up a
form of Government etc. you do not forgo and forget the power of godliness
the while.

Another thing I would take the boldness to mind you of, (now we are in
peace,) is, to hasten to the help of our Brethren: you know what Moses said to
the Number. 32.
two Tribes, when they stayed on the further side of Jordan, you have gotten
fine seats for your selves, and you will build houses and sheepfolds for your
cattle etc. you will let your brethren go over to fight, while you sit here;
this was the manner (says he) of your Fathers to provoke the Lord, but if you
do so be sure your sin ver. 33.
will find you out. So I say unto you, if you will now go and build houses,
and settle your selves in the world etc. and will not send over for the
effectual relief of Ireland, though you lie never so close and safe, your sin
will find you out, this sin will hunt you as a hound; (so the allusion is) it
will lie at the door as a Mastiffe at the threshold. Therefore as the Lord
has begun to Genesis 4.
smile upon us, and to cause the Sun to shine upon England (upon a great part
of it at least) oh forget not poor bleeding Ireland.

And what if you should spend one single thought upon poor contemptible Wales?
it is little indeed, and as little respected, yet time was the enemy made no
small use and advantage of it, how inconsiderable soever we deem it; oh let
not poor Wales continue sighing famishing, mourning and bleeding, while you
have your days of Feasting, rejoicing, Thanksgiving and praising God. Oh how
loath I am to mention it to you? is it not a sad case that in thirteen
Counties there should not be above God grant there be more I Know not so many.
thirteen conscientious Ministers who in these times expressed themselves
firmly and constantly faithful to the Parliament, and formerly preached
profitably in the Welsh Language The general practice of Godly ministers in
England.
twice every Lords Day? Yet (praised be our God) some few there be (though I my
self am unworthy to be reckoned amongst them) who are ready and willing to
spend and be spent for the glory of God, and the good of their country: oh
that you would allow them some small competency of maintenance for their
encouragement; be it, if you please, but mere food and raiment. That little
estate they had is wasted for their sincere affection to your service, and
therefore (may I crave leave to speak it) as it would be a work of piety in
you to send them forth to preach, so also a work of equity, you should relieve
them and provide for them.

But last of all, let that be now my exhortation, which is my constant petition
both publicly and privately to the Lord, for the Honorable Members of both
Houses of Parliament, Let faith and patience have their perfect work in you.
That is, you may perhaps see new troubles arise, Satan may rage yet more then
ever, (the last times will surely be the worst) be not weary of well doing,
let not your hands or hearts fall by any discouragement you may meet withal;
you have had a world of experience, how God has helped you and confounded your
enemies, how often has he brought them to ruin even by their own designs?
beware therefore of unbeleife, if you come into any new straites, never faulter
any more, but trust perfectly in that God that has hitherto never failed you,
who has wrought many a glorious salvation and deliverance for you, (which we
here behold and celebrate this day) to whom be praise and glory evermore
through Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

