PRAYERS PREVALENCIE FOR ISREAL'S SAFETY. Declared in A SERMON Preached in Saint
Margarets Westminster, before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at the late
solemn Fast, June 28. 1643.

By THOMAS CARTER, Minister of Dynton in Buckingham-shire.

Published by order of that House.



LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, and are to be sold by John Bellamie and
Ralph Smith, at the sign of the three golden Lions in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange. 1643.

Die Mercurii 28. Junii, 1643.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons, that Sir Oliver Luke do from
this House return thanks to Mr. Palmer, and Mr. Hill to Mr. Carter, for the
great pains they took in the Sermons they this day Preached at the entreaty
of the House of Commons at St. Margarets, in the City of Westminster, (being a
day of Public humiliation) and that they desire them to Print their Sermons.
And it is Ordered that no man presume to Print the said Sermons, or either of
them, but whom the said Mr. Palmer and Mr. Carter shall Authorize under their
hands in writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint John Bellamie and Ralph Smith to Print my Sermon. THO. CARTER.

Errata.
PAge 3 Line 38, for sins, read signs. p. 8 l. 37. for jude r. judge. p. 12.
l. 26. for mediate r. immediate, p. 18. l. 15. for First r. Fist, p. 20 l. 1^.
dele (how), p. 21. l ^^ for J^ab r. Job, p. 22. l. 5 for your petitioner, r.
the petitioners* p. 32. l. 5. for is r. ^^ p. 18. l. 25. in Margin, defect. 5.
Doctr.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IN the fathomlesse depths of infinite goodness and wisdom, a design is laid
through the clear discoveries of Gods perfections and glory, to complete and
accomplish his servants happpinesse. There is not any thing that befalls them in
this valley of tears, but by his contrivance, it brings with it a secret
influence, and activity, to raise them to the mount of joy. I need not tell you
how near the dust Gods people of this Kingdom were, they yet retain the
dints of contempt and scorn: but has not a strong reflection of Gods power
been cast upon us, from that very cloud under which we were? are there not
deliverances created for us, even beyond our hopes? has not the Lord raised
you up (most Noble Senators) as once he did that Pillar to the Israelites to be
a light to us, and darkness to our Exodus 14. 20.
enemies? Indeed at present we are in the midst of a red Sea, the whole face of
our Kingdom's besmeared with blood. But is not God able to make of these
threatening and discolored waves, walls of defense and safety? has he not a
Canaan reserved for England also? he is certainly full of bowels toward his,
and the true Israelites with us cannot want strength to draw them forth: But
God will not have his mercies abortive; when the appointed time of deliverance
comes, even in the Mount he Ezekiel. 36, 37.
will be seen, yet will he be sought unto for this: In his servants hearts he
has an armory of faithful prayers, these he appoints to prepare his way
before him; and till he finds himself encountered with the complete strength
of his own Spirit, he Genesis 32. 24. 2^.
will not be conquered. This is that means of means, the life and vigor of
all the rest that a Nation has of safety; of whose prevalencie (most religious
Statists) my imperfect meditations (with which at your command I lately
presented your ear, and now your eye) be pleased to honor by your Patronage,
and crown by your practice. Be ye wrastlers with the God of Heaven, and ye
shall be sure to foil your enemies on earth: It is the humble motion of him,
who is

Your unworthy servant and faithful Auxiliary at the Throne of grace, THO.
CARTER.

PRAYERS PREVALENCIE FOR ISREAL'S SAFETY.
Exodus 32. 9, 10. And the Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and
behold, it is a stiff-necked people.

Now let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may
consume them: and I will make of thee a mighty Nation.


AFter a narration of Isreal's sin in the six first Verses of the Chapter we
find: First, the Lords complaint of them unto Moses. 1 For their wickedness
in general, v. 7. 2 For their idolatry, 1. in making an Idol, 2. in
worshipping it, 3. in ascribing their deliverance unto it, verse 8.

Secondly, we have in my text a fearful commination of their utter ruin.
Wherein observe these three general parts.

1. The preface prefixed, And the Lord said unto Moses. 2. The ground of the
threatening, ( I have seen this people, and behold, it is a stiff-necked
people.) Wherein observe, 1. The compellation, ( this people,) 2. The Lords
manner of taking cognizance of their sin.

First, his view, ( I have seen this people:) Secondly, his censure, ( it is a
stiff-necked people:)

Thirdly, the sin whereof he finds them guilty, namely obstinacy,
metaphorically expressed ( it is a stiffenecked people.

Thirdly, the form of the threatening. Now therefore let me, etc.

1. The judgment denounced, namely the utter ruin of that Nation: first, the
cause, the Lords wrath: secondly, the effect, the Nation consumed.

2. The exception of Moses out of the threatening implied, with a gracious
promise expressed; the Lord will not only save Moses from perishing in the
common calamity, but he will make of him a mighty Nation.

3. An intimation of the only remedy to stay the hand of God from destroying
this stiff-necked Nation, namely, Moses his mediation, Let me alone that my
wrath may wax hot, etc.

1. The preface tells us that the Lord had no sooner entertained a purpose to
destroy this Nation, but he presently acquaints his servant Moses with it;
which being compared with his dealing with others of his servants* in like
case, affords us this instruction.

Indeed the wicked are suddenly destroyed, Pro. 29. 1.
and brought to a fearful end: Psalm. 33. 18
for either, first, the judgment falls suddenly upon them, like a net upon a
bird, Hos. 7. 12.
without any precedent notification given: or secondly, without any foregoing
expectation of it; all warnings notwithstanding, they securely go on, Pro. 22.
3.
and are cheerful, like Agag, thinking the bitterness of death is past, when
presently hewn in pieces: 1 Samuel 13. 3
or thirdly, without any precedent preparation for it, like those foolish
Virgins in the Gospel, though they expected the Bridegrooms coming, yet when
he came, were unprepared, and their Oyle's to seek. Mat. 25. 18
So that either through want of precedent notification, or expectation, or
preparation, the judgment is either sudden in it self, or at least sudden to
them.

But for the Lords own servants he uses to acquaint them with the approaching
judgment before it comes, and that not only his servants the Prophets, that
are near him, (as he never hides any such secret from them) Amos 3. 7. 1 Samuel
3. 11.
But all his servants in ordinary, as Lot, Abraham, Noah, and others.

The Lord does not now ordinarily discover future judgments by divine
revelation, as of old.

Neither only by their foregoing natural causes.

For so every intelligent man and discreet Statist, by an eye of reason, may
foresee the ruin of a Nation, like a storm in the clouds, by such evils as in
their intrinsecall nature, are destructive to a State, and brings its ruin by
way of natural causation: every effect being virtually in its proper cause
before the actual production of it: as 1. Divisions in a Church or State, like
the oppositions of the Planets, are of dangerous consequence, and make way for
civil wars, as the Jesuiticall faction well know, which makes them so
industrious in sowing the seeds of dissension in Church, State, Parliament,
City, and in all parts of the Kingdom, expecting that a Kingdom or City divided
will not long stand. Mat. 12. 25 Genesis 18. 17. Heb. 11. 7.


2. General misapprehension and misconceits of the Fathers of a Country, when
men look upon them as destroyers, who are the maintainers and upholders of it;
it is a dangerous symptom when a disease so seazeth upon the brain, that the
sick man looks upon his Father and Brethren, as enemies coming to kill him,
whose only desire and care is to recover and save him.

3. When through the covetousness and ambition of some, and partiality of
others, things are so carried in a Church or State, that worth is neglected,
and worthless men advanced: Ec. 10. 6. 7.
when the wise Counselor and valorous Captain (the strength and stay of a
Kingdom) are taken away, or taken off, and children set to rule over men: Isa.
3. 1, 2. 3, 4. and 19. 11.
when all creatures are out of their proper place, and in a motion contrary to
their natural principles, this must needs be a fearful sign of approaching
ruin.

4. Licentiousness, sensuality and luxury take away the heart, Hos. 4. 11.
effeminate men's spirits, infatuate a people, and make them neglective of their
own private, and of the public good; and a body thus filled with
excrementitious humors, cannot be far from some dangerous sickness.

A Nations ruin, by these and the like evils, is discernible by reason, as
procuring it by natural causation.

But the Lord foresheweth the ruin of a Nation to his own people in speculo
verbi, and by an eye of faith it is discernible by parallel cases, and upon
spiritual grounds in the Word of God.

As first, he shows the casting out of a Nation, by its fulfilling the
measure of sins and provocations of divine Majesty; Genesis 15. 15.
when the sins of it are great in themselves, great in Gods account by
manifold aggravations universally spread over all sorts of people, men hardened
also under the means of grace: by heaps of wrath ( n) Romans 2. 5. Dan. 5. 5.
so laid up, the Lord foreshowes a day of wrath at hand.

Secondly, by prodigious sins, mira, if not miracula, God with his own hand
(as it were) writing the ruin of a Nation, as he did Belshazzars, on the walls
of the great house of the world, which though the wise men of Babylon by all
their Art could not understand; yet the Lords Daniels can read and interpret
them, by help of the Word, as letters written in unknown Characters, cannot
be understood without a rule from the Writer.

I might instance in other particulars, as the Lords making way for his
judgments, by taking away of the righteous, or withholding their prayers. But
of this anon.

Now the Lord gives such clear notice, that howsoever blind Balaams will not
see the sword that is before them, yet as Solomon says, the prudent Christian
foreseeth it: Prove. 22. 3.
and that not only when it is so near, that obvious to sense, or discernible
by reason in the natural cause of it: but while it is afar off, (as St.
Peter speaks) 2 Pet. 1. 9. Zeph. 2. 1.
in fieri, not in esse, in the womb of Gods threatening before it comes forth,
and only discernible by an eye of faith.

And indeed though the judgment be future, and at present invisible, as being
not yet existent, yet by faith it is made as evident, and certain to the
faithful, as if this tragedy was now acting before their eyes, as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 11. 9.
Noah by giving credence to divine warning, 120. years before the stood came,
saw the windows of Heaven opened, the fountains of the deep broken up, the
rain falling, the waters rising, all crying, Help, help, we perish, we
sink, we die.

The reasons why the Lord is pleased to discover his purpose, may be these.

the off-scowring of all things, 2 Cor. 4. 13
yet they are privy counselors to the great King, and he reveals arcana
imperii, his secrets to them. Psalm. 25. 14


wrath to come, as Eliah did Ahab, saying, there is abundance of rain
coming, and therefore up to thy Chariot and fly for shelter. 2 King. 18. 4






Secondly, Comfort and encourage them.

Thirdly, Teach all to make a right use of these warnings.

But the time hastens me to a second observation, namely the Lords manner of
taking notice of their sins, in these two particulars mentioned. First, his
view, I have seen this people, contemplatus sum or consideravi, as Vatab.
renders it, or notum est coram me, as the Chald. Paraph. has it, i. e. he so
considered of them that he had a clear sight and full knowledge of them.
Secondly, his censure, it is a stiffenecked people.

Howsoever the Lord be an infinite omniscient essence above time, no prius and
posterius with him, although he does not draw forth one thing by and after
another, as man does by discursive reason, but sees all things unico simplici
intuitu, by one simple intuitive Act, yet is the Lord pleased to use this
Anthropopathie, to hold out unto us this golden rule to be observed in judging
either of persons or of things, opinions or practices, whether those be true,
or these good, which I shall propose to you as my second Doctrine.

In judging we ought first to enquire and see, and then accordingly determine.

The like rule we have laid down by Saint Paul, Try all things, find out the
truth, and accordingly determine for that which is good, and against that which
is evil: 1 These. 5. 21. 22.
And excellently by our Savior in the seventh of John. The Pharisees being
much offended at his healing the man upon the Sabbath ( Joh. 5. 8.) he having
Joh. 7. ^4
in the 21, 22, and 23. verses of this chapter justified his Act, and strongly
proved, that howsoever it might look like a breach of the Sabbath, and was by
the Jewish Prelates condemned as a breach of it, that yet indeed it was not, at
last he adds this general admonition, yet with reference to his own
particular, that they should not judge of his act by the show and face of it,
and that they should not look at his meannesse that stood for it, nor the
Pharisees greatness that condemned it, but examine it by the rule, Judge not
according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

First, For the negative part of the rule, (...), the word signifies the face
or countenance of a thing, and his direction is negative for that, not
according to appearance.

Secondly, For the affirmative, judge righteous judgment, (...), the word
(...) here translated righteous signifies according to Arist. such an exact
division of a thing that each part has neither more nor less then its true
proportion: so that to judge righteous judgment is to give each thing its true
estimate: Arist. Eth. l. 5. c. 7.
and this is to judge according to truth, as Saint Paul, Romans 2. 2.
and what is right, as our Savior speakss. Luke 12. 57


Judgment is the determination that the understanding by discourse makes of a
thing.

Now indeed rash, usurped or unjust judgment is condemned as sinful, 1 John
4. 1. 1 These. 5. 21. 1 Cor. 10. 15.
but judgment it self allowed as lawful, yea commanded as necessary; and not
only to enquire and examine (this even the Papists allow to every man) but
also to determine: and that not only for public persons, Magistrates in the
State, Ministers in the Church, but even for private persons also: indeed the
judgment of supreme authority belongs to God, and the judgment of B. Daven.
in praelect. de Iud. controv.
ministerial and subordinate power to public persons; but the judgment of
practical discretion belongs unto every private Christian: and that not only
concerning persons, but things also: always for the manner observing this
rule, first to enquire and see, and then to determine.

First, in judging of persons, and actions in reference to persons.

Rumors and probabilities are ground sufficient for a cautelous jealousy, our
Savior would not trust the Jews, because he knew what was in them, Joh. 2.
24, 25.
though we cannot look into the heart, and see what particular projects and
designs are there, as Christ did, yet we know there is corruption enough to
warrant a cautelous jealousy where there is an appearance of evil: and yet we
must not peremptorily determine but upon clear grounds, of pregnant testimony,
or strong presumptions: this the Lord teaches by his own example, he would
not proceed against the Sodomites upon the cry that came up; but he would
first go down and see: Genesis 18. 21. Deuteronomy. 13. 14.
and we have it given in precept in the 13. of Deuter. for public
judicature, and I conceive it holds as well in private censure, that we
diligently enquire before we determine.

Now because man cannot see as God does, for he looks directly on the heart, 1 Samuel 16. 7
and so judges of it; Jer. 17. 10
but man cannot, therefore he is to find out the heart by words and actions: as
the naturalists judge of the form of a thing by its qualities and operations;
so we of the habit of the heart, by its constant and natural productions, as
of a tree by its fruit. Mat. 7. 20.


The Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 5. 24. some men's sins are open beforehand and
go before unto judgment, and some men's follow after: 1 Timothy 5. 24.
some conjecture, that at the last Judgment such as are eminently good, or
notoriously bad, shall not come into the judgment of disquisition or
examination, but only come under sentence, namely Aq. sup. q. 89.
the judgment of retribution: and the like course may we observe in censuring,
as for such as are eminently good, or notoriously bad, the best of the good,
and the worst of the bad, there needs no great inquiry concerning them, before
we censure, but for the two middle sorts, the best of the bad, and the worst of
the good, here it is hard to discern between the precious and the vile; Jer.
15. 19
and therefore of such we are diligently to enquire before we censure.

As some persons, like the Moon at the change, seem to have less light and
worth in them then indeed they have, little in the eye of the world, much in
the eye of heaven. So others seem better then they are, like blazing Stars,
that make a great show, and look as gloriously as any stars in the heavens,
and yet no stars, but stinking meteors. Also there are aggravating and
extenuating circumstances, making the good or evil, more or less in Gods
account: and therefore if we would make a true estimate of men and their
actions, we must diligently enquire before we censure.

In judging of things we ought to judge secundum quod sunt, but in judging of
persons, or actions in reference to persons, it is not always so: indeed in re
comperta, in a case that is evident, it is equally an abomination to the Lord,
to justify the wicked person, or action, as to condemn the just. But in re
dubia it is otherwise, for here ( c) Prove. 17. 15. Aq. 2. 2. q. 60.
the rule holds, dubia in meliorem partem sunt interpretanda, charity to the
person should sway the judgment, though not absolutely to determine, yet to
think him good whom we do not know to be bad. 1 Cor. 13. 7.




First, We must not judge according to appearances.

Now appearances are 1. personal 2. real.

First, A personal appearance is that estimate which the quality of the
persons opposing or maintaining an opinion or practice, has brought upon it:
We are not to judge what kind of creatures the Moon and Stars are by that
luster and splendour that the Sun has cast upon them, for then we shall judge
them far more glorious creatures then they are. As we are not presently to
embrace and cry up an opinion or practice, because good men stand for it, and
bad against it, as if all were good which Nero persecutes: so neither are we to
cry down a tenet or practice, because good men are against it, and bad men for
it.

Indeed this is enough to raise a suspicion upon an opinion or practice, and to
cause a more strict scrutiny and enquiry into it, yet this must not sway our
judgment, but without al regard of the persons for, or against, indifferently
weigh the action: judge not according to personal appearances.

Secondly, there is a real appearance, which is the superficies, the suprema
facies, or countenance of a thing: Now error is sometimes cried up in truths
apparel, and vice in virtues color, as Jacob was blessed in Esaus garment: Genesis
27. 27.
and sometimes truth is cried down under an appearance of error, and if not
virtue, yet a thing in its nature indifferent under an appearance of evil, as
good Jehosaphat was made at, and endangered in wicked Ahabs apparel. 2 Chro.
18.


Now indeed a thing indifferent both in its nature and use, though not
intrinsecally evil; yet because it looks like a sin, and carries the face
of evil, it ought to be declined, Abstain from all appearance of evil. 1
These. 5. 22.


It is also true, that things in their nature indifferent, yet carrying an
appearance of evil, in respect of scandal, should not by authority be
imposed, and so be made necessary in their use.

But in as much as the outward face and appearance is not always suitable to
the intrinsecall nature of things, we are not to be swayed in our judgments by
that.

But setting all appearances personal and real aside, we are to search into
the nature of things, and to examine them by the rule, that so we may give each
thing its true estimate, and judge righteous judgment.

Now that we may rightly determine, three things are required, 1. A right rule
to jude by, 2. A right qualification of the persons judging, 3. A right
application of things to the rule.

The rule to try all opinions and practices by, is the Word of God. There are
indeed diverse subordinate rules: as*

1. The Laws and legal Commandments of authority; personal commandments
they impose on us, as they are men, legal as Magistrates; 1 Per. 2. 13. Acts
5. 29.
and by these all persons that are under them, are to be regulated in their
practice, so far as they may without disobeying God in his Word.

2. The example of Gods people and custom of the Church of God, is in some
cases a rule to direct us, and has vim legis, as Aquin. speaks: B. Andr. 1
Cor. 11. 16.
and therefore there being a controversy at Corinth whether women should be
uncovered, or men covered in the Congregation, the Apostle seems to refer
them to the Churches custom, as a rule in things of so low a nature, and not
determined in the Word, and by it to conclude and determine for, or against a
thing accordingly.

A third rule is each man's conscience, and to this the Apostle refers 1 Cor.
11. 13.
the Corinthians, Judge in your selves what is right: Now conscience is so
far a rule, that if we do any thing against it, we sin: and yet if we be
guided by conscience, and that erres, and leads us from the rule of the Word,
we sin too; an erring conscience cannot excuse a toto, though it does a
tanto, though it does extenuate, yet not annihilate a sin. And here we may
take notice of a twofold mistake amongst men. Sometimes a groundless fancy
is taken for conscience, and sometimes the bent of the heart and will: men
supposing conscience to be for, or against a thing, when indeed it is either a
mere fancy, without ground either of Scripture or reason: or at least the
heart and will, by some engagements, is bent and settled that way.

Now all these are but secondary rules, and are to be regulated by the Word,
the Word of God is the primarie rule whereby as all opinions and practices are
to be tried, in as much as the truth of those, and goodness of these consists
in conformity thereunto: so also all those secondary rules are to be regulated
and tried by it, as all weights and measures by the Kings Standard, they being
no further rules to us then they are agreeable thereunto: therefore the Prophet
Isaiah refers all to this rule, to the law, to the testimony, Isa. 8. 20.
no light unless according to this rule, this is the balance of the
Sanctuary, the touchstone to try all rules, all opinions and practices by.

2. For the qualification of the persons judging, they must be transformed and
renewed in the spirit of their minds, their understandings enlightened, Romans 12.
2.
and their hearts sanctified, or else they can never try and determine what is
that good and acceptable will of the Lord. They 1 Cor. 10. 15. 1 Cor. 2. 15.
must have gracious and spiritual hearts, as well as clear understandings, as
the Apostle shows.

And indeed every godly enlightened Christian, though not of such intellectual
strength, as to be able to judge of all theological truths, yet is of such
understanding, that through the help of Gods Spirit, he is able to judge of
those fundamental divine truths, which are of absolute necessity by an actual
explicit faith to be believed unto salvation.

If the eye be dim, dusty, or distempered, it makes not a true report of
things to the understanding; so if the person judging be not rightly disposed,
either through darkness in the understanding, or corruption in the heart, he
cannot judge righteous judgment.

There are two things that hinder right judging, prejudice and passion.

1. Prejudice: the eye must be free from colors, the palate must be insipide:
Intus existens prohibet alienum: if the eye be inflamed, it makes the whitest
thing seem red, and if the palate be bitter, it makes the sweetest thing taste
so; if a man be prepossest with an opinion, he comes like a Jury-man resolved
upon his verdict, before he hears the cause.

The second thing is Passion: troubled water never represents the true image of
a thing; facile credimus quod volumus, vel quod timemus, the heart has so
great an influence upon the understanding, that we are apt to believe what we
desire, or what we fear; and therefore it is said that a gift blinds the eyes
of the wise, a gift draws the Exodus 23. 8.
heart to the giver, and affection works so upon the understanding, that it
puts out the very eye of judgment, and makes even a wise man to think he sees
that, which indeed he does not.

Now therefore as when a man would exactly view a thing, he wipes his eyes that
no dust or water may hinder sight, so should it be our care to put away all
passion, and prejudice, that we may judge rightly.

Thirdly, there is required a right application of the thing to the rule.

1. We must with care and study examine the opinion or practice in question:
examine it as Joseph did his brethren, very strictly, concerning its father
that begot it, its brethren and associates, Genesis 42. verse. 7 9, 10, 11.
whence it came; and what the end of its coming, if not to prejudice the
State? turn it, and look upon it every way, in its causes, nature,
concomitants, effects, and consequences, yet warily distinguishing between
proper and accidental effects.

2. That with much humility and self-denial, we seek to the only wise God,
that he would present his truth, and make it clearly Prove. 20. 27.
shine before us, that he would heal our understandings that we may see it;
and by his Spirit guide our thoughts, and so lead us Joh. 16. 13.
into all truth.

Tares among the Wheat, sown by that envious man, like the Frogs of Egypt,
creeping into Matthew. 13. 25.
every house, surely it is because men judge according to appearance; this act
looks like idolatry; this form of government looks like the Antichristian;
this opinion, or that way, such and such holy men are for: thus whiles they
judge according to personal, or real appearances, they judge not righteous
judgment.

2. It discovers the cause whence it comes to pass that learned and godly men
do often meet and dispute, yet cannot agree upon a right determination, they
have light, and no doubt look through the mist of appearances, into the very
nature of things; yet perhaps there may be passion or prejudice to sway: or
else they may be too full of self, selfe-ends, looking at the credit of
victory, rather then the beating out of truth: or perhaps self-conceit and
selfedependance, Prove. 3. 5.
leaning too much to their own understanding: and then no wonder if they judge
not righteous judgment.

3. It discovers the reason why we have so many misconceits, and evil censures
of our Worthies in Parliament, and in our Armies, men shooting the arrows of
harsh censures, out of the Bow of a proud heart, even against these Stars.
Surely for the most part, the reason is, because they censure before they see,
and speak Jude v. 10.
evil of what they do not understand.

So I come to the third point, the compellation, ( this people.) The Lord was
wont to look upon Israel as his own, as Exodus 3. Exodus 3. 7. Exodus 7. 16.
I have seen the affliction of my people, and Exodus 7. Let my people go: but
now their idolatry has caused a variation of title, now he will not own them,
but looks upon them as strangers, populus meus is now become populus iste.
Whence we may infer,

That Idolatry dissolves a Church, unchurches a people, and breaks that bond
of relation between God and them.

For the clearing of this proposition, I shall endeavor to show two things.

1. What it is that constitutes a visible Church. 2. How, and in what respect
Idolatry dissolves it.


As the true mystical union of the faithful with Christ, and among
themselves, is the form that gives being to the invisible Church: so an
external union by profession (not publikly contradicted by their own opinions
and practices, as in the Papacy) gives being to the visible Church; as may be
collected from Mat. 16. 18. Matthew. 16. 18.


Now this profession of Christ, and of a people to be his followers, must not
only be verbal, but real: and consists in the setting up of his
ordinances, either by a Law, or by general submission unto them, and attending
upon him in the constant use of them: I say in the use of all the ordinances,
habitually, and in the actual use, of such of them, as they are capable of.

I do not mean those inferior ordinances of magistracy, marriage, etc. But
those sacred ordinances of preaching the Word, celebration of the Sacraments
and prayer, which the Lord has ordained and instituted as to be part of his
worship; so also to be the proper, mediate, ordinary means of conveying the
beginnings, and increase of all saving grace unto the souls of men.

Indeed the right manner of using these ordinances, with those helps of
discipline, government, etc. requisite to make the ordinances, the more to put
forth their strength, and so the more efficacious to us; these I grant to be
necessary to the well-being of a visible Church, but the ordinances themselves,
I conceive to be of the very essence, and being of it: no visible Church
without them, and that a true visible Church which has them, as before
specified.

And hence it is that the Prophet calls the whole Nation of the Jews professing
themselves to be his, in the use of his ordinances, the Lords flock, in
reference to those that were truly so, the denomination Jer. 13. 17.
there following the better part: and the Lord calls the people of Israel his
son, and such they were, though not by spiritual, Exodus 4. 22. Hos. 11. 1.
yet by external adoption: and so they are called his spouse, as being married
unto him by an external covenant and stipulation. Ezekiel. 16. 8.


And as by effectual calling, there is a real dedication of the soul to
Christ, and so an actual admission into the invisible Church: so by Baptism,
we are given up to Christ, by an external dedication, and so admitted into the
universal visible Church: and thereby are united to Christ, and one to
another, by mutual covenant, if not actual, and formal, yet vertuall, and
interpretative, and thereby also made members of particular visible Churches,
national and congregationall.

terminatively in stead of God, or relatively, intending or pretending to
worship God by worshipping that creature, this dissolves a Church.

An instance of this we have in my text, this people having set up an Idol to
worship, though they intended not to terminate their worship in the Idol, but
to worship the Lord by it, as verse. 5. yet for this, the Lord speaks of them
as a people cast off, Exodus 32. 5.
and at present would not seem to own them. And howsoever that Nation until
Christ's incarnation had a peculiar privilege, which no other Nation could
challenge, in respect of Gods absolute covenant made with them; and so were not
de facto, at least on Gods part, unchurched, he having not pronounced the
sentence of divorce upon them: yet their sin, both in respect of their
demerit, dishonouring God in so high a degree, and also in respect of the
intrinsecall nature thereof, as having thereby forsaken the Lord, and taken a
strange God: This sin, I say, on their part did by breach of covenant
actually unchurch them, and on Gods part, it did de jure, unchurch them: and de
facto, had unchurched any other Nation whatsoever: And during their continuance
in that sin, they had forfeited their right, lost the comfort and sense of
that relation between God and them: neither could others that were
unacquainted with that absolute covenant look upon them as Gods Church any
longer.

Now as our Savior yields, that the Jews though they had nothing of God in
them, and were none of his spiritually, but Joh. 8. 37. 39. 41.
the children of the Devil: yet living under right ordinances, they were
members of the true visible Church, the sons of Abraham and of God, by
external sonship: so also the Jews confess that if they were children of
fornications, ( i. e.) members of an idolatrous Church, they were broken off
from God, and none of his sons, no not by external adoption.

Indeed superstitious additions to the ordinances, or an erroneous way and
manner of using them, are sins of an high nature, and in a sense the taking of
Gods name in vain, in hindering the ordinances from attaining their true and
proper end, namely the honoring of Christ, and edification of his people, at
least in that degree as otherwise they might.

Yet as I conceive, such superstitious additions and errors in the manner of
using the ordinances, cannot amount to a setting up of an Idol, and so dissolve
a Church. Though the wife be a blasphemer, and guilty of the grossest sins,
yet a wife still, adultery only breaks the marriage bond, so only Idolatry
breaks that bond of relation between God and a people. When rebellious
Israel had played the harlot, and would not repent, but continued obstinate in
her Idolatry, the Lord gave her a bill of divorcement Jer. 3. 8.
and cast her away.

1 John 5. 21
As we have cause to be humbled for the Idolatry that has been committed in
the Land, lest it becomes ours by consent, so for time to come with detestation
to cast it utterly out of the Land. Isa. 30. 22.
Yea to remove all appearances of it, a true Church; like a modest woman,
should not endure a whorish dress: Yea and to remove all occasions of
Idolatry, though not formally so, not gradus in re, yet if it be gradus ad rem,
any occasion, help, or step to it, put it far away, Job. 11. 14.
and so keep the Kingdom far from an evil matter.

In the fourth place be pleased to take notice of the nature of Isreal's sin,
and the judgment denounced against it.

First, their sin is obstinacy, metaphorically set down (they are a
stiffenecked people.)

First, By neck is meant, the heart or will, as Zedekiah stiffened his neck
and hardened his heart, 2 Chro. 36. 1^.
which is all one; as the neck of the Ox bears the yoke, and so draws in
the Teame; so should the heart bear the yoke of Christ, and go on in his
ways.

Secondly, By stiffenesse or hardness of the heart, is meant the settled
strength of the will to go on in sin. And when once it is so set,

First, the heart becomes impenetrable, like Pharaohs, nothing can pierce it,
Exodus 7. 23.
either with fear of sin, before it is committed, or with remorse for sin
when it is committed; but is fearless and senseless. Isa. 28. 15. Zep. 1. 12.


Secondly, the heart becomes also inflexible and unalterable, like the Adamant
stone, Zach. 7. 12.
nothing can work upon it, or bring it into a better form: No washing can
make this Blackmore white. Jer. 13. 23


Indeed, first, there is a natural hardness which we bring with us into the
world, Isa. 48. 8.
a child though it has a tender body, yet it has a hard heart.

Secondly, there are some remainders of this hardness in the hearts of the
best, even of Christ's own disciples, Mar. 6. 52.
but this is partial, and but for a time. But when this sin comes to the
height, and is total and final, the heart fully and unalterably set to do
evil, Eccles. 8. 1.
then it properly denominates a person or people obstinate and stiffenecked.

This hardness is partly habitual voluntarily procured; and that,

First, by long and frequent committing of sin: Neh. 9. 29.
acts increase habits, and indispose the subject to receive contrary habits:
thus the heart becomes like the high way, so hardened by the often passage of
sin, that no seed will enter. Mat. 13. 4.


Secondly, by long standing out under the means of grace: like the Tortoise
which floats so long upon the water, until the Plin.
beams of the Sun have hardened its shell that it cannot sink, so living
long in sin under the Sunshine of the Gospel, the heart becomes so hardened
that it cannot repent. Romans ^5.


This hardness is partly also penal, and judicial: The Lord for their
sins, so many, and so long continued in, and for refusing of grace offered in
the means, in his just judgment gives men up to Satan, and to their own
hearts lusts, letting them loose upon them, and so their hearts become fully
obdurate.

This is the nature of their sin, but in what degree and how generally
spread, we cannot exactly determine.

Secondly, the judgment denounced, is set down in a metaphorical expression,
and implies that the Lord was ready by some severe judgment to consume that
people; his anger grown hot even to fury, like an enraged Lion, ready to tear
to pieces and consume.

From the sin and punishment, the doctrine which arises is this.

That obstinacy in great and grievous sins, under effectual means, is
usually the immediate forerunner of ruin: it is a token that the Lords anger
is hot against a Nation, and ready to break in upon it by some consuming
judgment.

I desire to instance in an example or two. In the 13. of Jeremiah Jer. 13.
by a linen girdle hid at the river Euphrates until, it was rotten, Ver. 10.
the Prophet shows that the Lord would cast the State out of his sight until
it was consumed, verse 10. Now because they presumed of safety, that either
through the wisdom of their State, or at least that by their cunning, each
private person would make some shift for himself, therefore he tells them that
they should be like drunken men, Ver. 12, 13.
sottish, and staggering to and fro in their resolutions, not knowing what to
pitch upon for their safety. And because they presumed of their power, Verse. 14.
he tells them that they were to God but as a pot in the hand of the potter,
soon broken to pieces by him; yea the Lord will cause them one to dash against
another, one to plunder and kill another. And because they expected foreign
help from Egypt, he tells them Verse. 16.
that it should be darkness unto them, and should rather increase then abate
their misery. Now at the ver. 15. 16. he exhorts them to repentance as the most
proper remedy to prevent all, do not proudly despise ( d) Verse. 15. 16
the Lords threatening; but humble your selves, and by repentance give God the
glory of his truth, justice, and power, which by your sins you have
impeached: But ver. 17. Verse. 17.
if ye will not hear this, but proudly despise this admonition, and stand out
under the means of grace; surely though ye be the Lords own people, 2 Chro.
36. 17.
yet ye shall be carried away captives; and he speaks in the presenttence, to
note unto them the certainty of the event, that it was as sure to come to pass
as if done already; the particulars of the judgment is more largely set down,
2 Chro. 36. 17.

First, the sword of the Chaldeans should come and wast their country: and not
only so, but they that escape the Sword shall lose their liberties, which they
did enjoy, and be made captives and slaves to a strange King; and (which was
worst of all) with their liberties they should lose their Religion too, and be
carried into Babylon.

Another example we have in the 11. of Matthew, Capernaum had Matthew. 11. 29.
so many outward and spiritual privileges, that it was said to be lift up to
heaven; for riches and honor, it was the chief city in that Province, and
for spiritual privileges, there was the seat of the Messiah, the place of his
habitation, there he wrought many wonderful miracles, and preached many
excellent Sermons: such effectual means, that might have moved even the stony
hearted Sodomites if they had been alive: yet such was Capernaums obstinacy,
that all these Sermons, mercies, miracles, wrought not upon this City; and
therefore says our Savior, this City that by pride and prosperity is so
lifted up, shall be brought full low, and so (as Histories report) it was
overthrown, of this great City, nothing there remaining but two or three
poor Fishermens Cottages.

full height of sin and its full measure. First, as obstinacy is the greatest
aggravation of sin, and makes our sins great in Gods account, and most
provoking, as carrying with it great unthankfulness to God, contempt of the
means of grace and of God, and of all the good offered to us in the means. So
secondly, it causes a real increase of sin; the heart like a Castle
resisting the Spirits assault upon it in the ordinances, corruption within
gathers strength: the flame of sin if not blown quite out by the Spirit in the
ordinances increases accidentally by the blowing of it back: Now all sin
like poison is of a destructive nature, though it not always actually kills
through want of measure; now when it is grown to the full, then it usually
destroys: So when the Amorites wickedness was full, the Lord cast them out.
Genesis 15. 15: Reas. 2.


A second reason is, because it makes a people incorrigible, and so brings them
into a remediless condition; the Lord for a time at the entreaty of the
dressers did forbear the Jewish state, that barren Figtree, but it was to try
if the digging or dunging of an evangelicall ministry would produce a
reformation, but when it continued unfruitful, it was by Titus and Vespasian
hewn down; and Solomon says Prove. 29. 1
that such as harden their hearts under frequent reproves, under effectual
means, shall be destroyed, broken to pieces as a stone with an hammer (as the
word signifies) because they are in themselves remediless; although indeed
there is a remedy in it self, namely Gods mercy in Christ upon their
repentance, yet none to the obstinate, because he wilfully rejects the
remedy: indeed the prayers of Gods people may keep off a temporal judgment
for a time, (as anon we shall show) but the Lords forbearance will but make way
for a heavier judgment in the end if they continue obstinate.

For application: If obstinacy in sin provokes the wrath of God against a
people, and hastens its ruin, then certainly repentance is the proper remedy
to appease the wrath of God, and save from ruin. But this duty having been
often taught and pressed, in this honorable Auditory, I shall pass over: and
proceed to another observation.

In the first place therefore observe, the exception of Moses out of this
threatening here employed, with this gracious promise here expressed, I will make
of thee a mighty Nation, Efficiam ut ex te gens oriatur magna, vel praeficiam
te genti multo majori, (so the Chaldee Paraphrase has it) that either the Lord
would raise him up a people, out of the loins of Moses, or else give him the
Princedome over some other nation: How ever it be, the Lord here promises not
only to save his person, but to raise his house: and the like promise upon the
like occasion the Lord made unto him, Numb. 14. 12. Whence we infer Numb.
14. 12.
this proposition.

In all the combustions and devastations wherewith the kingdoms of the earth
are shaken, as it is the Lords care to keep his Church on foot, so also to
preserve every of his servants persons, and to recompense their outward losses.

This general falls into three particulars.

The Lord will certainly keep his Church on foot so long as the world endures:
No sooner had the Lord a thought of destroying this people, but he presently
resolves upon another, for the Lord loves the gates of Sion more then all the
dwellings of Jacob, Psalm 87. 2.
he delights more in his Church then in all other societies: and he upholds
the world, keeps off judgments, bestows many blessings for the Churches sake
Isa. 19. 24.
; if his Church should fail, the world would fall to ruin.

Indeed it is not tied to any certaineplace, but is in the world like a ship in
the Sea, driven from place to place, but still in the Sea.

Neither does it at all times continue, the same degree of outward splendours
but like the Moon, not always alike visible, yea sometimes scarce
discernible, yet still in the heavens; and therefore howsoever Satan and his
instruments by cruelty, and subtlety, endeavor the Churches ruin; yet all
the power and policy of hell shall never so far prevail, as utterly to
destroy it; Matthew. 16. 18.
sooner may they pull the Sun out of the Firmament then the Church out of the
world, and when the Lord destroys the rebellious multitude, he will not
utterly destroy the house of Jacob Amos 9. 8.
.

When the Lord destroys a sinful nation, he will preserve his own people, he
will not destroy the righteous with the wicked Genesis 18. 23
: though he tosseth the people and sifteth them, as Wheat in a Sieve, though
he scatters the wicked, and like dust they are blown away by the wind of
his wrath, yet not a grain of his Wheat shall be lost Amos 9. 8, 9.
; he will either keep them out of the furnace, or preserve them in it, he
will either save them from the judgment it self, or from the evil of it,
that it shall not hurt them; one way or other he will be an hiding place Isay
32. 2. Isay 8. 14.
and a Sanctuary to his own servants: as here he promises to save his servant
Moses, so this unchangeable God, with whom is no respect of persons, will
doubtless do the like for them.

Moses lose his principality God will give him another; it shall be the
raising, not the overthrow of his house; if any of Gods servants shall, with
Amaziah, be troubled for loss of their offices, lands, revennues, or money, as
he for his hundred talents 2 Chro. 25. 9.
; the answer of the man of God may satisfy him; Is not the Lord able to give
thee more then this?

First, for losses voluntary; have you willingly laid out much for Christ in
the service of the Church and State? remember how God dealt with Abraham, Heb.
11. 8.
he in obedience to God, and for his sake left his native country, and all he
had; and yet was no loser, for the Lord recompensed his loss, and gave him a
better for it.

Secondly, for losses castigatory; consider how God dealt with Job, he was
plundered by the Chaldeans at one time, and by the Sabeans at another; even
quite undone, yet the Lord raised him up to a greater estate then ever Job 42.
1^
?

suffer with patience the spoiling of their goods, not only upon this ground,
that they shall have in heaven, a better and an enduring substance Heb. 10. 34
. But also even in this life they shall have an hundred fold Mark 10. 30.
; Not only that which is equivalent in spiritual graces, but also even in
outward things; so far as shall be for their spiritual good. They shall be
no losers, as our Savior promises, that in all the troubles that were to come
upon the world, they should not be an hair the worser Luke 21. 12
: The rivers empty themselves into the Sea, and the Sea fills all their
channels again, and so will the Lord return back whatsoever his servants lay
out upon him, nay they shall be gainers, they scatter and are the more
increased Prove. 11. 24.
.

Now we are come to the last point. The Lords intimation of the remedy, let me
alone that, etc. which how howsoever it seems to be a prevention of Moses his
mediation, yet as Augustine Non pracipiendo, sed monendo et exprimendo quid
illum a supplicio revocet. Aug. in Exo. q. 149.
well observes, the words do not carry in them a prohibition of Moses praying,
but an intimation of the remedy that would stay his hand from destroying; and
an indirect encouragement to the use of this remedy of prayer for them,
whetting his desires, and blowing back the flame to make it burn the faster;
and this use Moses made of it; for in the next Verse we find him earnestly
praying and mediating for them; so that from hence this truth naturally arises;

This here the Lord intimates, and the event proved it so; for upon the earnest
prayer of Moses we find, Verse 14. that the Lord changed his mind from the
evil he intended against them Exodus 32. 14.
, and which he had brought upon them, had not Moses stood in the gap Psalm. 106.
23.
.

We read that the prayers of the Church did great things on the behalf of
Peter Act. 12. 5, 6, etc.
, brake open the prison doors, made his chains fall off, made the Iron gate
fly open of its own accord, and so removed all obstacles that might hinder
his enlargement; I confess here were the prayers of many for one, and so the
less wonder: but we may read of Jacob Hos. 12. 4.
that when his brother came against him with an army, he alone by his prayers
and tears so prevailed with God that he obtained a glorious victory, not
conquering the Army, but overcomming his brothers heart, that all ended in Genesis
32. 24. and 33 4.
brotherly complements, and expressions of love in a sweet agreement.

We find one Lot prevailing for a whole City Genesis 19. 20.
, and Abraham for five Cities Genesis 18. 32.
, and Deborah by her prayers trod down the Churches enemies Jud. 5. 21.
: And if fasting and prayer will cast out Devils, why not the Churches enemies
Mat. 17. 21
? and if the prayer of faith will save a sick person from the natural death
Iam. 5. 15.
, why not a sick dying State from a civil death?

And yet howsoever the prayers of Gods people are effectual means, yet have
we no certain assurance that they shall actually save such a stiff-necked
people from ruin; and therefore we find the promises made to encourage men to
seek the Lord in a time of public danger, for such a people, to be set down
in a doubtful manner with an (if) in respect of the contingencie of the event:
if God will think upon us that we perish not Jona. 1. 6.
, and who knows if God will turn from his fierce wrath that we perish not
Jona. 3. 9. Jo. 2. 14.
?

For first, their prayers may be so faulty in the manner, that they may become
vain and fruitless performances Isa. 1. 13.
; and Saint James tells us that oftentimes the cause why men are not
successful in their designs, is either because they sought not God by
prayer, or failed in the manner, Ye have not because ye ask amiss Iam. 4;
2, 3.
.

Or secondly, the sins of a Nation may be so great in themselves, and so
aggravated, and the Lord so wearied in repenting Ier. 15. 6.
, in often calling back his anger, and reversing his sentence that had gone
out against them, that he peremptorily resolves to repent no more: yea though
Daniel, Noah, and Joab, though holy men should entreat for them, yet shall they
save but their own souls Ezekiel. 14. 14*
.

Or thirdly, the safety of a Nation is but a temporal blessing, though a great
one, and we have no absolute promise to obtain them by our prayers: indeed
spiritual mercies are bona absoluta, and bona bonum habentem facientia, they
are ever good to him that has them, and therefore we have an absolute promise
to speed in our Mat. 7. 11. Luke 11. 13.
prayers for them: he will never deny things truly good to them that ask. But
outward blessings are only bona respectiva, good in reference to certain ends,
sometimes by accident they make the possessor worse, and sometimes the denial
of an outward mercy makes way for a greater; and so oftentimes it comes to
pass that negando accipimus, we receive a mercy in Gods denial, we may have
the end of our prayer in the denial of the form.

Howsoever yet the prayers of Gods people are the proper remedy to save a
stiff-necked people that will not repent, it is all that can be done for them.

For first, it is the most effectual means to appease the wrath of 1 Samuel 25.
24. 32.
God, and to stay him from destroying: as Abigails humble entreaty prevailed
with David.

Secondly, it is certain that if prayer like Noah's Dove, be sent forth, it
shall never return without an Olive branch, either with tidings of an
abatement of the general deluge, for the common good: or at least it shall
return with much comfort and peace into your petitioner bosom. Psalm. 35. 19.


And thirdly, as nothing without it can save such a stiff-necked Nation, so if
any thing will do it, the prayers of Gods people will, and therefore the
effectual prayers of Gods people should be procured in a time of danger: as
the Mariners did Jonahs Jon. 1. 6.
in the storm, and the Ninivites cried mightily when their City Jon. 3. 9.
was in danger, though but upon this ground, Who knows what the Lord may do?

Outward means indeed are not to be neglected: as we must not idolize the
means, in trusting in them; so neither tempt God in neglecting of them.

Sometimes indeed the Lord will do the work by his own immediate 2 Chro. 20.
17.
hand, then the people are to stand still and see the salvation of God: But
ordinarily the arm of the Lord works by the hand of Moses, Isa. 63. 12.
all that is in our power must be done by us; our Savior told his Disciples,
that howsoever whiles he was personally present with them, he did miraculously
provide for their sustentation, Luke 22. 36.
and protection without scrip or sword, and they found no want of these means:
yet after his ascension, they must use ordinary means, a scrip and a sword
must be procured, yea, then a sword more necessary then a coat, sell thy coat
and buy a sword. In saving Jon. 1. 6. verse. 5. 13.
the Ship in that tempest in the first of Jonah, as they were praying and
crying to the Deity for help, so they spared neither cost nor pains to help
themselves, they rowed hard, verse. 5. and threw out their goods, verse. 15. And
when enraged Esau came Hos. 12. 4. Genesis 32. etc. 34. 1.
with an army against his brother Jacob and his family: as Jacob wrastled with
God by his tears and prayers, so withal he used prudent and submissive
endeavors for a pacification.

There must be a concurrence of three things to make prayer effectual to save
a Nation from ruin.

1. The persons praying must be holy men, such as Moses was: for, first such
only can pray in a spiritual manner, as having the spiritual gift of prayer:
culinary fire is in every house, but the element of fire is so rare, that it is
a question whether there be any such thing existent or no: so the natural gift
of prayer is very common, that is, such a praying faculty, as a natural man
may acquire or have by natural means, as quickness of wit, strength of
memory, elocution, and exercise in the word and prayer. But spiritual prayer
the breathing up of holy and spiritual desires, whether for outward or
spiritual mercies, yet always for spiritual ends; this fire comes from
Heaven, this spiritual gift of prayer comes from the Spirit of grace, that
does disponere and excitare, giving Zac. 12. 10.
both the habit and the act of prayer; the power to pray, and actuates that
power: it brings into the soul the fuel of holy desires, and enkindles them
also, and sets then a burning. Secondly, as holy men only can pray in a
spiritual manner, so their prayers only are prevalent; for in a sense they
are the prayers of Romans 8. 27.
Christ, indicted by his Spirit, put up in his name, and presented by his
mediation, so that when such men pray, Christ in his members prays and
prevails.

2. They must be such prayers as Moses his prayers were, earnest Verse. 10, 11,
12, 13.
strivings and wrastlings with God.

First, from an heart touched with a deep sense of our wants; we should offer
up prayers and supplications with strong cries and Heb. 5 7. Romans 8. 26.
tears, as our Savior did in the days of his flesh; with sighs and groans
unutterable, earnest ejaculations, like darts shot up to Heaven, out of an
affectionate heart; our spirits in their desires, like Noah's Arc, should rise
the higher, as the waters grow deeper, and the floods greater: so we find that
Christ prayed the more earnestly, when in that bitter agony; formal cold
prayers, like Luke. 22. 36.
Caesar's hartlesse Sacrifice, will not profit us, nor find acceptance with
God: painted fire as it has no heat, so it is of no use: it is an argument
that we disesteeme and undervalue a mercy, when we conceive such cold prayers
to be fit means to procure it.

Secondly, our prayers must be argumentative, persuasive entreaties; pressing
the Lord with arguments: we must plead with God, and reason the matter with
him, by reverent expostulations: the Lord is well pleased to be reasoned
withal by such as are reformed Isa. 1. 16. 17.
and washed, especially in his own language: indeed we can plead nothing that
is in us to move the Lord to mercy; but what is in his nature, his Christ, his
promises: we have many examples of this kind of prayer in Scripture, as it is
acceptable to God, so very prevalent with him: as here we find that Moses thus
prayed and prevailed, verse. 14. Exodus 32. 14.


Thirdly, as Moses in his, so we in our prayers, should not only strive against
the present outward judgment, but especially against the power and guilt of
sin, that cause the judgment: so did Moses here as we see, verse. 31, 32. he
confesses and bewaileth Ex. 32. 31, 32.
their sin, and cries unto the Lord for pardon of it, that so the Nation
might be every whit whole. We ought not only to Ioh. 7. 23.
strive against the plague without, but against the plague of the heart: not
only against wars and contentions, but against pride, 1 King. 8. 38.
covetousness, ambition, and such other lusts of the heart, from Iam. 4. 1.
Prove. 13. 10.
whence they come.

We should not only as Chirurgions look at the outward wound of the Kingdom,
and seek the cure of that by outward applications, but like the Physician,
look into the causes of these evils, and labor to procure a remedy for those
inward distempers, whence the outward do spring.

If we have not the evils removed that provoke the wrath of God, by a through
reformation, as well as the outward judgment: if by true repentance peace be
not made with God as well as an outward peace in the Kingdom, surely though
the outward evils be cut off, yet like Sampsons hair, they will grow again;
if we cut off only the branches, the root will sprout again.

Now therefore such prayers as Moses used, by such men as Moses was, and in
such an order as Moses did, are most effectual means to save a sinful Nation
in time of the greatest danger.

Now the reasons why such prayers are so effectual for the saving of a
Kingdom in danger, are three.

wounds and heales, spoils and saves: he raises the storm, and calmes it
again: Hos. 6. 1.
judgments like the Centurions servants, go and come at his command: and
therefore if we be troubled and arrested by judgments for the debt of our
sins, it is proper to make our peace with God, and agree with the Creditor,
no matter for the Sergeant: if Dogs fly upon us, it is most proper to speak
to their Master to call them off, who first set them on.

And howsoever prayer cannot change, or cause God to alter his eternal
unchangeable decree, yet it causes him to recall his present sentence, that is
gone out against a people: mutat sententiam, Greg. mor. l. 2. c. 24.
non decretum, says Greg.

And indeed Gods eternal decree takes in the means as well as the end: so
that according to Gods decree when his sentence of ruin is gone out against a
Nation, prayer and other means fall in, to hinder execution: and so his decree
stands, the present sentence only falls, as we see in the case of Hezechiah,
the Ninivites, and the Israelites here in my text.

to put new wine into old bottles, the mercy is lost, and the receiver Matthew.
9. 17.
hurt by it: therefore the Lord is ready to bestow mercies, and waits until
we are ready to receive them. God is as ready to give Isa. 30. 18.
mercies as a woman's breasts to give milk, he waits but for our drawing: Now
prayer draws the hearts of men nearer to God, and so puts them into a posture
fitter for mercies: it draws down fitness from God, it empties the heart of
self, and takes in more of God, and when prayer brings a mercy from Heaven it
fits a man in thankfulness, by an holy use of it, to send it back thither
again: as Hanna, when by prayer she had obtained a son of the 1 Samuel 1. 28.
Lord, she gave him to the Lord again.

2 King. 6. 26.
of Israel told the woman, cannot help, if the Lord do not concur. What can
the pipe do if the spring deny it water? The Lord does sometime suspend the
power of means, sometimes enlarge it above its natural pitch, as it seems
good unto him: if the Lord cooperate with the means, how weak soever, they
shall do the 1 Samuel 14. 6. Romans 8. 31. Jud. 7. 20.
work: The sword of Gedeon shall do great things, if the sword of the Lord
goes with it.

Now prayer carries God into the Army, and engages him in a just war to take
his peoples part, and to fight with them and for them, as we shall show anon.
And therefore when the inhabitants of Jerusalem were making fortifications, and
warlike preparations against their enemies, the Prophet blames them for not
looking up to God in the means, and the Lord calls them to add fasting and
other spiritual fortifications to their outward, to Isay 22. 11, 12.
make them effectual.

Before I come to Application, I desire to answer two questions.

1. Whether the cries and prayers of wicked men can avail any thing, either
for themselves or others.

2. How the prayers of some can be availeable for others, especially being
absent.

To which questions that I may give the more satisfying answer, I desire to
premise certain distinctions.

1. Crying is taken two ways. 1. Properly, for the putting up of a petition or
prayer. 2. Improperly, for the expression of the 1. Distinct.
creatures misery by the moan and cry that it makes.

Now indeed, the cry and moan of the creature often moves the Lord in mercy to
succor it: as the cry and moan of the babe, (though it makes no formal
request) makes the mothers bowels to yerne with compassion toward it, and to
succor it: so the Lords mercy being over all his works Psalm. 145. 9
, exceeding great, and extended to all his creatures, his mercy is drawn forth
to succor them at the sight of their misery: and thus he is said to hear the
cry of the Ravens Psalm. 147. 9
, because he is moved to relieve this poor creature in its misery. So Psalm.
78. Psalm. 78. 34 35, 36, 37, 38.
when the wicked were in distress and earnestly cried to the Lord, though
their heart was not upright with him, yet the Lord in mercy called back his
anger, and destroyed them not: Now the Lord did not this in answer to their
prayers, but as an act of mercy at the sight of their misery, expressed by
their cries.

The question then is, touching wicked men's prayers and cries properly taken.
Concerning them take another distinction.

Prayer may be taken, 1. Strictly, for the putting up of a formal request or
petition to God. 2. Distinct.
2. Largely, for the exercise of prayer in its ordinary use.

Now the exercise of prayer by reason of many divine truths inserted in it, as
confessions of sins, declarations of Gods nature and promises, and pressed as
arguments, if not to move the Lord, yet to move our own hearts, all which
truths being reflected back upon the soul, may possibly, through a
concurrence of Gods spirit, beget faith, bring the soul into frame, yea it may
become unto the speaker and hearers a converting ordinance, and so make a man
capable of mercies, and thus the prayers even of wicked men may be availeable
to the speaker and hearer, whether good or bad, by way of causation.

But secondly for prayer properly and strictly taken for the putting up of
desires to God, by way of petition, a wicked man has no promise to ground his
hope of prevailing upon, as anon I shall more clearly show. In the mean time
consider of another distinction, and it runs thus.

Prayer is to be considered, and is availeable 3. ways. 1. As it is a
Petition put up to God, and so it availes 3. Distinct.
via impetrationis, by way of impetration. 2. As it is an exercise of the
soul, and of the graces in it, whether common or saving, and so it availes via
causationis, by way of causation. 3. As it is a commanded duty, and a
principal part of Gods service, wherein we give God the glory of his
omniscience, mercy, power and wisdom; and so it availes via retributionis, by
way of retribution.

Indeed the benefits which God bestows upon men, in reference to their
works, whether formally good, or materially only, are properly called Gods
gifts, as coming from him, by free donation, and are termed rewards not
properly, but only analogically, as being given secundum non propter opera,
not for but only according to our works Romans 2. 5.
.

In the fourth place, Prayer being taken as a means of procuring spiritual
and outward blessings,

Is to be considered two ways. First, in the natural use; and so it is a
natural 4. Distinct.
man's means. Secondly, in the spiritual use; and so it is a spiritual man's
means.

Media or means are so called because in the midst between can and can not,
God has appointed us in the use of such means as we can, to seek to him, for
what we can not.

Now a spiritual man's means is praying in faith, in a spiritual manner, that
is appointed him to use as means, for procurement of what he wants.

But a natural man's means, appointed him, to use as means, is not praying in
faith in a spiritual manner (for that he cannot do) but the natural work
of prayer only, such prayer as a natural man can use.

Flying in the air is not a man's means of coming to a place, that is a Birds
means, but going or riding is a man's means: spiritual prayer is a holy man's
means, natural praying is the means of a natural man.

Indeed, the spiritual use of prayer is enjoined as a duty, which though he
cannot perform, yet ought he to desire and labor after; only the natural
work of prayer is required of him as a means of procurement of what he wants.

Now a natural man, though he be not sure to speed, yet ought he to wait for
God in the way of his judgments: Isay 26. 8.
his ordinances are his walk wherein often he is, and possibly may be found:
and therefore such means are to be used even of natural men: as we may see
Ezekiel. 36. where the Lord having promised justification, sanctification, and
withal diverse outward blessings, at last he Ezekiel. 36. 37.
adds, Verse. 37. Yet I will be sought unto that I may do it unto them: and
therefore Daniel 9. Dan. 4. 13. Hos. 5. 4.
complains, that they did not so much as pray that they might turn unto God.
Indeed, spiritual prayer is conditio subsequen^, and follows our conversion,
but the natural work of prayer is conditio antecedens, and may and ought to
go before it: And for the efficacy of a natural man's prayer, I shall
endeavor presently to show it in my answer to the first question propounded
concerning the efficacy of the prayers of wicked men.

My answer to that first question I present unto you thus. 1. Quest.


First, Prayer considered as a duty, must be performed even of wicked men, as
being good in it self, though by accident turned into sin Psalm. 107. 7
, and howsoever not being made in faith, it cannot please God, Heb. 11. 6.
in such sort as holy men's do, yet being good for the substance of the duty,
giving God the glory of sundry of his attributes, it may perhaps avail for
procurement of a temporal blessing by way of retribution: as the Pharisees
prayers had thereward of men's praises Matthew 6. 5.
: And so Ahabs humiliation, and the Ninivites repentance procured a delay of
temporal judgments.

Secondly, a wicked man's prayer considered as an exercise of the soul, and of
some common graces that are in it, and especially argumentative prayer may
perhaps avail, through the help of Gods spirit by way of causation, bringing
his soul into a better frame, and so making it capable of spiritual and
outward blessings.

But thirdly, a wicked man's prayer considered as a petition put up to God, we
cannot say it will avail by way of impetration. 1. Sort.


Indeed, there are two sorts of wicked men. First, such as do what they can in
breaking off the outward practice of sin, and do carefully perform the
natural work of prayer, and do what a natural man can, in the use of
means, howsoever they cannot ground their hopes of prevailing upon any
promise, and so upon Gods faithfulness, as being out of Christ, and therefore
cannot pray with assurance of prevailing: yet they may ground their hope of
prevailing upon the mercy of a gracious God, waiting on God in the way of his
ordinances, in hope that God in mercy will do something for poor creatures;
Who knows what God may do? The Ninivites went upon this ground, and it fell
out happily, the City was spared.

There is a second sort of wicked men that securely live in their 2. Sort.
sins, following the sway of their lusts, and continuing in actual rebellion
against him, and yet in their extremity do cry unto the Lord for succor: as
for these, the Lord threatens, that though they cried earnestly to God Mic. 3.
4.
, and were frequent in the use of prayer, making many prayers Isay 1. 15, 16.
, yet the Lord will not hear them, he will throw away their petitions, as
being an abomination unto him Prove. 28 9
.

For answer to the second question, how far forth the prayer 2. Quest.
of some may be availeable for others, especially being absent; I say;

1. Sometimes the thing prayed for, is not merely another, 1. Case.
and that in two cases.

First, love may so unite the heart of one to the other, that like Hippocrates
Twins they laugh and weep together, and sympathize each in others condition,
that in succouring the one, mercy is showed to both.

Secondly, they may be sharers in the same ship, as Jonah and the passengers
with him: or as members of the same Commonwealth, in a common danger; all in
the same condition, stand or fall togther; in this case also he that prays
against a public calamity, or for a public benefit, prays for himself as
well as for others: and so necessarily many reap the fruit of the prayers of
some.

2. In case the prayer be merely for others, then, first, by way 2. Case.
of causation the prayer of some cannot profit others that are absent: for in
the production of effects, there must be between the Contactus realis vel
virtualis.
agent and the object, a real, or at least a virtuall closing.

Nor secondly, the prayer of some cannot profit others by way of retribution,
whether absent or present, for every one shall reap the fruit of his own
work.

But thirdly, the prayer of some may prevail for others, though absent, by way
of impetration: Either first in respect of the prevalency of importunity set
forth in that parable of the Widows ( a) Luke 18. 5. 7.
overcomming the unjust judge, Luke 18. 5. 7. or else secondly upon Gods
purpose and promise of good unto others, upon condition of his servants
prayers; it being the Lords will that the prayers of his servants should give
vent to his mercies, that they may flow from God, as water from a full spring
upon the thirsty ground: as also it being the Lords purpose to grace his
servants, in gratifying great Kings and Kingdoms upon their prayers, as he
did Abimelecb upon the prayer of Abraham Genesis 20. 7. 17.
, and Pharaoh and his kingdom upon the prayer of Moses Exodus 8. 28. 29.
.

Now the prayers that are useful for the saving of a Nation from ruin are of
two sorts; First, the prayers of the Nation it self; Secondly, of Gods own
people for the nation.

nation it self, which also are twofold; first of the representative body of
a nation: for as the proper acts of those organs, which by natures deputation,
are appointed for performance of those Acts, for the good of the whole body, as
namely of the eye in seeing, the tongue in speaking, the ear in hearing, etc.
the acts I say of those parts are the Acts of the whole man Totus homo videt
etc. non totum hominis.
; so the acts of the representative body of a nation, not only acts civil,
but sacred, even their heart breaking and repenting prayers offered up for a
nation in the name of the whole, and that with their if not actual, yet
virtuall consent; surely these acts interpretatively are the acts of the
nation, and therefore in and by them, the nation prays. Secondly, the prayers
of the essential body of a nation: when a kingdom in all its parts, if not
all or the most men in it Universally, yet generally, all sorts, of all
degrees, in all places, like the Kingdom of Nineveh upon the preaching of
Jonah, and command of authority John 3. 5. 6, 7. 10.
, shall be up in prayer, fasting, weeping, reforming, and crying unto the Lord,
there were then great hope of an happy issue, because the nation prays.

Now these national humiliations and prayers, as the Lord prescribes them as
means to save a nation, Isa. 22. 12. So have they Isay 22. 12. 2 Chro. 20.
Jonah 3.
been always, performed with great success, as we see in the Ninivites,
Jehoshaphat and others.

The second sort of prayers availeable for the procurement of a nations
safety, are the prayers of Gods own faithful people for the nation: for
though they are very few, yet their prayers are exceeding prevalent for that
purpose (as has been showed) in so much that it is noted as a wonder, that
seldom happens, that the prayers of Daniel, Noah and Job, such holy men,
should avail but for the safety of their own lives Ezekiel. 14. 20.
.

Now their prayers are two ways considerable, either as the petitioners are,
First, dispersed in sundry places. Secondly, congregated in assemblies.

First, as they are scattered here and there throughout the kingdom, and so
though divided in place, yet as lines from every part of the circumference
round about, do all meet in the center, and as Stars every where round in
the heavens do meet in their influences, and work strongly on the earth, so
the hearty prayers of Gods people from all parts of the Kingdom agreeing in
the same request, with one heart do all meet at the throne of grace, and
work strongly there.

Secondly, the prayers of holy men are considerable, as they are conjoined in
congregations, with one heart and mouth to seek the Lord for a nation: for, as
a bundle of sticks being cast on the fire, one stick sets another a burning
until all is on a flame, and as Saul among the prophets prophesied also 1 Samuel
19. 23.
; so in a congregation, the zeal of some provokes many, and sets their hearts
a burning: and surely the prayers of a Congregation are most prevalent; for if
the prayer of one righteous man availes much Jam. 5. 1^.
, and a threefold cord not easily broken, united strength, the joint prayers
of many must needs be much more effectual; if when two or three godly men
shall agree upon a request and send up their joint petition to heaven, it shall
be granted, as our Savior has promised Matthew. 18. 19.
, how much more shall the joint petition of hundreds of holy men in a
Congregation?



Joel 2. and Jona. 3. that in a time of public danger, they should gather a
Congregation Joel. 2. 15, 16.
and call an Assembly of all sorts and ages, yea sucking children not Jon. 3.
5. 7.
excluded to seek the Lord: and at* Ninive we find that even the brute
creatures did bear a part in the Fast. For howsoever, (as has been showed)
only Gods servants can ground their hopes upon a promise: yet all that stand
not in open rebellion against God, can ground their hopes upon the mercy of a
gracious God as the Ninivites did.

Yea, brute creatures, and poor babes, that cannot put up a formal prayer,
yet their moan and cry, as being all lost in the common calamity, may move the
Lord to mercy, (as we have showed) and we accordingly find that the moan of
the one hundred and Jon. 4. 11.
twenty thousand infants of Ninive; yea, of the cattle, did much move the Lord
to pity.

From this Doctrine we may infer two corollaries.

First, when the Lord intends to save a Nation, he draws up Corol. 1.
the hearts, at least of his own people, to seek it: as when he intends a
shower to the earth, he draws up the vapors, and fills his bottles, so when he
intends to refresh a people with a shower of mercies, he not only gives to a
competent number the spirit of prayer, but draws out their hearts in the
actual performance of Ier. 29. 10. 12, 13, 14.
the duty. As we may see, Jer. 29. by comparing the 10. 12, 13, 14. verses
together, that when the time approached which the Lord intended for the
deliverance of his Church out of captivity, then he caused the earnest prayers
of his people to fall in, as the means to effect it: then (says the text)
shall they pray and cry to the Lord with all their hearts; and thereupon the
Lord was found of them, and turned away their captivity.

Secondly, when the Lord intends to destroy a people, he so carries Corol. 2.
things about in his providence, that his peoples prayers shall be wanting. We
find Jer. 7. that when the Lord by an irrevocable Ier. 7. 14, 15, 16.
decree had determined the destruction of the Jewish State, he prohibits his
Prophets praying for them. Where there is upon good ground a total despair of
a thing, there will, yea and ought to be a total recesse, and falling off from
use of means to effect a thing in it self, and in our apprehension, not
feceable. And therefore the Creators decree, being either by the event, or by
his revelation, made certainly known, the creature must submit: the Prophet,
though his heart was much set upon that State, Ier. 13. 17.
yet must not struggle against the known will of God. Now howsoever we have no
such prohibition; the Lords decree being hidden from us, so long as a Nation
has being, we ought not to cease praying: yet when the Lord intends the
ruin of a Nation, either the Lord takes away his Lots into his mountain, and
leaves not any considerable number of holy men, morally none, not a man to
stand in the gap: or he takes off the hearts of his people, Ezekiel. 22. 30. Ion.
1. 6. Luke 18. 1.
and suffers them, as he did Jonah, to be asleep when the Ship is in greatest
danger: or he lets the spirits of his people fall, as being discouraged, or
weary, or withdrawes the breathings of his Spirit in their hearts: and so
prayer being gone, the gap is open, the judgment breaks in upon a Nation.

And now for Use and Application.

Jacobs wrestling with God, can do more then a thousand of others: and
spiritual weapons can do more then natural.

Luther was wont to call the prayers of Gods people, his great Ordnance; and a
praying people are the horsemen, and the Chariots of Israel. In that famous
battle against the Amalekites, the prayers Exodus 17. 11.
of Moses gave a sensible advantage to Isreal's side, and indeed the victory.
The bringing of the Arc into the host, put courage into 1 Samuel 4. 5. 7, 8
the Israelites, in so much that they shouted for joy, but it struck a terror
into the Philistims, they cried, O woe unto us! God is come into the host:
effectual prayers bring God into an army, and carries him along with them,
fighting for them against their enemies.

When Jonathan and his Armor-bearer were to set upon the Garrison 1 Samuel 14. 6.
of the Philistims, Jonathan went upon this ground, that the success of a
war or a battle depended not principally upon multitude of men, but upon
Gods cooperating with them: we are indeed the weaker side (says he) but it is
no matter for that, if God works with us: now we find verse. 45. he wrought
with Verse 45.
God, doing his work, in a dependence upon him, and you see Verse. 14, 15, 16
what a great victory the Lord gave him.

ex intention agentis, they seek not intentionally therein the Kingdoms
ruin, yet exnatura rei, they do that which in its nature tends that way, they
do with Sampson, endeavor to pull away the Pillars that do uphold the State:
they open the breaches, and seek the removal of them that stand in the gap,
and so let in the wrath of God into our Land. Psalm. 106. 23. Ezekiel. 22. 30.


As the Pelican in seeking to blow out the fire, kindled about her young ones,
with her wings, the flame thereby was increased, her wings burnt, and so became
a prey: so these that by their persecution of Gods people, and by their evil
speeches, do seek to blow out this flame of zealous prayer in the Land, by
their opposition, that fire will increase, and they procure their own ruin.
For fire shall go out of the witnesses mouths, and consume Revel. 11. 5.
their adversaries.

James speaks. When Iam. 4. 3.
men make many prayers, and yet their hands full of blood, when they Isa. 1.
15. Hos. 7. 14. Ier. 3, 4, 5.
houle and cry, and yet rebel against God: they pray and yet grow worse and
worse: thus an effectual means of saving a Nation, is marred in the using:
and prayer to such a people, like the Arc among the Philistims, provokes the
Lords anger, and does a people more 1 Samuel 6.
hurt then good. We find in Isa. 58. that the people sought the Lord by a
daily use of his ordinances, they drew near to God by Isa. 58.
an outward performance of them, in hearing, in fasting, and praying, as if
they had been the most righteous Nation in the world, verse. 2. And they
complain and expostulate with God, as if he Verse. 2.
had not dealt well with them in not regarding their Fasts, verse. 3. Verse. 3.


Now therefore the Lord answers, it is true, fasting is a service that I
require, as a most effectual means of safety in a time of danger. But (says
he) Is this the Fast that I have chosen? to hang Verse. 4. 5.
the head like a bulrush, with an outward show of humiliation, whiles the guste
of Gods wrath is over? to hang the head, and the heart not dejected? to pinch
your bodies, and feed your lusts? to fast to strife and debate, and smite with
the fist of wickedness? to fast and pray, and yet live in strife and
oppression? surely such Verse. 4. Verse. 6. 7.
prayers will never be heard above. But says the Lord, verse 6, 7. Fast and
pray as ye ought to do, as the Lord has prescribed; not so much with rent
garments, with outward shows, (though even Jo. 2. 13:
this ought to be likewise) but come before the Lord with rent and wounded
hearts, and broken bleeding spirits, for your own sins, and the sins of
the Land: and with an unfeigned purpose of breaking off, of your own and others
sins, by a through reformation, both personal and national. And then verse.
8, 9, 10, Verse. 8, 9, 10
ye shall soon have a gracious answer to your prayers from the Lord, and
prosperity shall come like light after darkness, as the morning after a sad
dark night of adversity: yea the Almighty Job 29. 4.
shall shine upon your Tabernacles, as in former times. Now therefore the same
caveat which our Savior gives for hearing, let me Luke 8. 18.
givee for praying, Take heed how ye pray.



If we look upon the face of the Kingdom, we cannot deny but the wickedness
of the Land is very great, the sins great in themselves, universally spread,
many ways aggravated, and people hardened by the refusal of grace offered in
the means, and so like the Israelites a stiffenecked people, which is ground
of fear.

But then withal it cannot be denied, but that still we are the Lords flock,
a true visible Church, having the true Religion professed among us, and that we
have many of the true servants of God among us, for whose sake we have cause to
hope that the Lord will spare the Nation.

Again, we have indeed the form of godliness among us, and do draw near to
God in praying, hearing, fasting, and in the use of all the ordinances, as if
we were a most righteous Nation, which is matter of comfort.

But withal there is a general want of the power, the soul, and the life of
godliness, they pray and fast, and yet their hands full of blood, they pray,
and yet grow worse and worse, this is matter of fear.

Indeed our Ship is in jeopardy, the winds and waves very strong upon it: and
some holy men (though I hope not many) not affected with it, no more then Jonah
in the storm: the Amalekites are many and strong, our enemies that are risen
up against us, are many and extremely enraged, which is matter of fear.

But then we know they are Gods enemies as well as ours, and we have many holy
men every where like Moses, mediating and interceding for us as Moses for
Israel: like Abraham putting up prayer after prayer, as he for sinful Sodom:
and with Jacob wrestling day and night with the Lord for us, which is ground of
comfort.

So that like Nabuchadnezzars image, we stand upon feet part of iron, and part
of clay; staggering between hope and fear: we do not certainly know what the
Lord will do. But for our comfort we find that the prayers of Moses reversed
the Lords sentence gone out then against stiffenecked Israel, and we hope the
like prayers may prevail for sinful England.

1. Part.


1. To all men whatsoever, to stir them up to a twofold duty.

First, that by true repentance they would gather themselves to seek the Lord:
that they would labor to get into such a condition, that they might be able to
do some good to themselves and others by their prayers. First, the Kingdom is
in danger, and has need of good men's prayers, perhaps there may want five Genesis
18. Ezekiel. ^^. 30.
of the Lords number, perhaps there may want but a man to stand in the gap, a
few may turn the scale: If not, yet, secondly, thou shall save thine own
soul: at least thy prayer shall be with much comfort returned into thine own
bosom: whereas if we do not get into a praying condition, What will ye do
in the day of destruction, Psalm. 35. 13.
whither will ye fly, and with whom will ye leave your glory? there Isa. 10.
3.
is no creature on earth to fly unto, or in whose hands we can safely deposite
any thing that is dear unto us: now when we have no friends on earth, to have
God an enemy too; to have our hearts shut up that we cannot pray, and heaven
also that we cannot prevail, surely this condition is woeful. Now therefore we
should labor for the Kingdoms sake, and our own, to get into a praying
condition.

But if you will not be persuaded to this, yet secondly be entreated at least
thus far; by all loving and respectfull usage to give encouragement to holy
men, to be much in prayer for the Land: the Persians were wont to give divine
honor to the Sun, not so much because it was so glorious a creature, but
because an instrument of so much good to the world, all creatures by its light
and influence being preserved and refreshed: though we do not deifie the
public instruments of good to Church or State, yet good reason we should love
and honor them, and especially those that are the servants of the most high
God, who are a blessing in the midst of the earth: they have power to do
great things, as being the friends Act. 16. 2. Isa. 19. 29 Isa. 41. 8. Hos. 12.
3.
of God, and having a prevailing power with God. And therefore seeing their
prayers like the prayers of Moses are so useful to the Church of God, good
reason all should endeavor with Aaron and Hurr to keep up their hearts and
hands in prayer.

The second part of the exhortation is unto Gods own servants: earnestly to
exhort them, as Mordecai did Esther Esth. 4. 8.
, to 2. Part.
go to the King of heaven, as he to King Ahashuerosh, and make petition and
supplication before him for themselves and the kingdom: So the Prophet
Zephaniah Zeph. 2. 3.
finding little hope of prevailing in his exhortation to repentance, in the two
first Verses, at the third Verse he addresseth himself to Gods own people,
and exhorts them to seek the Lord, that if they could not prevail for the
land, that yet themselves might be hid in the day of the Lords wrath: as you can
see further into the kingdoms danger then others, by Prove. 22. 3. 2 Samuel 24.
16.
an eye of faith, seeing the sword stretched out over our Jerusalem ready to
destroy it: so also you are near to the Lord, and have more interest in him,
than Esther had with that Persian King; you have the gift of prayer, you have
this powerful engine to effect great things: and shall there be a price in
your hands, and not an heart to Prove. 17. 16. Isa. 62. 6, 7.
use it? God forbid. Therefore give me leave to extend the Prophet Isays
exhortation, Isay 62. 6. 7. principally intended to the Lords watchmen, unto
all Gods people, all ye that are mindful of the Lord, whether watchmen or
people, keep not silence, give the Lord no rest, be instant with him day and
night for Ion. 1. 6.
our Jerusalem: and as the Shipmaster awakened Jonah, checked him for his
security when the ship was in danger, and pressed him to call upon the Lord for
the common safety: so our ship being in the like danger, let me exhort you to
the same duty, and press my exhortation with the same argument, even
earnestly to call upon God, if so be that the Lord will think upon us, that
we perish not; and that you would entreat and plead with God for England as
Moses here did for Israel.

The third part is to you my Lords and Gentlemen of the Parliament: 3. Part.
As the Lord has raised you up above your brethren, and as it were with Moses
set you with him upon the Mount, so my humble request unto you is, that you
will labor to be holy as Moses was, fit to come near the Lord, and to speak
unto him: And then like Moses to be deeply affected with your own and Isreal's
sins, and earnestly to entreat and plead with God for that people whom you
represent. As the Lord has made you glorious creatures, like Stars shining
in your Orbs, so withal he has appointed that by your prayers and
endeavors, you should be in continual motion night and day to communicate
light and influence to the lower world: The Lord has raised you up above us,
as the Sun the Clouds, not to roll over our heads, by Lordly pre-eminence,
but to refresh the dry earth below, with fruitful showers: you have your
praeesse, propter prodesse, as the Schoolmen speak.

God has furnished you with abundance of this worlds goods, as he has filled
the mothers breasts with milk, not for her own sake, (if she keeps it up,
it is her own hurt) but to impart it to hungry babes that need it.

Unworthy great ones are like meteors, when they are raised up, though they
carry a great luster, yet are they ominous dismal signs of approaching
evils, they shine a while, and vanish in a stink of ignominy. But great men
should be like the higher spheres; as they guide the lower, and sway them in
their motions, so should they embrace and carry them in their bosoms: and by
their prayers and best endeavors, seek to procure the peoples good: that they
may worthily carry the name of patres patriae, the fathers, lovers, and
protectors of their country: And so like Deborah, the hearts of the people
shall be toward the governors of Israel Jud. 5. 9.
; they will love, serve and honor you whiles you live: and after death, as
your souls shall live in heaven, so your names on earth, and be had in
everlasting remembrance. ( b) Psalm. 112. 6


FINIS.

