IRELANDS INGRATITUDE TO THE Parliament of England.

OR, A REMONSTRANCE of Colonel CRAWFORDS, showing the Jeuiticall plots against
the Parliament, which was the only cause he left his employment there.

Die Sabbathi, Feb. 3. 1643.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Colonel Crawfords
Remonstrance be printed and published.

H. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin. 1643.

Colonel Crawford HIS REMONSTRANCE, DECLARING Why he deserted his employment
in IRELAND.
I Should not have thought my private sufferings so much worthy of public
consideration, as to engage the Press to a mention of them, if I had not
looked upon them as involved, not only in the public sufferings of
calamitous Ireland, but in the more public endangerment of Religion, Laws,
and Liberties of the three Kingdoms; and besides that, that the most
honorable Houses of Parliament, the best and highest Judges of such concerns,
had not authorized me to right my self in this kind. This authority
therefore, which I truly honor, shall as much vindicate me from vaineglory or
ambition in making this relation, as the truth of this relation shall clear me
from any aspersions which are or shall be cast upon me by mine and their
enemies. To use therefore no long preambles, the brief of my sufferings, when
I was forced to make an escape from Ireland, were these: besides the loss of
my command and fortunes there, being robbed (as shall afterward appear) of all
my Money, Clothes, Horses, and whatsoever I possessed, and so extreme an
hazard of my life; I have been unjustly traduced by the Marquess Ormond, and
the rest of that Council, as a deserter of that employment, which I had
undertaken, and a forsaker of His Majesty's service. To these unjust aspersions
I shall plainly answer, by setting down not only the reasons why I came
away, but the manner of it. Which I had sooner done, if, since I arrived in my
native Kingdom of Scotland, I had not been hindered by cross winds from
making my repair to this honorable Parliament; not only to justify here my
former actions, but tender my future service in that cause, to which I have
been ever most heartily devoted; in which I have already spent some of my
blood, and will never be sparing to venture the remainder of it.

When first I undertook the service against those barbarous and bloody rebels
of Ireland, authorized by Commission from His Majesty, and the honorable
Houses of Parliament; as it was my earnest desire, so it was my confident hope
to have given an account more acceptable to them, then either my self, or any
other joined with me in that undertaking can promise at this time. Nor were my
most hearty endeavors ever wanting, as God and my own conscience bear me
record, and all true Protestants, who have been witnesses of my actions will
believe. For shortly after my engagements in that service, I found in those who
had the greatest command, such backwardnes from all counsels tending to the
advancement of the great Cause in hand; such complying with the barbarous
Rebels; such subtle ways to retard the zealous endeavors of all who studied
to be faithful, and frowning upon them that were most forward in action, that
I found no less difficulty to acquit my self against the treacherous policy
of seeming friends, then to withstand the power of professed enemies. Yet
against both I ever confirmed my resolution so far upon the just and
Honorable Cause, that I am persuaded no man can convince me of yielding either
to the one or other in any jot, to the prejudice of the service. Neither should
any discontents have diverted me from my employment; nor the ruin of my
fortunes, nor the hard and cruel usage of my friends have been able to draw
me from that station wherein His Majesty and the honorable Houses of
Parliament had placed me: if I had not evidently found that I could stay no
longer there, without, either making shipwreck of a good conscience, and
taking courses destructive to the intentions of the Parliament: or else to
suffer imprisonment, and so be made unprofitable to that Cause, to which I was
addicted. Upon these reasons I resolved, with what peril soever, to endeavor
an escape from thence, that so I might be able in another place to do better
service to the true Cause, then I could possibly have performed there. And it
pleased Almighty God, though with the loss of all my fortunes (as aforesaid)
and danger of my life from pursuing enemies, to bring me safely hither. The
reasons which necessitated my coming away are these:

First, I saw by sad experience the Marquess Ormonds design in concluding a
Cessation with the bloody Rebels of Ireland, which seemed to me a second plot,
agreeing to the former, which in October 1641. was put into act by those
merciless Rebels, to deliver the remainder of His Majesty's true Subjects into
their hands, and so to root out the Protestant Religion, and destroy both
English and Scots from that Kingdom.

Secondly, he would have forced me to go for England with my Regiment in a
most unjust war against the Parliament there, who have sustained me and my
Regiment since the beginning of that Irish Rebellion. And most illegally he
sent two Companies of my Regiment under the command of another into England,
without my knowledge; which is without precedent or discipline.

Thirdly, the said Marquess formed a most unjust and illegal Oath, and
imposed it upon every Officer and Soldier to take, as appears by that Oath,
here annexed: I Resting fully assured of his Majesty's most Princely truth and
goodness, do freely and from my heart promise, vow, and protest, in the
presence of Almighty God, that I will to the utmost of my power and with the
hazard of my life, maintain and defend the true Protestant Religion
established in the Church of England, His Majesty's sacred Person, His Heirs
and lawful Successors, and His Majesty's just powers and Prerogatives;
against the Forces now under the conduct of the Earl of Essex, and against all
other Forces whatsoever, that are or shall be raised contrary to His Majesty's
commands and Authority.

And I will do my best endeavor to procure and re-establish the peace and
quietness of the Kingdom of England.

And I will neither directly nor indirectly divulge or communicate any thing to
the said E. of Essex, his Officers, or any other, to hinder or prejudice the
designs of his Majesty in the conduct or employment of his Army.



By the Lieutenant-Generall of his Majesty's Army.
WHereas his Majesty has been pleased to command the present transportation
of a part of his Army here into England, I do think fit, and hereby order,
that every Officer and Soldier to be transported hence do take the Oath above
written before they depart this Harbor.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dubin the 13. of October 1643. Ormond.


To which he pressed me extremely, telling me, that if I would not take it, he
would cashiere and imprison me. Upon this I feared a restraint of my Liberty,
and besides saw the unwillingnesse of my Officers and Soldiers to go into
England to fight against the Parliament, which might have been imputed to me,
as counselling them so to do.

Fourthly, I saw the illegal proceedings of that Ormond and the Council, in
imprisoning of real honest men, for not submitting to their fraudulent ways,
and enlarging of detestable Rebels, who had been murderers of many thousand
good Protestants. And Colonel Monks obtaining leave to pass for England of
Marquess Ormond, who by a private Letter from the said Marquess, was
afterward imprisoned at Bristoll.

Fifthly, the extravagancies of the said Marquess in complying with the bloody
Rebels; his frowning upon me for willingness to do service upon them, and
withstanding the Cessation; his calling the Parliament of England inhumane
Rebels, and hatchers of all the mischief that is befallen Ireland; his
frequent consultations how to invade the Parliaments Forces residing there; to
fend the Army out of Ireland to possess the Rebels of their lands; in
suffering so great numbers of the Rebels to frequent Dublin, as with the
assistance of Papists therein, should be able to destroy both the English and
Scots there residing. I cannot forget that in the Treaty betwixt the Marquess
Ormond and the Irish Rebels, it is included, that the Rebels shall have leave
to send at all times such numbers of their own, as they shall think fitting,
unto his Majesty, Whereupon the Protestants, fearing lest the Rebels might by
this means unjustly incense his Majesty against his good Subjects of the
British Nation, entreated that they might have leave also to send as many of
their numbers over, to inform his Majesty concerning the proceedings and
behavior of the Rebels: which was refused them by the Marquess Ormond and the
Council then in Ireland. And to that purpose two privy Counselors, the Earl
of Rosscommon, and Sir James Ware came down from the Council Table, to desire
those whom they knew to be of their faction, to withdraw their hands from the
Petition, obtaining none but one Major Morris.

As also that in November 1643. the Parliament in Ireland sitting, the House of
Commons had in debate that there might be a Remonstrance set out, declaring the
inhumanity of the Irish Rebels, and a Committee sent to the Lords Justices and
Council with it, desiring it might be recommended to his Majesty; whereupon
there was a Message sent down from the House of the Lords, no man sitting there
but the Marquess Ormond and four of his great Favorites, and among the rest
an Arch-Papist, my Lord Viscount of Meriyoung, in which Message it was
delivered, That there were greater matters of state to be considered, which was
nothing else but the sending over the English Army then in Ireland to fight
against the Parliament.

One particular more horrid then the rest I was informed of about that time;
that had been intended against Master Reynolds and Master Goodwine, who were
then sent over with Money (which was more acceptable there then themselves) the
day before their coming away, there was a Plot to have dragged them to prison,
the prime Actors thereof are in this last blessed victory of Sir Thomas Fairfax
and Sir William Brereton taken prisoners. Upon these reasons I withdrew my
self to Newery, from whence I wrote a Letter (too much to be here inserted) to
my Lord Marquess, full of humility (as by the true Copy I can prove)
entreating him to vouchsafe me a line in answer to my just and humble requests;
which were, that I might not be pressed to that Oath too burdensome for my
Conscience, nor enforced over to serve against the Parliament of England; which
if his Lordship would grant, I would with all alacrity continue in service
under him, according to the first intention of my Commission, against those
barbarous and bloody Rebels of Ireland, to which service I was so heartily
devoted, that (as I expressed to him) though I had been invited home with
hopes of better preferment, yet I had still rejected it; that to avoid his
indignation I had withdrawn my self toward Caregfergus, where if I heard not
from him, I should be enforced to resolve on a further journey, as God should
enable me. To which Letter receiving no answer, I soon after wrote him another
from the Newery, with the same humble requests, as also expressing to him my
former services, which he might well remember, and that they might deserve so
far, as that he might trust my fidelity without any new Oath. I desired also
that his Lordship would make a redress to me of the inhumane proceedings of my
Lord Moore against me, who endeavored by all means he could to take away my
life upon bare suspicion, without reason, and afterward robbed me of all my
goods, leaving me not a penny. Which barbarous usage I humbly referred to his
Lordships consideration, desiring a restitution of my goods, horses, and money;
but found no answer to any of my just requests. Immediately after I wrote
another Letter from the Newery also to my Lord Moore, desiring redress from
him, with more civility and respect then his cruel usage of me had deserved;
but found no satisfaction at his hands. Upon these occasions I plainly
understood, there was no staying for me with a good Conscience, nor any
possibility of continuing to do that service which I came to do against those
bloody Rebels, in revenge of so many thousand of my brethren murdered, and
vindication of that Religion which is far dearer to me then my life, and for
which I defy the tongue of any man to accuse me of any slacknesse in service
at all. I confess I was stricken with admiration to see so great a
Masterpiece of the Devil wrought in Ireland, exceeding (in mine opinion) all
the rest; which have of late, by the same Council, been hatched in England and
in Scotland, not only in the subtilty and horridness of the continuance, but
in the miraculous blinding of those men who call themselves Protestants, to be
made actors in it; that he could first find a means to make so general an
insurrection of those bloody Rebels, to the massacring of above an hundred and
sixty thousand Protestants; then raise an Army of English and Scots to fight
against those Rebels so long, until (besides the loss of much blood more) the
Protestants in so hot an Academy of War, were made excellent Soldiers (for
that cannot be denied) and fit to do service in the behalf of those Rebels
against whom they had been raised; so that those English Protestant Regiments
which come out of Ireland do a double service to Popery (and as the Proverb
is) stop two gaps with one bush; not only wounding the Parliament, from whence
the only relief should come to the cause of Religion in Ireland: but by
withdrawing themselves from thence, expose the residue of Protestants there to
the mercy of those inhumane Rebels. But I hope this extreme raging of the
Devil does but foreshew that his time is short; and God Almighty, to the
relief of his Church and people, will chain him up. These considerations have
drawn from me a Remonstrance, not to vindicate my self in any point of
Honor, for I conceive I never lost any, but to inform others by what wicked
means that Kingdom of Ireland is betrayed, and to open the eyes of those who
are not wilfully blind.

FINIS.

