Light in Darkness: DISCOVERED In a Sermon preached before the Honorable
House of COMMONS, November 24. 1647. being the day of their public Fast.

By WILLIAM CARTER, Minister of the Gospel.

Published by Order from that House.

PSALM. 97. 2. Clouds and Darkness are round about him. JOHN 1. 5. The Light
shines in Darkness. LONDON, Printed By M. Simmons, for Giles Calvert, and are
to be sold at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1648.

To the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS In Parliament assembled.
IN this discourse, you have the method of the Lords proceedings in making his
people happy; A Theme deserving a far better skill than mine to handle, and
your most earnest thoughts and study; the rather since his case therein is also
yours. The things belonging to our peace are seldom rightly known, either as
they come from him or you; therefore we often repine and murmr, where we should
return our thanks and praises; what he calls Light and Life, we often say is
Death and Darkness: Thus also things of peace and safety by you provided for
us, apt we are to call by other names. The Lord himself is therefore your
example, and what you expect from others he requires of you; a candid
interpretation and acceptance of his actions, though whilst he answers your
prayers in righteousness, his answers for the present be displeasing to you. He
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, yet if he answer
any thing conducing to our peace, it must be somewhat of that kind, because his
thoughts are not as ours, nor his ways as our ways; the light therefore is his,
the darkness ours. In these our days, if ever, still has been a time for faith
this way to work; And you shall honor Christ as much by trusting him in
darkness, as by working for him while it is day. To strengthen your hands in
both, has in this Sermon (which now also from the Press, at your command, is
humbly offered to you) been the care and study of

Your humble and affectionate servant in the Gospel, W. CARTER.

Light in Darkness
PSALM. 65. 5. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God
of our salvation, who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of
them that are afar off upon the Sea.
IN the words before my Text, we have the blessedness of the Saints, enjoyed
by them as dwellers in Gods House, Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and
causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts: we shall be
satisfied with the goodness of thy House, even of thy holy Temple. The
blessings from God whereby his Saints are satisfied, are therefore called the
goodness of his House, because they are obtained by seeking God, which is the
work and service of it. Mark 11. 17. Is it not written (says Christ) my House
shall be called of all Nations, the House of Prayer? His people are his House,
Heb. 3. 6. therefore a praying people. The Psalmist therefore also in relation
unto what he had to say of the goodness of his House, speaks to God under that
title, verse. 2. O thou that hear prayer, to thee shall all flesh come.

In my text we have the manner, how the Lord is pleased to answer the desires
of his people: and that in two things.

1. In respect of the things obtained. God will answer them, 1 By terrible
things, 2 In righteousness, how terrible soever the things are; that is, 1
They shall not be without desert, Psalm. 99. 8. Thou answeredst them, O Lord our
God, thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of
their inventions. 2 His people shall not lose but gain thereby, for all is done
in answer unto their petitions.

2. In respect of the giver of them. 1 As a God of their salvation will he do
it, By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, o God of our
salvation. They shall be as the morning cloud (says God of his people Israel,
Hos. 13. 3.) and as the early dew that passes away, as the chaff that is
driven with a whirlewind out of the floor, and as the smoke out of the
chimney; yet I am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shall know
no God but me* for there is no savior besides me. 2 As such a God of salvation
who is the confidence of all his people. Who art the confidence of all the ends
of the earth, and of them that are afar off upon the sea* How terrible soever
his answer be, his people shall have cause to trust him still.

The words thus opened, I may give you the sum of them in these two conclusions.

1. That by terrible things the Lord answers the prayers of his people. 2.
That how terrible soever his answers he, yet all is done in righteousness, and
he a Go^ of their salvation still in what he does, and the confidence of all
his Saints and children.
I shall speak to both, chiefly I shall insist upon the former, in handling
whereof I shall touch upon the other.

The point of Doctrine then is this: That by terrible things the Lord answers
his peoples prayers. As the heavens hear the earth, and that as well by hasty
Hosea 2. 21.
showers and storms, as by a gentle rain; and as 1 Cor, 15.
the earth hear the corn, yet that which thou sowest is not quickened except it
die: so the Lord hears his people, yet many times in ways not pleasing to
them at the present.

O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy pl(...), says David, Psalm. 68. ^5.
What are these (...)es, but where God is said to hear his people? Psalm. 3. 4.
I cried unto the Lord with my voice, he heard me out of his holy ^ill. Psalm.
18. 6. In my distress I called upon the Lord, he heard my voice out of his
temple. Now, as there is comfort from these holy places, so is he terrible from
thence, and that not only to his enemies, but also to his people. Thence is
that speech of Moses, Exodus 15. 11. that he is glorious in holiness, fearful
in praises, doing wonders. A great return of prayer was his carrying Israel out
of Egypt into Canaan. I have heard their cry (says God) and am come down to
deliver them, to bring them to a land flowing with milk and honey, Exodus 3. 7,
8. But he did it so, as many a time he made all their hearts to ache; witness
their afflictions multiplied ere they got out, their sad condition by the sea,
their bitter expostulations and complaints against Moses, Were there no graves
in Egypt? etc. Exodus 14. 11. With reference to this, the Lords answering his
people thus, Moses has that passage in his song, Glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises. Consider also his proceedings with them afterward: he
could have brought them to the mountain of his holiness in few days; he leads
them through a great and terrible Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
wilderness, where were fiery Serpents, Scorpions and drought; then caused
many thousands of them there to perish. All this he did in answer unto prayer;
Exodus 3. 7, 8.
and upon the whole it was for their advantage. Deuteronomy. 32. 10. He led him about,
instructed him, and kept him as the apple of his eye. Another most remarkable
return of prayer, was the coming of the Lord Christ in flesh, Malac. 3. 1. The
Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come into his Temple, but who may abide the
day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears? For he is like a
Refiners fire, and like Fullers soap. Therefore is the day of his coming called
a terrible day, Malac. 4. 5. Behold, I will send Eliah the Prophet, that is,
John the Baptist, (Matthew. 17. 12.) before the great and dreadful day of the
Lord. Called again, the great and terrible day of the Lord, Joel 2. 31. applied
also to the first coming of Christ by Peter, Acts 2. 16. 21. so called, partly
because his coming put his people to such hard things in the world; though
Christ is sweet, his Refiners fire is very terrible. Would you have an higher
instance yet? Then take that of Christ himself: he prays his Father for his
glory, John 17. 1. Father, glorify thy Son. His Father grants it, gave him a
name Phil. 2. 9.
above all names, set him at his right hand, a Prince and Acts 5. 31.
a Savior, where is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore. Psa. 16. 11.
But ought not Christ to suffer, and so to enter into his glory? Yes; thus he
answered the Lord Christ himself by terrible things: such things as made him
cry so to his Father thrice, and that with tears, O my Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me: and, why have thou forsaken me? And as
Christ is the pattern to which his brethren are to be conformed: Romans 8. 29.
so in answering them he makes them also many times cry out as forsaken; and
Father, let this cup pass, let that pass from us.

Prayer makes work for prayer, the Lord in answering one bespeaks many: he
will be sought to for his blessings: and, because he loves to hear his Spouse,
and says her voice is sweet, he will not suffer Cant 2. 14
a dispatch by one, but many wrastlings. Jacob had prayed for his return; in
his return he prays, Genesis 32. 9. yet was he put again to wrestle, verse. 24.
And for a further proof of the point in hand, observe, that when he gets the
fullest answer, conquers God himself; yet so, as he was touched in the hollow
of his thigh, and that put out of joint.

Another place for this purpose is, Psalm. 18. which is to be understood not of
David only, but of the whole Church of God, Cum David typum gerat Christi and
Ecclesiae, recte etiam ad certamina and victorias Christi, atque adeo ad totius
Ecclesiae militiam in hac vita, accommodatur hic Psalmus a Pau^^, and ab aliis
interpretibus. Moler. in Psalm. 18.
as it is applied by the Apostle, Romans 15. 9. where he cites those words of
this Psalm, v. 49. Therefore will I give thanks to thee, O God, among the
heathen, to prove that the Church of God among the Gentiles, should praise his
name. Now for our purpose, see what David, or the Church of God says, verse. 6.
In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God, he heard my
voice out of his temple: then the earth shook and trembled, the foundation also
of the hills moved, and were shaken, because he was wroth. There went up a smoke
out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: he bowed the heavens
also and came down, and darkness was under his feet. He made darkness his secret
place; the Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the highest gave his voice.
All these are metaphorical Allegorice hic locus debet necessario capi, quia
(praeterquam quod hoc Davidi evenisse in scripturis non legitur) non agic hic
propheta de singula^i aliqua liberatione seorsim, sed de omnibus e manu omnium
immicorum suorum. verse. 1. A(...)san (...).
expressions, whereby is set forth what terrible things God does in the world,
in answer to his peoples prayers; so terrible, as that when the answer comes,
the Saints themselves are in the dark as touching his proceedings, even when he
bows the heavens, and comes down amongst us, that is, shows himself in his
glory in our deliverance, Darkness Caligo sub pedibus ejus, id est, quod opera
and viae ejus cognosci non possunt. Luther. Reas. 1.
is under his feet; as the Psalmist also says in a like case, Psalm. 73. 16. I
thought to understand this, (i e. his dealing with him) but it was too painful
for me. The reason is given, because the Lord had answered him in such a
dreadful way; when the wicked prosper (says he) all the day long am I plagued
and chastened every morning,

The reason why he answers thus is,

Because what God does for his people, take one thing with another, is still in
order to the crucifying of the flesh: and what more terrible than such a death?
We pray for pleasing things, as we imagine, but as we are flesh as well as
spirit, so the flesh has still a part in every prayer, and what we beg, is
partly carnal, and upon the matter, in part, we beg we know not what. Now
the answer as it comes from God, take all together, is spiritual, which is a
crucifying thing to sinful flesh; hence comes in all the terror. The two
sons of Zebedee desire of Christ preferment in his kingdom, Matthew. 20. 20.
this for the main was a good request; but see what Christ says to it, v. 22.
You know not what you ask: not that in his kingdom are no proferments, or that
they were altogether sinful in that petition; there was a spirit of faith in
Christ, and love unto him, breathing in it; but they were partly carnal, in
what they begged, therefore they understood not at what rate it must be granted;
our Savior therefore adds, Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall
drink of? and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?
intimating clearly that they thought they begged a pleasing thing, but that the
answer would be terrible to flesh and blood: you see the reason; they were
partly carnal in their suit; the answer would be spiritual when it came. Many
fastings and prayers have been in these our days, and formerly, for setting up
the throne of Christ amongst us; God will answer rhat request, it is his
promise, Psa. 2. but in ways, it may be, more spiritual then we are apt to
think. This mkes his answer in that very thing, not pleasing even to those who
begged it of him. You pray for pardon, that is a pleasing thing, yet rightly
understood, not pleasing to the flesh; it mortifies corruption, breaks the
heart, engages to an holy life: every answer from our God to us, one way or
other, first or last, shall tend that way. God uses so to give good things
unto his children, as withal to give himself, and show to them his heavenly
glory in what is done: Jacob by wrestling conquered not his brother only, he
vanquished God himself. David prayed, Psalm. 18. God answered him, and so, as he
Cherubinis significatum est, qui iisdem vehebatur dominum fuisse and regem
quatuor cohortum seu castrorum Israelis. Quemadmodu^ enim principum quadrigae
dominorum suorum fulgent insignibus; ita hic Cherubini fignis Jehovae regis
Tetr^rchiarum Israelis. Mede in Apoc. p. 3. 2 Cor. 12. 10
bowed the heavens and came down, he road upon the Cherub, and did fly upon
the wings of the wind; i. e. he gloriously appeared unto David in his
deliverance. The Cherubims we find in Scripture are still used in setting forth
this glory of Christ appearing in and to his Church, Esaias 6. 1. Ezekiel. 1. Rev.
4. 7, 8. therefore called Cherubims of glory, Heb. 9. 5. Now God is terrible to
sinful flesh: so far as he appears, it dies: Jacob therefore, whilst he
conquered God in prayer, himself was overcome; signified by that touch upon
his thigh put out of joint, where the chiefest stresse in wrestling lies: When
we are weak, then are we strong; because as God appears, we die unto our
selves, and live in him. So when he bowed the heavens and came down to David,
yet so, as darkness was under his feet, and he constrained to live by faith,
and trust him still in darkness, notwithstanding all which God had done in his
deliverance. This therefore is one reason why he answers thus, because the
things we beg, though notioned by us as pleasing; yet rightly understood, as in
themselves, and as they come from God, are terrible to sinful flesh.

Besides what things are in themselves, the means It became him for whom are
all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to
make the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. When he had it
in his choice, as having all things in his power, because for him and by him
are all things, this was the way that best became him in wisdom to take, as
best and fittest for his purpose. Thus is his dealing too with us, he finds it
many times the fittest way to bring what he intends for us to pass by
sufferings. Thou prayest for the death of some corruption; it may be to destroy
that sin, he slayes thy first born, or dearest friend, ruins thy estate, or
name, o^ what is dearest to thee in the world; it may be those blessings were
but fuel for thy lust to feed upon, or stole away thy heart from him. The
greatest spiritual preferments of his people are by sufferings; the suffering
Christian many times the richest: I know thy tribulation and thy poverty, but
thou art rich, said Christ to persecured Smyrna, Rev. 2. 9. Our light
affliction (says the Apostle) (...)keth for us a far more exceeding and
eternal ^aight of glory; 2 Cor. 4. 17. Thus Haggai 2. 7. God says he will
shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come: Prosperity and
peace are the desire of all nations; the way whereby to answer that desire, it
may be, God intends, and sees must be, a long and bloody war. Thus, I say,
thoug^ the things are sweet* the means sometimes are bitrer: this is another
reason why his people are so answered by the God of their salvation.

Besides all this, another reason is, because in answering by terrible things.
As for instance:

1 God has this to do, either to make us willing to receive his blessings, or
to force the things upon us; either of which puts him upon his ways of
terror. Christ was prayed for long, but who was able to abide his coming? The
blessing of the promised Malac. 3.
land was prayed for long, but when the blessing came, they would not go in
and possess the land, but speak of making Captains to return to Egypt. Numb.
14. 4.
We pray for strength against a sin, yet are not willing it should die; sin
is our own flesh, and every one by nature cherishes and loves it. We pray for
pardon, but something to do there is, to make us willing to be pardoned; the
sinful heart 2 Cor, 5. 20.
would not be so engaged: His Oxen and his Fatlings are killed, but they who
are invited, will not come, Mat. 22. 4. And how often would I have gathered you
(says Christ) but ye would not? Luke 13. 14. therefore what does he? He
breaks our hearts, strikes us with his poisoned arrows, sets his terrors in
array against us. We pray for liberty, for deliverance, for reformation; when
these are offered to us, we refuse them all, would be in bondage still, despise
deliverance, and hate to be reformed: one man has this end, another that, to
keep up old ways still; now therefore is he forced to administer such physic
to the kingdom, as makes it sick, whereby to purge out such corruptions; or if
men will still have ends, to lay his matters so, as men's ends may serve for
his; which is not done, it may be, but by turning things quite up side-downe;
sometimes men go right, because themselves are turned unto God; sometimes
because things are turned, though they are still the same. Again, if that must
be his way, to force good things upon us, as indeed what he bestows, is
seldom much esteemed till it be enjoyed; therefore, many times, he stays not
until we are willing, but as it were with violence puts things upon us, so he
gains our hearts, and we are made to say, We could not think that Christ had
been so sweet. I say, if that must be his way to force a sinner in to Christ,
or force a kingdom to be healed, you will grant, he must be terrible in what
he does.

2 Besides his giving of the thing desired, this also has he to do, to sit
his people for his blessings: should he bestow them presently, they would be
curses, many times, not blessings to us, or cast away upon us. A man prays for
comfort, it may be he not sit for comfort; he prays for such an earthly
blessing, should it be granted, it might be his ruin: were the people of God
altogether free from fear of enemies, it may be, they are now of such a
temper, as to fall upon each other, and with as much eagerness and vigor, as
they have against the common adversary; witness that bitterness and envy
still amongst us; and where strife and envy is, says James 3. 16.
the Apostle, there is confusion, and every evil work. Those divisions which
now hinder our proceedings, would mischief us much more, had we obtained our
desires against our enemies: therefore now is he forced to make delays, and
carry on his work by such steps, whereby to exercise his people with
afflictions, thereby to bring them lower, to wear off such inordinate
affections, to fit them for the mercy when it comes. Were we again in peace
both from without, and with our selves, he sees, it may be, we should love the
world too well; therefore by lengthening out our trouble, he weanes us from the
world: you may discern this has a part in his delays, because a worldly
spirit is a cause of our distractions; were men more single hearted for God,
and less for worldly ends, the business of the kingdom would go on more
smoothly: what God intends to be removed, he suffers to be cause of our
afflictions. Thus was he forced to carry Israel into Canaan by the wilderness,
there to wander long, and suffer much, when as he could have carried them a
nearer way in few days, to humble them, to Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 16.
prove them, to do them good in the latter end.

He answers us by terrible things, because in righteousness he does it. By
terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our salvation.
Such an answer David had, Psalm 18. (as you have heard) what says David
thereupon, verse 20? The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness,
according to the cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me. With the
merciful thou will show thy self merciful; with the upright man thou will
show thy self upright; with the froward thou will show thy self froward. That
is, in hearing prayer he deals with persons much according as they deal with
him. Three ways he answers us in righteousness by answering by terrible
things. First, by this means in bestowing mercies, he takes occasion to
chastise his people for their sins, Psalm. 99. 8. Thou answeredst them, O Lord
our God, thou wast a God that forgavest them, although thou tookest vengeance
for their inventions. A poor soul begges of God an enjoyment of himself, in
the comforts of his Spirit; but, it may be, walks not so close with Christ as
ought to be; is careless of his service, eaten up with worldly cares and
lusts; God answers that petition, yet so, as he teaches him another lesson,
makes him see and feel with sorrow what it is to sin, brings him unto those
enjoyments through bitter trials and afflictions. What he does in answering
p^titions, is a branch of the administration of the kingdom of Christ, who is
a righteous King, A Scepter of righteousness is the Scepter of thy kingdom,
Psalm. 45. 6. True it is, that Christ has fully satisfied his Fathers justice
for his people; they are without Ephesians. 5. 27*
spot or wrinkle in his sight; therefore his afflicting them for sin, is not
to fill up any satisfaction unto Gods eternal wrath, that was finished upon
the Cross, Col. 1. 20. but for his perfecting that work, wherein he is engaged
for their good; afflictions are a means whereby he trains them up, and fits
them for that glorious inheritance which he has purchased for them: therefore
this his justice in his dealings with them, is founded in his love, it is a
Fathers justice; therefore also, is a part of what he answers unto their
petitions. Suppose a Father by a price redeems his son, rescues him from the
justice of the law; that son is liable to his fathers justice
notwithstanding, is corrected by him, and the rather, because of his
redemption. Thus is it with Christ, who by redemption frees us from eternal
wrath, yet not to live in sin, or as we list; no, when we are taken out of
the state of nature, and delivered from the curse, yet are we put into a
Kingdom, that a righteous Kingdom, there to be governed, if need be, to
suffer too, under the Scepter of our king.

Only take this in by way of caution; you must distinguish betwixt the justice
of this Kingdom, and the justice of a Creator to his Creature, and that two
ways.

1. First, in respect of the subject; the justice of this kingdom is the
justice of a Father, the other of a Judge without all such engagements. A
Fathers justice is a rule, which he takes up in his proceedings with his
children, m^erly out of love to do them good by his rewards and punishments;
should a father punish and reward without some rules of justice, he should
abuse his children and himself; and yet a father cannot do, no not in
justice, that in punishing, which others can, lest he wrong himself and them;
yet justice notwithstanding, but a fathers justice. The eternal pardon stands;
yet God, as a father, has another pardon, which sometimes he will not grant
unto his children. Matthew. 18. 35. He refused as to this worlds punishment to
forgive that sin of Moses at the waters of Meribah, Numb. 20. 12, 13.

2. In respect of the end; In the Creatours justice, the end of punishments is
only the glory of the Creatours justice, in which case, summum jus est jus,
and there is no sparing; therefore he stirrs up all his wrath against the
wicked, contends for ever with them, will be always wroth. But in the justice
of this kingdom, the end of punishing is the glory of the justice of that
kingdom, in which the good of the person punished is included; therefore
Christ sometimes can have his end by sparing, then he spares, sometimes by
less afflictions, then he takes a less, if not, he comes with seven times
Levit. 26. 24.
more; yet never to the full desert of any sin: Thou Psalm. 103. 10.
have not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities. Thus, I say, this caution taken in, the Lord in his rewards and
punishments amongst his subjects, deals according unto rules of justice, and
answers all petitions still in righteousness, and that so, as I may add,
although he frees his people from eternal wrath, yet in his righteous
dispensations in this life, he punishes his people more severely, many times,
than wicked persons; he has rods for them, which those who are his enemies,
seldom or never feel; afflictions that will not fasten on a rotten unbeleeving
heart, the hidings of his face, woundings of the spirit with apprehensious of a
fathers not displeasure: seldom have we found a wicked person suffering such
things as Job, struck with such poisoned arrows, the poison drinking up his
spirit, besides the loss of his estate and children, with sharp diseases on
his body: or as David, when he was wounded and sore broken, and roared by
reason of the disquietnesse of his heart, no soundness in his flesh, because
of his anger, nor any rest in his bones because of his sin, Psa. 38. Then
here is the case, many things you beg of God, he hears all; but in his
answer he has something to say to your sins, as well as unto you; something to
your pride, your selflove, your unbelief, unfruitfulnesse, love of the world,
want of love and tenderness unto his people; all which, and much more that he
has to say, must have a part in his answer to your prayers. Thus you see this
is one way, wherein because he answers in righteousness, his answer is by
terrible things: should it be only by things pleasing, this could not be.

2. He answers in righteousness by terrible things, because by this means
he allots to every one the fittest portion, most for his own glory, and his
peoples good; such things for some are best, and most for their advantage;
therefore to some he gives more, to some less, to some nothing of that which
is petitioned, designing unto them a fitter blessing; some he answers by
denying what is begged, which also in the issue proves the sweetest answer. He
intended Joshuah and Caleb a double portion in the land of promise, others in
the wilderness to fall; therefore he tries the people, to see who was of such
a spirit, to follow the Lord fully, Numb. 14. 2^.
as Caleb did, thence he took occasion, and found ways to cut off many
thousands; in all which yet he rejected not his peoples prayers* Moses and
Aaron were in the number: he carried many of them into heaven, though not into
Canaan; and he saw it was for their advantage to be answered so* Thus, I say,
he provides for every one the fittes^ portion; so as all this is in
righteousness, how terrible soever his answer be, and none shall have occasion
to complain at last, but shall acknowledge, he is righteous in all his ways,
and holy in all his works: Psalm. 14^. 1^ Psalm. ^7. 2.
though clouds and darkness are round about him, that righteousness and
judgment are the habitation of his throne, Psalm. 97. 2.

3. In righteousness by terrible things yet further, because hereby his
enemies, or false though seeming friends, are disappointed, and cut short of
that which he intends for others; for whilst he answers thus, they are
offended, they stumble and fall to backslidings, and apostasies from God, and
open enmity against him; which were before ordained Jude ^.
to that condemnation, as the Apostle speaks upon the like occasion. Should he
answer still by pleasing things, they would continue in the work, and cause of
God, and so be sharers in the blessings which he intends for no such. Thus in
bestowing Christ upon his people, because of his Refiners fire, and Fullers
soap, whom he intends for ruin, stumble at him, as a stone of offense,
rejecting Luke 7. ^^.
the counsel of God against themselves: therefore says the Prophet, because
of his Refiners fire and Fullers soap, who shall stand when he appears? the
wicked else would stand in the judgment, I mean, in this life, and sinners in
the congregation of the righteous. Now it is a righteous thing with God in
answering his people, to do it so, as such may be discovered, and receive
accordingly, who are unsound and false; which is not done but by his answering
by terrible things: at the same time, and by the selfsame means, whereby his
children are corrected, a pit is digging for the wicked, Psalm. 94. 12, 13. I
have stayed the longer in opening this fourth Reason of the point, because it
is the second observation from the words, which would not be omitted in
handling the text, I suppose you see it was not amiss to do it here.

I come now to application.

Honorable and worthy Senators): consider therefore what you have to do; the
work is in Gods hands still, more than in yours, his answer it will be as well
as yours to the kingdom: the answer of God unto his people will be in terrible
things; now therefore of necessity, if you miscarry not in this your service,
you must be Saints, there must be a through work of God upon your souls, and
you not only almost but altogether Christians: otherwise you will meet with such
rocks and stones of offense, as though you go far in a good cause, at last you
will stumble and fall, so as to forsake your true interest and felicity; each
man according to his temper, and sinful frame of spirit, will warp and turn
aside to ways destructive and pernicious both to himself, and to the
kingdom. Were it a work of another constirution, so as the prayers of the
Saints had no such influence upon it, a noble and heroic spirit, which an
unregenerate man may have, might carry you on and through without ^alting; but
since the work is such, wherein the Church of God is so concerned, you will meet
so much of the Refiners fire, and Fullers soap, as that which is but dross and
stubble (the best of Natures excellencies, not sanctified, are no better)
cannot stand before them; nothing but the integrity and uprightness of a
spiritual heart will carry you along without a fall. As for Natures gifts of
wisdom and abilities of reason, wherein, through the goodness of God, any of
you most abound, so far as you are not renewed and sanctified by Christ, they
are all in* grost by sin, a most deceitful thing, which will abuse the
wisest; and by how much the stronger Heb. ^. 1^
your reason is, when time serves that sin is thoroughly provoked, so much the
more desperately will you fall; whereas a spiritual heart goes smoothly on,
what ever provocation comes; it is not led aside by base and selfish ends, it
lives and prospers in a fiery trial, it shrinks not in the wetting, it knows
to dwell with everlasting burnings; that place, ( Esaias 33. 14.) I suppose is
meant of this worlds fire; a pertinent place for this our purpose. The sinners
in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites: who shall dwell
with devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? He
that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, he that despises the gain of
oppression, that shakes his hands from holding of bribes, that stops his
ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing of evil; he
shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the mountainous rocks; bread
shall be given him, his waters shall be sure; that is, he shall have comfort in
his condition, how sad soever to the eye of reason. Shall I give you an example
in this case? Take that of Saul; he was the likeliest of all the people for
abilities of nature; he miscarries, he perishes in the work of God, for want of
an holy heart. Take Jehu for another, he was a forward man, his heart was
naught, his ends corrupt, that ruined his posterity, and lost him utterly the
comfort of all his actions done for God: what he did against the house of Ahab,
though at Gods command, was by God himself returned upon his head as murder:
that I suppose to be the meaning of that place, Hosea 1. 4. Thus says the
Lord, I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu.

Now therefore, besides all other strong engagements to repentance, and turning
unto God, the beauty and excellency of Christ, the comforts of an holy life,
the sweetness of a pardon, the blessing of a quiet peaceful conscience, the
glory of the life to come; see here is one, which in reason you cannot
withstand. As you would the work of God should prosper in your hands, your
selves be happy in it, your names of blessed memory to all posterity; as you
would not be the builders, who refuse that stone which God will make the head
of the corner, in stead of a blessing be a curse to this kingdom, and the
Christian world; amongst all your labors and unwearied travel of your souls,
labor also and take pains with your own hearts, that you may believe in
Christ, and turn to God, so as there be a through work upon your souls, and you
Christians not only in profession, but so indeed: you who have already done
it, to increase and grow up into Christ, yet to a more spiritual and heavenly
temper; you who as yet are strangers to the life of God, now to begin. And let
not any be afraid of such a work; it is true, the God of your salvation will
answer you by terrible things; pardon of sin will break your hearts; count
upon it, if Christ comes into your souls, he brings fire with him; he shall
baptize you Luke 3. 15.
with the holy Ghost and with fire: you shall have trials of all sorts; but all
shall be in righteousness, and he a God of salvation still in all, and you
shall say there is no cause you should complain against him: you shall dwell
with devouring fire, dwell, that is, you shall have peace and quietness, and
rest in all: therefore you see also, notwithstanding all his terrors, he is
the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are afar off upon
the Sea; those Seas which are the farthest off from shore, whose waves are
highest, whose winds are most tempestuous and full of storms. Ask his people,
see if ever any of them yet complained, he that brings two talents Matthew. 2^.
to four, or five to ten, only he thinks much and hardly of his service, that
has but one, and hides it in a napkin. And can any think so to escape the
terrors of the Lord, by shunning of his service? if by terrible things he
answers his people, in what sort may you imagine will he answer such who are
not his, who despise his counsels, cast his precepts behind Prove. 1. 25. Psa.
50. 17.
their backs, and hate to be reformed? If the righteou^^e scarcely saved,
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? how will he stir up all his
wrath against 1 Pet. 4 18. Psa. ^8. 38. Prove. 1. 26.
them, laugh at their destruction, and mock when their fear comes?

souls, I shall add a second use of this point, and it is this; The God of our
salvation, you see, answers Phil. 2. 12.
us by terrible things; then work out your salvation with fear and trembling.
Take heed (brethren) of a careless common and profane spirit in this work;
Where God is terrible you must fear before him; therefore if that be wanting,
what ever is attempted or pretended in Religion, there is nothing done: if you
advance one step forward in the new birth, it is an answer from God, and it is
in things terrible to the flesh: his answer is a tearing of the soul up by the
roots, and planting of it into Christ; a breaking of the heart in pieces by a
sense of sin, a subduing of the soul to the power of his grace, a crucifying of
the flesh; such things cannot be done in you, but you must fear and tremble in
the work: therefore whilst you go on in your profession of religion, with
common* careless hearts, and what you do is slightly done, as something by
the by, not much regarded, all such religion can be but little worth. Some men
(says the Apostle) have a form of godliness, denying the power 2 Timothy 3. 5.
thereof; that is, they do as other Christians do, there is the form, but
with a common, careless spirit, so as there is nothing done in power.
Therefore think upon it well, and be persuaded; if this will not awaken you,
that all your godliness will be in vain, know also that the issue of it will
be terrible at last; it shall not be in vain, as to that mischief that will
follow: such profession of religion undoes thousands; it ends in fearful
backslidings and apostasies from God: you will rest in forms a while, until at
last you grow weary of your forms, and cast off all; having escaped the
pollutions 2 Pet. 2. 20.
of the world, that is, the grosser evils for a season, you will be again
entangled and overcome, and the latter end of such is worse than the beginning.
A dangerous thing it is to be religious, and not through in the work. When
Satan is cast out, and comes again Mat. 12. 44, 45.
and enters, he finds his house swept and garnished; such half conversions are
the sweepings, and garnishings of Satan's house, whereby a soul becomes much
fitter for his use; he can do more mischief by apostates than by others,
accordingly he comes with seven Devils worse than himself, and dwells there,
that is, has that soul faster in possession than before: all this for want of
working out salvation with fear and trembling; when as it is not made a
business to save the soul, and what is done, is not with care Esaias 63. 17.
Those that wander from the ways of God, are said to be such, whose hearts are
hardened against his fear: therefore also when the Lord would show, how he
would make an everlasting covenant with his people, so as ^e would not turn
away from them to do them good, he says he will put his fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from him. Jer. 32. 40.

by terrible things he answers you; will you think amiss of what he does in
answering your prayers? were it an unnecessary trouble put upon you, there were
color for offense, but what he does in all such things it is for you; it is no
more than what you beg of him with tears bespeaks; and all you see is done
in righteousness and judgment. By terrible things in righteousness will thou
answer us, O God of our salvation. Suppose he makes you walk in darkness, in a
sad condition, and you see no light; yet trust Esaias 50. 1^.
in the name of the Lord, and stay upon your God: trust not so much to what you
see in things, as what you see in him; therefore that is the counsel of the
Prophet, trust in his name, stay upon him. You, it may be, have been begging
comfort, healing for your souls, assurance of his love; he answers you with
terrors; yet trust him still, it is an answer notwithstanding. Long have you
wrastled with him for the kingdom, he answers you by earthquakes, lightening,
and thunder, as David has expressed it, Psalm. 18. as you heard before, The earth
shook and trembled, the foundations also of the hills moved and were shaken;
the Lord thundered also in the heavens, the most high gave his voice, hailstones
and coals of fire. Thus when you feel the very roots and foundatins of the
kingdom to shake under you, all this is no more but toward an answer to those
tears which he has put into his bottle; your own prayers, so far as they have
had a power with God, have been some cause of all these shakings; and you shall
see at last, how terrible soever his answer be, in righteousness he does it, and
that not only as to your deserts but, as to your advantage, and the kingdoms
peace: therefore, I say, learn from hence to take things well from him, and
trust him still what ever comes; be confident, though clouds and darkness are
round about him, P^^. 97. ^.
righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne: though
darkness be under his feet, and you not understand his way at present, yet he
bows the heavens and comes down amongst you, is the God of your salvation
still. See what the Saints have done in such a case in former times. Moses in
the wilderness, in those afflictions which befell the people, speaks for
himself and them, Psa. 90. 1. O Lord, thou art our habitation in all
generations. Little cause was there in sight so to speak; they had not where
to lay their heads but in a tent, that in a wilderness, the Lord who was their
shelter, all they had, brake in upon them in his wrath, consumed many thousands
of the people; yet see what faith will say to this; Lord, thou art our
habitation in all generations: not only in times of peace, but in the saddest
seasons. So David, Psalm. 38. 15. when as he ro^red by reason of the
disquietnesse of his heart, in thee, O Lord, do I hope, says he, and thou will hear me, O Lord my God; as Job says in a like condition, though he kills
me, yet I Will trust him; and you see that neither of them trusted God in vain.
The poor Canaanitish woman, she came begging unto Christ, and laid open her
condition; at first he answered her not a word, this was terrible; when he
spoke it was in terror, I am not sent (says he) but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, and, it is not meet to take the childrens bread and cast it
unto dogs; what terrible things are here? yet she goes on, Lord help me, the
dogs have crummes, she speeds accordingly, all these terrors made but way,
to that which was the sweetest answer that her soul could wish; O woman great
i^ thy says, be it unto thee even as thou will: you have the story, Matthew. 15.
22. You must not take one piece of his answer, and say that is all, take all
together, then you will see the sum is this, be it unto thee even as thou will.
Thus I say what ever terrors or afflictions come, what ever shakings or
tremblings of the mountains, what ever lightnings or thundrings in wrath, take
nothing ill from him, bate nothing of your thankfulness, nothing in your
confidence and trust, nor be discouraged, you who labor in the work of God.

are set on fire of hell, no water upon earth will quench them; enemies James
3. 6.
will multiply, and possibly renew their strength, after an ebb there comes a
flood; friends also will some be false, some angry, cross and peevish; pass
not for these things, your security stands not in exemption from them, in vain
it is to seek it, such things must be, but here it lies, that you in
uprightness and singleness of ^eart, act for God, and for your country, in
carrying on his work: therefore if any thing lie heavy upon your hearts in
your proceedings, think not to bate your burden by sinful condescensions, or
deserting of the truth, no, you shall go on and prosper because of truth, and
meekness, and righteousness, even whilst your right hands teach you terrible
things, against the enemies of God and of the kingdom, what ever falsehood,
injury, or ingratitude you meet withal from others. And you must expect that
those who serve and save a kingdom, where still are persons of all sorts, must
ever act upon such terms: it is with you in this, as with the Lord himself, by
answering in righteousness, you shall not answer pleasing things to all; but
here is your comfort, what you do for God is under his protection, and he
engaged therein much more than you.

I was silent, says David, because thou Psalm. 39. 9.
did it, say you so too. As God has laid his plot with circumstances put
together, it is not this or that which you may think was il neglected, or il
done, had it been otherwise, could shape out such an answer as the Lord intends
for you at last: then murmr less at creatures, and look up more to God, the
answer you expect is to be his as well as theirs.

answers by terrible things, who makes darkness his secret place, his pavilion
round about him dark waters Psalm. 18. 11.
and thick clouds of the skies, may cause, for ought you know, these liftings
up to be but for a season, and occasions of a greater fall; who then may dare
from what the Lord has done, to take a liberty to despise, or set himself
against his brother? You have not had your answer yet; God has more to say;
ere he has done, his answer may be quite another thing than you imagine;
something he has to say to your sins as well as unto you, (as you have
heard) among the rest, to such divisions, strife and bitterness amongst his
children: when we were low, we loved better, then was no such noise of our
contentions and invectives one against another which now fills our ears; and
what follows? the best gifts for want of love are useless, men of good
abilities are made unprofitable, like sounding brass, or tinkling Cymbals,
making a noise in the 1 Cor 13. 1.
world to no purpose: God sees all this, and certainly will not be silent in
it. He forgave to us a debt of ten Math. 18. 27, 28.
thousand talents, in all his great delivera^ces wrought amongst us, had he
taken advantage at our sins, he had destroyed us utterly; now if we take our
fellow servants by the throat for a few pence, will he not have somewhat to say
to this? then fear thus to provoke that God who answers his Saints by
terrible things. You heard before what cause from hence you have, to work out
your salvation with fear and trembling; give me leave here to renew that
exhortation, the rather, because one main thing intended by the Apostle in that
his counsel, Phil. 2. 12. is that in their working out salvation, they should
travail so in the way to life, as not to fall out by the way. He speaks to
Saints, he calls them so, chap. 1. 1. says it was meat for him to think so of
them all, therefore by working out salvation, he means not so much their
labor after their first entrance into Christ, but after those enjoyments of
God which believers, in his service, in this life obtain, which is the work and
business of a Christian in this world; salvation begins here, therefore the
Church is called Heaven. So Psalm. 132. 16. I Matthew. 13. 31, Matthew. 16. 19.
will cloth her Priests with salvation, which must be meant of something in
this life. Now because he that in pursuance of a Christians work shall
persecute his brother, works not with fear, but is insolent, bold and proud,
therefore the Apostle in opposition unto all such strife among brethren, bids
them work out their salvation with fear and trembling: see what he says both
before and after, you will find that is his scope; be ye like minded, says he v.
2. that is, one toward another, Romans 15. 5. having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind, let nothing be done through strife and vainglory, but in
lowliness of mind let each esteem others better than themselves, thus did
Christ, says he, and lost not by it, by humbling himself he was exalted,
wherefore, says he, work out your salvation with fear and trembling; he
brings it in with a wherefore upon what he had said before of brotherly love
and mutual forbearance, and in the words following pursues the same subject,
do all things without murmurings and disputings: so as I say this fear and
trembling in working out salvation, he opposes, as to a common careless spirit
in religion, as was showed before, so to that liberty and boldness which they
took, in despising, hating and striving with each other: the truth is, these
two go still together, commonnesse or profanesse of spirit in a Christians
work, and pride or bitterness one against another. The Apostle puts them again
together, Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, that is opposed to bitterness,
and holiness, that is opposed to profanesse: therefore it follows, looking
diligently lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and lest
there be a profane person like Esau: that man was eminently guilty in them
both. A bitter spirit is always Jam. 3. 14, 15. 1 Timothy 6. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 16. 1
Cor. 3. 3.
in the same degree a common and profane spirit in religion, what ever zeal
and forwardness may seem to be: there is much profession of religion, not so
much of the fear of God, that is the cause of so much gall and wormwood
now-a-dayes. Look in what degree the true fear of God and holiness prevails,
so far they will not suffer it in any soul. The Apostles reason also which he
adds, is most remarkable; For (says he) it is God that works in you, both
to will and to do of his good pleasure; intimating that it was their pride and
selfeconfidence, that was the cause of all their strife, forgetting who it was
that made any of them to excel; as if he should have said, Have any of you
gifts, or graces, any strength or joy? God can cause those gifts to wither, he
can withdraw and take away your joy and comfort, he works in you both to will
and to do, and that of his good pleasure; therefore fear and tremble to
despise each one his brother. What we do in all such bitterness and strife,
we think is in pursuance of the work of God in the way to life, Joh. 16. 2.
they shall think they do God service, says our Savior; but if he be our
Master, and we work for him, where is his fear Malac. 1. Romans 14.
if we despise or judge our fellow servants? Be zealous for God, and so, as not
to be bitter one against another; zeal, if not right, will turn into
bitterness, and bitterness will soon kindle a false zeal. To conclude, if
therefore now the Lord has wrought for us deliverance, we take encouragement
to sin that way, besides what other dreadful things we may expect from him,
lo this is one, profaneness and commonnesse of spirit will grow upon us, and
(as the Apostle says) our religion will be in vain, James 1. 26. God shall
withdraw himself, and we be short of our enjoyments of him; work we may, but
no salvation will be wrought out by us; 1 John 3. 14, 15. he that loves not
his brother, abides in death; and whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer,
and we know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.

FINIS.
Die Jovis 25. Novembris 1647.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That Mr. Wheeler do from this
House give thanks to Mr Carter for the great pains he took in his Sermon
preached yesterday at Margarets Westminster before the House of Commons (it
being a day of public Humiliation) and that he desire him to print his Sermon;
wherein he is to have the like privilege in printing of it, as others in the
like kind usually have had.

Henry Elsinge Cler. Parl. Dom Com.

I appoint Gites Calvert to print my Sermon.

W. Carter.


