THE COVENANT OF GOD WITH ABRAHAM, OPENED. WHEREIN I. The duty of
Infant Baptism is cleared. II. Something added concerning the Sabbath, and the
nature and increase of the Kingdom of Christ.


Together with A SHORT DISCOURSE Concerning the MANIFESTATIONS of GOD unto his
People IN THE LAST DAYS. Wherein is showed the manner of the Spirits work
therein to be in the use of ordinary gifts, not by extraordinary Revelations.

By WILLIAM CARTER Minister of the Gospel in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for John Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear in
Goldsmiths row in Cheapside, 1654.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, AND To the right Worshipful the
ALDERMEN and SHERIFFS of the City of London, IN Observance of their Commands,
And Testimony of his hearty affection and due respects, These short Discourses,
I. THE COVENANT OF GOD WITH ABRAHAM. II. THE MANIFESTATIONS OF GOD UNTO HIS
PEOPLE.
Are humbly presented

by their Servant in Christ, W. CARTER.

TO THE READER.
WHat I desired to offer upon this subject of Infant Baptism, I have brought
into as little room as I could; I have therefore purposely avoided a particular
answering of every Objection urged by those that differ; neither have I
mentioned all, nor many arguments, to prove what I assert therein; but have
singled out that which I conceive to be the chief, which is, that express
command of God to Abraham's seed, Genesis 17. 9. to observe the token of his
Covenant in their Generations; Baptism being now the token and seal thereof as
Circumcision was, and the Application of it unto Infants part of that token.
Dissatisfaction therein, as in other cases, in many is for want of industry in
searching out the truth: therefore I would not discourage my Reader by too
large a Volume.

Solomon says, we must seek for Wisdom as for Silver, and search for it as for
hid Treasures; Prove. 2. 4.
in which labor the way is not to stay only upon some lesser veins, but by
them to find out the maine body of the Mine. Many hints we have of this truth
in Scripture, here and there, but the root of this matter is the Covenant of
God with Abraham, to which therefore I have especially confined this discourse.

The reason why yet notwithstanding I have thus far enlarged, is because this
Covenant is of such extent, it being indeed a summary of the whole Gospel of
the Kingdom; in opening whereof therefore I could not but insist upon sundry
things touching the kingdom of Christ. Concerning the Sabbath also I have been
forced to enlarge a little, because I find it a parallel case between that and
Infant Baptism; I have therefore in my way unto my text stayed a while, in
opening the third and fourth Chapters of this Epistle to the Hebrews, inserting
some brief heads of what, some years since, I have handled more at large in
that subject of the Sabbath. Nor could I well avoid a digression upon the
Doctrine of the Law, that so I might vindicate and persuade the Study of the
Old Testament, in order to an establishment in, and a right understanding both
of the Sabbath, and of the Ordinances of the Worship, whether it be
Infant Baptism, or any of the rest. The good Spirit of God who is the
comforter of his people, lead us into all truth, and guide our feet into the
way of peace; which is the prayer of

Thy Servant in the Gospel, W. C.

ERRATA.
Page 6. lin. 28. r. (...). ^ p. 39. l. 33. for confirmed, r. conferred. p. 86
l. 6. for there, r. then. p. 94. marg. r. Psalm. 62. 12. p. 102. marg. r. Mark.
10. p. 111. l. 15. r. is sealed. p. 117. l. 28. for, let not the people of God
imagine, r. the people of God may not expect. p. 154. l. 33. r. Thirdly, it
appears. p. 155. marg. r. Use. 1. p. 159 marg. r. Use. 2. p. 170. l. 18. r.
against.

THE COVENANT OF GOD WITH ABRAHAM OPENED.
Heb. 6. 13, 14, 15, 16. For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could
swear by no greater, he swear by himself, saying, surely, blessing I will bless
thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee. And so after he had patiently
endured, he obtained the promise. For men verily swear by the greater, and an
Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife. Wherein God willing more
abundantly to show unto the Heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel,
confirmed it by an Oath; that by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled
for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.


IN opening this Scripture it will be necessary, for a clearer proceeding,
first, to consider the Apostles scope in this whole Epistle.

He writes this Epistle to believing Hebrews, such at least as did profess
the faith of Christ, as appears in that he calls them holy Brethren,
partakers of the Heavenly calling, of whose profession Christ was the Apostle
and High Priest, chap. 3. 1. They had been instructed in the Doctrine of Christ,
chap. 5. and 6. He commends them for their labor of love, in ministering to the
Saints, chap. 6. And they are supposed to be in a Christian Church, chap. 13.
7. 17.

Now these believers were many of them forsakeing the Ordinances, of the
Worship, of the New Testament; they were casting off their holy profession,
whereof Christ Jesus was the Apostle and High Priest, and were going back again
to Moses; as we see also in other Epistles to the Churches, especially in that
to the Galatians. This Apostasy he endeavors in this Epistle to prevent and
cure. And that is his main scope therein, as appears, because still in the
close of his Argumentations, which are many, his conclusions are by way of
exhortation to that purpose.

As for instance, to hold fast their profession, and their liberty; chapter 4. 14.
having said something before by way of Argument, thus he concludes, Having
therefore such an High Priest, Jesus the Son of God, who is entered into the
Heavens, let us hold fast our profession. And verse 16. let us come with
boldness, (...), with liberty or freedom of speech to the Throne of grace;
spoken in opposition to the Jewish bondage, who had not in their worship that
free access to that throne or mercy-seat, as we now have, but were kept at more
distance, and made to stand without the veil, Heb. 9. 8.

Again chap. 7. 8. 9. See how he argues all along, not to prove that Christ was
come, but (taking that for granted) to prove that upon his coming there was to
be a change of the Priesthood, and of the Law of the worship of God. Then after
all, see how he concludes, which is not till chap. 10. 19. Having therefore
Brethren boldness (the same word again, (...), translated liberty in the
margent) to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, and having an High
Priest over the House of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith, etc. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without
wavering, not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of
some is. So, v. 35. Cast not away therefore your confidence, (...).

The bondage of the Jews did chiefly stand in this, that they were under such
Ordinances and Administrations of worship. Gal. 4. 9. As for their personal
state wherein they stood by Faith, they were free as we are free, being under
the same Covenant of grace, and justified by Faith as well as we. Therefore all
this is spoken of the Worship of the New Testament in opposition to the Old,
that they should not forsake that, to return again to this.

Again chap. 12. 15. 16. his exhortation is, that they would not sell their
birthright; what is the birthright of believers (for of such he speaks) which
they can sell? is it not their privileges in the Church, and Worship of the
Gospel? Of which also is meant that opposition between the Old Testament and
the New, in the following part of that Chapter.

I shall name but one place more, that is, chap. 4. 9. There remains
therefore the keeping of a Sabbath for the people of God. His arguments from
whence he thus concludes, we have before from Ps. 95. beginning chap. 3. v. 7.
where the Saints of the New Testament (as appears by the Apostles application
of that Scripture) are prophetically brought in thus exhorting one another, O
come let us worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker, for
he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture and sheep of his hand; to
day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, etc. I am the good
Shepherd (says our Savior, Joh. 10.) and my sheep will hear my voice:
therefore that is made the argument among the Saints exhorting one another to
come, and worship, and kneel before the Lord, because it is the voice of Christ
the great Shepherd of our souls that calls us to it; and that we harden not
our hearts, as they did in the Wilderness, to whom he was a Shepherd also,
called the Shepherd of Israel, Psalm. 80. 1. So Psalm. 77. 20.

And because two things especially he does for us as our Shepherd, namely, he
feeds us, and gives us rest, Cant. 1. 7. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves,
where thou feedest, and where thou causest thy flock to rest at noon: therefore
that is made the Argument further, lest he swear against us in his wrath, as he
did against them, that we shall not enter into his rest.

Now the Apostle from that Scripture, Psalm. 95. in order to persuade them to
the worship of the Gospel, in these two Chapters, the third and fourth, proves
the Christian Sabbath, as we shall see anon. Such is the connection between
these two, the Worship, and the Sabbath, as he that grants the one must not
deny the other; therefore having brought his Arguments for that his purpose he
thus concludes, v. 9. There remains therefore the keeping of a Sabbath (so
in the margent, and in the Greek) for the people of God. He says not there
remains a Sabbath, but a Sabbatisme, (...), the celebration of a Sabbath for
the people of God. Because these believers to whom he wrote were forsaking not
only the Christian Sabbath, but also the Worship: and so his scope there being
to prove both, and to prove the one by the other, therefore he uses this word
(...), rightly rendered the keeping of a Sabbath, which comprehends both the
Sabbath it self, and the Celebration of it in the house of Gods rest, in the
solemn instituted Worship. There remains therefore the celebration of a
Sabbath for the people of God. Now, I say, such being his conclusions, by this
we see, that a main scope of the Apostle in this Epistle is, to prevent this
their Apostasy from the Worship of the Gospel.

Having thus found out his scope, it will be necessary also and very useful
sundry ways, in that which I intend to insist upon from these words, that we
consider also, in the second place, what course he takes to prevail with them
in this matter; namely, First, whereas the Ordinances of the Old Testament were
given by Angels, and by the hand of Moses, Gal. 3. 19. Heb. 2. 2. Acts 7. 53.
And the Ordinances of the New Testament by Christ himself. In the two first
Chapters he sets out the dignity of Christ above Angels. And in the third
Chapter he prefers him before Moses. Consider the Apostle and High Priest of
our profession Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him that appointed him, as
Moses also was faithful in all his house. He to be esteemed as the builder, and
such a builder as made the World, and is God. Verse 4. Moses but as a Stone in
that building; he as the Son, and as an Owner; Moses only as a Servant in this
house. Now having thus prepared them, he faleth upon his intended subject: and
having made mention of the house of Christ, He lays down that proposition,
chap. 3. 6. His house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, (...), and the
rejoicing of the hope firm to the end. That is, if we forsake not the Worship
of the Gospel. Because under the Jewish Ordinances they were in a state of
bondage, and because that Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a
better hope did, by the which we draw nigh to God, Heb. 7. 19. therefore their
holding fast the Ordinances and Privileges of the Gospel he calls an holding
fast the confidence or liberty, and the rejoicing of the hope.

And because the house of God is the place of his rest, (as we see Esai. 66. 1.
Where is the house that ye will build for me? or where is the place of my rest?
So Psalm. 132. 8. 14.) He takes occasion thence to exhort them, not to refuse
the offer made by Christ unto them of resting with him in his house: and that
he does,

First, in the words of the Prophet David, Psalm. 95. where he finds an
exhortation for his purpose, penned to his hand. Wherefore (says he) that is,
because we are his house, ( as the Holy Ghost says) to day if ye will hear
his voice (that is, the voice of Christ, for his voice it is, whose house and
sheep we are:) harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of
temptation in the Wilderness, when your Fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw
my works forty years; wherefore I had in disdain that Generation, (and said,
they do always err in their hearts, and they have not known my ways) as I
swear, (...), in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my rest.

The Prophet presses us to hear his voice in this matter, because he is our
Shepherd, and we the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand, as was
said before. The Apostle urges us to hear his voice, because he is the Apostle
and High Priest of our profession faithful in his house as the Son, and the
Builder of it. He varieth the title, but he speaks to the same thing: for what
the Lord Christ does as the Apostle and High Priest of our profession in his
house, he does it as the great Shepherd of our souls: as we see Psalm. 23.
where David seting forth the blessings of his house (as we see in the close of
the Psalm, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever) he does it by
this; The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. He makes me to lie down in
green pastures, he leads me by the still waters, etc.

We heard before that two things especially he does for us as our Shepherd; he
feeds us, and he gives us rest. Ps. 23. 2. He gives us green pastures, and he
makes us to lie down therein. He spreds a Table for us, and that in the
presence of our Enemies. Both these he gives us in himself; he is our Bread of
Life, and he is our Rest. In order to both these, he has built us an House of
rest, which is his Church, as we shall see anon: There he feeds us, and there
he causes his flock to rest at noon. Cant. 1. 7. He appoints also a day of
rest to be celebrated in his house, in the Service of it.

And because his sheep are not as the wild beasts, that live of their own
finding, but are under the government and guidance of their Shepherd; therefore
called the Sheep of his hand, Psalm. 95. that is, of his government, Psalm. 77.
20. and such as know his voice; therefore at his voice it is, that they come
together as his flock in his house and Worship, and that upon the day appointed
for it by himself. O come let us Worship and bow down etc. To day if ye will
hear his voice, etc. All this he does as our Shepherd, and he does it also as
the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, in as much as in that capacity
he appoints his house, and the service of it, and was faithful therein to him
that appointed him, as the Apostle shows.

And in as much as he is Lord also of the Sabbath, as he is of his house, and
has set apart and sanctified that day, for the service of it; this being as
much in effect, as if every Sabbath day we heard from him a voice inviting us
to rest with him in his house; therefore is it that the Prophet brings in the
people of God in that manner, as upon that day, exhorting one another, saying,
O come let us Worship, etc. to day if ye will hear his voice. Nor is there any
other day wherein the Saints can be supposed, ordinarily, to exhort and stir
up one another to worship God; The other six days are appointed for labor,
Exodus, 20. 9.

I have been willing to stay the longer upon this, because it will be useful in
opening the Covenant of God with Abraham, as we shall see anon. And because in
these two chapters, the third and fourth, we have a clear evidence for the
Christian Sabbath, which also I shall make some use of in clearing the duty of
Infant Baptism, which is the thing especially intended in this discourse; for
which cause also I shall stay yet a little longer upon these two chapters, before
I come to my Text, to show from the words of the Apostle that by, to day if ye
will hear his voice, in that Psalm. 95. is meant the Christian Sabbath day;
which may be cleared in this manner.

First, It is evident that it is meant of a day of rest, chap. 4. 7, 8. He
limiteth a certain day, saying in David, to day, after so long a time, as it is
said, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: for if Joshuah
had given them rest, namely, that rest of which David speaks, then would he
not afterward have spoken of another day. Therefore of a day of rest it must be
meant; else the Apostles argument had not been concluding nor pertinent,
because many other days might have afterward been spoken of, although Joshuah
had given them all the rest that was ever to be expected.

Secondly, It is meant of such a rest as God can and sometimes does swear in
his wrath against his own people, who are his house, and the people of his
pasture, that they shall not enter into it: this cannot be said of what they
enjoy in their personal interest by faith only; but, as for the comfort of his
Ordinances and Sabbath; how this may be said concerning that, we shall see
anon, in opening the promise of God to Abraham.

Thirdly, That it is meant of a Sabbath days rest, appears by the manner of
the Apostles arguing in this place, in as much as the Apostle proves it to be
another day of rest, besides what was in use in the Church before. Another in
opposition to the seventh day Sabbath, and that because David speaks of it as
a rest to be entered into a long time after, although the seventh days rest was
entered into from the beginning of the world, in as much as he spoke in a
certain place, saying in this wise, and God rested the seventh day from all his
works; and in this place again; if they shall enter into my rest: implying a
promise that some shall, though others shall not enter into it. Now, says the
Apostle, this being spoken by the Prophet David, of a time then to come: and
again that he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, to day, after so long a
time; there remains therefore the keeping of a Sabbath for the people of God;
namely, over and besides the seventh days Sabbath. Now from this his manner of
arguing, it is evident that he supposes this day of which David speaks,
saying, to day if ye will hear his voice, to be a day of the same kind as the
seventh day Sabbath was; because else there had been no such opposition to be
made, nor would there have been place for an although, or a notwithstanding, in
the case as in v. 31. because any other rest might have also been entered into
from the beginning of the world, as a believers personal rest by faith was; but
that which makes the opposition is that David speaks of a Sabbath days rest,
to be entered into now a long time after, even in the times of the New
Testament, of which times that Psalm. 95: is a Prophecy, as appears by the
Apostles application of it in this place; and thereupon he concludes it to be
another day of rest remaining for us besides the seventh days rest. By this we
see that by to day if ye will hear his voice, is not meant only of a Christians
personal rest by faith, which is every days enjoyment, and was entered into from
the beginning of the world, but of another Sabbath days rest besides what was
in use before.

Fourthly, Because it is meant of a day of rest to be celebrated in the house
of God, in his Worship. So the Apostle concludes, verse 9. There remains
therefore a Sabbatisme, (...), the celebration of a Sabbath for the people of
God: a word comprehending the Sabbath and Worship put together, as was before
observed. And the coherence of the words Psalm. 95. implies as much. O come let
us worship and bow down, and kneel before the Lord our maker; for we are the
people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand; to day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, etc. It appears also from the Apostles
wherefore, chap. 3. 7. His house are we; wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, to
day if ye will hear his voice, etc. So as if the question be, what voice? or
what day? the answer from the Psalm, and from the Apostles inference, must be
this, the day of worshipping the Lord our maker, and of resting with him in his
house, and his voice, whose house we are, inviteing us unto it.

Fifthly, Because the Apostle understands it of a day to be kept upon the same
ground, in relation unto Christ his ceasing from his works, and entering into
his rest, as the seventh days Sabbath was in relation to God his ceasing from
his works, after his making the first creation, and entering into his. So it
follows verse 10. There remains therefore the keeping of a Sabbath to the
people of God; for he that is entered into his rest, that is Christ, has ceased
from his works, as God did from his. And that it may appear that it is Christ
of whom he thus speaks, I must stay yet a little longer upon these words for
the clearing of it.

The Apostle in these words makes a further application, and explication of
that ninty fifth Psalm for his purpose: for whereas in that Psalm it is said,
that he is the Lord our maker, and we the people of his pasture, and the sheep
of his hand; and therefore should come together, worship and bow down and kneel
before him; he makes this the reason why this other day of rest, of which David
speaks, should be looked upon as a Sabbath, thus to be celebrated in his
house and worship, as the former Sabbaths were, because this our Lord and maker
Jesus Christ, spoken of in that Psalm, has entered into his rest, and ceased
from his works as God did from his.

And that it may appear that Christ is that Lord our maker, whose voice we are
to hear upon that day; Consider what is said, Heb. 3. 4, 5, 6. Christ the
Apostle of our profession, who built the house, and built all things, and is
God, he as a Son was faithful over his own house, whose house are we, if we
hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm to the end.
Wherefore (as the Holy Ghost says) To day if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts. He exhorts them, in the words of the Prophet, and brings it in
with a wherefore, upon what he had said of our being the house of Christ,
therefore he supposes, his voice it is we are to hear whose house we are,
which (says the Apostle) is Christ the Son of God, who built both it and all
things else. His house are we; wherefore, to day if ye will hear his voice.

And that it may also be clear, that those words, v. 10. are to be understood
of Christ his entering into his rest:

First, I must a little mend the translation, or rather the placing of the
words therein; for these words, his own, in the former part of the verse, he
that has ceased from his own works, (which make them seem to be meant of a
Believers ceasing from his sin, which is his own work) are not rightly placed
there, but should be in the latter clause; thus, He also has ceased from his
works, as God did from his own works; for so they are in the Greek, (...), That
is, as God did from the works peculiar to his first creation, so did Christ
from his.

Secondly, consider the words, v. 14. which are brought in with a seeing then,
pointing to something going before, namely to his entering into his rest; v. 10.
Seeing then that we have a great High Priest that is passed into the heavens,
Jesus the Son of God, etc. Which can refer only to those words, v. 10. of his
entering into his rest, for that supposes his passing into the heavens.

Thirdly, it cannot be meant of ceasing from sin, because it is such a
ceasing as was God's ceasing from his works, which was such as he took
satisfaction, in what he had done; it was not only Negative or a bare ceasing
from labor, that God entered into, but a Positive rest, and satisfaction. Exodus
31. 17. He rested the seventh day, and was refreshed; And looked upon his work
and said, it was exceeding good. But he that cease from sin, looks upon
that as evil, and takes no satisfaction in it at all.

Fourthly, Consider that those words, v. 10. are the Apostles argument to prove
that there is another rest, or keeping of a Sabbath remaining for the people of
God, besides what they had from the beginning of the world, v. 3. and since
Joshuahs time, v. 8. for our ceasing from sin upon our rest in Christ by faith
proves no such matter.

Fifthly, I may add, what our Savior Christ says of himself, Mark 2. 28.
Luke 6. 5. That he is Lord also of the Sabbath. He is Lord of Heaven and Earth,
Lord of his House, and Lord of his Worship. There are differences of
administrations, but the same Lord. 1 Cor. 12. 5. and he is Lord also of the
Sabbath, which he could not be unless he also had entered into his rest,
ceasing from his works, as God the first creator did when he ceased from his:
because the reason of the keeping of a Sabbath is put upon this, because it is
the day of our Lords entering into his rest. Exodus 20. 11.
Our everlasting Sabbath in Heaven will be an entrance into the joy of our
Lord; Math. 25. 21.
so also the comfort of a Sabbath now is Communion with the Lord of the Sabbath
in his own rest. Therefore since he is Lord of the Sabbath, he must enter into
his rest, as God did into his; as the Apostle speaks of him in this place. By
that which has been said, it appears, that this is meant of Christ his ceasing
from his works, and entering into his rest. Which being so, it is evident
concerning this other day of rest, of which David speaks, saying, To day if
ye will hear his voice, that the Apostle understands it of a day of rest to be
kept upon the same ground, in reference to Christ his entering into his rest, as
the seventh day was in reference unto God his entering into his.

Much more might be said from these two chapters for the Christian Sabbath; but
I would not stay too long in my passage to my Text. Thus much was necessary to
be inserted, because I shall make use of it anon, where we shall see, although
it may seem too large a digression, yet that it was not needless nor
impertinent.

Thus it appears, that by To day if ye will hear his voice, is meant the
Christian Sabbath day; to the keeping whereof, in the House and Worship of
Christ, the Apostle exhorts them (as I said) First, in the words of the
Prophet David, verse 7. Then,

Secondly, v. 12. he exhorts them in his own words to the same purpose, and as
it were by way of commentary upon those words of David. Therefore as the
Prophet, so the Apostle proceeds to press his advice and exhortation upon them
from their example who fell in the Wilderness, showing that David in that Psalm
makes the condition and case of such who in the times of the Gospel shall
forsake the Ordinances and Sabbath of the New Testament, refusing to hear the
voice of Christ inviting the people of his pasture, and sheep of his hand, to
rest with him in his house upon his day, to be the same with theirs who tempted
God in the wilderness, in refusing his offer to give them the land of Canaan,
destroying the inhabitants before them, and to give them rest in that land; and
that he will swear against them in his wrath, that they shall not enter into
his rest, as he had done against these who fell in the Wilderness.

Thus having finished in these two chapters his arguments, and exhortations
taken from that Scripture Psalm. 95. he proceeds to another, and still in
prosecution of the same work, namely, to deliver them from this forsaking of
the Worship and Ordinances of the Gospel, and that is this. He shows, that upon
the coming of Christ, there was to be a change of the Priesthood, and of the
Law of Ordinances; and that Christ is now the only High Priest over the house
of God; being a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck, not after the
order of Aaron. This he begins at the fifth chapter; he pursues it in the
seventh, eighth, ninth, and to the ninteenth verse of the tenth chapter, where
he concludes, and from what he had said, persuades them against this Apostasy.

This sixth chapter, is part of a digression, which he begineth at the eleventh
verse of the fifth chapter: in which he sharply reprehends them for their
unprofitableness, when for the time they ought to be Teachers, that they had
need to be again taught the first principles of the Oracles of God. But that he
says he would not do, but would go on to perfection, even to those things
which he says are (...), hard to be understood: He gives his reason, because
the recovery of such, who had tasted of the sweetness of the Ordinances, and
House of Christ, and were utterly fallen away, not only from them, but also
from the other principles of the Doctrine of Christ, would be but in vain
attempted.

This sharpness of his toward them he again mollifies, verse 9. But we hope
better things of you, etc. Endeavors to comfort them, and exhorts them, in the
words next before my Text, to labor with diligence for a full assurance of
hope to the end: And not to be slothful, but followers of them who through
faith and patience inherit the promises.

Now in the words of my Text he urges this duty of laboring for a full
assurance of hope upon them, by showing that ground of this assurance of hope,
which the Saints have from the example of Abraham, that great pattern of
Believers: and that two ways. 1. By way of immitation, set forth by showing 1.
What God did for him, namely, 1. He made him a promise of blessing and
multiplying him, 2. He confirmed it by an Oath, 1. Swearing by himself. 2.
That because he could swear by no greater, giving to him the best security he
could.

2. What Abraham did, and found thereupon. 1. He inherited the promise, 2. Yet
that after he had patiently endured.

In all this is intimated, if we follow his steps and do as he did, that we
shall find as as he found. Thus is his example propounded for a ground of
assurance of hope by way of immitation. 2. By way of instruction, in as much as
what God did for him, was intended not for him only, but also for all
Believers, as Heirs of the same promise together with him.


This is set forth, by showing 1. The Nature and Use of an Oath among men; 1.
Men swear by the greater, 2. Unto them it is (in point of confirmation) an end
of all strife.
2. God's end in making that Oath to Abraham. 1. That he might show the
immutability of his Counsel, 1. More abundantly, 2. To the Heirs of Promise.
2. That strong consolation might be had, set forth by 1. The means, namely, by
two immutable things, wherein it was impossible for God to lie. 2. The persons
that should have it, Believers, even of the times of the New Testament. That we
might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before us.




By this we see that many things might be considered from these words by way of
observation.

First, That the things promised in the Gospel, are by the Saints obtained by
inheritance. Abraham inherited the promise, and all Believers are here called
the Heirs of promise. Begotten to a lively hope, to an inheritance
incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1. 2. So Acts 26. 18. Brought from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, to receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them who are sanctified by faith in Christ. And that will be
the welcome sentence from the judge at last, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit ye the Kingdom. Their title is sure, they cannot lose their portion,
and it is so great it must be freely given, and by such a Father; the Gospel
therefore is his Testament: The sum of what is promised therein, is an
enjoyment of God himself: Those that have it, must therefore be his Children by
union with him in Jesus Christ. And if Children, then Heirs of God, Romans 8. 17.

Secondly, That those who do enjoy this inheritance, by faith and patience they
must inherit it. Heb. 4. 2.
This work is carried on by the power of a creating word, and the word profits
not where it is not mixed with faith; Romans 1. 17.
it is the power of God to Salvation to them only that believe. And because
the Lord will take time to perform his promise, dispatching this great work not
all at once, but by degrees, therefore we have need of patience, that having
done the will of God, we may receive the promise, Heb. 10. 36.

Thirdly, That the example of believers is a great advantage to a Christian in
believing. Abraham's example is here made the ground of a Christians confidence.
So Romans 4. 12. Believers are said to walk in the steps of Abraham's faith. Thus
David comforted himself, Psalm. 22. 4, 5. Our Fathers trusted in thee, and they
were not confounded.

Faith is a great work, but this encouragement we have; the things to be
believed are things of a common salvation, Jude 3. A duty to which others are
obliged as well as we; and that which many thousands have done before us. 1
Pet. 5. 9. Whom resist steadfastly in the faith, knowing that the same
afflictions are accomplished in your brethren which are in the world. So, Col.
1. 23. If ye continue in the faith, grounded, and settled, and be not moved away
from the hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to
every creature which is under heaven. As if he had said, Had it been a Gospel
devised only for you, and so you put upon a way of believing by your selves,
you might then have disputed the case, and have been unsettled; but it is not so.

Fourthly, That Oaths are lawful, and in some cases a duty among Christians.
God himself swears, and his swearing is set forth by what is in use amongst
men, namely, for confirmation, to put an end to all strife. When he swears, he
acts after the manner of man; now if he acts as a man, it shall not be in that
which is sinful. He was made like us in all things, yet without sin, Heb. 4.
25. Leut. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shall
swear by his name. So Jer. 4. 2. whereby we see how to understand those other
places, Math. 5. 33. James 5. 12. namely, that we swear not profanely or
commonly, but religiously, and as a sacred work; so says our Savior, let your
communication be yea, yea, nay, nay: And that we swear not by any creature, but
by his name; such instances are given in both places.

Fifthly, That those who are Believers have not only the Promise, but also the
Oath of God, to rest their confidence upon. He loves to do like himself, and
therefore to do the utmost for his people: In working, his right hand teaches
him, Psalm. 45. 4. and in promising and making sure his promise, he does what
may be done for us. Because he could swear by no greater, he swear by himself.
What cause have we to be convinced of sin, because of unbelief, as our Savior
speaks, John. 16. 9. since God has done and said so much, if we are
unbelieving notwithstanding!

Sixthly, That there is a strife or controversy between God and each
uncomfortable soul among his people. Full of disputes and jealous thoughts we
are, which are the cause of our discomforts; therefore God gives to us his
promise, and his oath, to be an end of all such strife between himself and us;
That by two immutable things, wherein it was impossible for God to Lie, we
might have strong consolation.

Other things might be observed; I shall name but one observation more, and
that I shall insist upon, and for which I made choice of this Scripture upon
this occasion.

It is this.

Seventhly, That what the Lord confirmed by Oath to Abraham, he confirmed it to
us, even to all believers after Christ to the worlds end.

Abraham is here brought in as a pattern, and all believers are here supposed
to inherit the promise made to him in common with him; in as much as he says
that what God did for Abraham, when by Oath he confirmed to him the promise of
blessing him, and multiplying his seed, he did it that he might show the
immutability of his counsel to the Heirs of promise, and that we, that is the
believers of the New Testament, might have strong consolation: If the promise
so confirmed unto him, had not been intended and belonged also unto us, that
confirmation of it so to him had conduced nothing to our comfort, nor had we
been Heirs of that promise.

For a further proof of this point, take Gal. 3. 29. If ye be Christ's, then
are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. Where we see, that
what we have in Christ, we have it all as Abraham's seed, and as heirs with him
of the same promise; and what we have as Abraham's seed, we have it all in
Christ: so as the promise made to Abraham is an Epitome or the sum of the
Gospel. So Luke 1. 55. 72, 73. we find that when Christ was sent into the
world, and what was done by him, it was to perform the Oath of God to Abraham.
He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy, as he spoke to
our Fathers, to Abraham and his seed for ever. To perform the mercy promised,
to remember his holy Covenant, the Oath which he swear to our Father Abraham,
that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life.

A further proof hereof we have in all those places where believers of the New
Testament, both Jews and Gentiles, are called Abraham's seed, because thereby
they are all entitled to his promise, made as you see, to him and his seed. As
for instance, Gal. 3. 16. To Abraham and his seed were the promises made; he
says not and to seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed, which is
Christ. And this I say, that the Covenant which was confirmed before of God in
Christ, the Law which was four hundred and thirty years after, could not
disanull. This one seed, which is Christ, is not meant of Christ in his own
person only; for then no believer should be accounted the seed of Abraham, but
only Christ; but of Christ in his mystical body, as 1 Cor. 12. 12. All the
members of that one body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ. Which
body (says the Apostle here) is not made up of two seeds, Jews and Gentiles,
but of one seed, though made up of both. And that he means Christ in that
sense is evident by that passage. The covenant which was confirmed in Christ
430. years before, etc. What before he called a promise made to Christ the one
seed, he afterward calls a covenant confirmed in Christ, namely, to us in him
as members of his body, both Jews and Gentiles; therefore this one seed, which
is Christ, is meant of Christ in his mystical body. By which it appears that
the promise made to Abraham was confirmed to believers, both Jews and Gentiles,
as his seed. So Romans 4. 16. Therefore is it of faith that it might be of grace,
to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is
of the Law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the
father of us all.

Another proof is that in Psalm. 105. 6. O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye
children of Jacob his chosen; he has remembered his covenant for ever, the word
which he commanded to a thousand Generations, saying, unto thee will I give the
land of Canaan, the lot of thine inheritance. If any branch of Gods promise
unto Abraham may seem to be meant only of the Old Testament, and not of the
New, it is this of the Land of Canaan, Genesis 17. 8. I will give unto thee and to
thy seed after thee, the Land wherein thou art a stranger, all the Land of
Canaan, for an everlasting possession, and I will be their God. Yet is it
expressly said that this promise was a Covenant for ever, a word commanded for a
thousand Generations, and for an everlasting possession: which needs must
extend to the times of the Gospel, because else it had been only for thrice
fourteen Generations. Matthew. 1. 17. And we know that Canaan hat^ long since
ceased to be the possession of Abraham^ natural seed. Thus also the Apostle
says here. That the promise and oath which we have, Genesis 22. 16. By my self
have I sworn, that blessing I will bles^ thee, and multiplying I will multiply
thy seed, as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is by the Sea shore and
thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies, (which cannot but refer to the
conquest of that land of Canaan) is made and so confirmed unto us, that we
might have strong consolation.

If the Question be, what that is which is contained in that promise concerning
Canaan, to be an everlasting possession to Abraham's seed, and the Lord to be
their God, which is to be fulfilled in the times of the New Testament.

I answer, It is all that of which Canaan and the good things thereof was a
type, namely, the spiritual blessings of the heavenly Canaan, the Church of
the New Testament, yea of Heaven it self. And for the proof hereof,

First, something we have in that of Ezekiel. 47. where the Prophet speaks of
the Church of the New Testament under the type of Canaan, and says, The
Strangers are appointed the lot of their inheritance with the children of
Israel. Verse 22. They shall have inheritance with you, among the Tribes of
Israel. Not in the Earthly Canaan, but the Heavenly represented by it. So Esai.
65. 9. Mine Elect shall inherit it, and my Servants shall dwell there, and
Sharon shall be a field of Flocks. Speaking of the Church of the New Testament.

Secondly, Observe that Abraham accordingly did by faith embrace that promise
of Canaan to be an everlasting possession to him and his seed, as a promise
referring to, and including not only an earthly, but also an heavenly
inheritance, Heb. 11. 8. 9. 10. The reason there rendered by the Apostle, why by
faith he left his own country, went into the Land of promise, and lived there
with Isaac and Jacob in Tents as strangers, is given v. 10. because he looked
for a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. So v. 13.
14. 15. 16. in what they did and said, when they counted themselves strangers
and pilgrims upon earth (says the Apostle) they declared, that they did seek a
better country, that is to say, an heavenly. Then mark what follows;
Wherefore he is not ashamed to be called their God: namely, in that which he
did in fullfilling of his promise; implying that if it had been only an
earthly Canaan, which by promise they received from him, it had not been worthy
of him to give as their God. In this the Apostle interprets that promise to
Abraham, Genesis 17. 8. To thee and to thy seed will I give the Land of Canaan,
for an everlasting possession, and I will be their God; That is, by the
Apostles interpretation, he would be so in giving them not only an earthly,
but also an heavenly Canaan; so as together with those earthly blessings, he
would bestow himself upon them.

Therefore also, when the Israelites brought their first fruits to the place
which God did choose to place his name there, and were there to make their
acknowledgment before the Priest, of the fulfilling of that promise, and were
required to rejoice there before the Lord their God, for every good thing which
the Lord their God had given them, Deuteronomy. 26. 1. to 11. Interpreters do well
refer it not only to temporal, but also to the spiritual good things, whereof
they were a type; because the good things were such as God is there supposed to
give them as their God. And because not only their first fruits, thus given to
God, but also the whole lump was holy. Romans 11. 16. which implies that they
had not only a natural, but also a sacred and religious use of their estates
in Canaan; And because this whole action was an act of solemn worship, in
which the type and the thing typified always go together.

Hence also is it that Esau is branded for a profane person for selling his
birthright to this promise. Had it been only of a temporal, and not of a
spiritual Canaan also, there had been nothing of profanesse in it; which
always is a contempt, or neglect of something spiritual. And his sin is made
the same with theirs who sell their birthright now for a morsel of meat. Heb.
12. 16. which those believers do, who for worldly advantages forgo their
privileges in the Church and house of God; and of such the Apostle means it,
as is evident by the scope of the place, and of the whole Epistle, as was
showed before, and not of wicked men, for their birthright is nothing else but
death and hell.

To this I may add what the Apostle says, Heb. 3. and 4. chapters: namely,
that the Lords offer to the children of Israel in the Wilderness, to carry
them into Canaan, and to destroy the inhabitants before them, and that in
performance of his promise unto Abraham, Exodus 2. 24. with 3. 6. 8. and 6. 8.
Numb. 14. 23. Matthew. 11 29.
was a preaching of the Gospel to them, chap. 4. 2. 3. And whereas the Gospel
is a promise of rest in God through Christ, to every believer, he says also,
that it was an offer to them of an entrance into Gods own rest. And when he
swear that they should not see the good Land, concerning which he swear unto
their Fathers, and that their carcases should fall in the wilderness; this, by
the Prophet David, Psalm. 95. and by the Apostle in that place, is called a
swearing against them in his wrath, that they should not enter into his rest.
Which could not have been said, unless in that promise the spiritual
blessings of the heavenly Canaan also had been comprehended. Which, albeit I
suppose by that which has been said, is evident to an impartial mind, yet
because so many stumble at this mistake, that this promise concerning Canaan
was no Gospel promise, nor to be in any part fulfilled in the times of the New
Testament; and because the vindication of this truth is of concernment to our
work in hand, I shall stay a little in opening this Scripture.

For which purpose, let us consider the words, Heb. 3. 17. With whom was he
grieved forty years? was it not with them that sinned, whose carcasses fell in
the Wilderness? It should rather have been rendered thus, Whom had he in disdain
forty years? (...); The word is taken from the Greek Interpreters, who always
use it in this sense, throughout the Scripture, namely, to abominate, or reject
a thing, as one should do that which is profane, unclean, or hateful: as in
those places, Deuteronomy. 7. 26. Thou shall utterly detest it, (...); Deuteronomy. 7. 26.
and thou shall utterly abhor it, for it is an accursed thing. So 2. Chron. 21.
6. The Kings word was abominable (...).
unto Joab. So Psalm. 36. 4. He abhors not evil. (...). So Levit. 26. 15. and
18. 25. Genesis 27. 46. Number. 21. 5. Therefore the Substantive, (...), by the
Septuagint, is put for a polluted thing, or an abominable Idol, from which we
are to separate. (...). 4 Reg. 23. 13. (...). Suidas. ^ Quadraginta ^nnis (...)
litigavi, secundum Rab. Dav. Rab. Abra. (...) cum fastidis abominatus sum. Merc.
The word in the Hebrew, Psalm. 95. is (...), I had in disdain, so Junius and
Montanus. As I would not omit this place in clearing this point, so neither the
weight of this word in this signification, in opening this place; for the word
is such as according to the nature of it, and the use it has in Scripture, it
refers here to God's withdrawing his favor from his people, and his keeping
them at such a distance in the wilderness, forty years, for their sin,
according as he had sworn against them in his wrath, and that in respect not
only of earthly, but also of spiritual enjoyments, not suffering them to enter
into his rest. A like carriage of his we read of after their sin in Canaan,
Psalm. 106. 40. The wrath of the Lord was kindled against his people, in so much
that he abhorred his own inheritance, (...). Therefore I say it should so be
rendered, whom had he in contempt or in disdain forty years? was it not them
that sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness? And to whom swear he, that
they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not? So we see
they could not enter in because of unbelief. He goes on chap. 4. 1. Let us
therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of
you should seem to come short of it; for unto us was the Gospel preached as
well as unto them; but the word did not profit them, not being mixed with faith
in them that heard it.

In these words the Apostle makes their case and ours to he the same; the
Gospel preached alike to both, and the success to be alike, in case the word
preached be not mixed with faith in them that hear it; as it did not profit
them, so also that it will not profit us. Now that we may discover the mind of
the Apostle herein, and how that offer of Canaan to them was a preaching of the
Gospel, as was said;

First, we must have recourse to, and consider what was said in showing the
scope of the Apostle in this Epistle, page 1.

First, That he writes this Epistle to such as did profess the faith of
Christ. Secondly, that they were forsaking the worship of the New Testament;
and that a main scope of the Apostle in this Epistle is to prevent and cure
this apostasy. And for that purpose how he tells them, that the Lords people
are his house, chap. 3. 6. And exhorts them, in the words of the Holy Ghost,
therefore to hear the voice of Christ, the Apostle and High Priest of our
profession, inviting us to celebrate his day of rest in his house, in the
Worship of the Gospel. And how he argues upon that subject in those two
Chapters, the third and fourth.

Secondly, we must consider yet moreover, that believers are the house of Gods
rest in a twofold capacity.

1. First, as members of the mystical body of Christ, or of the invisible
Church; and so, as Homogeneal parts of that body, they are his house, not only
as collectivly taken together with the whole family of heaven and earth, Ephesians.
2, 19. 20. 21. but also singly, each believer is his house, as every drop of
water is water, as well as the Sea is water, Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by faith, John. 9. 56. 1. Cor. 6. 19. 1 John 4. 6.

2. Secondly, As in a Ministerial body, or a visible Church; and so they are
his house only in the way of an Ordinance; as the bread in the Lords supper is
his body, so also the Church, or society wherein we worship God, is his body
and his house only in the way of an Ordinance, that is, as the supper of the
Lord is that Ordinance, wherein we enjoy the communion of the body and blood of
Christ, and he says of the Bread and Wine, this is my body, and this is my
blood; that is, it is equivalently so, or in effect the body and blood of
Christ unto his people: so the visible Church or Congregation, whereof we are a
part, and wherein we worship God, is that Ordinance, wherein we enjoy the
comforts, and perform those duties, which belong to us as members of the body
of Christ; and is in equivalency, or in effect, the mystical body or house of
Christ unto us; so as we have as much therein, in our worshipping God, as if
all the family of heaven and earth were therein met together, and only they.
In this second capacity the Church of Corinth is called the body of Christ, 1
Cor. 12. 27. and the Church of Ephesus is called his House, Ephesians. 2. 22.

Thirdly consider also, that as we are the house of Gods rest in this twofold
capacity, so accordingly, in the same twofold capacity, have we an entrance
into this rest of God offered to us in the Gospel.

First in our personal interest, as believers, and as members of the mystical
body of Christ by faith.

Secondly, in the public and sollemn Worship, or Service of his house, and
sanctifying of his Sabbaths, both which the Lord has ordained and sanctified,
to be means wherein our personal interest is improved, and wherein we have a
more full enjoyment of this rest in God, through Jesus Christ. Now this our
entrance into his rest, as his house in this second capacity, is that which the
Apostle chiefly speaks to here when he says; Take heed brethren of an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. And that in case the
people of his pasture, and Sheep of his hand, even his own children, will not
hear his voice, but forsake his worship, refusing his offer in this Gospel
rest, as they did in the Canaan rest, he will also swear against them, as he
did against these, that they shall not enter into his rest. And bids them fear,
least a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of them should seem
to come short of it.

Every true believer, as considered in the first capacity, has rest in God
through Christ by faith, from which he shall never totally fall. But as
considered in the other capacity, as he has a great advantage to his enjoyment
of this his rest, in the celebration of it upon the day of his rest, in the
service of his house the worship of the Gospel: so of this a believer may come
short, and shall, in case he forsakes that holy profession. In this sense
therefore it is called a departure from the living God, chap. 3. 12. because it
is a departing from him, as to what a believer does enjoy in this second
capacity; a departure from him in tanto, though not in toto, in part though not
in whole; and in so doing he will seem to come short also of the other, as the
Apostle says, Heb. 4. 1. least any of you should seem to come short of it; for
although in his personal interest and capacity, he enjoys his rest in Christ,
by faith, yet there will be little appearance of it unto others, if not as
little also to his own soul.

And the case herein was just the same with them who fell in the Wilderness;
for though they did not enter into Canaan, yet many of them went to Heaven, and
in their personal interest by faith did enjoy rest in God in this life too.
Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, were in the number; and they could say, Lord, thou
have been our dwelling place in all Generations, as in the song of Moses, Psalm.
90. 1. And the sin of those that refused to go into Canaan, is called an
Apostasy from God, Numb. 14. 9. (...), in the speech of Caleb to the people,
be not ye Apostates from the Lord; so the Septuagint has it, whose translation
the Apostle follows in this place.

And by that which has been said appears the reason, why the Apostle says,
that to us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them, and therein
supposes, that it was preached too to them as well as unto us: because as the
Gospel is a promise of rest in God, through Christ by faith, Matthew. 11. 29. so
the enjoyment of this rest, in the service of his house upon his day, is a part
of that Gospel and promise: And as we enjoy it in the Ordinances and Sabbath of
the New Testament; so did they the very same rest, in the Sabbaths and the
Ordinances of the Old, whereof Canaan and the blessings thereof, with the
conquest of, and protection from their Enemies was a part. Therefore his offer
of Canaan to them was an offer of an entrance into his rest, and so a preaching
of the Gospel to them. As it was the will of God to administer the covenant of
grace, in the times of the Old Testament, by types and shadows, so not only by
other types, but also by this of Canaan. Thus their passing from Egypt through
the Sea, and their being relieved by water out of the Rock in the Wilderness,
were but types, yet such as therein they did enjoy the same communion with God
in Christ, as believers now enjoy in the Ordinances of the New Testament,
Baptism, or the Supper of the Lord. And that Rock was Christ, as well as the
Bread in that Supper is his Body, as we see 1 Cor. 10. And their case the same
with ours, in point of sin and punishment, as here it is made by the Prophet,
Psalm. 95. as to one that reads and considers that tenth chapter easily appears.
Therefore also whether the conquest of Canaan was not a Church action, as well
as other services of the house of the Old Testament, let it be considered.

The reason why we may so judge is, not only because they subdued those
kingdoms by faith; Heb. 11. but also, because it was the execution of a
Sentence of Anathema, so as the destruction of the inhabitants was not upon a
natural ground only, as in other cases, but upon a spiritual, because they
were destroyed as accursed things, which sentence cannon be executed but by a
consecrated people, and only in that capacity; for where there is an execrate,
there must also be a consecrate, to whom it is made execrable; for these two
are relatives, and the one cannot be without the other.

This we find Deuteronomy. 20. 10. where is commanded a differing carriage of Israel
to the Canaanites, and to the nations a far off round about. As for the Nations
and Cities a far off, Israel might make peace with them, which if they refused,
and by war were overcome, they were to kill only the males; And the word is only
this, thou shall smite them with the edg of the sword, v. 13. (...)
But of the Cities of these people which the Lord thy God does give thee for an
inheritance (says he) thou shall save nothing alive that breaths, but thou
shall utterly destroy them, v. 17. the word is, (...), (...).
Thou shall devote them, or Anathematize them, that is, shall destroy them not
as men destroy enemies according to common rules and light of nature only, but
as accursed things. Therefore the whole congregation became guilty of Achans
sin in the accursed thing: where the same word is used Jos. 7. 1. The
children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing; in the
excommunicate thing, says the Geneva translation, not improperly. Ves tantum
servate vos ab anathemate ne Efficiatis vos anathema. Et vos ipsos singuli and
alii alios. Junius in Jos. 6. 21.
And why the whole congregation guilty? Because the conquest of Jericho was a
Church-action, which implies communion, and it was their duty to see not only
each man to himself, but also to watch over one another in it, which if they
had done when he forsook his rank to hide his stolen goods, that evil might
have been prevented. Jos. 6. 21. Therefore also when the whole congregation
sent to Reuben and Gad, Joshua. 22.
and the half tribe of Manasseh, about the Altar which they thought they had
built for worship, which (had it been so as they supposed) had been a
transgression to be punished by the Church of Israel, even as the setting up of
an Idol; This case is made by the congregation, in their dealing with them
about it by their messengers, parallel with that of Achan and Peor, wherein the
whole congregation suffered for the sin of some few, and was delivered from
wrath by punishing the offenders.

By that which has been said, we see, that this promise of Canaan to be a
possession to Abraham's seed, is a Gospel promise, that Abraham looked upon it
as such; and that in performance thereof his spiritual seed did enjoy not only
an earthly Canaan, but withal an heavenly, even in the times of the old
Testament; which heavenly Canaan as it is yet in being and shall be, and
enjoyed by the same spiritual seed still, so we are to look upon that promise,
as intended also for us of the New Testament, in all generations, and for an
everlasting possession.

In this manner has the Lord been pleased to confirm his Gospel to believers;
he has singled out Abraham as a pattern, and confirmed it to him, and in him
to us as his seed. And it has been his usual course thus to do. As for
instance, when he gave that great promise, of conquering the enemies of the
blessed seed by conquering God in prayer, he gave it first to Jacob, when upon
occasion of his prevailing in wrestling with God he called him Israel. And from
him do we at this day claim the same privilege, and are called by that name
the Israel of God, Gal. 6. 16. Peace be on them and on the Israel of God. So
when he gave unto his Saints the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, he gave them to
Peter, and that his new Name in order thereunto, Matt. 16. 18. He had his name
before given, Ioh. 1. 42. but there he gives him the reason of his new Name,
and the comfort of it; and from that gift to Peter the Saints do claim their
Church power, each according to their place and station in the Church; for they
have it as Peter's, that is, as stones in that building, or if you will, as
confessors, which makes them to be Stones in the house of God. And as persons
are more or less eminent in that work, so have they more or less of that
power; therefore the Officers of the Church are entrusted with the greatest
share. So here also he singles out Abraham, and confirms that to him which he
intends to bestow upon all believers, and gives him also his new name upon
the same account. The reasons why he has done thus, I shall show anon. But
before we come to them, for our more clear proceeding, let us first consider
what this promise made to Abraham was, and what is the meaning of it.

The Apostle here recites that promise, Genesis 22. 16. where the words are
these; By my self have I sworn, that blessing I will bless thee, and
multiplying I will multiply thy seed, as the stars of Heaven, and as the sand
by the Sea shore, and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies. The
Apostle here, for brevity sake, sets down but two things, Gods blessing
Abraham, and his multiplying his seed: his scope in this place being, not so
much to set out the full extent and compass of the matter of Abraham's promise,
but only the manner of Gods confirming it by an oath: therefore if you will
have a just account of that promise, you must take it as it is set down in
Genesis, not only in chapter 22. 16. but also in other places, especially in
the twelfth and seventeenth chapters: for the same promise is several times
repeated, and by various expressions set forth. And it contains four things.

First, in general, that God would bless Abraham, and with him all believers,
the heirs of his promise, with all spiritual blessings in Christ, as Children
and Heirs of God, Romans 9. 7. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham are
they all Children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, (says the
Apostle) they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children
of God, but the children of the promise are accounted for the seed. By which we
see, the blessing which God bestowed upon Abraham, and with him upon all
believers, saying, blessing I will bless thee, etc. Genesis 2. is the blessing of
Gods children, namely, all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus. As also we find
Gal. 3. 16. that the covenant and promise made to Abraham, was confirmed to us
in Christ; and to this promise the Law was added, four hundred and thirty years
after. And it is called a preaching of the Gospel to Abraham. v. 8. even in
what was said, In thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. The
Scripture (says the Apostle) foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen
through faith, preached the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all
Nations be blessed. So that they which be of faith are blessed with faithful
Abraham. And you see the blessing is their being justified by Christ. Again,
Gal. 3. 29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and Heirs according to
the promise. So as look what blessings we have in Christ, they are all wrapped
up in that promise made to Abraham; and it was intended by the Lord to
comprehend (as was said before) the sum of the Gospel. This I say, in
general, was intended in the promise made to Abraham; Genesis 5. 15.
and herein his promise did not differ from that promise made unto our first
parents, The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head.

Secondly, More particularly, in Gods promise unto Abraham is contained
something peculiar unto him, and which believers are to claim particularly from
his promise made to Abraham; as namely, in the second place, that God would not
only bless Abraham, and in him all believers, but also would make them
blessings; and that chiefly and in the first place to their familis; and not
only so but also to Nations, Genesis 12. 1, 2, 3. Blessing I will bless thee, and
thou shall be a blessing, and in thee shall all the families oj the earth be
blessed. So Genesis 18. 18. All the nations of the earth shall be blessed in
Abraham. This promise Peter alleges and explaineth to the Jews, Acts 3. 25.
Ye are the children of the Prophets, and of the covenant which God made with
our Fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed shall all the Kindreds of the
earth be blessed. The word is all the families of the earth, (...), The same
word we have, Epes. 3. 15. Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is
named. The covenant made with Abraham therefore, as by this place we see, that
we have it in that of Genesis 12. 1: where it was first made and given, so also
that it respects families and posterity; else he had said all the believers,
or all the people of the earth, not all the families of the earth, shall be
blessed. And he could not have said to the Jews, ye are the children of the
covenant, had it not respected the children of the people of God. Nor is it to
be restrained only to the Jews; for the promise is concerning all the families
of the Earth. Therefore it follows in the next words, v. 26. Unto you first,
God having raised up his Son, has sent him to bless you; therefore to others
he was sent also, afterward to bless them. What we have as Abraham's seed, we
have it all in Christ, as was showed before; therefore he is said to come to
bless the children of the covenant, the Jews first, and afterward the
Gentiles. And this blessing, as it is first laid down, Genesis 12. and here
repeated by the Apostle, we see is a blessing both upon the people of God
themselves, and upon their families.

Nor is this promise to be restrained only unto this, that of Abraham and his
seed the Lord Christ should come, (although that also be included, because what
we receive from Abraham, we have it all in Christ) for so all those of the line
of Christ were blessings to the world as well as he. And because here is
something intended applicable to all believers, namely that they also shall be
blessings in their generations; And because a blessing upon families is
intended also, for so the words run, thou shall be a blessing, and in thee
shall all the families of the earth be blessed; therefore I say it must not be
so restrained.

But the meaning is, whereas the Lord in bestowing mercy and salvation upon the
sons of men proceeds not according to their merit, either in being or
foreseen, but according to his own free-choice; that in his covenant with
Abraham he has thus far limited himself, and discovered his mind and purpose,
that his choice shall not be proportionably all over the world alike, but that
it shall be by families and nations; so as he will ordinarily cast elect
children upon elect parents; and the lot of the Saints in neighbourhoods and
places together, and not by equal numbers, in each part of the world alike. Had
not his election been so limited to families and nations, neither Abraham nor
believers could have been said to be blessings, in spiritual things, either to
their families, or to any other where they live; as now they are, because God
so blesses only his Elect, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. He has blessed us according as he
has chosen us.

And for a further proof that this also is one part of Gods promise unto
Abraham, and in him confirmed unto all believers, it is not to be omitted that,
de facto in experience, we have found it so. In all ages God has cast it so in
his providence, that his people are not to be found in all places alike; but we
find them together in some families and nations. Now this is not fallen out by
chance, but because God has so made his choice, has been a God to believers
and to their seed, in their Generations; and has made them blessings, for the
conversion and edification of their children, neighbors, and acquaintance, and
that not only by a common providence, as he blesses the corn and grass of
the field, (although it must be granted that in an ordinary way of causes, good
education and example is a great advantage toward the seasoning of the hearts
of little ones, with the knowledge and love of Christ) but it is by virtue of a
special word of blessing, a creating word of promise, which gives a being to
the things promised, even this promise made to Abraham, and in him to all
believers; Blessing I will bless thee, and thou shall be a blessing, and in
thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed: without which, such
examples and other means of education and conversion had not had such efficacy
and power in turning sinners unto God.

But in the next place, let us see what the Scripture faith further for a
proof hereof. That in Psalm. 105. mentioned before, speaks something to it,
where it is said, that Gods covenant with Abraham was a word which he has
commanded to a thousand generations: which phrase implies that it should be a
blessing conferred upon posterity, from generation to generation, according to
that in Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee, in their generations, to be a God to thee and thy seed after
thee.

That which makes it more clear is that of our Savior, upon the conversion of
Zacheus; Luke. 19. 9. Now is salvation come into this house, for as much as he
also is become a son of Abraham. Salvation was not only come into his soul,
but also into his house, and upon that account. And for the same reason it was
that Paul could use that argument to the jaylour, Act. 16. 31. Believe and thou
shall be saved and thy house, namely, because of this promise unto Abraham,
that God would bless Abraham, and with him believers as his seed, and make
them blessings to their families: so as the conversion of the father of the
family would bring salvation into his house.

To this purpose also is that in Romans 11. 16. If the casting away of them be
the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be but life from
the dead? For if the first fruits be holy, the lump also is holy; and if the
root be holy, so are the branches. He speaks it of the calling of the Jews, and
puts it upon this: He makes Abraham and the Fathers to be an holy root, as
we see verse 28. As concerning the Gospel they are enemies for your sake, but
as touching the election they are beloved for the Fathers sake; for the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance. The Jews are broken off from this
holy root, and the Gentiles are graffed into the same root, and the time is
coming when the Jews shall be graffed in again, and that for the Fathers sake,
and because the gift once given to them God will not repent of.

If it be said that graffiing into the holy root, is to be understood of the
Gentiles being brought into the Church: I answer, it comes all to one; for the
church brings fourth children unto Abraham, Gal. 4. Jerusalem which then was,
is said to have her Children; who adhering to the letter of the Law, in
opposition to the Gospel which was typified and shadowed therein, sought to be
justified by the works of the Law; born therefore, as Ishamel was by Agar,
only after the flesh. And Jerusalem which is above, which is the mother of us
all, has her children also; who being justified by faith, are brought forth,
as Isaac was by Sarah, by promise. But whether it be the one or the other, we
see that both sorts of children are brought forth to Abraham. All the children
of the Church are Abraham's seed. Therefore I say it comes all to one.

Nor may we say that Christ only is this holy root, into which the Gentiles are
graffed; because it had been no argument to say, Because Christ is holy,
therefore the Jews are or shall be holy, and therefore shall be converted. But,
make Abraham that holy root, and the argument is good. And because the Jews
which are to be converted cannot be said to be natural branches to Christ, as
to their own root, as they are said to be to that root of which the Apostle
speaks; namely, by reason of their relation to it, as branches of it. So as
this blessing upon families and kindreds, and his ordering in such manner his
election, as has been showed, as by this Scripture you see, it was intended in
the promise unto Abraham: so also that it is still in being, and shall be to a
thousand generations, to all generations (so I suppose we are to understand
that phrase, Psalm. 105.) even to the worlds end.

Which will yet be more evident, if we compare this Romans 11. with Esai. 59. 20.
For the Apostle cites that place, to prove the conversion of the Jews to be
expected in the latter days. v. 26. So all Israel shall be saved, as it is
written, There shall come out of Sion a deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob. For this is my Covenant unto them (namely, the Jews)
when I shall take away their sins, that is, when they are called, and ingraffed
again into their own Olive tree, from which for a long time they have been
broken off. Now if we look into Esai. 59. we see there what this covenant is,
viz. in the words next following at verse. 21. This is my covenant with them,
(says the Lord) My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in
thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed,
nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, even for ever. Then mark what the
Apostle affirms hereupon, Romans 11. 28. As concerning the Gospel, they are
enemies for your sake, but as touching the election, they are beloved for the
Fathers sake; for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. So as it
is the purpose of God's election, thus made according to his covenant with
Abraham, which entayleth thus his blessing upon families from generation to
generation; which, as by this of the Prophet Esaiah compared with that of the
Apostle, it appears, that it shall be verified even to the converted Jews in
the latter days: so by the Apostle Romans 11. we find that this privilege is no
other then what is and has been enjoyed by believing Gentiles since their
being graffed into the same root and Olive tree from whence the Jews were
broken off.

For this cause also the Apostle says of the children of believers, that they
are holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. And the Apostle Peter exhorts the repenting Jews to be
baptized, because the promise was to them and to their children, Acts. 2. 38.
Both which places I shall open in the application; namely, this in the third
use of the point, the other in the fourth.

A further evidence of this truth, that in the covenant of God with Abraham was
promised to his people such a blessing upon posterity, we have from the nature
and use of circumcision, and the application of it to the child, as a necessary
and essential part of that ordinance; Genesis 17: 10: 14.
this branch of the promise, concerning the circumcision of the heart of the
seed of his people, being thereby signified and sealed. As also from Abraham's
being therefore called the father of all them that believe, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
because of his receiving this promise of such a blessing upon families, and
the seal thereof, in order to the increase of his spiritual seed. ^am. 11. to
18.
Both which I shall have occasion to speak to in the first use of the point,
and thither I refer my Reader rather then stay upon either of them here. Where
we shall also see, that this second branch is one maine thing, which is
peculiar to this covenant of God with Abraham, which was therein added unto
that promise, which was given unto the Church of God before.

Obj. But it will be said, that many times a godly parent has ungodly
children, and sometimes the children of ungodly parents prove believers; how
then is a Believer a blessing to his family? or how is Gods election carried
through the families of his people, as was said?

To this I answer.

Answ. First, that although he makes his people blessings, yet sometimes it
proves not effectual; Gods blessings do not always take effect upon the sons
of men, through their sin. As he has promised his blessing upon his word, that
is, that God himself will be present with it, and work in and by it; for which
cause it is not a common but an holy word, namely, so in it self, yet is it
not always effectual to the hearers of it.

Secondly, There is an evident reason, why notwithstanding God has promised
such a blessing upon believers, their families and children, yet that sometimes
this blessing should not take effect.

1. Because sometimes family duties are neglected; believers sometimes follow
not Abraham's steps, in faith and obedience, and in close walking with God, as
his servants and friends, as they ought to do; and then no wonder if such
persons and their children come short of this blessing, because God who
ordains to the end, ordains also to the means; therefore the children of
such Parents by such example will be apt to grow remiss and careless in
Religion.

2. Because, although his promise be to carry his election so, as to cast elect
children upon elect parents: yet he reserveth to himself, and also uses, in
this, a liberty, namely, ever and anon to be still breaking off some, and
graffing in others into this holy root. So he passed by Ishmael, and took
Isaac: passed by Esau, and took Jacob: afterward he brake off the Nation of
the Jews, and graffed in the Gentiles: at last he will graff the Jews again
into their own root. So now a days a believers child proves ungodly; then is
that child broken off: an unbeleevers child is converted to the faith; then is
that child graffed into this holy root. Therefore, for a right understanding of
this promise made to Abraham, we must take in that caution or qualification to
it. And it was necessary, as God has so far confined himself in his
election, namely, to families and nations, that he should withal reserve this
liberty; because if he had so entayled his election to believers families, as
that none of their posterity should ever be broken off, very many and great
inconveniences, through man's corruption, would ensue.

3. A third thing contained in the Lords promise unto Abraham, is, That by thus
blessing, and making believers blessings, God would multiply his seed, Genesis 22.
16. Blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thy seed as
the stars of Heaven, etc. So Genesis 17. 2. I will make my covenant between me and
thee, and I will multiply thee exceedingly; and v. 5. Neither shall thy name
any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham. for a Father of many
Nations have I made thee. This also is part of the Gospel and contained in the
promise made to him and us, as we may see further by that which is here
expressed in the Text. When the Apostle would give instance of what God had
confirmed by oath to Abraham, that he might show the immutability of his
counsel to the Heirs of promise, and that we might have strong consolation, he
gives that for one, the multiplying of his seed.

A further proof we have, Genesis 15. 5. Look now toward Heaven, and tell the
Stars, if thou be able to number them; and he said unto him, so shall thy seed
be. Abraham believed (it is said) and it was counted to him for righteousness.
This the Apostle brings to prove justification by free grace, through faith
in Christ, Romans 4. 3. 18. 22. Therefore that multiplying of his seed promised
in those words, so shall thy seed be, had reference not only to the Jews, but
also to believing Gentiles, the increase of whose number by means of Gods
blessing believers so as to make them blessings, as Abraham's seed, was intended
in that promise, and as part of that Gospel which God preached unto Abraham;
else his believing it had not been imputed for righteousness, nor the Apostle
alleged it to prove justification by faith in Christ, as he does in that place.

Again, we know that one great promise to believers now under the New
Testament, is, that the kingdom of Christ, that is, the Church at last shall
fill the world. Dan. 2. The stone cut out without hands, which smote the image
upon the feet, and brake to pieces the Iron, and the Clay, the Brass, the
Silver, and the Gold, became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth. And
the stone is interpreted of the kingdom of Christ, v. 44. To this purpose is
that of our Savior, Matthew. 13. 31. comparing the kingdom of Heaven to a grain
of mustard seed, which is the least of all seeds, but when it is grown is the
greatest of all herbs. And that it is like to leaven, which a woman took and
hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened. Now the Lords
making believers blessings, and thereby multiplying Abraham's seed, is that
which makes his kingdom thus to be like leaven, whereby the whole world at
last will be seasoned with the knowledge, and love of Christ. Therefore this
multiplying of believers, so as to fill the world, is made by the Apostle (
Romans 4. 13.) to be part of Abraham's promise. The promise that he should be Heir
of the World was not to Abraham, or to his seed through the Law, but through
the righteousness of faith. Then mark what follows, v. 16. Therefore it is of
faith, that it might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the
Law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us
all; as it is written, I have made thee the Father of many Nations. Who against
hope, believed in hope, that he might be the Father of many Nations, according
to that which was spoken, so shall thy seed be, namely, as the stars of heaven
for number. From these words observe, First, that Abraham by the promises given
unto him was made the Heir of the world. Secondly, that the promise of
multiplying his seed, in those words, I will make thee a Father of many
Nations, and, so shall thy seed be, was one promise whereby he was so made the
Heir of the world. Thirdly, that this promise of multiplying his seed, and of
his thereby being made the Heir of the world, was not made to Abraham or his
seed through the Law, but through the righteousness of faith; therefore a
Gospel promise. Fourthly, that this promise was made sure to all believers, as
well Gentiles as Jews.

Fourthly. A fourth thing contained in Abraham's promise, confirmed both to him
and all believers, is, that his seed shall possess the gate of his enemies,
Genesis 22. 16. The place here cited by the Apostle in the Text, as intended also
to the Heirs of promise in the New Testament. By my self have I sworn (says
the Lord) that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the
Seashore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; that is, their
power and authority. For as gates were for defense, so they were places of
judgment. Amos 5. 15. Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish
judgment in the gate. Deuteronomy. 16. 18. Judges shall thou make in all thy gates.
Dan. 2. 49. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, were set over the affairs of the
provinces, but Daniel sat in the gate of the King. This therefore was Gods
promise unto Abraham, that by means of this blessing he would so multiply his
seed, as they should not only fill, they should also subdue the world at last,
and reign over it, Psalm. 47. 3. He shall subdue the people under us. Rev. 11.
15. The Kingdoms of this world shall be the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ. Dan. 7. 18. 28. The Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of
the most High, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him.

All this you may observe is reduced to Abraham's promise. Psalm. 47. (which is a
parallel prophecy to that of Dan. 7.) O clap your hands all ye people, shout
unto God with the voice of triumph; for the Lord most High is the King over all
the earth. He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.
God reigns over the heathen, God sits upon the Throne of his Holiness.
Then mark what follows; The Princes of the people are gathered together, even
the people of the God of Abraham. All this dignity and power therefore is
confirmed upon them as his seed, and heirs of his promise. And although by what
has been said it is evident that this also is one branch of Gods promise made
to Abraham: Yet, I shall add one place more, wherein (with submission, I
suppose) we have also a prophecy, of what God will do for his people in this
kind, and all reduced still to his promise unto Abraham. It is Psalm. 105.
mentioned before, a Psalm made upon occasion of David's bringing the Ark to the
Tabernacle, which he had prepared for it upon mount Sion, as we see 1. Chron.
16. 1, 7. in which accordingly we have a prophecy, foreshewing what God will
do when he shall set his King upon his holy hill of Sion; having dashed his
enemies in pieces like a Potters vessel; even when the Kingdoms of the earth
are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. In which prophecy
observe two things.

First, how he puts all that he says therein, upon Gods promise unto
Abraham. O give thanks unto the Lord, make known his deeds among the people,
sing unto him, talk of his wondrous works, O ye seed of Abraham his servant,
ye children of Jacob his chosen. Again, v. 8. Which covenant he made with
Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac, and confirmed the same to Jacob, saying, Unto
thee will I give the Land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance. And verse 42.
what the Lord did for his people, was, that he remembered his holy promise, and
Abraham his servant.

Secondly, observe what he says of Abraham's seed, namely, by setting down what
God had already done, in fulfilling his promise unto Abraham; he foretells what
he would do afterward in a more glorious way; and that he does by three types.
First before they went into Egypt, when they were but few, rebuking Kings for
their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. From
verse 12. to 15. Secondly, the history of Joseph, from v. 16. to 22. which he
brings in with a moreover, as being an instance of the like nature. He being
sold by his brethren, for a season was in prison, in fetters of Iron; until the
time that his word came, namely, that what God had promised was to be
fulfilled. Then the King sent and took him, and made him ruler over Egypt; to
bind his Princes at his pleasure, and teach his Senators wisdom. Thirdly the
history of Israel in Egypt: brought in with an also, as being another instance
of that kind. First, in a state of servitude, then afterward the Egyptians
destroyed for Isreal's sake, they brought out with riches, and Canaan given
them, that they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Under these
instances thus given, I suppose, you have a prophecy, of what God will do for
his people now, in the times of the Gospel, namely, however kept under and
oppressed for a season, yet at last the dominion shall be theirs, possessing
the gate of their enemies. The Lords rebuking Kings, advancing Joseph,
destroying Egypt, delivering his people, casting out the Canaanites, were types
of all this; as appears, not only in that the Psalmist was a Prophet, and
that Israel then was a type of Israel now under the Gospel, and their Canaan a
type of ours; but also because the Psalmist in his Preface, v. 8. speaks of
that which follows in the Psalm, as wherein God remembered his covenant for
ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations, which covenant be
made with Abraham, and confirmed the same to Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for
an everlasting covenant: which could not have been said, had not he intended to
do the same things over again, in the times of the Gospel, which he then did
for his people; and what he did then to be a type of what he would again do
in a more glorious way. It had not been worth the while for the spirit of God,
only to repeat the History, having set that down at large already long before;
but (with submission, I say, to better judgments) I suppose, in these histories
the spirit of God intended a sample, and prophecy of what God will do for his
oppressed people at the last, namely, he will cause them to possess the gate
of their enemies: and that in remembrance of his holy promise, and of Abraham
his servant.

Therefore you may observe how it is said, that the History of the children of
Israel, and of Gods dealings with them in the Wilderness, and in Canaan,
consists of Parables, and dark sayings. Psalm. 78. 1. Hearken my people to my
Law, I will open my mouth in a Parable, I will utter dark sayings of old. What
are these dark sayings? Namely, he repeateth the History of the Children of
Israel, in the Wilderness, and in Canaan. Now Histories, of themselves, are
very easy to be understood; but it seems there was more intended in those
Records, besides the bare History, namely, that it contained types, and samples
of what God would do again, after Christ, and that in a more spiritual way. And
you may observe, by comparing Psalm. 78. 2. with Matthew. 13. 35. that the
Evangelist affirms that 78. Psalm to be a prophecy of Christ, instructing
his Disciples in the Law. For when Christ had been teaching the people by
parables, what the several sorts of hearers may expect, each according to their
kind and their carriage in that work, he says, that this the Lord Christ did,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, saying, I will open
my mouth in Parables, I will utter things which have been kept secret from the
foundation of the world. Upon the same account this 105. Psalm is a prophecy,
although it seems to give us but the repetition of an History. That seventy
eight Psalm I shall have occasion to speak to more fully by and by.

Thus we see, from that Psalm. 105. that what is said of the conquest of the
world by the kingdom of Christ, is also a part of that promise made to Abraham
and his seed. And that we find it to be a part thereof, not only in that of
Genesis 22. 16. Thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies: But also in that
of Genesis 17. 8. I will give to thee and to thy seed after thee, the Land wherein
thou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession, and
I will be their God. For a further clearing hereof, namely, that in that
promise of Canaan to be an everlasting possession to Abraham's seed, that
conquest is intended;

First, let it be considered, that we have already found in that promise that
which makes it a Gospel promise, to be fulfilled in the times of the New
Testament: namely, the spiritual blessings of the Heavenly Canaan, whereof that
land and the good things thereof was a type. p. 23. Now one part of those
spiritual blessings of the Heavenly Canaan is the multiplying of the spiritual
seed, whereby the whole world at last shall be filled, and subdued unto Christ,
as has been showed. Therefore if the spiritual blessings of the Heavenly
Canaan be intended in that promise, the conquest of the world by Abraham's
spiritual seed cannot be excluded. Moreover because this conquest is to be a
spiritual work, to be effected by the sword of the spirit, the word of God,
including therefore also a conquest of sin, and an enjoyment had of the
blessings of the Heavenly Canaan, the kingdom of Jesus Christ: Therefore this
conquest is it self a part of those spiritual blessings. And what God did for
Abraham's seed in that Land, was also a type thereof.

Secondly, I may add, that it will not be denied, but that in the conquest of
the earthly Canaan, Abraham's seed was made to possess the ga^ of their
enemies, and by that it will appear that those two places before mentioned,
Genesis 22. 16. concerning the possession of the enemies gate, and Genesis 17. 8.
touching Canaan to be an everlasting possession, are parallel, both speaking to
the same thing. Which being so, as the Apostle here in my Text, by citing, and
alleging for our consolation, that oath of God, Genesis 22. 16. concerning the
multiplying of his seed, and causing it to possess the gate of his enemies,
has fixed the fulfilling of that promise also upon the times of the New
Testament; so it needs not much be questioned, but that their possessing of the
gate of their enemies, in the earthly Canaan, was a type of what the spiritual
seed should do, as to the enemies gate, in the times of the New Testament. But
because to some it may be it will be yet a question, let us consider,

Thirdly, what is said of Canaan, Genesis 9. 26. Where the Lord gives a promise
to Shem, and Japheth, to the self same purpose, and of the same tenor as here
in these two places, he does to Abraham and his seed. Blessed be the Lord God
of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant; God shall enlarge, or persuade,
Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his
servant. As for his being a servant unto Shem, that was fulfilled in the
conquest of the earthly Canaan by Abraham's seed, who were Shems posterity; but
for his being a servant to Iapheth, dwelling in the tents of Shem, that is to
be fulfilled in the times of the New Testament, when Jews and Gentiles make one
Church, one spiritual seed of Abraham. Gal. 3. 16. Romans 4. 16.
That I think will be granted to be the meaning of those words, God shall
enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem. And upon the same
account as Shem and Japheth are put for the Church of the New Testament,
wherein none can with any certainty affirm which is Japheths posterity in
nature, and which is Shems; Canaan is there put for the wicked of the world,
whether of his posterity or not. And as Shem, and Japheth, are there made types
of the one, so also is Canaan of the other; and the meaning this, that in the
times of the New Testament, there will be a season wherein the wicked of the
world shall be under the Church of God. Therefore here when God comes to renew
the same promise unto Abraham, with an addition touching the manner how it
should be accomplished, namely, by his blessing and multiplying his seed, he
speaks in the same phrase, and says, To thee and to thy seed will I give all
the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession, and thy seed shall possess
the gate of his enemies: The meaning therefore must be the same, namely, that
he and his seed should be heirs of the world; and that his seed should fill the
world at last, and rule over it, as has been showed.

For a further clearing hereof, consider how the Prophet Zachariah speaking of
those last times, wherein that promise, Canaan shall be his servant, shall be
fulfilled, says, In that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house
of the Lord of Hosts, Zach. 14. 21. where by Canaanite is meant a wicked man,
or a man of the world; according to that in Rev. 21. 27. a place parallel to
this in Zachariah speaking of the same times and things. There shall in no wise
enter into it, that is, the Church or House of God, any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie; but they which are
written in the Lambs Book of life.

And for a further illustration of this matter, it is considerable, what one
very probably observes concerning that of Abraham, Genesis 14. how, in rescuing
Lot, he overcame those four Kings, whose people afterward became the four
Monarchies, or Kingdoms set forth by Nebuchadnezzars image, which Abraham's
seed at last shall break in pieces, and obtain their power. Dan. 2. Amraphel
King of Shinar, afterward the Babylonian Monarchy, Genesis 11. 2. Arioch King of
Ellasar the Grecian, for Hellas is the name of Greece, (...), he came into
Greece. Acts. 20. 2.
Chedar-laomer King of Elam, the Persian, Esai. 21. 2. Dan. 8. 2. And Tidal
King of Nations, the Roman; for it is said, Genesis 10. 2. that by Japheths
posterity were the Isls of the Gentiles or of the Nations divided, which is the
same title with this in Genesis 14. King of Nations, or of the Gentiles, for it is
the same; and it is taken for granted that the posterity of Japheth did
inhabit, and people Europe, where afterward the Roman Monarchy did obtain.
Which being so, then Abraham's conquest was a type or sample of what God would
do for Abraham's seed, his Saints, in after ages then a long time to come.

Thus we see in these four things, what that promise is which God made to
Abraham, and in him to all believers, as his seed; and what particulars are
contained in it. And it needs not seem strange that it is so comprehensive,
because it was intended to contain the whole Gospel; which Gospel we see does
not only bring us the glad tidings of remission of sins, and salvation by
Christ; but also concerning the Saints being put into a Kingdom, as also the
increase and power which that Kingdom shall obtain, and by what means it shall
be made so to increase; for which cause also it is called the Gospel of the
Kingdom; and godliness is said to have promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4. 8. Now let us in the next place consider the
reasons of the point, and that in each of those particulars before mentioned;
which therefore I shall show by answering so many Questions; viz. four.

Quest. 1. Why the Lord should take this course in blessing of his people?
Evident it is that he was resolved to bless them as his Children, with all
spiritual blessings in Christ; but why should he do it in such a method, to
single out one of his people, namely Abraham, and to bless him as the
original pattern, and in him to bless all the rest as his seed? For so the
point is, that what God confirmed by oath to Abraham, he confirmed it to us,
even to all believers to the Worlds end.

To this I answer.

Answ. The reason of it is in the Text. Namely, that he might show the
immutability of his counsel to the Heirs of promise, and that he might do as
much as might be to help and strengthen his peoples faith, that they might the
better trust him. The Lord knew that by drawing out his work into length of
time, as he has done, and laying his designs so long before, he should have
occasion to do the same things over again and again, and therefore should in
his works to former of his Saints, give types and samples of what his people
might expect in after times, even in that great work, the conquest of the world
by the Gospel of Jesus Christ. As for instance, what he did for Israel in the
flesh, in their deliverance from Egypt, driving out the Canaanites before them,
managing the affairs of his Kingdom among that people in that Land, he does
over again, though in a more spiritual way, for his people under the Gospel
which are the Israel of God, and the seed of Abraham also. Gal. 3. 29. and 6.
16. Heb. 8. 8.
And their condition made parallel with ours by the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 1. to
11. and Psalm. 95. as has been showed. Now this advantage to his peoples faith,
God would not lose; therefore he gives not only his promise and oath, but also
gives them first to Abraham, and in him to all his Saints in aftertimes; that
so they might have their eyes and observation fixed upon all his works wrought
for his people in ages before, in answer to the self same promises to be
believed by them. And in this the heirs of promise have a double advantage to
their faith, whereby the immutability of the counsel of God is ascertained unto
them.

First, by way of experience, in as much as they are required to believe no
more then what they see others have believed, and has been fulfilled to them
long before, and believed it upon the same terms, our case being made by this
his blessing of his people in this method the same with theirs. This therefore
was David's argument for comfort in his desertions; nay of Christ himself, of
whom even in that very thing David was a type. Psalm. 22. 4. Our Fathers trusted
in thee, they trusted and thou did deliver them, they cried unto thee and
were delivered, they trusted in thee and were not confounded.

Secondly, in that it was the surest and clearest way, of making known the mind
of God unto his people, thus by taking one of the same kind, and making him a
pattern for all the rest. He might have done it by large descriptions in words,
but so had we been more entangled with variety of interpretations, it being to
pass through many ages, languages, and nations; whereas by taking such a
pattern to hold forth to all ages, what his people may expect from him, our
understandings are fixed more upon things then words, whereby we have a more
certain knowledge, and less subject to mistakes. Thus the great privilege and
power of the Saints, in conquering the enemies of those whom God will thus
bless, by overcoming God himself by prayer, was first given to Jacob, (Genesis
32.) with his new Name, and in him to all the rest of his people, and for the
self same cause.

Quest. 2. Why the Lord, who bestows his blessings according to his own free
election, should so confine his choice, as to bestow these blessings by
families, and by nations, that he takes not his number proportionally from all
places of the world alike.

Answ. Many reasons may be given of this.

1. It is not impertinent to be considered, that his purpose is to raise up an
abundant glory to himself from small things; that is one reason why he chose
men, and among men not many mighty, but the weak things of this world are
chosen: 1 Cor. 1. 26.
therefore would he not leave little Children out of his Kingdom. Mark. 10.
14. Of such is the Kingdom of God, (says our Savior) that is, they also are
part of it. By such he means not as so qualified, but that of such also the
Kingdom does consist; Both because it is by him given as an argument or reason
why children should be brought to him; for had he intended the qualification
only, it had been an argument as well to bring Lambs or Doves to Christ, for so
are the subjects of his Kingdom qualified, even as Lambs and Doves. And
because he says afterward, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as
a little Child, that is, as a child receives it, shall not enter therein; This
our Savior adds to show the mistake of his Disciples, who thought, it seems,
that little children were not capable of receiving the Kingdom of God, or of
entering into it, or to be made partakers of the blessings of Christ, and
therefore did forbid their being brought to him; to which he says, that they
are as capable of that work upon their souls as others are, in as much as, in
the first reception of the Kingdom of God into our souls, we are as little
Children are, that is, we are merely passive in it. Now because he would that
little children also should be members of his Kingdom, therefore has he made
it one branch of the Gospel of this Kingdom, that the families of the
righteous shall be blessed.

2. Neither is it to be omitted, that by this means is made to appear that in
Christ, the second Adam, the same is done to life, as was in the first Adam
unto death. As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor.
15. 22. Now if you consider what makes us children of the second Adam, you will
find that the original of our Sonship in Christ is Gods election. Ephesians. 1. 4.
According as he has chosen us in him, having predestined us to the adoption
of Children by Jesus Christ. By a natural birth we cannot be made sons in
Christ, for our sonship is founded in grace; therefore (I say) it has its
original from Gods free election, who will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy. Romans 9. 15.
Now therefore since this cannot be by natural generation, and it must be
acknowledged that the children of believers are by nature born children of
wrath even as others, Psalm. 52. 5.
the Lord yet goes as far as may be, and by promise has so confined his
election, as ordinarily to cast elect children upon elect parents.

3. That which is more clear, the reason is, because of his love to elect
parents. The Lord knows what it is for Parents to be blessed in their Children,
and how he indeareth himself to his Saints thereby. Deuteronomy. 4. 37. Because he
loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them. So Deuteronomy. 10. 15.
to 21. and Romans 11. 28. As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your
sakes, but as touching the election, they are beloved for the Fathers sakes.

4. Because of his love to his elect when children; therefore he casts them
upon such Parents, by whom they may be brought up in his fear, which otherwise
had not been; and he loves to work as much as may be by second causes. Where
could Isaac have been so brought up as in Abraham's family? I know Abraham
(says God) that he will command his Children and his Household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord. Genesis 18. 19. Had not the Lord thus far
confined his choice (for an absolute confinement there is not, as was showed
before) to Families, Kindreds, and Nations, his elect had been destitute of
means of Education: and the great advantage in the family relation, for the
seasoning of the hearts of young ones with his fear, had been lost; which
advantage God would not lose; therefore in all the ages of the world, his
blessing still has been upon the families of his people. Until he put his
Church into a Kingdom every believers family was a Church, as the Church is
yet called the household of God; Ephesians. 2. 19. and 3. 15.
His blessing therefore was upon them for that season upon that account. And as
in Abraham he laid the foundation of that Kingdom, so in him he begins that
promise of a blessing upon believers families, that when his Church should
consist of many families put together, yet each might have his blessing still
upon it.

Fifthly, This he does because it is the most natural and readiest way to
multiply the spiritual seed, for the increase of that his Kingdom; which as in
Abraham he began, so in this promise, first given to him, of a blessing upon
Families and Nations, by making him and all believers blessings, he laid a
foundation of the greatness of it. This is that which makes this Kingdom to
be like leaven, (as was showed) whereby although at first it was but little,
yet at last it shall leaven the whole lump. By his making believers blessings,
they are the means whereby persons are seasoned with the knowledge and love of
Christ, especially the young ones brought up under their tuition. Should he
have taken his elect from all places of the world alike, then it may be here
had been three or four in England, as many in France, and so of the rest: the
Turks, Persians, Indians, all other Nations, must each have had their
proportion; so as the Saints must have lived each one alone by themselves, and
in an ordinary way could not have been built up, nor the Kingdom of Christ
increased. But when God casts the lot of his Saints together, making his
choice by Families, Kindreds, and Nations; by this means the gifts of Gods
people are improved, and light increased; one believer receives help, and
takes light from another, the succeeding generation from the former, and each
generation is exceeded by that which comes after: because the children stand
as it were upon their fathers shoulders, and in many things see that which they
saw not, until at last the earth be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the sea, Esaias 11. 9.
and the whole world be subdued to the power of the Gospel, the Sword and
Scepter of his Kingdom. And I must add, that this is one great design of God,
in the times of the New Testament, to bring down the knowledge of himself by
Jesus Christ so far to our capacity, as that by the use of ordinary means and
gifts, in studying the Scriptures, Dan. 12. 4. Joh. 16. 13, 14. Heb. 1. 1.
his people may search into and understand the deep things of God, so as not to
need the help of extraordinary gifts, such as the Prophets had under the Old
Testament, which then in the nonage of the Church were of use and necessary.
Now had not he taken this course in his election, he had been crossed utterly
in this his purpose; because had he not so provided for the education,
increase, and edification of his people, it must have been by extraordinary
ways and gifts, or not at all.

Quest. 3. If the question further be, why God should so exceedingly multiply
the spiritual seed.

Answ. The answer is easy; many reasons may be given; I shall mention only
that in the Text, viz. that God has need of such a number, that the seed of
Abraham might fill the world, and so might possess the gate of their enemies,
which (as we have heard) was part of his promise unto Abraham. And though it be
true that God could cause a few, (if he so pleased) by strength and force of
Arms, to subdue the whole world, yet that he would not do, because he loves
to carry on his work, especially now in the times of the New Testament, as much
as may be, by ordinary means and ways; and has abundant cause, as his
designs are laid, so to do; and the promise is, that the Church shall fill
the world, as well as rule over it. Dan. 2. 35. Matthew. 13. 33. And because, as
he will himself be righteous in all his works, and the Kingdom of Christ must
be a righteous Kingdom, (Psalm. 45. The Scepter of thy kingdom is a right
scepter) so the affairs of this Kingdom shall be managed, and the increase
thereof endeavored by his people, by such means and ways as are according to
common rules of righteousness and justice among men; Which could not be,
should it by violence only be effected. God has given the earth to the
children of men, Psalm. 115. 16.
so as the property and right of persons to their Estates, Lands and Liberties,
is not founded in that which is spiritual, but in nature, in common
providence, and in that great charter given to the first Adam, and to his
posterity, Genesis 1. 28. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be
fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowls of the air, and over
every living thing that moves upon the earth. Which power and dominion over
the creatures is as well continued to the sons of men now since the fall, as
is the efficacy of that blessing in those first words, be fruitful and
multiply, and replenish the earth. Therefore do we find the same again
renewed to Noah and his children, Genesis 9. 2. Into your hand they are delivered.
Only a sanctified use of things, and that all things are in the hand of Christ
to be managed for his peoples good, is from our spiritual state and interest;
So that his Saints are not, by their Saintship, entitled to any such possession
of their enemies gate, as that by force they may therefore take it unto
themselves.

Obj. It will be said, it may be, that when the Nations in the promised Land
were destroyed by the Church of God, his people did not act therein according
to the common rules of righteousness among men, in as much as Israel had no
such title in nature or reason to that Land.

To this I answer.

Answ. That what the Israelites did in this was by special revelation and
command from God, who, when he would make a National Church, and so the Land
possessed by his people an holy land, accordingly, when the iniquity of the old
inhabitants was full, did by his prerogative institution execrate or
anathematize them, devoting them unto destruction: which sentence as he might
justly pass upon them for their sins, so his people also might as justly
execute at his command. But there is no such revelations, nor commands, nor
such administrations to be expected now, in the times of the new Testament;
yea, though it be a truth, that even in these times also there are execrable
things, which by virtue of his institution are to be rooted out of the Church,
whereof that conquest of that Canaan was a type. And if we seek out the
answer-type, or what among his people now may hold parallel with that action,
we shall not find it in an earthly, but in an heavenly Canaan, nor in a
casting of wicked persons out of a nation, or out of the world, but out of the
Church by excommunication. Nor may any thing at all be done by the Church, as
such, but what is spiritua^ And although the people of God shall have just
cause to make war against Antichrist and his party, yet it shall be upon a
natural and civil account, for their just liberties opposed and invaded by them.

Therefore I say, that in a way of righteousness his people may obtain the
possession of the gate of their enemies, One course which God takes to fulfill
this his promise, is by multiplying them. As by blessing he will multiply the
seed, so by multiplying them he will cause them to possess the gate of their
enemies. And by this means that dominion and power which they shall at last
obtain, shall need no force, either to get, or to maintain it, but it shall
naturally fall upon them as from other causes so also by reason of their
number, even according to the law of nature, and common rules of righteousness
and justice. Therefore is it said, Esai. 2. 3. that in the last days, when the
mountain of the Lords House, that is, the Church shall be established in the
top of the mountains, and exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow
unto it; and when Christ shall judge among the Nations; that they shall beat
their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks; Nation
shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

What course the Lord will take also to lessen the number of the wicked before
that day come, I shall not now discuss, although the Scripture is not silent
in it; but what by destroying the one, and what by multiplying the other, the
number of the seed of Abraham will in time be such, as that in a way of
righteousness, and justice, the possession of the enemies gate will be theirs.
Therefore I say, God has need of such a number for a fulfilling of his
promise. And this is one reason why he so exceedingly multiplies the seed of
Abraham.

Quest. 4. As to the fourth Question, why that should be part of his promise
also, that Abraham's seed should at last obtain such power; I need to say no
more, but that this was his promise from the beginning, even to our first
Parents, that the righteous should subdue the wicked at the last. Genesis 3. 15.
The seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head. And afterward renewed to
the Sons of Noah, Shem, and Japheth. Genesis 9. 27. God shall persuade Japheth,
and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant; that
is, Jews and Gentiles shall make one Church, and the wicked of the world shall
be under their authority and power, as has been showed. Therefore I say, this
their possessing the gate of their enemies, is but what the Lord has, even
from the beginning, engaged himself to do for his people. And in Abraham's
Covenant we have but the same repeated: only with this addition, namely, the
manner how this seed shall obtain this power.

Thus you have the reasons of the point. Now before I come to application, it
will be necessary that I answer one objection more, which is this.

Obj. Our Savior says, his Kingdom is not of this world, Joh. 18. 36. How
then shall his Saints obtain such possession, and power, so as the Kingdom,
and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom, under the whole Heaven, shall
be given to them, and the Kingdoms of the Earth become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and of his Christ?

To this I answer.

Answ. That notwithstanding all this, yet it is most true, that the Kingdom of
Christ is not of this world, nor ever shall be. It is a spiritual, an heavenly
Kingdom. The matter of it, the laws, the power, and the end of his Kingdom,
are all spiritual. Whatever is of this world, is fading, and has a period set
for its continuance; but the Kingdom of Christ is everlasting. Thy throne O
God is for ever and ever. Psalm. 45. 6. Therefore when it is said, That the
Dominion and the Kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the Saints
of the most High: and the Kingdoms of the earth become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and of his Christ: the meaning is, not that the Kingdom of Christ shall
then be of this World, or shall cease to be a spiritual Kingdom, or that the
Kingdoms of the world shall cease to be of this world; that is, the one shall
not cease to consist of that which is natural, both for the Matter, Order,
Power, and End of the Kingdom; nor the other cease to consist of that which is
spiritual, and heavenly; for that were for it to degenerate, and to be deposed
from its glory; But as a man, when he is made a subject of Jesus Christ in his
conversion, is made a spiritual man, a new creature, not but that he is the
same man in nature still, but such a work is wrought in him as he is
equivalently another man, yea as much another in effect as if he had been
annihilated, and a new man made out of the dust; for, though he be the same man
in nature still, yet by Union and Communion with Christ, he is acted by another
principle of life to what he was before, namely, by the quickening spirit of
the second Adam: 1 Cor. 15.
so that whereas before, he was only of the first Adam, now he is of the
second; before was only of the earth earthy, now he is also of the Lord from
Heaven; So when the Kingdoms of the earth are become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and of his Christ, they will be the same Kingdoms in nature still, and
the same things done, and upon the same grounds of common justice; yet because
the people of God will be so multiplied, as theirs will be the power, it will
be equivalent to such a change as if they did cease to be the Kingdoms of the
earth, and were turned into the Kingdom of Christ. The Kingdoms of Christ,
and of the world, will ever be distinct in their Nature, and Use; yet such
influence will the Kingdom of Christ have upon Commonwealths, as they will be,
as it were, swallowed up into it. And indeed as our Savior alleged that unto
the Roman Governor, when he was accused for an enemy to Caesar, and for which
it is evident, he put him to death, because he made himself a King, alleged I
say for his defense, that his Kingdom was not of this World, and therefore
would be no interruption unto Cesars: so may it be alleged still, against the
jealousies and hard thoughts which men are apt to have of the people of God,
because of this Doctrine, that the time will come when the seed of Abraham
shall possess the gate of their enemies; I say it may be alleged that the
Kingdom of Christ is not of this World, and therefore no cause of any jealous
thoughts, that his subjects should be any disturbance to the Kingdoms of this
World. Justice, and righteousness, and obedience to Magistrates, will have
their free course, and upon grounds of nature and reason as before: And what
influence the Kingdom or Subjects of Christ shall have upon the Kingdoms of
the World, will not be destructive to them, but perfective of them. That which
is spiritual destroys not that which natural, but perfects it. The power will
be naturally devolved upon them, as from other causes, so also because of their
number, and having power and authority in their hands, they shall do the same
things for which government is ordained, and upon the same grounds in nature as
before; only here will be the difference, what they do, they will do it like
Saints, and as becomes those who are subjects of the Kingdom of Christ, and as
in obedience unto his command. As a believer does all the same duties in
nature, in all relations in the world, Parents to Children, Masters to
Servants, Children to Parents, Servants to Masters, one Neighbor to another,
as he did before his conversion, or as other men do, only with this
difference: unregenerate persons do them only upon a natural ground; and
because nature is corrupt, the duties many times are done accordingly; but a
believer, though he does the same things, and upon the same natural ground too,
yet he does them also in obedience unto Christ, and as sent by him about that
work: in which respect his people are said to be sent by him into the world.
Joh. 13. 16. The Servant is not greater then his Lord, neither he that is sent
greater then he that sent him. In our conversion he takes us out of this
world. Joh. 15. 19. Because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out
of the world, therefore the world hates you. And he sends us into the world
again, because there lies our work, and the same duties in nature we are to
do, yet not as being of the world, but as being of Christ, and called out of
the world, and sent in again by him: Thus, when the men of this world are in
place of government, they act only upon principles of nature; and the nature
of man being by sin corrupted, the work is done accordingly; hence is all that
injustice in the world, even from those whose work and interest it is to
preserve justice what they can. But when this power is cast upon the people of
the Lord, though they shall perform the same work of righteousness in
government, and upon the same ground in nature too, yet they shall act as
persons who have more then nature in them; namely as such who are sent by
Christ, and governed by his word and spirit; So as the inhabitants of the earth
shall have no cause to complain, that power is put into such hands; nay they
shall greatly rejoice in that day, as is foretold often by the Psalmist, Psalm.
97. 1. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice; O clap your hands all ye
people, shout unto God with the voice of triumph, for the Lord most high is
terrible, he is a great King over all the earth. Psalm. 47. 1.

I come now to the Application, wherein although much use may be made of this
point otherwise, yet I shall insist only upon two things. First, upon such
things from it as may tend to clear the point of Infant Baptism. Secondly
something I shall also add concerning the Kingdom of Christ. First, I say,
upon Infant Baptism, concerning which yet I shall not enter at large upon that
controversy: only I shall insist upon such arguments as do arise from this
point. Other arguments there are, and fitly urged also, which I shall not
mention. Now for that purpose, it will not be amiss nor impertinent, from what
has been said in opening this point,

Use. 1.
First, that hence we learn, and observe the difference, and agreement, between
those two great promises, made by God unto his people. The first to onr first
parents, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head. The
other this promise unto Abraham, Blessing I will bless thee, and thou shall be
a blessing, and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed, and
multiplying I will multiply thy seed, etc.

I say, wherein 1. They agree, viz. 1. Both to be fulfilled in Christ. 2. Both
made to a spiritual seed. 3. Both for the increase of that seed, and the
conquest of enemies. 4. Both comprehending the whole Gospel.
2. They differ, that in this promise unto Abraham, the Lord makes an addition
to the former: namely, he gives a more particular account, how this conquest
shall be accomplished. 1. By putting this seed into a Kingdom; that is,
whereas before it was in families only, that many families should be put
together, to be a separated peculiar people to himself, a Kingdom of Priests,
and an holy Nation, as they are called, Exodus 19. 6. This kingdom he began in
Abraham, when he chose his seed; first, to be carried on in the Church of the
Old Testament; then in the Church of the New Testament, under a differing
manner of administration, yet the same kingdom still, as appears by that of
our Savior, The Kingdom of God shall be taken away from the Jews, and given
to others. Matthew. 21. 23.
Which kingdom, as to the matter of it, was from the beginning, but was not
put into such a form, nor by any word of God so appointed to it, until
Abraham received the promise, and he and his seed made the heirs of the world,
as has been showed. 2. By that provision which God has made for the increase
and greatness of this kingdom, by blessing believers, so as to make them
blessings to Families, Kindreds, and Nations. This being the means appointed by
God for multiplying the seed, by so casting elect children upon elect Parents,
as was showed in opening the reasons of the point.



Which being so, now for our purpose, let it further be considered that as God
made an addition to his Gospel, or rather a further discovery of his mind
therein, in his promise unto Abraham, so he also made an addition to the seals,
for confirmation of it to his people, namely, the seal of Circumcision, which
also was first given to Abraham, and not in use before.

And as this addition to his Gospel was a promise of making believers blessings
to families, and nations, in order to the multiplying of the seed, and increase
of the Kingdom of Christ, so the application of this seal to Infants, is part
of the seal, thereby signifying and confirming that promise of such blessing.
So Genesis 17. 10. This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and
thy seed after thee; every man-child among you shall be circumcised; and the
uncircumcised man-child, that soul shall be cut off from his people, he has
broken my covenant. Had not the application of it to the Infant been part of
the token of the covenant, the child's not being circumcised had not been a
breach of the covenant; nor could the Lord have said, this is my covenant, that
the man-child be circumcised, if the application of that ordinance to the child
had not in it a signification and confirmation of some thing in the covenant.

Thence also is that in Acts. 7. 8. He gave Abraham the covenant of
circumcision, and so (or accordingly) he begat Isaac, and circumcised him the
eighth day. That is, he did it according to that covenant of circumcision, so
as the application of the seal to the Infant was part of the covenant to be
performed on the part of Abraham and his seed in their generations, even by his
spiritual seed, to a thousand generations, in that which is the same for
substance, and equivalent to circumcision, as we shall see anon.

And that this blessing upon families and posterity, was signified, held forth,
and sealed by circumcising the child, appears further, by that promise
uttered in that phrase, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. I will circumcise thy heart, and the heart
of thy seed, which kind of expression intimates, that the promise of the
conversion of their children was held forth, and confirmed in that seal. As
when the Apostle says, We are baptized into one body, it implies, that our
union with Christ in one body, is signified and sealed in baptism; because
else, those words had been in no capacity to have been so used in that sense as
they are used, both by the Apostle and by Moses. But in stead of saying we are
baptized into Christ, the Apostle must have used some such words, We are united
or ingraffed into Christ: And Moses must have said, that God would convert
their seed, or he would change their hearts, not that he would circumcise their
hearts; for what had the conversion of their seed been to circumcision, or
union with Christ to baptism, had not the one been signified by the one, and
the other by the other?

Moreover I may add, that the sign had not held proportion with the thing
signified; namely, there had been nothing in the sign to signify and seal
that blessing upon posterity, had the application of it to Infants been left
out; which I the rather urge because this blessing upon families, in order to
the multiplying of the spiritual seed, is that peculiar addition made in Gods
covenant with Abraham, to what he had given before to Adam, and his Wife, which
therefore in the seal thereof should not be omitted. Nor indeed had there been
any use of the application of it to the infant, nor that made a part of the
ordinance, had there not been such a branch in the covenant as a blessing upon
families and posterity to be thereby signified and sealed.

By that which has been said, I suppose, is evident that as Abraham's covenant
was sealed in circumcision, so this additional promise in it of multiplying
believers, by making them blessings unto families, and nations, was signified
and sealed, by the application of the seal to Infants; so as if that privilege
be denied unto Infants, that which was given to us in Abraham's covenant is
rejected, as he says, Genesis 17. The uncircumcised man-child shall be cut off
from his people, he has broken my covenant.

And it is further to be observed, that in reference to these two things;
namely, this additional promise, and the seal thereof (in respect of which
things only, Abraham's covenant exceeds that promise given to our first Parents)
was he called the father of all them that believe.

First, (I say) from this additionall promise is he so called, as appears
Romans 4. 18. Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the Father
of many Nations, according to that which was spoken, so shall thy seed be, that
is, as the Stars of Heaven for multitude. Genesis 15. 5. It was not only his
believing in general, but his receiving, and believing that promise concerning
the Lords thus multiplying his seed, that made him the father of many nations.

Secondly, it was not only that which made him so, but also his receiving the
seal of that promise, as we see Romans 4. 11. He received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had being yet
uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that believe, though
they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also. From
which place we may observe, First, that circumcision was a seal of the
righteousness of faith. Secondly, that because it was a seal of that
righteousness, which he had before he was circumcised, he therefore became the
Father of all that believe, whether circumcised or not. Now had not this seal
been given him that he might be the Father of believers, his receiving it at
this or that time, whether before, or after his believing to righteousness,
had made nothing for the universality of his relation as a Father of all
Believers.

That it was not his faith only, nor his degree of faith above others which
gave him that title appears, because,

First, so should Eve rather be called the mother of the faithful, or Adam the
father of them, because they were the first believers, and in likelihood their
faith not much if at all inferior unto Abraham's. And and Enoch, Noah, others
are likely to have had as strong a faith as his. Nor do we find, Heb. 11. where
all are mentioned, that Abraham's faith is preferred before theirs. One great
advantage, which is a longer experience of God, theirs had above his. And Heb.
7. we find, as Abraham was above Melchisedek in one thing, so he above Abraham
in another. He blessed Abraham, and (says the Apostle) without controversy,
the lesser is blessed of the greater. V. 7. And that wherein Abraham had
pre-eminence, is not specifyed to be his faith, but that he had received the
promises, V. 6. he blessed him that had the promises, all which Melchisedek had
not received, namely, such promises as were peculiar to Abraham, as the father
of Believers: as for other promises of life and salvation by Christ, the
promised seed, Melchisedek had received them as well as Abraham. In this I say
was Abraham preferred, allthough by office Melchisedek was greater then he.
Therefore since there were believers, and eminent believers before him, he
could not be the father of the faithful either because of his faith, or the
eminency thereof.

Secondly, besides this, when God gave him his new name, Abraham, and made him
the father of the faithful, he gave him something new, which was not, at least
not so held forth unto believers in former times. As when Peter had his new
name and the keys of the Kingdom given him, it was a new gift. For albeit there
was something of that nature before, at least in substance, in the Jewish
Church, yet not altogether the same. So when to Jacob was given a new name,
with a promise of overcoming the enemies of the holy seed, or of this kingdom
by overcoming God in prayer, it was a new promise; for the Church till then had
not such occasions of enemies to rise up against it, as now it had, when God
would single out a people, rejecting some, and choosing others, and that in such
an external and eminent way, to be a peculiar people, and a Kingdom for
himself. Now should the Saints be hard put to it, to do much that way in
prayer. This people and kingdom he began in Abraham, as has been showed; and
although it is true Esau was not the first enemy against this Kingdom, or
seed; Ishmael was before him; yet Esau was the first who in that manner opposed
it, as to seek to destroy the seed. As for Ishmael, he slighted it, scorned
Isaac and mocked him; so did Esau slight it at the first, when he sold his
birthright; but at last he found himself pinched and aggrieved so as he sought
to destroy Jacob. Enemies of God at first use to slight, and scorn, that which
afterward they persecute even to blood; thus did Esau. Therefore (I say) Jacob
was the first, who was put to it, by conquering Heaven, to prevail against the
enemies of this Kingdom, and had his name of Israel given him thereupon. Gal.
6. 16.
And the peace of the Israel of God depends upon such a conquest at this day.
Thus in Abraham's new name, and his being made the Father of the Faithful,
there was something given which believers had not, at least in such a way had
not before, in reference to which he was so called. Therefore it was not for
his faith only, nor the eminency thereof.

Thirdly, there is nothing in faith, or in the eminency thereof, that could
occasion that his name to be given unto him.

When God gave Jacob his name Israel, it was a name suitable to his prevailing
with God, it signifies as much. So the name Peter signifies a Stone, which
was given to Simon, and in him to us, in reference to that confession of
Christ, which makes us Stones in his Temple. So when God gave Abram his name
Abraham, it was upon a like account. Abraham signifies a Father of multitudes,
and that reason of it is expressly rendered by the Lord himself, Genesis 17. 5. Thy
name shall be Abraham, for a Father of many Nations have I made thee. In the
New Testament called the father of all them that believe. And it points us to
this, that it was in reference to something which he was to have as a Father,
for which he was so called, namely, this additional promise made to him in his
covenant, and the seal thereof, concerning the multiplying of his seed, by
making him and all believers after him, to be blessings to Families and
Nations: and was therefore so called, both because he was the first Father that
received this blessing, which was a blessing upon parents and their children;
and because, at least in a great part, by virtue thereof the holy seed was to
be propagated and increased. And believers are said to be his seed, because
that promise and covenant made to Abraham, concerning the Lords blessing and
multiplying his seed, is so much a cause of their being brought forth unto
Christ; his ordering his election so, as to bestow his blessing thus by
Families and Nations, being that which makes the Kingdom of Heaven like
leaven, as was showed before, one believer, ordinarily, being the means of the
conversion of another.

Some think believers are called the seed of Abraham, because they are
propagated from his example in believing, because they are said to walk in the
steps of the faith of Abraham. But this is not a sufficient reason for that
denomination; Romans 4. 12.
for we are to look as well at the example of others Heb. 12. 1. There is
mention of a cloud of witnesses, compassing us about, to whose examples we are
to look; chiefly to look at Christ, the Author, or the Captain, (...), and
finisher of our faith.

Thus we see that Abraham had his new name, and is called the Father of all
them that believe, in reference to these two things; First, because of this
additional promise given in order to the increase of his spiritual seed; and
Secondly, because he had given him also the seal of this promise, the
circumcision of the child.

The sum of what we have in this first use, for clearing the duty of
Infant Baptism, is this; That from the consideration of the difference, and
agreement, of these two great promises, that to our first Parents, and this to
Abraham, we take occasion to observe these five things. First, that in this
promise unto Abraham an addition was made to the former promise. Secondly, that
the Lord upon this occasion added a seal also, for confirmation of his Gospel
to his people; namely, the sign of circumcision, the token of Abraham's
covenant. Thirdly, that the application of the token unto Infants, was part of
the token of the covenant. Fourthly, that as this additional promise was of a
blessing upon families, and nations, in order to multiply the seed, so by this
application of the token unto Infants was this promise sealed. Fifthly, that in
reference to this additionall promise, and the seal thereof, was Abraham
called the Father of all them that believe, and they his seed: So as what he
received from the Lord, both in the promise, and the seal thereof, he received
it not only for himself, but also for his seed, even his spiritual seed in
their generations.

Use. 2.
A second use of this point may be that which the Apostle makes of it in this
place, when he says, this the Lord has done, to show the immutability of his
counsel to the Heirs of promise, and that we might have strong consolation,
What the Lord has intended, and designed for believers, let them embrace. Let
them not lose the comfort of this Oath, and Promise, made to Abraham, and his
Seed. And let their care in this be, as well in one thing as another. Let their
faith, and hope, enter into that which is within the veil, (as the Apostle
speaks) even into Heaven it self, whereof that within the veil was a type,
Heb. 9. And there let the soul rejoice, in all the secrets of the covenant,
the whole mystery of the Gospel, even in that which neither eye has seen, nor
ear heard, nor has entered into the heart of a natural man to conceive. The
merit and satisfaction of the blood of Christ, sprinkled upon the mercy seat,
the efficacy and power of his intercession, as our great High Priest; the
blessed privilege of our adoption, the gift of his good spirit, the glorious
inheritance of the sons of God, A free access into the bosom of the Father;
his infinite love, his eternal and free election. In all this so much above the
sphere of natures light, let faith be confident and strong, in the Promise and
Oath of God to Abraham, and his seed. And let not that branch, peculiarly added
unto his covenant, be forgotten, or neglected, the Lords purpose of election as
to families, and posterity, the conquest of the world by multiplying Abraham's
spiritual seed, and that by making believers blessings to families and nations.
Let not the people of God so easily part with so ancient entayled privileges,
wherein the Saints have rejoiced for so many ages. Let them have so much
compassion on their Children, as not to blot their names out of Heaven, or
thrust them out of the Kingdom of Christ, into the Kingdom of Satan: for to
one of the two Kingdoms they must belong. Those who know their own privilege
herein, will not upon such slender grounds part with it, as the manner of some
is to do.

And as Gods promise unto Abraham and his seed, is called a Covenant; and
therefore something to be performed on their part, as a duty commanded, and
required by the Lord, that his Covenant be not broken: so let believers search
and see what that duty is, for which purpose, let us make this further use of
this point,

Use. 3.
From thence to learn, not to confine that great promise made to Abraham and
his seed, Genesis 17. within the compass of an earthly Canaan, as meant only of
the temporal things of that Land, or the multiplying of his natural seed
therein; but also of all such blessings in Christ, whereof Canaan and the good
things thereof were types. That very promise, verse. 8. of the Land of Canaan to
be an everlasting possession to his seed, and he to be their God, by what has
been said in opening this point, we see is yet in fulfilling, even to us of the
times of the New Testament, in the spiritual blessings of the Heavenly Canaan,
and in the conquest of the World, by the people of the God of Abraham, whereof
the conquest of that land by Joshuah was a type, as has been showed.

If any shall affirm, that in neither of these two respects that promise can be
brought down to these times, it behooveth such to find out some other sense,
wherein it may be so extended, because we see that what the Lord confirmed unto
Abraham, of blessing, multiplying, and causing his seed to possess the gate of
his enemies, he confirmed it to us, even to believers of the New Testament, as
his seed and heirs according to the promise.

In opening the point, I was the larger in the proof hereof, and have
therefore insisted upon some things by the by, concerning the Kingdom of
Christ, (although a full unfolding thereof would require a far larger
discourse) because it conduces much toward the clearing of Infant Baptism to
be a duty which God requires of his people, that the full extent of Gods
promise unto Abraham, whereof we have found that to be one branch, be
considered and understood.

For if this be granted, that the promise made to Abraham, Genesis 17. especially
that part of it, v. 8. concerning Canaan to be an everlasting possession to his
seed, be of such extent, and made also to his spiritual seed of the New
Testament, it will follow, that that command of God in those words next
following, verse. 9. Thou shall keep my covenant therefore, thou and thy seed
after thee, in their Generations, is to be meant also of his spiritual seed
even in our days, and as a command that now lies upon the same spiritual
seed, in all Generations, Psalm. 105.
in as much as that command is brought in with a therefore, upon the promise
made to the same seed in the words next before going, Thou shall keep my
covenant therefore, thou and thy seed after thee, in their Generations. And
(says God) This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy
seed after thee; every man-child among you shall be circumcised: and ye shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the covenant
between me and you; and v. 14. The uncircumcised man-child shall be cut off
from his people, he has broken my covenant.

Obj. It will be said, how is this command of keeping this covenant obliging to
believers now, since the covenant to be kept was then specified to be the
circumcising of the child, in as much as circumcision is now abolished? Or what
is this to baptizing children, the point in hand to be cleared in this
discourse?

To this I answer.

Answ. First, It is to be observed, that this command of God is primarily fixed
upon the general duty, namely, the covenant to be kept, and not upon this or
that way of keeping, either by circumcising, or baptising: so as the
circumcising of the Child came under the command only upon this, because it
was declared then to be the token of the covenant; and by the words it is
supposed, that when it should cease to be the token of the covenant, it should
no longer be a duty; and what else, by the same authority, should be made the
token of the same covenant, would be the duty in stead thereof. Mark the words,
he does not say, Thou shall therefore circumcise every man-child among you, as a
token of the covenant between me and you; for so had that been made the token
for perpetuity, to have continued so long as the covenant it self. But first,
in general he says, Thou shall keep my covenant therefore, thou and thy seed
after thee, in their Generations; that is, they should observe and perform the
token of the covenant, whatever that prove to be; and in the second place, he
adds, This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy
seed after thee; every manchild among you shall be circumcised, and the
uncircumcised man-child has broken my covenant: therefore, as I said, as for
circumcision, that was a duty only upon those words, declaring that to be then
the token. Circumcision is now abolished, yet the command of keeping the token
of Abraham's covenant is still in force, and binding to Abraham's spiritual seed,
in their Generations; therefore what is now the token of that covenant must be
observed in stead thereof.

The like manner of institution we have concerning the Sabbath; therefore those
who deny Infant Baptism, oftentimes deny the Sabbath, and not without cause,
for there is the same reason of both, and we may illustrate the one by the
other. The Lord intended in time to change the day, from the seventh to the
first day of the week, as he intended in time to change the token of Abraham's
covenant; therefore in the fourth Commandment also, the command is not
primarily fixed upon the seventh, or any day, to be remembered and kept holy,
but upon the general duty, that the rest-day of the Lord be remembered, and kept
holy, what ever that day fall to be. Exodus 20. 8. 11.
Remember the Sabbath day, that is, the rest-day, to keep it holy; and the Lord
blessed the rest-day, and sanctified it. And the remembrance and keeping of the
seventh day is in the commandment made a duty for this reason, because that
was declared to be then the day, wherein God had entered into his rest, after
his making of the world. And upon the same account, when after the travail of
his soul, in the new creation, he entered the second time into his rest, as it
is declared that he did, Heb. 4. 9. 10. (as was showed p. 11. 12. as also
appears by what he says of himself, Mark 2. 28. that he is Lord also of the
Sabbath, which he could not be, unless he also had a rest which he entered
into, as God did into his.) Because that was upon the first day of the week,
when he rose from the dead; therefore by virtue of that command, Remember the
rest-day to keep it holy, the first day of the week is now to be remembered and
kept holy, in as much as that is now the rest-day of the Lord our God, as
formerly the seventh day was.

As for his Ascension, I confess, it is not so clear, although very probable,
to be upon that day, from Acts. 1. Acts 1. 3. 12.
by the computation of the forty days from his Resurrection, and the mention of
a Sabbath days journey, from mount Olivet to Jerusalem, occasioned (as is
likely) from their making that journey then upon that day, verse. 12. But albeit
his rest was not completed till he passed into the Heavens, and sat down on
the right hand of the majesty on high, yet he first entered into it at his
Resurrection, in as much as he was raised in incorruption, with a spiritual
body, and in glory. 1 Cor. 15. 42. 43. 49. 20. And because he did then first
cease from the travail of his soul: Which (I say) being upon the first day of
the week, there needs no more to fix that command upon this day, as a day
which God has sanctified and blessed; because it comes within the general rule
prescribed, that the rest-day of the Lord must be remembered, and kept holy, and
that the Lord blessed the rest-day and sanctified it.

So as if we should analyze that fourth commandment, we may take it thus.

In that commandment we have 1. A duty commanded, namely, that the Lords
restday, that is, the day wherein he entered into his rest, be remembered, that
is, that the memorial of it be solemnized, and that by keeping of it holy. In
that sense the word remember is used, Exodus 13. 3, 4. to 9. Remember this day
in which ye came out of Egypt, etc. So Hester 9. 27. 28. The Jews ordained,
and took upon them, and their seed, and upon all that joined themselves unto
them, that they would keep these two days, according to their writing, every
year; and that these days should be remembered, and kept, and that these days
of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish
from their seed. So the Lord here commands the memorial of his rest-day to be
preserved, by keeping that day holy. 2. The duty explained, by showing 1 The
nature of it, 1. As to the day. 1. In general, one in seven, six days shall
thou labor, and do all thy work, but etc. 2. In particular, for that season,
it is declared of the week the seventh day to be the day. The seventh day is
the Sabbath, or the rest of the Lord thy God.
2. As to the manner of observing and keeping of that day, namely, thou shall
do no manner of work therein, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates. In which, by a Synecdoche, all other Sabbath days duties are
commanded.
2. The reason of it, 1. Because God made the world in six days, and rested the
seventh. 2. Because he therefore blessed the rest-day, and sanctified it,
because therein he had rested.


So as by this analysis, we see that the seventh day was commanded to be kept
in this manner, not as the seventh, but as the rest day of the Lord; for that
we see is the reason of the duty, because God had rested therein, and because
he therefore blessed and sanctified the rest-day.

I have been the longer upon this point concerning the Sabbath, because it
receives so much a like measure in the world with this of Infant Baptism, and
the clearing of the one will help us in the other. For in like manner also, in
this of Abraham's Covenant there is 1. A duty commanded, viz. to keep that
covenant, viz. the token, sign, or seal thereof, which is a part of it, which
Abraham and his seed were and are to keep. 2. A declaration, or explication,
what was then the token of it, namely, that the man-child be circumcised; and
in case the Child was not circumcised, that the covenant was broken.


By all which we see, that notwithstanding the token of the covenant was
specified then to be the circumcising of the child, which is now abolished: Yet
the command of keeping the covenant, in performing that which is the token of
it, is still in force, and lies on the seed of Abraham, even his spiritual
seed, to this day.

Secondly, For answer further, it is to be considered, that baptism is now in
the room of circumcision, and is the very same, for substance, to us, as
circumcision was to them before Christ, namely, the token and seal of that
covenant made with Abraham, and his seed, as appears, Gal. 3. 27, 29. As many
of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. And if ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. By
which we see (as was before observed) that whatever we have as Abraham's seed,
we have it all in Christ; and what we have in Christ, we have it all as
Abraham's seed; and that we are baptized into Christ: that is, our initiation
into Christ, and whatever we have in Christ, and whatever we have as Abraham's
seed, is sealed unto us in baptism. By which it is evident, that as
circumcision was to them, so baptism now to us is the token and seal of that
covenant made with Abraham and his seed.

A further proof of this we have also, Coll. 2. 11. In whom also ye are
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, being buried with
him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him. Where we see, First, that
the thing signified or sealed, or the spiritual fruit of circumcision, was the
circumcision of the heart, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh;
And that the very same is the spiritual fruit of baptism, signified and
sealed thereby, namely, a death and burial to sin, and a spiritual
resurrection, which is the same with the circumcision made without hands, in
putting off the body of the sins of the flesh. Secondly, that, whereas Christ
was circumcised, and that not because he had a body of sins of his own to be
put off, but the body of the sins of the flesh of the members of his
mystical body; those only who are in Christ receive this benefit, because they
have it by the circumcision of Christ; so that whoever had, or have this
circmcision made without hands, are supposed to be in Christ, and members of
his body, and thereby entitled to and interessed in his circumcision. And here
we see also that the very same we have in baptism, in the spiritual fruit
thereof, namely, that only those who are in Christ receive that benefit, in as
much as they are buried with him in baptism, and risen with him therein; with
him, that is, as members of his body, who have this circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, buried and risen
thus again. Thirdly, we see in the last place, that the Apostle tells them
expressly, that the benefit and fruit of circumcision, which is the circumcision
made without hands, they had by being buried and risen with Christ in baptism;
and therefore that they were complete in Christ, in the ordinances of the
Gospel, without the rudiments of the world, the Jewish ceremonies, whether
circumcision, or any of the rest; therefore there is the same thing done in the
one, as was in the other, and this the same for substance to us, as that was to
them, and this in the room, and place or stead of that, so as we have no more
in baptism, then they had in circumcision. Therefore Abraham is said to
receive the sign of circumcision, that he might be the father of them that
believe, because he received it not only for himself, but also for them, as was
showed, page 66. for what he received as the father, he received it also for
those who are his Children. And as he received it for us, so we have it at this
day, even circumcision in baptism, in as much as therein we have the
circumcision made without hands, as the Apostle says, and have it also in the
way of the same ordinance for substance (for such is baptism to circumcision,
as was showed before) wherein they had it before Christ. And whether it is not
for this reason, that Abraham is said to be the father of circumcision to them
who are not of the circumcision only, but also walk in the steps of the faith
of Abraham, Romans 4. 12. Because he received that ordinance for himself, and for
all his seed, both Jews and Gentiles, let it be considered. And that according
to that extent, we are to understand that command of God Genesis 17. 9. Thou shall
keep my covenant, thou and thy seed after thee in their generations; and this
is my covenant, every man-child among you shall be circumcised.

Now is it to be omitted, for a further evidence that baptism is in the room
and place of circumcision, that the lords supper is the same, for substance,
with and in the place of the passover, as appears, 1 Cor 5. 7. Purge out
therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened; for
Christ our passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the feast, not
with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice, and wickedness, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. This he speaks in reference to their
putting away from amongst them the wicked person, v. 13, by whom, as by leaven,
the whole lump, namely, the congregation, which in celebrating the supper he
says are one bread, 1 Cor. 10. 17. was leavened; which purging of their
Church, that they might so keep the feast, that is, might so eat the supper
with unleavened bread, he could not have so expressed by such phrases, taken
from the passover, had not the passover and the supper been the same for
substance.

Obj. Suppose it be granted, that baptism is the same for substance with, and
in the place of circumcision, namely, the seal or token of the same covenant
with Abraham, as circumcision was, and that the command of God lies still upon
Abraham's seed, even in all generations, that the token of this covenant be
observed, and kept by them: yet what is this for baptizing infants, in as much
as baptism may seal unto us Abraham's covenant, although it be confined only
to persons of ripe years, who can make confession of their faith?

To this I answer,

First, that what was cleared in the first use must here be considered; namely,
that the application of the seal to the infant is part of the seal, or token
of the covenant, and is to be reputed part of the substance of that ordinance,
so as the token of Abraham's covenant is not kept, nor that command of God
fulfilled, (Genesis 17. 9.) in case it be left out. Therefore is it said the
uncircumcised man-child has broken the covenant. v. 14. The reason is, because
that branch thereof, which was peculiarly given to Abraham, and which makes the
difference between his covenant, and that which was given before, namely, a
blessing upon posterity, is therein signified, and sealed, as was showed in the
former use. Take away that branch of Abraham's covenant, wherein it differs
from that which the Lord had before given to his people, and the covenant under
that consideration as his, although other branches of it are kept, is broken;
and if that branch of Abraham's covenant be not taken away, but continued unto
us of the new testament, that part of the seal wherein it was signified, and
confirmed, must continue.

Secondly, Suppose the application of this ordinance to the infant should be
reputed only a circumstance, and not of the substance of it, yet if it be
altered, it must be by a word from the Lord himself so altered, or else it
must continue. Any circumstances therein which by his institution are altered,
we have warrant accordingly to alter, otherwise not. As for instance, that
instead of circumcising, it should now be baptizing with water, we have a word
of institution for it. And the application of the token of Abraham's covenant to
the Female is also a circumstance, which the Lord has added; so we find, Act.
8. 12. when they believed Philip, preaching the things concerning the kingdom
of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women.
And we have a reason for it even in that place, where baptism is said to be
the seal of Abraham's Covenant, namely, Gal. 3. 27, 28. because having there
said, as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ, he
adds in the next words, There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither Bond
nor Free, there is neither Male nor Female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus:
Namely, as in other respects, so in this of their being baptized into Christ.
Under the Law that could not be said; Exodus 23. 11. Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
the Jew had a privilege, which the Greek had not; so had the Male, which the
Female had not; but not so now. For this reason we now apply the token of
Abraham's covenant as well to Females, as to Males, which they did not. But if
any will alter further, so as to forbid the application of the seal to Infants,
it behooves them to show by what warrant from God they make that alteration.

And whereas they of that opinion against Infant Baptism think, that they are
only upon the negative part, and therefore call for a precept, or example, to
prove the lawfulness thereof, thinking it sufficient, because, as they
suppose, neither precept nor example can be found, thereupon to refuse the
practice of it, in this they are mistaken. As for a command, there it is, Genesis
17. 9. Thou shall keep my covenant therefore, that is, shall perform the token
of it, thou, and thy seed after thee in their Generations; which, as has been
showed, is a command which lies upon Abraham's spiritual seed now, in the times
of the New Testament, and it behooves such as deny Infant Baptism, to show
that God has made such an alteration in the token, or seal of his covenant, as
that it is now not to be applied unto Infants; and whereas the application of
it unto them was a part of the token or seal thereof before Christ, that since
Christ it has, by a word of institution from God, ceased so to be.

Thirdly, This application of the token of the covenant unto Infants comes not
only under the notion of a duty, but also of a privilege; therefore is it
said, Acts. 7. 8. he gave to Abraham the covenant of circumcision, and so he
begat Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day. It was therefore a gift
conferred upon him and his: which being given to Abraham, and to his spiritual
seed in their generations, to him as the father of all them that believe, to
all believers as his seed, a privilege both to parents and to children; which
I say being once given by God, who may presume to take it away, without a word
and warrant from himself? and we know the gifts of God are without repentance,
Romans 11. 29. therefore is it not to be imagined, that by him it should be taken
from his people, least of all, that now in the times of the new Testament, his
bounty to them should be short of what it was before.

Obj. It will be objected yet further, that this command thus urged is only
from the Old Testament: but if the application of the token of Abraham's
covenant to Infants now had been intended, the New Testament had not been so
silent in it, as not to leave us one precept or example for it.

To this I answer.

Answ. First, that the New Testament is not altogether silent in this matter;
as for instance, Acts. 2. 38. where Peter said unto the people, Repent and be
baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the demission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; for the promise is
unto you and to your children, and to all that are afar off, that is, even to
the Gentiles also, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Namely, the
promise of receiving the Holy Ghost, which he says they should receive upon
their repentance and baptism, according to that in Joel mentioned, verse. 17.
that in the last days God would pour out of his spirit upon all flesh, as well
upon Gentiles as Jews; and not only so, but also according to Gods promise
unto Abraham; therefore he says it was not only unto them, but also to their
children; for as we may grant that in Joel to be here meant, so we must not
exclude that of Abraham, for they are both as one in this matter. The gift of
the Holy Ghost, and that also to the Gentiles, is a main branch of Abraham's
covenant, as we see, Gal. 3. 13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the Law, being made a curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come on
the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the
spirit through faith.

Nor may we confine that promise in Joel to extraordinary gifts of tongues, and
miracles, because it is a promise that was not to expire with the Apostles
times, Acts 2. 17.
but extends to all the latter days, and unto all those whom the Lord calls
among the Gentiles, and is yet in fulfilling, when all those gifts are ceased;
for that phrase, the last days, in Scripture, signifies all that space of
time from the coming of Christ in the flesh to the end of the world, 1. Tim.
4. 1. 2. Tim. 3. 1. Heb. 1. 2. and 9. 26. And if the words be considered, it
will appear, that the ordinary gifts of the spirit are also included therein.
Mark the words; In the last days (says God) I will pour out of my spirit upon
all flesh. This in the general. In particular, it follows; First, your Sons
and your Daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see visions, and
your old men shall dream dreams. This we may understand of extraordinary gifts,
and prophesying, fulfilled in the Apostles and Prophets extraordinarily
inspired, in the Primitive times, of use then in laying the foundations of the
Church of the New Testament, being of the seed of the Jews. Secondly, and on my
servants, and my handmaids, will I pour out of my spirit in those days, and
they shall prophecy. This must be meant of ordinary gifts, because it is made
a distinct thing to the former, as that which God would do for all his
servants; he would give them the spirit of prophecy, as we see Rev. 19. 10.
when John, would have worshipped the Angel, because he had revealed such
prophesies unto him, the Angel forbids him, saying, See thou do it not: and for
this reason, for (says he) I am thy fellow servant, namely, in this thing, and
not only his, but also of thy brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus, for
the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. Now every believer has the
testimony of Jesus; so is it said, Rev. 12. 17. The Dragon made War with the
Church which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus
Christ; So chap. 1. 9. Therefore every believer has the spirit of prophecy,
although not so as to preach in the Church, a privilege forbidden unto Women,
1 Cor. 14. 34. 35.
yet to understand the prophesies, which the Saints of the Old Testament
ordinarily had not; the prophesies were as things sealed up in those days, but
Christ has opened the seals of that book to us of the New Testament. 1 Pet.
1. 10. 11. Dan. 12. 9.
Rev. 5.

A promise to this effect we have also to all believers, Joh. 16. 13. when the
spirit of truth is come, he shall lead you into all truth, and he shall show
you things to come. So Joh. 2. 13, 20, 27. he says not only to fathers, and
young men, but also unto little children in religion, that they had received
the unction of the holy one, and they knew all things, being taught by that
anointing. As these places must be understood of what is common to all
believers, so (I suppose) it is also the meaning of that latter clause in that
prophecy of Joel, cited by the Apostle, Acts. 2. 17. upon my servants, and
upon my handmaids, I will pour out of my spirit in those days, and they shall
prophecy. By the more plentiful pouring forth of the spirit upon believers, (
Joh. 7. 39.) because now the Church is of riper age, the Saints in some respect
have an equal participation of the spirit, even in the use of ordinary gifts,
as the Prophets of old had in extraordinary ways: therefore what is the
portion of all believers, in the times of the New Testament in that behalf, is
called the spirit of prophecy. Therefore is it that such preaching, which we
must suppose may bring us something that is not good, is called Prophesying,
and that it must not be despised, as we would not quench the spirit. 1 These. 5.
19. 20. Quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying, prove all things, hold
fast that which is good.

Now for our purpose, observe that here is an invitation to repenting and
believing Jews to be baptized, they and their children. I say, to repenting and
believing Jews; for the words of the Apostle cannot be meant, that the promise
did belong to them, and their children only as Jews, Abraham's natural seed,
but as believers, and upon their conversion. First, because that which belonged
to them properly as Jews, was not Baptism but circumcision. Secondly, because
John Baptist had fully cleared that point before, upon a like occasion, when
the multitude came to him for baptism, he said unto them, Bring forth
therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to say, we have Abraham
for our father. Thirdly, because he makes the Gentiles case parallel with
theirs, and says the same promise did also belong to them, yet with the same
limitation, namely, to so many of them only as the Lord our God shall call,
implying that it is an effectual call to faith and repentance, that gave to any
such a privilege, either Jew or Gentile. Therefore Peter seeing their faith,
and the work of God upon them, and upon no other account, endeavors thus to
comfort them, and exhorts them to repent, that is, to go on as they had begun,
and to embrace the profession of the Gospel, and to be baptized; and tells
them of their interest and privilege by promise; and least they should be
discouraged, because of the greatness of their sin, in rejecting, and
crucifying Christ, he tells them that even the Gentiles should be received to
the same privilege, and that the promise was to them also; God would pour out
of his spirit upon all flesh, when they also should believe, and repent, as
they now did.

Therefore also that clause, to as many as the Lord our God shall call, Gal. 3.
14.
is likewise so to be understood, namely, not only to them, but also to their
Children did the same promise appertain, (according to the tenor of Abraham's
covenant, whereof baptism is the seal, and in which the gift of the Holy
Ghost is one thing promised) although it be not so expressed. As it is the
manner of the Scripture, many times, to speak so, as the sense of the latter
part of a sentence is to be filled up from the former part, and the former from
the latter. As for instance, Psalm. 1. 6. The Lord knows the way of the
righteous, and the way of the wicked shall perish. Implying, that the Lord does
not so know the way of the wicked, and that the way of the righteous shall not
not perish. So Pro. 10. 24. the fear of the wicked shall come upon him, but
the desire of the righteous shall be granted. Implying that the desire of the
wicked shall not be granted, and that the righteous shall be delivered from his
fear. So when he says here, The promise is to you, and to your children, and
to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call; It
implies that the promise did belong to these Jews upon their effectual call,
and to their children; and that when even the Gentiles, who were yet afar
off, should be so called, that the same promise was to them and their children.
And as we cannot suppose, that the promise of the gift of the holy Ghost, upon
baptism, did belong to these Jews without this call; so neither can we think
his meaning to be, that it did not belong to the Gentiles when so called, in
the same latitude, namely, as well to them and their children also. Thus we see
(I say) that the new Testament is not altogether silent in this matter, as also
shall be made more to appear anon, even from a further application of this
point; and sundry other arguments are pertinently, from thence, urged by
several authors, which I shall not stay upon, confining my self to the point
in hand, about the covenant of God with Abraham.

Secondly, I answer further, that as for the matters of the law, of which
nature all the ordinances of the worship are, the New Testament speaks but
very briefly, and but by hints and touches, here and there, because it
supposes the Church to be sufficiently instructed in those things before,
referring us for a full understanding of such things, to what was received and
known among the people of God from the Old Testament. For we must know that the
times of the Old Testament were the season wherein the Lord did instruct his
people in his Law: As the times of the New Testament are the season wherein he
has more fully unfolded the mysteries of the Gospel, which were but darkly
shadowed in the Old. So that, as our instruction in the knowledge of the
Gospel, is not to be expected only from the Old, but must be taken from the
New; so our establishment in the Doctrine of the Law must not be taken only
from the New, but also from the Old.

So we are to understand that in Luke 16. 16. The Law and the Prophets were
until John; since that time the Kingdom of God is preached. Not that then the
Gospel began, or that the Law was then ended, and laid aside, and to be of no
longer use. It is true, in the covenant of works made with our first parents in
the state of innocence, there was Law without Gospel; but as to the Old
Testament and the New, they both consist of Law and Gospel put together; only
they had most of the one, we of the other. But the meaning of that place in
Luke is, that the time before John was the season of instructing the Church in
the Doctrine of the Law; therefore it follows that since that time the
Kingdom of God is preached, not the Kingdom of God began. And the time after
John was to be the season wherein the Church was to be more fully instructed in
the Gospel.

A further evidence of this we have, Psalm. 78. 1. Give ear (O my people) to my
law, I will open my mouth in a parable, I will utter dark sayings of old. Who
is it that speaks thus? It is Christ, of whom this was a prophecy, as we see
Matthew. 13. 35. All these things spoke Jesus in parables, that it might be
fulfilled that was spoken by the Prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in
parables, I will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation
of the world. And as in the Psalm he says, Give ear O my people to my Law;
so when he had spoken his parable, Matthew. 13. 9. he adds, He that has an
ear to hear, let him hear. Well, what is this Law that Christ will teach his
people? (For we see, the Psalm is a prophecy, wherein Christ is brought in
teaching his Disciples Law.) The Law that he teaches is this; He relates the
history of the Israelits, how they provoked and tempted God, and how he
punished them in the Wilderness, and in Canaan; how they being afflicted did
repent, and then sinned yet more, and were not steadfast in his Covenant; and
what the carriage of the Lord was toward them, all along, in his dispensing
punishments, or mercy to them. This he calls his teaching his people his Law,
and this he says he would declare to them, that they might set their hope in
God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments, and might not
be as their Fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, that set not their
heart aright. v. 6, 7, 8.

And this is the scope of Christ in the parable of the sower, where he shows
what befalls unfruitful hearers, some as the Highway, some as the Stony, some
as the Thorny ground; which the Holy Ghost makes parallel with that Psalm. 78.
in Matthew. 13. 3. So as by that Psalm it is supposed, that when he instructed
and tutoured his people in the Wilderness, and in Canaan, under the
administrations of the Old Testament, dispensing punishments and favors, as a
Father to his Children, as occasion served, he then taught his people his law,
and so as should serve for the ages after Christ, as he says, verse. 5. of that
Psalm, He established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel,
which he commanded our Fathers, that they should make them known to their
Children, that the Generation to come might know them, even the children which
should be born, who should arise and declare them to their Children, even in
the ages after Christ; for you see the Psalm is a prophecy to be then
fulfilled.

The reason of this is because however the Law of the Old and that of the New
Testament, in circumstances, and in the particular duties required, do differ,
yet as to the substance, or general nature of the Law, they are one and the
same. As for instance, the general nature of the Law, in both, we have in the
words of our Savior, Luke. 10. 28. This do and thou shall live; And of the
Apostle, Romans 10. 5. The man that does those things shall live by them. So
Nehem. 9. 29. and Ezekiel. 20. 11.

The Law prescribes that rule and method of service, which God has set and
sanctified, in order to our enjoyment of life and blessedness, in and from
himself. More particularly, three things there are in the general nature of
the Law, and in respect of each of them it is one and the same to us, as it was
to them.

1. A commanded rule, or method of service to God, Heb. 9. Then verily the
first Covenant or Testament, had also Ordinances of Divine Worship. This word,
also, supposes both the one, and the other, to have such Ordinances of Divine
Worship.

2. That this rule or method of service, so commanded, is holy, consisting of
such things as have in their use a spiritual efficacy above the common course
of nature. Such were theirs to them, and such are ours to us. The Law is holy,
the Commandment holy, Romans 7. 12. and the Law is spiritual. v. 14. Even those
duties which are naturaly moral, being now to be performed to a spiritual and
supernatural end, together with other institutions, namely, in order to enjoy
communion with and life in God, are spiritual and holy.

3. These Ordinances, or Commandments to be observed under penalties, both
corporal and spiritual; the word life comprehends both, which is our case as
well as theirs. 1 Cor. 10. 1. They were all baptized, and did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, yet fell in the
Wilderness for their lusting, for their Idolatry, Fornication, tempting God,
and murmuring. Now (says the Apostle) all these things happened unto them for
examples, and were written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world
are come. Wherefore, let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he
fall, namely, as they fell. So Psalm. 95. applied by the Apostle to us of the
New Testament, Heb. 3. and 4. Tempt not God, nor provoke him, as they did in
the Wilderness, least he swear against you in his wrath, as he did against
them. And this he speaks to believers, (as has been showed) whom he calls
the people of his pasture, and sheep of his hand. Psalm. 95. Holy brethren,
pertakers of the Heavenly calling, Heb. 3. 1. whom also he supposes to be in
Christian Churches, Heb. 13. 7. And we find that the profanation of the
Sacrament by the Corinthians was punished also by corporal sickness and
death. 1 Cor. 11. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many
are fallen a sleep. Therefore I say, the Law is a command to be observed upon
penalties and rewards; Psalm. 2. 12. Heb. 6. 10.
only to us his rewards and punishments are more in that which is spiritual,
and less in things corporal, then they were to them.

Nor is this to be under a covenant of works. It is true, the Law to man in the
state of Innocence, before the Gospel was added, was a covenant of works; but
ever since, both to them before, and to us after Christ, the Law has been as
it were incorporated with the Gospel, as thereby become part of the Covenant of
grace. Therefore the Law given by Moses is called the Testament of Christ, as
well as the Law given to us by Christ himself; that the Old Testament, this the
New, and both confirmed by his blood; that in the type by the blood of Bulls
and Goats, this in the answer-type by his own blood, Heb. 9. 16. Where a
Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the Testatour;
whereupon, nether the first Testament was dedicated without blood. Now the
Testament of Christ, so confirmed, must needs be of the covenant of grace, not
of works. Therefore also what Moses says of the Law given by him, Deuteronomy. 30.
12. 14. It is not in Heaven that thou should say, who shall go up for us to
Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it? but the word is
very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, etc. This the Apostle Romans
10. 6. applies to the Gospel, in opposition to the Law, as in it self
considered without the Gospel, or as a covenant of works.

Before the Fall the Law was given by God as Lord of his Creature; but since
the Fall it has been the Law of the Kingdom of Christ; which makes it cease
to be a covenant of works.

1. Because Christ in his Kingdom, is so our Lord as he is also our Head, and
we the members of his body, and quickened by his spirit, and therefore part of
our duty therein required is, that it be done by his strength. Joh. 15. 5.
Philip. 1. 11.
In the covenant of works, the Law was Do this and live; but in the covenant of
grace, it is Do this in the strength of Christ and live.

2. Because our state and condition as subjects of his Kingdom, depends not
upon our keeping the Law, but upon free grace in Christ by faith, although our
comfort in that Kingdom and State, be much according as we keep or break that
Law. Joh. 14. 21. He that has my Commandments (says Christ) and keeps
the^, he it is that loves me, and he shall be loved of my father, and I will
love him, and will manifest my self to him. So we are to understand those
words, when the Apostle says, we are free from, and dead to the Law, and are
not under the Law, but under Grace: that is, in respect of our state and
condition, or of the justifying of our persons. In the state of innocence, Do
this and live was the covenant, in respect of state; therefore Adam had no
sooner sinned, but he was in a state of eternal death; but to us only in
respect of the comforts in that state wherein we are, as subjects of the
Kingdom of Christ, and members of his body. Therefore although we are punished
for sin, yet not with eternal death, but with temporal punishments, whether
corporal or spiritual; and that out of love to do us good, as from a Father;
our state in Christ continues still. Therefore although we are bound by this Law
as subjects of his Kingdom, yet we are free from the law in respect of that
legal state, as under a covenant of works.

3. Because however we are punished by Christ for sin, yet the matter is
wholly taken up by him in his Kingdom, and we are not carried out thence to be
punished, or thrown to hell. Therefore are we free from the Law as to the
eternal curse.

4. In that when he punishes for sin, he proceeds therein according to the
nature of the justice of his Kingdom, which is the justice of a Father, which
obliges him in punishing to aim not only at the glory of his justice, but
also at the good of the person punished; which end if he can attain by sparing,
he is engaged even in justice, and that he may be a righteous Father, to spare:
or if a lesser affliction will do it, to take a less: and although sometimes
when he sees cause he will not spare, and when a lesser affliction will not do
the work he takes a greater, and comes with seven times more, Levit. 26.
yet never to punish any of his children according to the full desert of any
sin. He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to
our iniquities, Psalm. 103. 10. Now this is not according to the tenor of a
covenant of works, for there is no such liberty taken; there is no sparing,
because the end of punishment therein is not the good of the person punished,
but only the glory of his justice.

Thus we see, that although one ingredient in the general nature of the Law,
both before and since the coming of Christ, be, that it is a command under
penalties; yet it follows not that either they were, or that we now are, under
a covenant of works.

I have made so large a digression upon this subject, because some do insist so
much upon this point against Infant Baptism, alleging that the new Testament
is so silent in it; for by that which has been said of the general nature of
the Law, to be one and the same to the people of God under both Testaments, we
see clearly the reason of these two things.

First, how God could make the time of the old Testament to be the season
wherein he would instruct his people in his Law, and that for all ages
afterward, according to that of our Savior, The law and the Prophets were
until John, and since that time the kingdom of God is preached: implying that
the doctrine of the Law was unfolding until then.

Secondly, why the Lord Christ, who is the Apostle of our profession, and was
faithful to him that appointed him, as Moses also was faithful in all his
house, Heb. 3. 1.
that is, in all the service of it, should speak so little in his new Testament
concerning the Law, which is the rule which he has set for the service of that
his house; namely, because he could look upon that, for the greatest part, to
be done already. And should he have been more particular therein, he had taken
his people off from the study of the old Testament, which he would not do,
since it was written for our learning, yea he purposely avoyds it, that he
might oblige his people to that study. His faithfulness in the house of God
did bespeak it of him. Therefore whoever shall confine himself only to the new
Testament, to find out the law of Gods worship and service, he shall never
find it, not only as to Infant Baptism, but also to all other Ordinances
whatsoever; because, as I said, the new Testament speaks of things only by
hints, here and there, for the most part, and as supposing many things then
already known, when that was written, and commonly received among his people.
As for instance, he says of his Church, (even that Church wherein Timothy was
instructed touching his behavior, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
and therefore meant of a visible Church) that it is his House; See p. 28.
and the Church of Corinth is said to be the Temple of God; 2 Cor. 6. 16. But
where is the nature of the house, or Temple, unfolded in the new Testament? For
that we must go to the old; and there we find, that a Temple, or an house of
God, must be separated from that which is common, and made sacred to his
presence; and such must a people be, who are now his House and Church; which
presence of his when he totally withdraws, he calls it a profaning or
defiling of his Sanctuary. Ezekiel. 24. 21. I will profane my sanctuary the
excellency of your strength; that is, he would make it common, and to be as any
other place. Again, the word separate, is sometimes used in the new Testament,
as, Acts 13. 2. 2 Cor. 6. 17. which is of necessity to be understood by him
that would understand the Ordinances of God, and service of his house, or the
house it self; for they all are separated things. But we find not in the new
Testament what it is, but in the old we must search, and there we find it
often made opposite to that which is common, that is, which is and works
only within the common road of nature; therefore we find, that then a thing
is separated, when it is set apart for a supernatural efficacy and end, of
which nature all the Ordinances of the worship then were, and are so still. So
for the Sabbath, where shall we find, that the first day of the week is to be
remembered, and kept holy, as the Rest day of the Lord, as the Seventh day was,
if you have not recourse to the fourth Commandment, where the command is fixed
upon the general duty of remembering, and keeping the Rest day, whatever that
day fall to be, as was before observed? Page 75.


I might give many such instances, I shall name but one more, and that is this,
the applying of the token of Abraham's Covenant to infants; which must have been
more particularly appointed in the new Testament, had not the command of God,
when he gave to Abraham that Covenant and the seal thereof, been so expressly
fixed upon the general duty of keeping the token of the Covenant, yea whatever
that token prove to be (for God did intend to change it, as was showed) And
withal the application of it to the Infant so expressly made an essential
part thereof, as being that wherein was signified and sealed that branch of
Abraham's Covenant, which made it to be his, and to differ from what was given
before, in reference to which also, and to the seals thereof, he was called the
Father of them that believe, and therefore received both the one, and the
other, both for himself and us, as was showed before; namely, a blessing upon
families, in order to the multiplying of the spiritual seed. Which being
considered, the silence of the new Testament in this matter of Infant Baptism,
is an argument rather for it then against it; because had it not been taken for
granted, and as a thing commonly received by all the Churches, from the light
of the old Testament, that this token of Abraham's Covenant should also be
applied unto Infants, those who had so many questions and disputes to be
decided by the Apostles, had never let so great a privilege go so quietly,
without so much as a question put about it. And it had been necessary, that the
Lord should have given a caution for leaving Infants out of this new
administration, that we might have known his mind, had he so intended.

Use 4.
Hence we see a reason why the Apostle faith of the children of believing
parents, that they are not common, or unclean, but holy. 1 Cor. 7. 14. one
reason is, because they come under this word of blessing from God, in as much
as that word was confirmed not only unto Abraham, but also to all believers;
Blessing I will bless thee, and thou shall be a blessing, and in thee shall all
the families of the earth be blessed. That which God blesses he sanctifies,
and separateth from that which is common or unclean; As it is said of the
Sabbath day, he blessed the Sabbath day, and sanctified it, that is, made it a
day which should not be reputed common, but holy. Nor are the children of
believers under a blessing only in a common way of providence, as he blesses
the corn and the beasts of the field, as has been showed, (although according
to the ordinary course of causes and things in nature, it must be acknowledged
a blessing to be born and brought up of believing parents) for if that were
all, it would not make their children holy.

It is said, that Christ upholdeth all things by the word of his power. Heb. 1.
3. so as the common course of things in nature is not without a word of
blessing from God. The earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon
it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives
blessing from God. Heb. 6. 7. So Psalm. 107. 38. yet here is no holiness in all
this, because this is done in the common course of nature; and that which
makes any thing to be holy, is something which is spiritual and supernatural,
or separated from that common road. And this is the case of Infants of
believing parents; they are not only under a word of common providence, but
also under such a particular word of blessing from God, by means whereof
believers are made blessings to their children, in that which is spiritual and
supernatural, even to the conversion of their souls to God, without which word
of blessing all prayers and good example, or means of education whatsoever,
are not so effectual thereunto. Hence it is that the Apostle puts that
difference between the Gentiles and the Jews, as between a wild Olive and a
good Olive tree. Romans 11. 24. If thou were cut out of the Olive tree which is
wild by nature, and were graffed contrary to nature into a good Olive tree.
That which made this difference was not to be found in that which was merely
natural; for the Jews were borne in original sin, and corrupted thereby as
much as the Gentiles; but in something supernatural, namely, because the Jews,
though they were sinful too, yet they were under the means of grace, and they
had God engaged by covenant to them and their children for their good. But as
for the Gentiles, he left them to their natural condition, without such means
to mend them, nor was God engaged so to them for their good; but they were
under the curse of God, therefore they grew wild as a tree in the Wilderness
that has none to order it. And so were all those that came of them, such
children of such parents, alike under the curse of God in sin, and not looked
after or regarded by the Lord, as it is said, Acts, 14. 16. He in times past
suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. And whereas the Jews are
called the natural branches of this good Olive tree, and are said to be Jews
by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles Gal. 2. 15. this is not spoken
because this difference was from nature only, and not from that which is
supernatural, but because this privilege they had by birth, according to the
covenant of God with Abraham. And we see by that of the Apostle, Romans 11. that
look what privilege the Jews had of this kind, the believing Gentiles do now
enjoy since their being graffed into the same Olive tree, from whence the Jews
for a time are broken off; and that when the Jews shall be again graffed into
it, they shall enjoy the same again, as was showed p. 39, 40, 41, etc.
Therefore I say, this is one thing which makes this difference between the
children of believers, and of unbeleevers, that they are holy, and these common
or unclean, because they are under such a word of blessing which these are not;
yea though we cannot with certainty affirm of this or that Infant of a believer
that it is inherently holy yet holy as thus separated and differenced, from
those who are common, by that word of blessing from God, under which they are.
As we cannot upon certainty affirm of any particular person in the Church that
he is inherently holy, because he may make a lie in his confession, yet of
every such person we can say he is in that sense holy, namely, as separated
unto God in that relation, and thereby differenced from those who are common or
unclean.

To this I add, that as it is a necessary qualification, in the confession of
one who is received into Church relation, that therein be held forth in words
and actions, that which gives a positive ground of hope that he is inherently
holy; so in this promise of God to Abraham, concerning his purpose of election
so by families, as has been showed, we have no less ground of hope concerning
Infants of believers. In the one we have a persons own profession concerning
his spiritual state and interest in Christ, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Matthew. 10. 14.
in the other we have what God himself professes, how he has separated them
unto himself, and made them part of his kingdom, and partakers of the blessing
of his covenant. And as a person of ripe years is received to baptism, not
because he is certainly known to be inherently holy, but upon his profession to
be such, wherein both himself and the Church may be deceived; so upon that
which God has said concerning Infants are they to be received also. Nor let it
seem strange that those who are made holy from a word of blessing from the
Lord, are by him appointed to have the seal of that word and covenant by which
they are so made holy, as in the former use was proved, that he has so
commanded and appointed. Which also is another reason why such children are by
the Apostle called holy, namely, because they are not only within the covenant
of Abraham, but also are appointed of God to be a subject recipient of the
seal of that covenant. The seal is holy, and those to whom it is applied must
be so, or else it is profaned and made common.

As for that interpretation given of that place by some, else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy, to be meant, that else their children were
bastards, but now they were legitimate; It cannot be the meaning of the
Apostle; because so the Apostle had answered nothing to the satisfaction of
those who had put the Question to him about putting away an unbeleeving Wife.
For it seems the Corinthians had written to him, and had put certain questions
to be answered by him, as we see verse. 1. whereof that was one. Now for him to
say, that a believing Husband might lawfully keep his Wife still, though an
unbeleever, else were their children bastards, had been to leave them as dark
and unsatisfied as before; for that had been but idem per idem, or barely to
affirm the thing. But it is evident the Apostle brings that of the childrens
being holy as an argument to prove their lawful continuance in that relation,
notwithstanding one of them was an unbeleever. Nor can we suppose the Apostle
would so reason, that except one of the married couple be a believer, their
children are bastards. Moreover the holiness here mentioned is supposed to be
such as the unbeleever contributeth nothing to it, he is sanctified, he does
not sanctify, therefore cannot be meant of legitimacy of birth, which must be
as well from the one as from the other, since marriage is an ordinance not
peculiar to the Church of God, but common unto all mankind.

By this answer of his it appears, that it was a Jewish scruple that did
trouble them, namely, whereas under the Law it was a sin for one of the
Church of the Jews to marry a strange Wife, that is, one who was not of the
Church, and in such case they were commanded to put away their Wives, and to
separate themselves from them as being polluted by them, as we see in Ezra 10.
11. and 9. 12. as it was also the sin of the old world, that the sons of God,
that is, they of the Church, did take in marriage the Daughters of men, that
is, of the posterity of Caine: Such was the Law of the communion of Saints
also, in the Church, even in those days. Therefore the Corinthians put the
Question to the Apostle, whether now also in the times of the New Testament,
one of the Church might continue in Wedlock with one not of the Church, but an
infidel. To this the Apostle answers, that if the unbelieving Wife was not
sanctified in or by the believing Husband, that is, if any Church-Law was
thereby broken, so as their continuance in that relation was not lawful but did
cause pollution to the believer, that then their Children must not be reputed
holy, but unclean or common, so as if they would deny the Wife marriage
communion upon that account, they must deny their children all spiritual
communion in the Church. For such was the Law to the Jews, Ezra 10. 3. They
put away their Wives and such as were born of them also, and that according to
the command of Ezra, and according to the Law. By that which they granted he
proves that which they did question.

Obj. If it be objected, that upon this account, not only children of
believers, but also Nations must be reputed holy, because the promise is that
believers shall be blessings also unto Nations.

To this I answer.

Answ. The case is not the same, for children are immediately under this word
of blessing in the family relation, as the people of God in the Church are
immediately under that blessing, which the Lord commands out of Sion. But as
for Nations, they are under it in a more remote capacity, by means of what the
Saints are in their families and in the Church. Therefore although such as are
of the Church, and the children also of such families are holy, yet it
follows not that therefore the Nation should be holy.

To this I add, that children are in the power of parents and at their
disposing, and so as when they, in their sanctification, or being made holy,
give up themselves to God by faith, and obedience to his ordinances, their
children are therein vertually given up also, in as much as a believer in some
respect gives up to God together with himself all in his power. Now this
cannot be said of any nation whatsoever.

Obj. It will be objected yet further, That the Jews are said to be holy, even
the whole people of the Jews, who now are unbeleevers; Romans 11. 16. If the
first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy; and if the root be holy, so are the
branches: yet have they no right to baptism; and therefore that this holiness
of the children of which the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 7. 14. be it from their
interest in the Covenant of God with Abraham, is no argument for
Infant Baptism, because the unbeleeving Jews also are supposed by us to be
holy upon the same account, and holiness to be taken in the same sense in both
places.

To this I answer.

Answ. First, It is true, those two places are parallel, and in that sense they
have been both above alleged to prove that branch of Gods covenant with
Abraham, concerning a blessing upon posterity, in order to the multiplying of
believers. And yet it is as true, that there is a great difference between
them. As for that in 1 Cor. 7. 14. the Apostle therein speaks of particular
persons that they are holy; but that is not the meaning of the Apostle, Romans
11. that those particular persons of the Jews who persist in unbelief, or that
the whole people of the Jews are now in the times of the New Testament holy,
in any sense whatever; for it is expressly said of them that they are broken off
from the holy root: v. 20. are cast away, v. 15. are enemies, and so unclean,
and profane, and therefore not holy, v. 28. But whereas the Jews are there
said to be holy, although it is indeed spoken of the whole body of that people,
yet is it not to be understood as meant of that whole in the full extent
thereof, but of that people only, in respect of that part thereof, or of those
persons which either were or in Gods time should be afterward converted. As it
is an usual manner of speech in Scripture, by a Synecdoche, to attribute that
to the whole, which yet properly and peculiarly belongs to a part; as for
instance, it is said, The ten Kings shall hate the Whore and burn her flesh
with fire, Rev. 17. 16. and yet it is meant but of part of the number, for it
is said of the same Kings that they shall lament her fall. Rev. 18. 9. So it is
said of the Thieves that were crucified with Christ, that they reviled him,
Matthew. 27. 44. Mark 15. 32. yet it was but one of them that did it, the other
rebuked his fellow, and honored Christ with that petition to him, Lord
remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom, Luke 23. 39. And according to
that manner of speaking it might have been also said, that the Thieves did
acknowledge Christ upon the cross. Thus Joh. 12. 34. it is said, the people
answered him, we have heard out of the Law, that Christ abides for ever: yet
it was but some one, or some few, among the people, not the whole people, that
made this objection. So John 7. 20. Such like phrases do speak rather to the
kind or sort, then to the particular persons intended by them. Thus we are to
understand that of the Apostle, Romans 11. when he says of the people of the
Jews that they are holy, namely, what properly and peculiarly belongs to a
part, even to those of them who either then were, or afterward should be
converted, he ascribes to the whole, and in respect of that part he calls
the whole body of that people holy. The reason is, because the scope of the
Apostle is to set forth the kind or sort of people, namely Jews, not the
particular persons that should be called. Now in 1 Cor. 7. 14. his purpose is
to assert such particular persons to be holy. And that the Apostle is thus to
be understood, it is evident because else there will be a contradiction in the
Text; for he says of the whole people as well, that they were cast away, and
enemies, as that they are holy, and beloved for their Fathers sake; Now that
these should be both true of the whole it cannot be; and all were not broken
off in the Apostles time, but some of the branches were cut off, v. 17. and
blindness did happen to Israel not wholly, but in part. v. 25. nor is it
otherwise at this day. And as when he says of the whole people, that they were
cast away, and enemies, it is meant of the whole, only in respect of that
refuse part which persist in unbelief. So when he says of the whole that they
are holy and beloved, it must be meant of the whole, only in respect of that
better part which either had believed, or should afterward believe. Nor is
there cause it should seem strange that the Apostle when he says the lump is
holy, should refer to them who are yet unborn, and so cannot be actually
holy, if it be considered, that the covenant to which the Apostle has relation
in that place, was made not only to persons then in being, but also unto all
posterity, and that the lump of which he speaks is of the same extent, and so
to be understood as well when he says the Jews are holy, as when he says
they were enemies and cast away; Nor can it be imagined, that he should, either
in the one or the other, intend only those who either then were, or should
afterward at one certain time be in being, but such a lump or whole he means,
as should have a being successively, and part after part; therefore may well
say of the whole that it is holy, though it be only in respect of a part as
yet unborne. Now therefore since these two places do so much differ, and in as
much as in 1 Cor. 7. 14. the Apostle expressly says of such particular persons
that they are holy, the argument from thence is strong and pertinent, all that
which is objected from this other Scripture notwithstanding.

Use 5.
Hence also we see the reason of our Saviors speech to his Disciples, Mark.
10. Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is
the Kingdom of God. Of such, that is, not as so qualified, as was showed
before, p. 49, 50. But his meaning is, that the Kingdom consists also of
such, even of little children. I say the reason,

First, why he mentions here the Kingdom upon this occasion, says not, of such
is the Church of God, or of such are my people, but of such is the kingdom. The
reason is, because this kingdom of which he speaks, P. 62.
is that which was begun in Abraham, the greatness whereof is founded in a
great part in that promise made to him, of a blessing upon families and
posterity, so as upon this account the children of believers are to be reputed
part of that Kingdom, and in believers bringing their children unto Christ,
that promise made to Abraham is in part fulfilled, that being a means appointed
and designed by God, whereby the Kingdom of Christ should grow to its intended
greatness.

Secondly, the reason also why our Savior says, they should therefore suffer
little children to come unto him, because the kingdom does consist of such,
namely, because they being part of that Kingdom, the promise of the blessing of
the Kingdom did also belong to them. And as this is part of the Gospel of the
Kingdom, that believers should be blessings to their children, namely, so as
they should be means of their conversion, and in that respect of bringing them
to Christ, by an internal work of grace upon their hearts, so it was very
suitable and necessary, that they should in such external ways also bring
them to Christ, as there they did, that he might lay his hands upon them and
bless them.

Thirdly, the reason also why our Savior was so much displeased, and angry
with his Disciples, for their rebuking those that brought them, (...) the word
is, and it is to set forth the most passionate indignation had against a
person. The same word is used, Matthew. 20. 24. to set out the displeasure taken
against James and John, by the other Disciples for their ambitious request, to
be one at the right hand, and the other at the left hand of Christ in his
Kingdom. When they heard it, (says the Text) they were moved with indignation
against the two brethren, (...). The reason (I say) why he was so much moved
with anger upon this occasion; namely, because not only his affection to the
parents and the children, but also his own interest, so much concerned in it,
led him to it. His Kingdom is his portion, and has been his great design,
from the beginning of the world. Matthew. 25. 34.
The greatness and increase of this his Kingdom depends much upon little ones
being brought to Christ: so as when his Disciples forbad Infants to be brought
to him, they crossed him in his design and interest. Let all the true
Disciples of Christ be afraid to incur his anger, upon this account. Now for
our purpose:

First, if infants are part of the Kingdom of God, and so the blessings of that
kingdom belong unto them, as the Apostle Peter said in a like case. Act. 10. 47
Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized, since baptism is
the seal of our entrance into this kingdom, and the blessings of it; and they
a part of this Kingdom, and therefore receive the Holy Ghost as well as we?

Secondly, this command of Christ upon such grounds, was not given to his
Disciples only for that short time wherein he was to be with them in the
flesh. It was recorded after his ascension, and of a perpetual obligation to
the Disciples of Christ, in all ages then to come. What was so written, was
written for our learning; and we have no other such external way of bringing
them to Christ, that he may lay his hands upon them, and bless them, but in
baptism, wherein our initiation into the Kingdom of God, and the blessings of
that kingdom, are sealed. And as by his laying his hands upon them, and
blessing them at that time, we see that infants are capable of benefit by
outward signs, which themselves cannot consider nor understand; so that in
baptism now, the Lord Christ in doing his part therein, does the same thing in
effect, as then he did to those children, when he took them in his arms, laid
his hands upon them, and blessed them; in as much as their entrance into his
kingdom, and the blessings of it, as I said, is therein signified and sealed.

Thirdly, to this I may add, that unto whom he is a King, to them he is also a
Prophet. Therefore as of such is his Kingdom, so such are his Disciples; and
are made Disciples, when their parents are converted, because they are then in
the way of the spirits teaching, as has been showed. Called Disciples, Acts
15. 10. Circumcision called a yoke put on the neck of the Disciples. This, by
the way, I observe, as a sufficient answer to that argument brought by some,
from Matthew. 28. against baptizing Infants; yea supposing it should be granted,
what they say to be the sense of that place, namely, that only those who are
made Disciples may be baptized. Although more might be said, about those words,
in answer to it, namely, that in the words, baptizing them, Matthew. 28. 19. we
have, by a Synecdoche, a part for the whole, (an usual form of speech in
Scripture) for we know the Apostles commission did extend as well to a setting
up of other ordinances, as of baptism. Therefore when he says, Go teach all
Nations baptizing them, it is as if he had said, Go teach them, and enter them
into the practice of the worship of the Gospel: of which, among other things,
the application of the token of Abraham's covenant to Infants may be a part, any
thing in that place contained notwithstanding.

No more at present upon that subject. But having had occasion in opening this
point to speak of several things concerning the Kingdom of Christ; I must
add something, though but briefly by way of application also upon that.

Use 6.
Therefore a sixth use of this point may be, that from thence we learn to
rectify some mistakes about this Kingdom, and to remove such prejudice, and
hard thoughts, as may be apt to lie in the minds of men against it; Dan 7. 27.
Psalm 47. 3.
namely, whereas it is said, that the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness
of the Kingdom, under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the
Saints of the most high. And that they shall fill the world; and the Lord shall
subdue the people under them, and the Nations under their feet. These may seem
to be hard sayings, and not to be born. This doctrine, will some say, teaches
the people of God to be ill subjects, to graspe and reach after power, and to
be disturbers of Commonwealths; and indeed it is true, if things be not rightly
understood, there seems just cause of such offense; but if matters be
scanned, and considered rightly, there is no such cause of any jealousies or
fears at all.

1. By that which has been said in opening this point we see, that although it
must be granted, that as the Church of Christ is a growing thing, and of the
increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, Esaias 9. 7.
and therefore must fill the world at last; and that what the Lord has said of
Abraham's seed, concerning a possessing of the gate of his enemies, must be
fulfilled in its time; yet that God will take a most natural, genuine, and
satisfying way to bring his people to such power. You see he will do it by
multiplying the seed of Abraham. He will not do it by violence, he declares
against it, Esaias 2. 4. but by the word of truth, meekness, and righteousness.
Psalm. 45. Nor by unrighteous ways of any kind; The scepter of his kingdom is a
right scepter; No fear of any unrighteousness in it, it is a spiritual
Kingdom, and ever shall be so; When the Lords mountain shall be exalted above
the hills, it will be the Lords mountain still. The weapons therefore of its
warfare are spiritual; the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, is
that whereby it shall subdue the world; and that also as it is managed by his
Saints in their families and congregations, the Lord so making them blessings
to one another, and his kingdom thereby to be as leaven, whereby the whole lump
by degrees, at last, shall be seasoned with the knowledge of Jesus Christ. This
is the nature of that conquest, whereby his kingdom shall be made so great.

2. Observe moreover, that this power, whatever it be, shall be in the hands of
Abraham's seed. So the promise is, Thy seed, even his spiritual seed, for that
promise was made to his seed of the New Testament also, (as has been showed)
shall possess the gate of his enemies. It is not said, that such as are
pretenders to be Abraham's seed shall have this power. The same seed which God
will bless, and thereby multiply, shall possess the gate of his enemies.
Therefore also, when this is brought to pass, it shall be said, The Lord
reigns, let the earth rejoice, Psalm. 47. and 97. Rev. 11. 15, 16. which could
not be so said, if this power was to be given to any but his own people.
Therefore since it is to be in such hands, it will be matter of rejoicing, not
of any grief at all.

Obj. It will be objected, that even hypocrites in the Church, till they are
discovered, are in the judgment of charity, to be reputed by the Church to be
Abraham's seed, and to be received to all external privileges and ordinances
accordingly; therefore we cannot appropriate or restrain this promise only to
the true spiritual seed of Abraham.

To this I answer.

Answ. First, It is true, that even such are to be so reputed, and received by
the Church; but it is one thing what the Church may and must do in her
administrations, another thing what God will do in his work of providence. Now
this promise is of what God will do in his work; he will cause the seed of
Abraham to possess the gate of his enemies.

Where the Scripture speaks of what is to be done by the Church to her
members, it takes in all the branches of that vine, both good and bad; but
where it speaks of what God has promised to do, or give, unto the Church,
it confineth it only to believers. Yea, even those external privileges of
the Church, in the administrations of the worship, although the Church may
impart them even to hypocrites, being members, (for such will get in unawares)
yet God has not given them unto such, but to believers only. As for
hypocrites, they are partakers of them upon another account, namely, because
among other privileges which God has given unto his people, this is one, that
they shall have to do with one another in the communion of the Church, in the
ordinances of the worship, as confessors; and the Church-relation to be built
upon confession, and the ordinances given to them not as believers only, but
as confessors. Matthew. 16. 16, 17, 17, 19. Upon this it is that hypocrites also
are received by the Saints, when unknown, to the same external privileges
with themselves, because they also are confessors of Christ. Not that they
have any right to claim any of them, though the Church have warrant to give
them unto such, being claimed by them; they take them at their own peril, the
people of God do but their duty, although they do not theirs. Were this power
therefore, of possessing the gate, to be given by the Church, as part of that
which she is to administer unto her members, it would follow that it should be
imparted in the same latitude, namely, to the same persons, together with other
privileges to which professors are received in the Church, and so hypocrites
would it may be have the greatest share. But Christ has left no such Legacy in
his Testament to the Church, to be a disposer or dispencer of civil power. His
Kingdom is not of this world, as has been showed. This promise therefore
speaks not what the Church shall do, but what God the most high will do,
who rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. Dan. 4.
17.

Secondly, yet because what God does in this matter, he does it by men, and by
Saints too among others, although not in a Church capacity; for a further
answer to this objection, I must also add, that in those days, wherein the
seed of Abraham shall obtain this power, the Church shall be brought to that
perfection, as that there will be few or no hypocrites therein; and if but a
few, the power in effect, will be in the hands of the true seed of Abraham
notwithstanding, by reason of their number.

What perfection the Church in those days shall be brought unto, is held forth
in sundry places. As for instance, Esaias 60. 21. the Prophet speaking of those
times, as appears by Esaias 59. 20, 21. compared with Romans 11. 26. says, Thy
sun shall no more go down, for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light,
and the days of thy mourning shall be ended; thy people also shall be all
righteous, and they shall inherit the Land for ever, the branch of my planting,
the work of my hands, that I may be glorified; I the Lord will hasten it in his
time. Till that time come, it is not to be expected. So, Esaias 35. 8. An high
way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness; the
unclean shall not pass over it, no Lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast
shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk
there, and the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs
and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away. This promise is reduced to Gods Covenant
with Abraham, concerning his blessing and increasing his seed, Esai. 51. 1, 2,
3. 11. And of the same times is that spoken, Rev. 21. 27. when it is said, God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. v. 4. And the City had no need of
the Sun, for the glory of the Lord did lighten it. v. 23. and v. 27. is added,
there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie: but they which are written in
the Lambs Book of life. So Rev. 22. 14, 15. Blessed are they that do his
commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates into the City; for without are Dogs, etc. and whatsoever
loves and makes a lie. Zach. 14. 21. In that day every pot in Jerusalem and
in Judah, shall be holiness unto the Lord of Hosts, and in that day there
shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of Hosts.

From these places I determine not an absolute perfection in the Church then,
or an exemption from all Hypocrisy, but a far greater measure of Purity then
as yet is attained to I may; and I may add, to what degree soever of purity
and perfection in the Church the meaning of those expressions is to be extended
less or more, it is evident, that until the Church be come to that ripeness
and glory, yea even such as may deserve that title of the new Jerusalem which
comes down from Heaven, wherein righteousness shall dwell, the people of God may
not expect to possess that power. The truth is, should such power be put upon
them now as things are, in that condition wherein the Church of God is at
present, there would so many put on visards of Hypocrisy and seeming Saintship
to get into place, as but very few of the true spiritual seed of Abraham should
obtain it; and such dissemblers and pretenders being in place would act very
much unlike to Saints, and so much the worse by how much the more they are
refined in profession and the outside of religion, being false and rotten still
within. Therefore as the Lord has designed such a power even in this world
unto his people, so he has reserved it until such time as they shall be in a
fit capacity to receive and use it, as he says Esai. 60. 22. I the Lord will
hasten it in his time.

Thus we see, that notwithstanding this objection, the promise of such power is
intended unto such as are Abraham's spiritual seed indeed, not to those who are
pretenders only to be such, so as when that day comes, as it shall naturally
fall upon them, so there will be no cause of grief to people that power is so
placed as it will then be.

To conclude this use, I must add a word by way of caution, least I be
mistaken in that which has been said; namely this, That in the mean season,
till this new Jerusalem be come down from Heaven, it is not to be supposed that
the people of God should lay aside their swords, or not to share among others
in the power of Commonwealths, and not be instrumental, and that above others
too sometimes, in carrying on the work of God in the world, in order to the
increase of his Kingdom, and that by force too, so far as it is capable to be
used to advance that work. But as when the whole power shall be put into their
hands according to the prophesies mentioned before, it shall naturally be
divolved or cast upon them, and become theirs according to the common rules of
justice, from principles of nature and reason, as has been showed; so much
less in the mean time in being serviceable to their Country, shall they act in
any other capacity then as good Commonwealths men, and as being involved in
the same common interest with others of that nation or society whereof they are
a part. Their Saintship may fit them for their trust, and in elections may
bespeak them to it by way of merit, but not entitle them to any place or power
in Commonwealths. The Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, nor ever shall
be, as was showed before in opening of the point.

Should the power and government be entitled to Saints as such, we had need be
in a better capacity to know them, and to say which are Saints, which not, then
indeed we are. Therefore to salve that difficulty, those who have pretended
that privilege and acted thereupon, have accordingly ordered their affairs by
pretended Revelations from Heaven; which practice how absurd it is, and what a
monster in a Commonwealth, is obvious to any understanding that will but
consider, that acts of justice in a Commonwealth are to be of public
cognizance, and such as are supposed to be owned, or ought to be, by the
community, or the major part thereof, for which cause a Revelation from Heaven
brought in evidence in any court, although it should be true, is not a
sufficient evidence for any Judge to go upon in passing sentence, because
unless the Judge have a Revelation also, it comes not within his understanding
to be able to judge of the matter. If both Judge and Witnesses have a
Revelation speaking the same thing, yet he may not pass the sentence
thereupon, because the sentence of the Court is supposed to be the vote of the
Commonwealth: therefore the power, even all the power thereof, if need be, is
engaged to put the sentence in execution. And for this purpose it may be
pertinently considered, whether that was not one cause why Cain was not to be
put to death for his murder, because having done it secretly in the field, it
was not revealed but by the Lord himself: for what comes within the
cognizance of any Civil Court, of matters criminal to be punished, must be
within the compass of sense or reason.

Use. 7.
One thing more concerning this matter I shall add, which is a seventh Use to
be made of this point, Namely, that those who are the people of God do learn
from thence, what course is to be taken by them to advance this Kingdom.

By that which has been said we clearly see, the course they are to take is to
endeavor what they can to increase the number of his people. And in order
thereunto that they labor to be blessings to their Families, and to the Nation
and places where they live; to be a means to season the hearts of their little
ones, servants, friends, and neighbors, with the knowledge and love of Christ.
And though the work is great, and far beyond our own abilities, or all that we
can do by instruction or example, should the Lord withdraw his powerful
assistance, yet we must know that God is able, who has promised to make
believers blessings to Families and Nations, and by multiplying them to cause
them to possess their enemies gate. Now for this end that you may be blessings
in this manner,

First, take heed you break not Abraham's Covenant, as those persons do who deny
the application of the seal thereof to Infants, as has been showed from Genesis
17. and thereby as much as lies in them do nullify and make void that
promise; therefore in defense of that mistake it is often seen, that they deny
that promise to be of such extent.

Far be it from me to say or think, that none of that belief ear blessings to
Families or Nations. Many of them I believe are holy and sincere, and very
dear to Christ, who knows how to pass by the errors and infirmities of his
people, and makes even such, notwithstanding that mistake, instruments of much
good to both. But this I may affirm from what has been said in this point,
that those who thus forbid little Children to be brought to Christ, whatever is
pretended, are in that thing but small friends to his Kingdom; and in that
particular, an ill way it is they take, in order to their being blessings,
either to families or nations. The right way of increasing that Kingdom, and
of exalting his throne and power in the world being waved and neglected, other
ways which are unnatural, unsafe, and false, are quickly taken up, and so the
issue is according; and in stead of setting up his Kingdom, ere they are
aware, they are ready to set up something else, wherein that I say, no more, no
blessing is to be expected.

It is the blessing of God upon persons, not their abilities how great soever,
whereby they are made active in being blessings unto any, chiefly in managing
affairs of his Kingdom, which is a blessed Kingdom. And we see that he
conferreth blessings still according to his covenant, as all that he has ever
done, or does for any of his people, has ever been and is according to a
covenant. And however we are apt to think that an omission of an ordinance or
duty therein required makes no great matter, yet he puts much upon it and
proceeds accordingly as he sees fit in giving and denying of his blessing, and
in leaving marks of his displeasure upon such as do transgress therein.

2. As you would be blessings to Families and Nations, as you are to have that
privilege by virtue of Abraham's Covenant, so you must follow Abraham's steps.
Be not slothful (says the Apostle) in the words next before my Text, Heb. 6.
12. but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
If ye were Abraham's children, says our Savior, Joh. 8. 39. (that is, so as to
inherit Abraham's promise and blessing, for otherwise they were his natural
seed) ye would do the works of Abraham. Think not therefore to be blessings to
your neighbors, or to your own children, or servants, as Abraham was, unless
you follow his steps: And that in three things especially.

1. You must teach your Families as Abraham did, Genesis 18. 19. I know him, says
God, that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may
bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. Implying that if
family duties be neglected, notwithstanding the promise, the blessing will not
take effect. God carries on his work of sanctification so as to take his people
into communion with himself therein, and to make them active in the work:
therefore he conferrs his blessings of that nature upon us by the use of means,
and they such as are fittest, and most natural, and proper to bring his work to
pass. Among all the means of grace there is none more effectual then
family-instruction and example; by means hereof are persons fitted and prepared
for, and made more capable of benefit by public preaching, the younger sort
especially. Hereby the parents or family-governours authority, example, and
interest is improved to a very great advantage, to cause attention,
wakefulnesse of spirit, readiness to hear, to read, to ponder and consider the
truth revealed in the Gospel. That respect and love which usually is mutual in
such relations, is of mighty force to make endeavors of this nature happy and
succesful. The Lord knew this, and therefore would not lose it; therefore has
he promised to water such endeavors with the dew of his blessing. He loves
there to bless, where there is something to be blessed by him. Matthew. 13. 12.
and 25. 29.
Knowing therefore of what use his Saints might be, to bring in others to
himself, especially those under their power, guidance, and tuition, he has
therefore promised to make believers blessings unto families kindreds and
nations. Upon this account it was, that Joshuah could undertake not only for
himself, but also for his house. Jos. 24. 15. Choose ye whom ye will serve, but
as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. Thus we read that Timothy knew
the Scriptures from a Child. 2 Timothy 3. 15. And this because the same faith
dwelt in him, which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother
Eunice. 2 Timothy 1. 5. We read also, how the wise Solomon was instructed by his
Mother. This therefore is your way to increase the Kingdom of Christ. And yet
this is not all.

2. Another thing wherein you are to follow Abraham's steps, is uprightness and
singleness of heart in what you do for God. Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me and be
thou upright, and I will make my covenant between me and thee; and I will
multiply thee exceedingly. So Psalm. 112. 2. The generation of the upright shall
be blessed. A great part of a Christians work in his walking with God, lies in
family duties. Now if he be but formal in it, taking up a form of Godliness
because he loves to seem religious, although he abound in duties of all sorts,
albeit a form of Godliness is better then nothing, yet little good is done in
such a case. He that in sincerity and singleness of heart, sets himself to
glorify God, and to save the souls of such as are about him, he it is that is
a blessing where he lives. Such uprightness of heart engages his affections
in the work, therefore what counsel or instruction he administers, or what
example he gives, takes more impression. What comes from the heart goes to
the heart; and there it fixes with more authority and power. A formal
Christian is like unsavory salt that seasons not.

3. You must not satisfy your selves with this, Abraham must be followed yet
one step further. You must labor to be friends of God as Abraham was: James.
2. 23.
that is, you must be spiritual and heavenly Christians, walking close with
God, no strangers to him, observing narrowly his carriage toward you, applying
your selves to please him in all things, to gain upon his love, to increase in
favor with him. Such as keep acquaintance daily and converse with God, such
persons always are a blessing where they live. As our Savior says, they are
like leaven apt to season such as are about them with the fear and love of
Christ. He that converseth much with God, has an humble, meek and savory
spirit; He is rich in faith, much of God appears still in all his
conversation; His presence therefore and example is a check to wickedness, a
provocation and encouragement to holiness of life. As a friend of the
Bridgroome, he is a blessed means to bring many souls into the arms of
Christ. On the other side, whoever he be that neglects this friendship, is in
very small capacity to be an instrument of spiritual good to any; especially to
those who are nearest to him, who most observe his ways, and see into his
actions. A friend of the Bridegroom and the Bride must be a friend of God.

FINIS.
A SHORT DISCOURSE Concerning the MANIFSTATIONS of GOD unto his People IN THE
LAST DAYS.
Wherein is showed the manner of the Spirits work therein to be in the use of
ordinary gifts, not by extraordinary Revelations.
HEBR. 1. 1. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times
past to the fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by
his son.


IN these words we have a comparison between the people of God of the times
before and after Christ, touching the differing manifestations of God to them.
This in the general is the Apostles scope: for when he says, In th^se last
days God has spoken unto us by his Son; by us, he means not only those
who heard the Lord Christ speaking in the flesh; that was more then he could
say of those to whom he wrote this his Epistle, that they all had so heard him
speaking; If therefore that had been his scope, he had said, To some of us he
has spoken by his Son. Moreover the Apostle speaking of the same times and
persons (1 Cor. 10. 11.) says, Upon us the ends of the world are come. And
that phrase we find in the same sense used, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 1. 1 Pet.
1. 20. and Heb. 9. 26. therefore by us in these last days, he means the
people of God under the New Testament, in all the times since Christ, to the
end of the world.

A further evidence whereof is the opposition made between us and the Fathers;
for as by the Fathers in time past he means the people of many ages before
Christ, so by us in these last days, he means the people of many ages after
his coming in the flesh. Thus we see the scope of these words in general,
they show the differing light of the former, and of these latter ages of the
world. Now more particularly,

In this comparison we find, 1. Something wherein they are alike; namely, 1.
In the Author of this manifestation; the same God has spoken both to them and
us; the same God in the Old Testament, and in the New. Such things are said in
both, as none could speak but he. Therefore in our search and study of the
Scriptures, neither the one nor the other is to be neglected by us. 2.
Something in the nature of it; both to them and us he has not done it
immediately by himself, but by Prophets then, and that in diverse manners; now
by his Son, and he not only God, but also man. Though he could have done it
by himself, either without a messenger, or a voice, or any other means, yet
this has been his course in all ages, To send his treasure to us in earthen
vessels. He creates peace to him that is a far off, and to him that is nigh,
but he creates it as the fruit of the lips. Esaias 57. 19. I create the fruit of
the lips peace.
2. Something wherein they differ, concerning which something is affirmed, 1.
Concerning them. He spoke to them, 1. By Prophets, that is, by persons
extraordinarily inspired by God. 2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2. By those Prophets he did it piece-meale,
(...), now a little, and then a little, at sundry times. Something to our first
parents, in that promise, The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head;
more to Abraham, more yet by Moses, afterward more by the other Prophets. 3.
This was done in diverse manners, (...), by Dreams and Visions, by Urim and
Thummim, by other extraordinary ways of Revelation.
2. Concerning us in these last days, in opposition unto all these he says
only this, He has spoken to us by his Son: wherein, however not
particularly expressed, yet something is employed, in opposition unto each of
those particulars mentioned in the other, namely, that 1. Whereas to them be
spoke by such Prophets, to us he has spoken only by the Son himself. 2.
However by those Prophets, to them he spoke piece by piece, at sundry times;
yet to us, by that one Prophet his Son, he has spoken all at once. By his
Son he has revealed the whole mystery of his will, even that which was hid
from ages and generations, but now made manifest to his Saints. Col. 1. 26. 3.
Though in times past, to them he spoke several ways, by dreams and visions,
and the like, yet in these last days those ways are ceased, and he has
spoken unto us this one way only, by his Son.




These three things, although not expressed, yet are implied, because of that
opposition made of his speaking by his Son to his speaking by Prophets, at
sundry times, and in diverse manners; else he could not have said that to them
he spoke so, to us he has spoken thus; and because this his speaking by his
Son is mentioned, as coming in the place and instead of those his former
ways of speaking; One thing more I must add by way of explication, that the
opposition made is not betwixt what was extraordinary then, and what is
ordinary now; because the manifestations of God by ordinary means now, are
manifold, and piece by piece, even in these last days; but the opposition is
betwixt what was extraordinary then, and what is extraordinary now; then by
Prophets at sundry times, and in diverse manners, now only by his Son. And by
extraordinary, I mean that which is above the common line of believers.

The words thus opened offer to us many things by way of observation; I shall
only speak to those three particulars wherein the manifestations of God to
them and us do differ. The first whereof and the third I shall put together in
one conclusion, which I shall insist upon; in handling whereof, I shall also
touch upon the second.

The Conclusion or point of doctrine is this,

That, However in the times before Christ, God spoke to the Fathers by Prophets
extraordinarily inspired by the Holy Ghost, and by diverse ways of Revelation:
yet to us in these last days, those extraordinary ways, and such Prophets are
ceased; and he has spoken to us only by his son; what else is to be attained
to, in the manifestations of God to us, is only by the use of ordinary gifts,
in searching out the mind of God from what the Son has spoken.

In handling whereof, something must first be done yet further by way of
explication, and so the question will be this, What the Apostle means by
speaking, He spoke by the Prophets, and has spoken by his Son? To which I
answer, That we are not to confine it only to a literal speaking by a voice,
Exodus 4. 8.
because the Prophets sometimes spoke by signs, and the Son spoke not only
by words, but also by actions; therefore it is said, that his blood speaks,
Heb. 12. 24. And by a voice the Son spoke but to a few, in the days of his
conversing with us in the flesh; but this his speaking in the Text is to us
also upon whom the ends of the world are come, as was showed before; therefore
by his speaking by the Prophets, we are to understand the whole manifestation
of God, which he gave unto his Saints by them, whether by word or otherwise,
left upon record in the books of the Old Testament. And by his speaking by his
Son the whole manifestation of God by Jesus Christ, and that not only in
words but in his actions also, his incarnation, death, resurrection, ascension
into glory, even his whole work in the office of his Mediatourship, upon
record, and unfolded in the writings of the New Testament. Therefore the
Apostle says the work of his Ministry was, to give the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Therefore what the
Apostles did in their Ministry, was part of this his speaking by his Son; for
they gave forth no light into the world but in his face, which is not meant of
his natural face, for he was now ascended, but by face is meant the whole
draught, or story of Christ, as it is set forth in the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles. Therefore also the Apostle says, the subject of his
preaching was Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 1. 23. and the sum of all that we
learn in the Gospel is Christ, Ephesians. 4. 20. Ye have not so learned Christ. By
all which appears, that this his speaking by his Son, is not only by a voice,
but by words and deeds both, as they are set forth to us in the writings of the
New Testament.

Therefore also if it be objected, that even in the times of his speaking by
his Son, those extraordinary ways of revelation have been in use, because the
Apostles had them; the answer is ready, that what was done by the Apostles and
Prophets in the Primitive times, was his very speaking by his Son, it was the
means whereby the Son has given out that word or manifestation of God which
he had to speak; and when the Apostle here opposes this his speaking by his
Son to those extraordinary ways by Prophets in former times, the meaning is
not that the Sons speaking was not extraordinary, but that being dispatched
and finished, (which was done when what the Son had manifested was confirmed
to us by those Witnesses, chosen of God, fitted and attested by miracles and
gifts of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 2. 3. 4.) that afterward those ways of
Revelation should not be in use.

Obj. It will be said, If speaking by Apostles and Messengers be a speaking by
the Son, why was it not a speaking also by the Son before his coming in the
flesh, when he spoke by Prophets, especially since those Prophets of old were
also the Messengers of Christ; for he that gave the New Testament and confirmed
it by his blood, Heb. 9. 16. gave also the Old, Heb. 8. 8. And it was the
spirit of Christ which spoke in those Prophets, 1 Pet. 1. 11. The Prophets
searched what manner of time the spirit of Christ which was in them, did
signify; by which spirit also he preached to those who were disobedient in the
days of Noah, 1 Pet. 3. 19.

To this I answer.

Answ. First, that it is true, the spirit of Christ spoke in them, and they
were sent by Christ the Son of God, but the Son was not then made known as
now he is; therefore the Apostle Paul says of himself, that God did choose him
to reveal his Son in him or by him, Gal. 1. 16. And the Evangelist speaking
of the Word, or Son of God, says of those times, the light shone in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. Joh. 1. 5. therefore also the
message was not then delivered in the Sons name, as now it is, We as
Ambassadors for Christ beseech you. 2 Cor. 5. 20. therefore though he spoke in
those Prophets, yet that was not this speaking by the Son.

Secondly, because then he spoke only by Messengers, now he came himself and
spoke; and the manifestation of God by him, was not more by what he said, then
by what he was, and did; and though by Messengers still, yet their work was
only to lay open, and make out to us that manifestation of God which was given
by the Sons coming, and by what he said and did. The work of the Prophets then
was to declare what the spirit of Christ revealed to them; but the work of the
Apostles, and other Penmen of the New Testament, was to set forth and unfold
what Christ himself, in the whole work of Redemption, had said and done, which
the Apostle calls a revealing of the Son by him, and a preaching Christ
crucified, and a giving the knowledge of the glory of God in his face; Gal. 1.
16. 1 Cor. 1. 23. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
therefore though this is done in some part by Messengers, yet is it called a
speaking by the Son, the other not. Which Objection being answered, we may
conclude, that this his speaking by his Son, takes in all the Scriptures of
the New Testament, in which the words and works of Christ are set forth,
either by way of History, as in the Evangelists, or of Explication, as in the
Epistles, or of Prophecy, as in the Revelation. And I must add, that it
contains also the Scriptures of the Old Testament, because he came to fulfill
the Law and the Prophets; and because what was spoken by the Prophets darkly,
was spoken over again by the Son with greater light, according to that usual
saying, The New Testament was veiled in the Old, the Old revealed in the New.
So as the sum of the point is this, that what we have in Scripture manifested
of God, is all we are to expect of extraordinary revelations; what else is to
be done in Gods discovery of himself and his truth unto us, is to be had in the
use of ordinary gifts, by study and searching out the mind of God from what the
Son has spoken in them.

For a confirmation of this truth something is further to be observed from
those words in the Text, (...), in these last days: which words imply that
there were certain periods of time foregoing; there is at least a first and a
second, where there is a last. Take one from Adam to Moses, another from him to
Christ, then from Christ to the end of the World is the last. Now what is it
which makes these distinct periods of time? namely, the several degrees of Gods
manifesting himself to the Sons of men; now therefore because ours is the last,
we are to expect no other such manifestations of God, but what we have received
by this his speaking by his Son, as we have it in the Text, In these last
days he has spoken to us by his Son. To this may be added that in the
Parable, when messengers were sent, at last he sent his Son, and after him
none, Matthew. 21. 37. And it is said, that he reveals unto us all the Fathers
mind: All that I have heard of the Father, have I declared unto you. Joh. 15.
15. and none has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

A further evidence of this truth we have yet in the Text, from that second
note of difference mentioned in opening the words, namely, that however by
those Prophets to them he spoke piece after piece, (...), at sundry times, yet
to us, by that one Prophet his Son, he has spoken all that he had to say at
once, and laid open the whole mystery of his will. Ephesians. 1. 9. That which was
hid from ages and generations, but now is made manifest unto his Saints, Col.
1. 26. So as more cannot be done, in opening all the secrets of his love, the
heights and depths of the mercy, goodness, and wisdom of the father, then
what the son has done; and we may say with Solomon in this, what can the man
do that comes after the King? even that which is already done. Therefore more
then what is done by the Sons speaking, is not to be expected.

To this purpose is that in Jude 13. where the Apostle bids us to contend for
the faith once delivered unto the Saints; Eccles. 2. 12.
once delivered, that is, so as it was fully done, to which nothing should be
added, so as we should expect no more such delivering of the faith; therefore
in case any of it were lost by any, or in hazard, as some did then make
Shipwreck of the faith, 1 Timothy 1. 19.
he says not that they should contend for more revelations, whereby to be
established in the truth, but should contend for what they had received. So the
word once is used, Heb. 9. 28. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of
many; and Heb. 10. 10. through the offering of the body of Christ once; and
Heb. 7. 27. who needs not daily, as those high Priests, to offer up
sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples; for this he did
once, when he offered up himself; that is, he did it so as there needed no
more sacrifice for sin, because it was a perfect and complete sacrifice, such
as would do the work. He did more by his one sacrifice once offered, then was
done by all the many sorts of sacrifices before him; so he did more by his one
manifestation once made, then all the Prophets before him had done in all
times, by their several ways of revelation. Now therefore I say, this being so
that the manifestations of God are no more by pieces, but all given forth at
once, there is no there ways to be expected besides this his speaking to us by
his Son.

Another proof of this point we have, Joh. 16. 13. When the spirit of truth is
come, he will guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he shall show you things to
come; he shall glorify me, for he shall take of mine and shall show it unto
you. In which words we have the work of the spirit, what and in what manner it
should be in the Saints after the Ascension of Christ; for he spoke this to his
Disciples as believers, not as Apostles only, his scope being to comfort them
in reference to his departure from them; Because I have said these things to
you (says he) sorrow has filled your hearts, but it is expedient for you that
I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; and when
he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of
judgment; and not only so, he shall lead you into all truth, etc. all which
are things common to believers, and not a word does he speak of their
Apostleship in that place; therefore I say the words do set forth the work of
the spirit in the Saints, what it should be after his departure from them, even
to the worlds end: So as if any extraordinary revelations are now to be
expected, we are likeliest to find them here; because if any be, they must be
from the spirit; consider therefore what he says in this place; He shall guide
or lead you (says he) into all truth, (...), that is, he shall do it so as
your selves also shall be active in the work; he that is led must himself put
forth his strength and go. It follows in the next words, he shall not speak
of himself, but what he shall hear that he shall speak, and he shall take of
mine and show it unto you; that is, he shall not by immediate revelation give
or bring a new Doctrine of his own, that Christ had not before revealed, but
his work should be to build upon his foundation, and what he has heard
revealed or spoken by the Son, the Spirit should demonstrate to them, and make
them understand; therefore he adds, He shall glorify me, for he shall take of
mine, and show it unto you. The Spirit puts this honor upon Christ, that look
what he has spoken or revealed, that he takes and shows it unto us, and only
that. The Spirit never steps aside from the Scripture, or from what the Son
has spoken, to show or teach us any thing whatsoever; all the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God is in the face of Christ. The Sons work was
Revelation, the Spirits work is Demonstration; as he says here, he shall take
of mine, and show it unto you: So the Apostle says, that his preaching was in
demonstration of the spirit and of power, 1. Cor. 2. 4. and by the hearing of
faith it is said that they received the spirit, Gal. 3. 2. that is the way
wherein the spirit of God breaks in, and works upon us, not by visions or
extraordinary revelations as in the Prophets of old time.

Obj. 1. But you will say, it is said before, v. 12. I have many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now; howbeit when he the spirit of truth is
come, he will guide you into all truth: whereby it seems there was something
the spirit should say, which Christ had not said. To this I answer.

Answ. First, that the meaning is not, that Christ had not revealed the whole
mystery of his Fathers will; for he says, Joh. 15. 15. All things that I have
heard of the Father I have made known unto you. But that concerning what he had
declared he had more to say, for a more particular and fuller understanding of
it, which he would perform by his spirit after his Ascension; therefore he
says that this the spirit should do, not by speaking of himself, but by
taking of the things of Christ and showing them unto us.

Secondly, I answer further, that the Sons speaking in the Text implies more
then is intended Joh. 16. 12. where he says, I have yet many things to say,
for this he intends only of what in words he had said unto them; but in the
Text by the Sons speaking is meant (as has been showed) the whole
Manifestation of God in Christ, whether in words or actions; therefore though
it be granted that in words he had not spoken something which the spirit should
show unto them, yet in his whole manifestation in words and actions put
together you have the whole matter which the Spirit was to show.

Obj. 2. But it is said, verse. 13. that the Spirit should lead them into all
truth, and show them things to come, which seems to restrain this place to be
meant only of the Apostles, because others are not led into all truth, nor
does it show things to come to all believers.

Answ. To this I answer that we find the like affirmed of all believers, 1 John
2. 20. where the Apostle speaking to all sorts of Christians, under the names
of Fathers, Young Men, and Little Children, (v. 13.) says, Ye have an unction
from the holy one, and ye know all things. Which is not so to be understood as
if these little Children, though they had the Unction, had nothing hid from
their knowledge, for then what needed the Apostle to write to them, because of
those who did seduce them, v. 26? nor can it be said of the Apostles
themselves, that they were so led into all truth as that no truth was unknown
to them; the Apostle says we know in part; therefore that is not the meaning;
but that it is the property and office of the spirit to lead us into truth, and
into one truth as well as another, and that all truth at last the Church shall
be led into by the Spirit, and that so far as we are led by the spirit, we are
led into the truth, which being but in part, we know but in part in this life.
As for his showing things to come, that also is meant of all believers, who by
what the Son has revealed are put into a capacity, by search of the
Scriptures, to understand prophesies, which were things sealed up before even
from the Saints, which the Spirit enables us to do also by taking of the things
of Christ, and showing them unto us: Therefore is it said ( Rev. 5. and 6.)
that the Lamb that was slain took the book of prophesies, and opened the seals
thereof; By fulfilling the prophesies as to his own person, he makes the
Saints of these last days able to understand them also as to his Church or
mystical body. Rev. 5. 9. Thou art worthy to take the book and to open the
seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood,
and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests. And this the voice both of the
four living Creatures, and of the four and twenty Elders, even of the whole
Church and company of believers.

Another Testimony to this Doctrine we have Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if
we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him, God also bearing them
witness both with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the
Holy Ghost, according to his own will? Where we see the manifestation is the
Sons the Lord Christ, and the work of the Apostles was to be but Witnesses
and Confirmers of it to us, for which they were fitted with power of miracles
and other gifts of the Holy Ghost, which being done, the work and office of the
Apostles was ended, and of no further use but by their Writings, unless we can
suppose that what the Son has spoken needs a further Witness, or
confirmation to our faith. Therefore also Christ is said to be the Apostle and
High Priest of our profession, Heb. 3. 1. because our whole direction in
Religion is what he has spoken to us.

Thus having found this to be a truth, the next thing to be considered, is, how
it comes to pass, or what reason can be given, since the Lord has the same
abundance of spirit, and could as easily speak to us by dreams, visions and
revelations extraordinary, and by persons infallibly inspired, now as ever, his
people also as dear and precious to him, why he should now deny his people that
which formerly he granted, and leave them only to what he has spoken by his
Son, to find out the mind of God and the mystery of his will only by the use
and improvement of ordinary gifts. Among other reasons that might be given of
this I shall mention three.

Reas. 1. Because this his speaking by his Son has brought into the world a
greater light, whereby those ways of revelation are made useless and
unprofitable; as when the Sun arises, all the Stars are out of sight.
Christ is the Sun of righteousness, who since his rising has put the Saints
into a better state, then to stand in need of such ways of light which were in
the world before. 1. Joh. 2. 8. The darkness is past, and the true light now
shines. It is true that in the time of the Churches infancy, under the law,
the Saints needed such dispensations and they had them; but since his speaking
to us by his Son, the Church is no more as a child under age, and it needs
them not; the reason is, because by his speaking to to by his Son, the Saints
are in a better capacity of finding out the mind of God, by industry and
labor, in the use of ordinary gifts, by search and study of the Scriptures,
because the whole mystery of his will is now revealed; for where there is the
whole truth discovered in any matter, each part will bear witness, and give
illustration to the other, which was not so in the times before Christ; they
had truth, but not the whole truth laid open; that is the meaning of that
place, John 1. 18. The Law was given by Moses, but truth was by Jesus Christ:
not that the Law was not truth, Psalm. 119. 142. Thy law is the truth: but it
was the truth under types and shadows, so as much of it was then hidden, which
now is made manifest: The mystery kept hid from ages and generations was
revealed by Jesus Christ. The Law shows the order, but the power is discovered
in the Gospel; the Law tells us of life in God in the ways of his service,
but it leaves us to ask such questions, Who shall ascend into heaven, or
descend down into the deep, and how shall this or that be? the Gospel answers
all these questions, Romans 10. 5, 6, 7, 8. When a man has not the whole of a
matter before him, he cannot see far into it, or make a full judgment of it.
This was the case before Christ, therefore they had need of such Prophets, and
such ways of revelation which are useless now. Therefore also the Apostle
says in opposition to those times, that We all with open face behold as in a
glass the glory of the Lord. And so we are to understand our Savior, Matthew.
11. 11. concerning John, that he was greater then all the Prophets before him,
and the least in the Kingdom of God greater then he, It is not meant of John's
personal gifts or graces, for so he was beyond many in the Kingdom of God; but
of the state of things in general, as they stood then and afterward, in
respect of knowing the Lord, and the mystery of his will. The Prophets did not
so fully understand what themselves prophesyed, as now they are understood, 1
Pet. 1. 11. And indeed this is one main thing intended in Gods speaking by his
Son, a bringing down of the knowledge of God to the understandings of the
sons of men to the lowest condescension. This work is full of difficulty; God
therefore condescends, and finds out ways to do it by degrees; now when he
spoke to us by his Son, he did as much as could be done therein. No man
knows who the Father is but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him. Luke 10. 22.

Reason 2. Because by speaking to us by his Son, he has also put us into a
capacity of attaining to as near communion with God in the visions of his
glory, and revelations of his love to us, in an ordinary way, as they attained
unto by those extraordinary ways of speaking to them; and however those ways
are ceased, yet we (in a right sense understood) are not without the visions
and revelations of the Lord.

The reason is, because by means of that glorious manifestation, which God has
made of himself by his Son, all the Saints of the New Testament have a more
plentiful participation of the Spirit of God, then formerly was had. John 7.
38. He that believes in me, (says Christ) as the Scripture has said, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living waters. This he spoke (says the
Evangelist) of the spirit, which those who believe in him should receive; for
(says he) the spirit was not yet given, because Christ was not yet glorified;
so as such giving of the spirit was to be an effect of the shining forth of his
glory among his people; which is as much as to say it is a fruit of Gods
speaking to us by his Son. The spirit stayed until that light and glory did
appear. The spirit of God is the spirit of truth, accordingly he works like
himself, John 14. 17. and 16. 13. therefore when the whole mystery of the
truth of the Gospel was revealed by Jesus Christ the Son of God, then was the
season of this more plentiful pouring forth of the Spirit of God upon his
people. The Spirit was given before, but not in such a measure or degree as
afterward.

The Scripture sometimes speaks of a new degree as of a new thing, Gal. 4. 4.
God sent his Son to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might
receive the adoption of Sons; yet they had received the adoption of Sons
before, in the times of the Old Testament; To whom pertains the adoption,
says the Apostle, Romans 9. 4. And Israel was his firstborn, Exodus 4. 22. Hos.
11. 1. but the privilege thereof the people of God in the nonage of the Church
had not received in that degree as afterward they did, Galat. 4. 1. And yet at
the resurrection such a farther degree is spoken of to be expected, as if we
had not yet received the adoption. Romans 8. 23. Waiting for the adoption, the
redemption of the body. The reason is, because the latter so exceeds in glory
that which was before; as the Apostle speaks concerning the differing glory of
the ministration of the Old Testament and the New; 2 Cor. 3. 10. Even that
which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory
which excels. Thus also, and for the same reason, though he speaks but of
another degree or measure of giving the spirit, he speaks of it as if it had
not been at all given before.

The spirit was plentifully given before to the Prophets extraordinarily
inspired, but now it is so given to all believers, although in another way, at
least it is a privilege belonging to them, however by too many it is so much
neglected. Therefore is it made an appurtenance to our adoption, ( Romans 8. 15.
Ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba father. Again,
because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your
hearts. Gal. 4. 5.) Because it is a gift bestowed upon all believers. And in 1
John 2. 20. the Apostle says not only that the fathers, or young men, but
also even the little children, under which three names he comprehends
believers of all sorts, had received the unction of the holy one, and knew all
things. And to all the Saints in the Churches of Galatia he says, that by the
hearing of faith they had received the spirit. Gal. 3. 2.

Therefore the officers or ministers of the Church, and preachers of the Word,
who also are ministers not of the letter, but of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3. are men
of the same gifts as others are, subject also to error as others are, 1 These.
5. 19, 20, 21. That prophesying which we must not despise, as we would not
quench the spirit, the Apostle says we must suppose may bring us something
that is not good. Quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying, prove all
things, hold fast that which is good. Therefore are they called Elders, because
however their Function is sacred, yet their gifts are the same with other
Christians, and differ not in kind, but only in degree; chosen therefore by
Christians from amongst themselves.

And for a further proof and illustration of this truth, we may observe that
the ordinary preaching of the word by such persons so gifted, whether Elders,
or others allowed by the Church to preach the word, is there called
prophesying, Despise not prophesying. As also it is called by that name, Romans
12. 6. and 1 Cor. 14. And as the Preachers are called Prophets, so what
provision they by study and labor have provided for the people, is called a
revelation, 1 Cor. 14. 29. Let the Prophets speak two or three, viz. only so
many at one meeting, and let the other judge. If any thing be revealed to
another that sits, let the first hold his peace; for ye may all prophecy one
by one, that ye may all learn, and all may be comforted; and the spirits of
the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; for God is not the author of
confusion, but of peace. In all this the Apostle speaks of ordinary
preaching; First, because it was such wherein the women might not speak in the
Churches. V. 34. As for women that were Prophetesses extraordinarily inspired,
they might speak therein. Therefore that was one thing for which Thyatira was
blamed, namely, for suffering the woman Jezabel to teach, who called her self
a Prophetess, and was not, Rev. 2. 20. And it is said that Philip had four
daughters that did prophecy, Acts 21. 9. Secondly, because we cannot suppose
that a revelation received from God by a Prophet extraordinarily inspired,
could run him upon extravagancies, or upon that which made confusion in the
Church, so as the Apostle should need to tell them that two persons must not
speak together at once. And also because he says, the spirits of such Prophets
are subject to the Prophets.

As for those words, If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the
first hold his peace; although they are alleged by some to prove the contrary,
yet being well considered, it will appear also even from those words
themselves, that they are rather to be meant of something which he had provided
to speak before he came into the Congregation, then of a sudden extraordinary
revelation. I confess as the words are translated, they sound something the
other way: the word, by, is not in the Greek, and we are to read them thus, If
any thing be revealed to another that sits, (...), not that sits by. It
is not the Apostles scope only to express the posture of the man; for whether
he sat or stood, if he had a revelation, he was to have the same liberty of
speaking. Nor is it his scope only to set forth his being by, or present in
the Congregation; for then he had rather said, (...), or (...); But a further
matter is intended, as we may see by the same phrase used Acts 13. 14. Paul and
Barnabas, at their first coming to Antioch in Pisidia, went into the Synagogue
on the Sabbath day, and (says the Text) they sat, (...): In which words also
the holy Ghost intends more then barely to record their posture in the
Synagogue, or to set it down whether they sat or stood. It is a phrase, both in
this place and in the other, 1 Cor. 14. importing thus much, a placing
themselves so in the Congregation, as thereby giving notice to them that they
had something to speak unto the people; as appears in that the rulers of the
Synagogue, after the Lecture of the Law was ended, applied themselves to Paul
and Barnabas, without any speech had with them before, whereby to have known
their minds, saying, Men and brethren, if ye have a word of exhortation to the
people, speak. Whether it was because the Sons of the Prophets in Israel were
not fixed in one place, for the exercise of their function, but went
occasionally from place to place prophesying in the Synagogues, or what else
was the cause, it seems that in their Synagogues there was a place provided on
purpose, in which whoever placed himself, the people expected some word of God
from them; and those who would tender themselves to speak, did purposely set
themselves in that seat: some such custom I suppose it was that occasioned
this phrase; and so you are to understand that of Paul and Barnabas, and this
in 1 Cor. 14. If any thing be revealed to another that sits, that is, to
another that is provided and tenders himself to speak; in such a case (says the
Apostle) he that speaks first is to take but so much time as to leave room for
him who is to follow. Thus we see, that those very words do point us rather to
the ordinary provision of the preachers of the word by ordinary gifts, and to
something whereof they are supposed to be provided by meditation and study,
before they come into the Congregation, then to any extemporary revelation. And
it is evident from those reasons given before, that the Apostle speaks of
such, and that as the Preacher is called a Prophet, so such provision is there
called a revelation.

To this I may add, what we have found and considered from Rev. 19. 10.
compared with Acts 2. 18. and Rev. 12. 17. in the former Treatise upon the
Covenant of God with Abraham. page 85, 86. 87. namely, that now in the times of
the New Testament every believer has the Spirit of prophecy, yea though he be
no preacher in the Church, as is there showed from those words of the Angel
forbidding John to worship him, saying, See thou do it not, I am thy
fellow servants, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus; worship
God, for the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy. This Testimony of
Jesus is the whole manifestation of God by Jesus Christ, contained (as was
showed p. 132) in the Scripture of the Old and New Testament; so called because
the Lord Christ is that faithful and true Witness, which God has taken to
himself whereby to give credit to his Gospel in the hearts of his people; being
fitted for that work, as being his Son, who knows all his bosom thoughts,
Joh. 1. 18. And as being a distinct person to the Father; Joh. 8. 17. 18. for a
witness must be another person: And because of his assuming our nature, and so
being made one of our number: In reference to all which it is that he says, Ye
believe in God, believe also in me, Joh. 14. 1. Now by that speech of the
Angel, whoever has this Testimony, (which is the character and privilege of
every believer in the times of the New Testament, Rev. 12. 17. and 1. 9. and 6.
9.) has the Spirit of prophecy, and is therefore a fellow servants to the
Angel by whom the Lord Christ gave the revelation of such prophesies unto his
servant John. The reason is because whoever has the Testimony of Jesus, has
it not only in the Letter, but has received the Spirit also. Gal. 3. 2. The
ministration of the New Testament is a ministration of the Spirit, 2. Cor. 3.
8. Therefore he says, that the Testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy,
because it is not had without the Spirit. No man can say that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 12. 3. It is a living word, if it be an
abiding word in any soul, 1 Pet. 1. 23.

By all which places we see that we in the times of the New Testament are not
without the Revelations of God; and that in an ordinary way, by the use of
ordinary gifts, we have in effect the same communion with God, in the visions
of his glory and the discovery of his fatherly affection to us, as they had by
those extraordinary ways of Revelation.

This therefore is another reason of the point; namely why those extraordinary
ways are ceased, and that what is attained of the manifestations of God to our
souls must be had in the use of ordinary gifts in search and study of the
Scriptures.

Reason. 3 Because if God had still continued his speaking to his Saints by
extraordinary ways, and by persons infallibly inspired, such as were the
Prophets and Apostles, he had taken a course to keep his people at a lower
stature in believing then is now attained to: Had there been advantage in
continuing such means, the personal presence of Christ in the flesh amongst
us, of all other had been the greatest; but we see what our Savior says to
that, Joh. 16. 7. It is expedient for you (says he) that I go away; implying
that there was intended for the Church a better state, by his presence with us
in the Spirit, then what they had by his presence in the Flesh.

The reason is,

1. Because our faith had stood more in the authority and personal respects of
the messengers, and less in the evidence of the truth it self, and so less
in God; that which the Apostle endeavored so much to prevent in his hearers, 1
Cor. 2. 3, 4. I was with you (says he) in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling, and my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power. That is, he sought
not to gain upon them so much by personal respects, but by the evidence of the
truth it self, as he says, 2 Cor. 4. 2. By the demonstration of the truth
commending himself to every man's conscience. He gives the reason of his
practice, v. 5. That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in
the power of God: which is attained unto rather by this way of studying the
Scriptures, when by comparing places and things together, our faith is resolved
into, and fastened upon the selfe-evidencing light which is in truth, then by
taking all from Prophets or Apostles.

Had that been still the way, as in the Primitive times it was, and the times
before Christ, how apt we should have been to take things upon trust from an
Apostle, and not to search into the truth it self, is evident, if we consider,
First, how natural it is to us, our own corruption leading us unto it, to take
up things on trust from man, that so we may not have to do with God in any
truth, because thereby the flesh is crucified, which therefore strives against
it, and will close with creatures to shift off him. Secondly, if we consider
one great experiment which the world has had in this particular, which is
this: 2 These. 2. 7. 1 John 2. 18.
We know that in the Primitive times, even in the Apostles days, Antichrist
had his rise, and by degrees he gained upon the Church. In these our days
Antichrist is falling, and loosing every day, and so as never to arise again.
What is the reason, since their light was the same with ours, in some respects
greater? Consider where lies his strength, and that will point you to it. It
lies in an implicit faith, that people will believe as the Church believes;
take that away, it is to Antichrist as the removing of that pillar by Sampson
was unto the Philistims, when the house and the Philistims came down together.
This now points us to consider, if one reason why he then rose, and is now
falling, though the light whereby he falls is the same which then was in the
world, be not because then the truth was taken more upon trust from the
Apostles; whereas now the light we gain is by search and study of the
Scriptures, whereby believers are more established and built upon the light of
the truth it self; for what light we gain by industry and study sticks by us,
is more digested, more powerful and useful in the soul. Therefore how often
is this urged by the Apostles to try the spirits, and to try all things, and
hold fast that which is good. And, If we (says the Apostle) or an Angel from
Heaven preach another Gospel, let him be accursed?

2. Because our understandings had not been so exercised and improved, which is
a great part of Gods design, in as much as the excellency of man lies in his
reason. It is true, the way of Gods improvement is by the death of the old man,
with all his excellencies whatsoever, so as reason it self becomes a dead
thing to us, as considered only of the first Adam; but though it dies, it does
not perish, but grows up in the new creature to a glorious improvement and
increase; That which thou sowest (says the Apostle) is not quickened except it
die: 1 Cor. 15. 36.
it dies therefore that it may be quickened in the new birth, wherein it is
sanctified by Christ, and afterward improved to the utmost in his children:
For which purpose God finds himself engaged to bring matters unto such a
state, as by labor in the use of reason sanctified, a man may search into the
deep things of God, without such extraordinary helps; and when should that be
expected if not in these last days, when God has spoken to us by his Son,
whereby he has rendered himself with greatest advantage to the understandings
of his people? Now I say, had those ways of speaking by extraordinary
revelations been continued, we had been apt to take things up with case from an
Apostle without study or labor in the use of our understandings. The rather is
this to be urged, because God will be served by our understandings as well as
other faculties, therefore will omit no course that might be taken, whereby to
necessitate and provoke us thereunto. Therefore had those ways been still in
use, we had been hindered in our growth in faith and in the knowledge of God and
of his will.

3. Because therein also stands the growth and strength of Christians, not
only that they happen upon the truth, which those who are weak may do, but
also that they be thoroughly possessed of it, and seasoned with it, that it be
well digested and made their own; so as they be able to manage and improve it
for their comfort, and for a withstanding of gainsayers; which is not so well
attained when truth is taken in without study from an Apostle or the like. What
a man gains by study he is able to master, and that masters him, and he keeps
it better, and that keeps him. A man that takes a truth on trust may keep it by
him till he be withstood, but when opposition comes, he is not able to reply,
and must go for an answer unto him on whom his faith is pinned. There would
have been at least more of this in Christians, had not those ways been laid
aside, then now there is, though there is too much of it notwithstanding.

Obj. You will say, that by what has been said, it seems that the Saints in
these our days are in a better state, or in a more noble way of knowledge,
then they were in the Apostles times, whose practices are our patterns or
examples, and in many cases made the rule of our actions, which seems hard to
be affirmed.

To this I answer.

Answ. First, that their practice being our pattern which we are to follow, is
not because they were in a more noble or better way of knowing the mind of God
to edification, but because thereby is hinted to us what was the word and mind
of the Son of God, who is the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, as
touching the practice of the Saints in all succeeding ages; we having no more
certain way in many things to know what the Son taught, both by himself and
his Apostles, touching his worship and service, then by what we find was the
common and received practice of the Churches in those days.

Secondly, that in some respect we are in a more noble and a more edifying way
of finding out the mind and will of God, then they were then, appears by this,
because that was the time of laying foundations, ours are the times of building
upon foundations being laid, and of growing up to a more perfect man; Ephesians.
4. 12. 13. Now though there be a strength in the foundation that is not in the
building, yet there is an eminency in the building above foundations.

It appears also, in that when knowledge shall most increase, which toward
the end it shall, it shall increase that way; namely, by labor and study in
searching of the Scriptures, not by extraordinary visions or revelations. Dan.
12. 4. At the time of the end many shall run to and fro, that is, shall search
to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. The same word is used 2 Chronicles.
16. 9. The eyes of the Lord do run to and fro throughout the earth, to show
himself strong for them whose heart is perfect toward him, that is, he
searches and seeks occasions to show his power for such; it is meant of such a
going to and fro as men use in searching; such as when the children of Israel
went about gathering the Manna, Numb. 11. 8. where the same word is also used.

Fourthly, I may add that which was mentioned before concerning Antichrist,
that notwithstanding in the Apostles days the same light did shine forth among
the Saints, and in some respect greater, yet that then he had his rise and
increase, and in these our days is falling and declining to his utter ruin and
extirpation; which shows that the Saints of these times in some respect, even
in point of knowledge and edification therein, have pre-eminence above those
who lived in the Apostles times.

Use. 2.
Learn from hence what course is to be taken to be built up in the
manifestations of God unto your souls; search the Scriptures, study thoroughly
that Book of God, and give your diligence to understand what God has spoken to
us by his Son. That is the Mine in which we are to dig for this Wisdom as for
Silver, and search for it as for hid Treasures, Prove. 2. 4. And look not after
extraordinary visions or revelations. Or else if that be your way, you see,

First, your labor will be lost, your expectations frustrate. Those ways of
speaking now are ceased since God has spoken to us by his Son.

Secondly, you shall run a most desperate hazard of delusion, because you are
not in your way, and so have nothing to defend you from the subtilties of
Satan. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, Prove. 10. 29. And he
has given his Angels a charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways, Psalm.
91. 11. but out of your way you have no promise of protection; as for instance,
If it be in things within the compass of nature and reason, sense and reason is
your guide, and look what their direction is, that is your way; and a
sufficient guard they are from his delusions; therefore our Savior said to his
Disciples, Luke 24. 39. Behold my Hands and my Feet, that it is I my self;
handle me and see; for a spirit has not Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have:
implying, that in matters of that nature, sense and reason rightly used are a
defense sufficient, in a common way of providence, from delusions of the Devil.
Or if it be in matters above nature (as the things of the Spirit are) yet if
you keep to the word of God, that is your way, and that will keep you, and be
your protection; because it is a creating word, so as although it speaks of
glorious things, above the line or sphere of nature, yet is it able to make all
good. But if it be in natural things you deal without sense and reason, or in
spiritual and supernatural things, without the Scripture, or in any other way
of revelation then by the word of God, which he has spoken by his son, now
are ye upon the Devils ground, and in his snare, and he shall lead you captive
at his will; so the Apostle says 1 Timothy 2. 25, 26. Those who oppose or
acknowledge not the truth are in the snare of the Devil and taken captive by
him at his will. The reason is, because he is a spirit, who can make powerful
impressions upon fancy, and much resembling those of the spirit of God, and
so in stead of a Conception by the Holy Ghost, you shall ere you are aware
receive a strong delusion of the Devil.

Thirdly, by this means will you be taken off from that where your advantage
lies, embracing in stead thereof a fancy or a shadow. Thus the Jews, who
followed after the Law of righteousness, their desire in general was good: I
bear them record (says the Apostle) that they have a zeal of God, but they
sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law, and so by means
of that diversion, were deluded by Satan and their own corruption, and attained
not the Law of righteousness, Romans 9. 31. Thus also the Disciples did not
know, or not consider, how their advantage was in Christ crucified; their
hearts were altogether set upon an earthly glory; for which cause how foolish
and slow of heart were they to believe all that the Prophets had said
concerning Christ? Luke 24. 25. So in this case, the advantage of the Saints
lies in their being led by the Spirit into all truth: and that not by
immediate speaking of himself, but by taking of the things of Christ, and
showing them unto us. John 16. 13, 14.
Now therefore, if you neglect the study of the Scriptures, seeking after and
expecting revelations extraordinary by the spirit, you are besides your work,
and lose the advantage of the season. The Spirit will never that way lead you
into any truth. It will take of the things of Christ and show them to you;
communion with Christ by faith, pardon of sin, the blessed privilege of
adoption, the infinite satisfaction which the father takes in his beloved
sons obedience, the admirable healing virtue in his blood, the life and
blessedness to be enjoyed in fellowship with the father and his son; such
things as these of Christ, the spirit will take and show them to you; it will
ravish your souls by what it makes you see in each particular; it will cause
you to comprehend with all Saints what is the height, and depth, and length,
and breadth, to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
it will fill you with all the fullness of God: but as for any immediate
revelations of himself without the things of Christ and without the Word, so
he will do nothing for you. Satan may come and make strong and powerful
impressions upon your spirits without taking any of the things of Christ, but
not the spirit of God; which impressions if you listen or give heed unto, your
thoughts and labors are diverted from your proper work where your advantage
is; and though your desires and intentions in the main are good, yet you will
mscarry and come short of what you seek; in stead of advancing forward you will go
backward in Religion and the work of God; in stead of getting higher, you will
be low, and poor, and beggarly, even in the dust, and as Children carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, by the craftynesse of men, whereby they lie in
wait cunningly to deceive. This has always been the policy of Satan; he passes
not how strong or fervent your affections are, about the matters of the soul,
so as you are besides your work; for so the work of God is hindered, and his
work goes on.

Use. 3.
Hence also learn how to study and to hear the word with profit. There are
mistakes, as in the matter or the Object, so in the manner of our study. Now
from the point which has been opened, this is the rule, that we hear and study
as those who are spoken to by the Son, and that in three particulars especially.

First, you must give the more earnest heed to the things which are spoken.
This is the Use made of this point by the Apostle, Heb. 2. 1. having in the
former chapter proved this Doctrine, that God has spoken to us by his Son,
and withal set forth his dignity above the Angels, that is his conclusion,
Therefore (says he) let us give the more earnest heed to the things which we
have heard, least at any time we let them slip. This is the great impediment
whereby the saving virtue of the Gospel is obstructed, and it becomes so
fruitless in the souls of men, because other things are heeded so so much,
and that so little; Dogs and Horses are regarded by us; but when God has
written to us the great things of his Law, they are accounted as a strange
thing. Hose. 8. 12
This is the cause why after so much means enjoyed, so little good is done;
when after many Messengers the Lord has sent his Son, in stead of yielding
him the fruits of his Vineyard, the sons of men conspire to kill the Son that
so the Vineyard may be theirs. Christ has said enough to overcome the hardest
heart, he shows the plenty of his Fathers house, the privilege and blessed
state of the sons of God, the sweetness of a pardon, the glory of the life
to come: but alas, it is not a careless slothful or bare hearing that will do
the work. Hearken diligently unto me, (says God) so hear and your souls shall
live. Isai. 55. 1, 2.
Stir up your selves then, when ever you engage in this work; think who it is
that speaks, and what he says; and know that if you slight him now, you shall
not do it long; the time is near at hand when you must stand before his seat of
judgment, and receive your sentence from his mouth for life or death eternal.

Secondly, you must continue in his word, and not be tossed to and fro with
every wind of Doctrine, as clouds without water, as the Apostle speaks Jude 12.
If ye continue in my word (says Christ) then are ye my Disciples indeed, and
ye shall know the truth. Joh. 8. 31. Such therefore as are ever wavering and
flitting to and fro without establishment, so far at least as they are so
unconstant and unsettled, they are not taught by him, but by their own corrupt
and sinful ends, or they take up things on trust from men, and so as the tide
turns they turn and float about, according to the stream and current of the
times, or as they are biased from their own corruptions. Two things must be in
this continuing in the word of Christ. First, the understanding must be
established in the truth, and you in some measureable with your own eyes to see
it, and to charge it home upon your souls as the truth of God. Secondly, your
practice must be answerable; he that is not a doer of the Word, is a forgetful
hearer, James, 1. 25. The seed sown is not preserved in the earth except it
grow.

Thirdly, The truth must make you free, Joh. 8. 32. Then are ye my Disciples
indeed, (says Christ) and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make
you free: if ihe son makes you free, then are ye free indeed. Two things there
are in this freedom. First, a freedom from the reigning power of sin.
Secondly, an establishment with a free spirit in the service of the Lord. It is
not enough that you continue in the word, unless it has this powerful saving
work upon you, to change the heart, to sanctify it, and to subdue the soul to
the power of the truth and grace of Christ.

Fourthly, you must labor to receive the Word not in the letter only, but the
spirit also with the word. The Spirit is received, says the Apostle, by the
hearing of faith, Gal. 3. 2. And believing ye were sealed by the holy Spirit of
promise, Ephesians. 1. 13. which being a peculiar blessing upon, and effect of the
Sons speaking, (as we have heard) therefore that you may hear as those who are
spoken to by the Son, this also must be added.

These are the revelations to be expected, and which you are to labor for; and
this is the only way to be above external forms and outsides; not to lay
forms aside, for so you are besides them, not above them; but by a right use
of them to labor after higher things, for which they are designed. I through
the law, am dead to the law, (says the Apostle) Gal. 2. 19.
that is, by a right use of the Law he was dead to the Law: so by a right use
of forms, (which is, whether it be the preaching of the Word, or any other
Ordinances, to be made partakers of the Holy Ghost in the use of them) in a
right sense understood, we are above them.

It is most true, to rest in any forms, even in the Letter of the Word it
self, that is, in the mere notion or understanding of it, without the Spirit,
is low and poor and beggarly; but by way of prevention or redress hereof, to
seek and wait for extraordinary revelations, is out of one extreme into
another, and in striving to be above forms, to neglect and lay aside the
ordinances and ways of God, which he has sanctified and set apart to be the
way and method of a blessed enjoyment of himself. Nor will this do the work
pretended; this seeking after extraordinary revelations, is as low and poor a
matter as the other. Those were useful only in the time of the Churches
infancy, or when foundations were in laying, as was showed before; therefore
whilst men seek that way to be above, they are below, even in the dust. The
fruit of every ordinance in the worship is an anointing with fresh oil, (even
a further participation of the Spirit of God) so the comfort of a Sabbath is
expressed in that Psalm. 92. 10. entitled A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath day, and
so the blessing of the house of God is set forth, Psalm. 23. 5, 6. As for
instance, In prayer our heavenly father gives the Holy Spirit to them that ask
him, Luke 11. 13. And by one Spirit are we baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12
13. In the supper of the Lord, we have the communion of the body of Christ,
namely, in partaking with our head in the same anointing with the holy Ghost: 1
Cor. 10, 16.
and are all made to drink into one spirit. 1 Cor. 12. 13. And so in all the
rest. The work therefore to be done in this also of hearing the Word, is, that
by the hearing of Faith we receive the Holy Ghost, Gal. 3. 2. and that upon our
believing we are sealed by the holy spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 13. that is,
that there be,

First, A powerful impression by the word upon the soul, from the spirits
witness to it, setting of it home with life and vigor, begetting and
confirming faith, changing the heart, subduing it unto the power of the truth
of God, so making it unto the soul a creating word, without which work it is
but a dead letter to it.

Secondly, The Image of Christ, as it were, stamped upon the soul in that
impression; elsewhere called his being formed in us, Gal. 4. 19. in reference
to which the word is called an immortal seed, that lives and abides for ever;
by which we are begotten in the new birth; 1 Pet. 1. 23.
called also an ingraffed word, James 1: 18, 21
because it turns us into its own nature, and makes us like to Jesus Christ;
which image consists in our likeness to him in his death and resurrection,
Philip. 3. 10. in the mortification of sin, and a spiritual resurrection unto
newness of life, Romans 6. 5.

Thirdly, A witness of the spirit to the soul of our interest in God upon
this new birth, and giving us the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1: 14.
in our enjoyments of him, in communion with all the persons of the Trinity,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 1 John 5, 6, 7, 8. Romans 8. 16. 17.

Use. 3.
A third use of the point may be a confutation of that opinion entertained by
some, that there are not now in being any true Ministers of Christ, who can as
Ambassadors from Christ, in the name of God and in his authority speak unto
the people, because there are none that can take upon them to preach by an
infallible spirit. The reason alleged is because those who speak so in the
name of God, as his Ambassadors, or as in his stead, must do it by a Word
which is wholly, undoubtedly, and merely true, that so they may be certainly
known both to themselves and others to be so commissioned from the Lord, and
that both preachers and hearers may be infallibly assured that it is indeed the
word of God which they preach. Thus say they, the first lawful preaching of the
Gospel was performed by word of mouth, and that such as was sincere, 1 Pet. 2.
2. Sound Doctrine, Titus 1. 9. Such as was received not as the word of men, but
as it was indeed the word of God, 1 These. 2. 13. And therefore since God has
nowhere commanded nor licensed, that what was begun by such a word of truth,
should afterward be carried on by a word not wholly and merely true, that
those who now take upon them to perform that office of a Minister in the
worship of God, speaking in the name of God, and as his Ambassadors unto the
people, in as much as they cannot pretend to such infallibility, do act without
commission, and are guilty of will worship, and are not to be reputed the
ministers of Christ, in as much as all Administrations in the Church are to be
by his institution and command.

Now from that which has been said in opening this point, we have a full and
satisfying answer unto this: namely,

First, that however in laying the foundations of the Church of the New
Testament, and in setting down the institutions of the worship, it was
necessary that God should make use of persons of infallible gifts, which
accordingly was done in Christ and his Apostles and Evangelists; yet that it
was never intended that the work should be carried on by such, but that in
building upon those foundations, and in the Churches growing up even to the
measure of the stature to which it is intended in this world, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.
the work of God should go on and prosper in the hands of his servants by the
use of ordinary gifts, in studying the Scriptures, and in teaching and
instructing one another in the knowledge of the Gospel, and so as each teacher
in the Church has need to be taught, and is supposed to be subject unto
error, as has been showed from 1 These. 5. 19. page 145. which will yet be
more clear from that place, if it be considered that those duties there
mentioned by the Apostle in that golden chain, from verse. 16. to 21. are
linked together in such order, as they are depending one upon another in a
Christians practice, as if we should read them thus; That ye may rejoice
evermore, pray without ceasing, for that end in every thing give thanks, for
that end quench not the Spirit, and so of the rest; as you would not quench the
Spirit, despise not prophecy, and for that end prove all things, and hold fast
that which is good; for he that proves them not, despises his teachers
doctrine as not worthy to be considered or examined. Now this connection
between these duties being the Apostles scope, it appears that the Spirit is
quenched by despising that prophesying wherein there may be some errors and
mistakes. Therefore however the Apostles and Evangelists who were to write the
Scripture, had an infallible gift, yet ordinary Elders of Churches even in the
Apostles time had it not, but were subject to mistakes as we see in the Angels
of the seven Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. And of the Elders of Ephesus it is said,
that even from amongst themselves should men arise speaking perverse things to
draw away disciples after them, Acts 20. 30.

Secondly, We see also, that the state and condition of the Church of the New
Testament bespeaketh as much, that the Church should be built up by the use of
such gifts only, and that extraordinary gifts should cease, as has been
showed in the third Reason of the point. God had otherwise in part lost his end
in speaking to us by his Son, of which his speaking one end was, that he
might bring down the knowledge of himself so far to our capacity, as that in
the use of ordinary gifts by search and study of the Scriptures, we might
understand the great and deep things of God, without the help of gifts
infallible and extraordinary.

Thirdly, the nature of the office of a Pastor and Teacher in the Church
speaks no less, in as much as they are called Elders and leaders, (...), not
as Lords over Gods heritage, but as examples to the flock, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
to go before the people in the same work wherein the whole Church is engaged,
namely, among other things in the search and study of the Scriptures; therefore
supposed to be endued but with the same gifts for kind with the rest of their
brethren, the difference between them and others, in respect of gifts, being
only in degree and eminency, not in kind, as has been showed; chosen
therefore they are by the Church from amongst themselves, and according to
certain rules set down in Scripture, as in 1 Timothy 3. and Titus 1. which might
not be in case they should be persons extraordinarily inspired, and could speak
by an infallible Spirit, and known such to be, for such can be chosen only by
God himself, either immediately from Heaven, or by a Prophet or an Apostle; in
which case the Lord also gives Testimony to such choice by the gift of
miracles, Heb. 2. 4.

Nor is it any disadvantage to the Church to be taught by such who are
themselves subject unto error, since we are not to take any thing merely upon
trust from our Teachers, but are commanded to try the spirits, and to prove all
things: And if we (says the Apostle) or an Angel from Heaven preach another
Gospel unto you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8. Nay I may add, that since our
work and duty is to search the Scriptures, it is for our advantage that our
Leaders who go before us therein are persons of the same gifts, and subject to
the same infirmities with our selves, because hereby that wherein they excel
will be a provocation and encouragement to us to be industrious in the same
study and labor. And that wherein they are defective lays a necessity on us
to search and study so much the more, lest we be misled. And had the Lord
continued persons of such infallible gifts, it had been a means to take us off
from that laborious and diligent search and study of the Scriptures, which now
we are necessitated to, as was showed at large in opening the point.

Quest. If the Question be, how such persons then can speak unto the people as
Ambassadors from God, and in his name, so as the people may receive it in his
authority, and may be assured that what they receive is indeed the word and
truth of God.

To this I answer.

Answ. That it is true indeed, if when we receive the truth as spoken to us in
the name of God, it were to be supposed that we receive it only upon trust
from those who are our Teachers, it must then be granted that none can speak to
us in the name of God but only such as have an infallible gift, and of whom we
can be certain of their faithfulness therein; but that is not our work to build
our faith only upon the credit of our Teachers, (although that is not to be
denied its due respect) but, what ever certainty we have of their faithfulness
and ability, our faith has a further ground to fix upon; namely,

First, upon the selfe-evidencing property which is in light and truth; for
which cause it is that the Apostle himself says, 1 Cor. 10. 15. I speak as to
wise men, judge what I say: and Gal. 1. 8, 9. If we or an Angel from heaven
preach any other Gospel unto you then that ye have received, let him be
accursed. Therefore also 2 Cor. 4. 2. he says that he and his fellow laborers
did not take any other course, or use any other means to gain upon their
hearers, but by manifestation of the truth, commending themselves to every man's
conscience. Such things revealed concerning God, and Christ, and man, so put
together in one body of light, each part thereof bearing witness to,
illustrating and bespeaking the other, all agreeing in such full consent and
harmony of truth, so far beyond the wit of any creature to have invented, is
discerned and acknowledged by true believers to be the truth of God, and in
some sort not unlike, as light is known to be light by him that sees it;
therefore I say, that is one thing upon which our faith in believing the truth
of God depends, beyond the credit of our teachers how great soever it be. And
yet this is not enough, because such is man's impotency and corruption, being
left unto himself, as his light is his darkness, so as by how much the
stronger his reason is, so much the more he is infatuated and deluded; seeing
he sees not, and hearing he does not understand nor yet perceive; Matthew: 6.
23: and 13. 13.
therefore I must add, That our faith depends,

Secondly, upon the inward testimony and work of Gods spirit, opening the heart
and inabling us to see this light, and to believe the truth: And without this
work of the spirit, whatever may be said in reason, a full belief thereof as
the truth of God cannot be. Joh. 14. 26. The Holy Ghost shall teach you all
things Joh. 16. 13. He shall lead you into all truth; 1 John 2. 20. 27. Ye have
an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things. 2 Cor. 1. 21. 22. He
which establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who
has also sealed us, and given the earnest of his spirit in our hearts.
Therefore when the Lord Christ himself preached, Joh. 6. the Jews despising him
and saying, Is not this the Carpenter? our Savior says the reason was because
they were not taught of God, verse. 43.

Quest. If the Question be how the Spirit does this?

Ans. I answer. First, not by extraordinary or immediate revelations, as was
showed from John 16. 13. p. 137. The spirit shall not speak of himself, etc. The
spirit will not come to any man and say in so many words, this is truth, or this
is Scripture, or this the word of God. But,

Secondly, The spirit does it by sanctifying us through the truth, John 17. 17.
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth. So John 7. 17. If any man
will do the will of him that sent me, (says our Savior) he shall know of my
doctrine whether it be of God or not: 1 Pet. 1. 23, 24, 25. The Apostle to
prove the word to be the immortal seed of God, says, it lives and abides for
ever, thereby intimating, that it abides not where it lives not; therefore by
its being made a sanctifying word it becomes an abiding word in that soul. A
sanctifying word is when together with it we receive the spirit, which is a
fountain of life in every believer.

Three things there are in this his sanctifying us through the truth whereby we
are brought to believe it to be the truth of God.

First, in this sanctification a man is by the spirit wrought to give up
himself to the power of this truth of God as his, and that in every faculty;
for that is the nature of sanctification, it is a giving up or a separating of
a thing to God; Romans 12. 1. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
and in voluntary agents it is a giving up of themselves to God, else the will
is not given up to him, and so the man is not sanctified; therefore in the
sanctification of the understanding, it is made active in its own illumination,
and gives up it self to the power of the word of truth, and to God therein;
hence it is that whilst the spirit of God sanctifies us through the truth, it
begets in us a belief that it is the truth of God.

Secondly, by this sanctification, so far as it prevails, (for it is but in
part in this world) we are delivered from the corrupt biasings of the heart,
which are the cause of all our darkness and unbelief, of all those shifts and
evasions whereby we are kept from owning his authority in his word; men of
corrupt minds they are who are reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8.

Thirdly, in the work of sanctification the soul finds the infinite power of
God in this truth, in mortifying sin, in a new birth to righteousness, and
in filling of the soul with comfort, which however is a work secretly carried
on in the soul, and so many times the power of the sanctifying word not much
taken notice of in actual thoughts, yet the soul wherein it is accordingly
does secretly own and acknowledge this power of the word, and God himself
therein, yea even when actual thoughts from the corruption of the unregenerate
part are reasoning against it, and would not see it.

Thus we see upon what further ground our belief of the truth as the truth and
word of God depends, besides the credit of the persons by whom we are
instructed and taught therein; Who notwithstanding may be acknowledged as
Ambassadors from Christ, who speak to us in the name of God and in his
Authority, upon a twofold account.

First, from the nature of their work, which is to instruct us in the truth of
God; in which although much of the truth slips besides our faith and knowledge,
because of the weakness both of Teacher and Hearer, and it may be but very
little of it is discovered unto us, yet something is done in that behalf, so
as we can say of this and that particular truth which we have learned by their
means, that it is indeed the word of God; and how small soever that be, yet it
comes upon our souls from our Teachers in the name of God and in his
authority, because, as it will be granted that when we receive the truth of God
in his authority, it is not therefore to be supposed that we are presently
possessed of all the truth of God at once, nor of all that truth which is
spoken to us, should it be by persons of infallible gifts, because we receive
no more then what we understand; so it is as true, that how small soever that
part of the truth of the Gospel be that we receive as truth, we cannot but
receive it in his name and authority, because he is the God of truth, and the
things revealed in it are such as none else could reveal but he; therefore
called his truth, John 17. 17. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is
truth. And indeed that only do we receive in his name and authority, which we
receive as truth, were it by persons of infallible gifts; therefore I say, so
far as they are able to fasten any truth upon our understandings, they are
truly said even from the nature of their work to speak to us in the name of
God.

Secondly, from the nature of their office, which is such as they are therein
consecrated, and appointed by a creating word of institution, to be in this
thing in stead of Christ himself unto the Church; so as he says to them, He
that receives you receives me; and he that despises you despises me, Luke
10. 16. and 2 Cor. 5. 20. We (says the Apostle) are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead be ye
reconciled to God. This the Apostle speaks of himself and others, as those to
whom God had committed the ministry of reconciliation, verse. 19. Now that
ministry was committed not only to Apostles and Evangelists. He gave also
Pastors and Teachers, for the work of the ministry, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. So
Heb. 13. 7. Therefore I say, by virtue of his word of institution they are in
this capacity, not by virtue of any infallibility or freedom from error in
their teaching. The ministry is that Ordinance of God whereby the truth of God
is by degrees to be discovered, and whereby that which is discovered to be his
truth, should come upon the soul in the same Authority and Power, as if God
himself did speak it to us. God could as easily have spoken to us himself
from time to time, but he chooses rather and finds it necessary to deal with us
according to our capacity, that his terror may not make us afraid, as Elihu
said to Job, (Job 33. 7.) and to bring down the knowledge of himself to such
ways and means agreeable to our condition, as that we may receive it in
earthen vessels, and yet be assured that it is the word and truth of God, and
so as that in this Ordinance of the ministry we have that which is equivalent
unto his speaking to us himself.

This is the manner of Gods dealing with his people in bestowing himself upon
us, that what we cannot have immediately by himself, by virtue of his
ordinances we should have in equivalency or in effect made good unto us: which
is one reason why the Scripture calls a false Ordinance an Idol, or a false
god; namely, because that is the nature and use of the ordinances of the
worship of God, to be to us as in his stead, or to be equivalently or in effect
as Christ himself unto our souls. Thus in the supper of the Lord, we have his
body and blood, though not his body and blood in nature, or by
transubstantiation, yet because that supper is his ordinance, wherein we do
enjoy the communion of his body and blood, the bread and wine in that use and
administration is equivalently, or in effect, the body and blood of Christ unto
us. So the Church wherein we worship God, is called the body and house of
Christ, though as in it self considered consisting but of a few, and of them
it may be a great part Hypocrites, it cannot properly or primarily be so
called; yet that being his ordinance, wherein we enjoy communion with him as
members of his mystical body, and as the temples of the holy Ghost, and wherein
we do the work and enjoy the comfort which belongs unto us as such, therefore
in equivalency, and in the way of an ordinance, that Church is to us the body
and house of Christ. 1 Cor. 12. 27. The Church of Corinth is called his body,
and the Church of Ephesus is called his house, Ephesians. 2. 22. Therefore in that
society of professors wherein we worship God, by virtue of his institution, we
have as much as if the whole family of heaven and earth were met and only they;
and in case a man be justly and orderly cast out by the Church, the sentence is
as dreadful and falls as heavy upon his soul, as if Christ and all his
Saints and only they had passed the sentence: so says Christ, Matthew. 18. 18.
Whatsoever ye bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. And as such a society of Christians
is his body, so they meet together in his name, (for those who are his body are
invested with his power and authority) although some of them so meeting, as to
their personal state and condition, are not his members. So also is it in the
ministers of the Church, though in themselves they are subject unto error and
infirmity as others are, yet by virtue of a like institution of Christ, in the
execution of their function, look what truth they are able, by such gifts as
they have, to fasten upon our understandings, it comes to us in the name of
God, and in the same authority as if Christ himself had spoken it unto us.

For a further clearing whereof, let it be considered, that because the
ministration of the New Testament is a ministration of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8.
therefore not only the Apostles and Evangelists, but also Pastors and
Teachers, who also are given by Christ for the work of that ministry, Ephesians. 4.
12.
(as has been showed) are ministers not of the letter but of the spirit: For
which cause also the Apostle says of all the Saints in the Churches of
Galatia, concerning whom we cannot suppose that they were all converted by
Apostles, that they had received the spirit by the hearing of faith, Galat. 3.
2. Which being so, it may be truly said of us, that even in their ministry we
are made pertakers of the Holy Ghost, and that in their teaching, so far as we
are fruitful hearers, we are taught by God himself, who therefore may very
well be said to receive the word from such ministers, as spoken unto us by them
in his name, and as in his stead.

Now by that which has been said I suppose it does appear, that albeit there
are none that can pretend infallibility, yet that they may be true ministers of
Christ, who may speak unto the people in his name and as his Ambassadors.

Use. 4.
Learn from hence also how much they are mistaken on the other side, who
because of the Spirits teaching promised to believers cry down humane learning
as unnecessary in a Minister of the Gospel. The spirit of God we see makes use
of ordinary gifts; Yea those who are not believers may be means to build up
those who are. As some of those who perished by the flood did help to build the
Ark, wherein the Church was saved. Many such will at the last day say, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils?
Matthew. 7. 22.

Were we to expect such ways of Revelation, whereby Apostles were enabled in
their work, yet humane learning would not be useless to us. The spirit of God
knows how to make use of all advantages it finds in nature, whereof this is
one. The Apostle Paul, as he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, so he
makes use of his learning in his ministry. Much more now those extraordinary
ways are ceased, is it useful in the Church of God. Thereby the
understandings of men are exercised and enlarged, and they made more able to
search into, to understand the Scriptures, to instruct others therein. The
spirit of God has made great use thereof in overthrowing and confounding
Antichrist: and as the Church is built up by use of ordinary gifts, so will he
use it still to carry on his work to more perfection.

As by the Sons speaking God has brought down the knowledge of himself to
our capacity, and that because in Christ he makes himself known to us in all
the properties and affections of the humane nature, so accordingly the spirit
of Christ works in us after the manner of man, even as the spirit of a second
Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 47. Therefore though he works powerfully, yet he works
sweetly, and carries on his work so as to take us in, and to make us active in
what is done. So our Savior himself has set out the manner of his working,
John. 16. 13. as has been showed; He shall guide or lead you into all truth.
He takes time also and works by degrees, he works also by means, and
makes use of man's reason, yea of every faculty in man, in carrying on his
work: and as by humane learning reason is improved, and takes in more light,
so also he works by that.

It is true that man's reason and the improvements of it by any learning
whatsoever, without the spirits sanctifying work, is but such a light as is our
darkness; Matthew. 6. 23.
in which case, by how much the more a man excells therein, so much the more is
he ensnared and entangled by his own deceitful heart; but being sanctified,
they are a great advantage in the spirits work, both in us and by us. Learning
may be abused, and the best things corrupted are the worst; but let not the
abuse of any thing bespeak in us a casting off, or a neglecting of its
necessary use: so should we debar our selves the comfort of the choycest
blessings in this World.

The Scriptures are to be a Christians chiefest study; Psalm. 19. 7. Psalm. 1. 3.
The Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; Blessed is the man
that makes it his delight and meditation; that he may know Christ and him
crucified, that he may be taught by him as the truth is in Jesus, unto a full
assurance of understanding of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of
Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, as the
Apostle speaks, Col. 2. 2, 3. In comparison to and without which all other
learning is little worth. And yet because this spiritual and heavenly wisdom
so excells, it puts a value also upon the other, as being useful and
subservient thereunto; and so as those who are the true and knowing friends to
this Scripture-learning cannot with reason be enemies to that. Let all
professors of the true Religion and lovers of the truth be friends and
cherishers thereof.

FINIS.

