A LEARNED And exceeding well-compiled Vindication of Liberty of RELIGION:
Written by Junius Brutus in Latin, And Translated into English by N. Y. who
desires, as much as in him is, to do good unto all men: Wherein these three
following Propositions are undenyably proved, and all Objections to the
contrary fully Answered.

1. That if Magistrate, in case of necessity, promise Heretics Liberty of
Religion; they are bound to perform their promise after that necessity cease.

2 That Magistrates may with a safe Conscience grant Heretics Liberty of
Religion, and oblige themselves by an Oath, or Bond of assurance, to provide
for their safety and security.

3. That Magistrates ought to grant Heretics Liberty of Religion, and to
oblige themselves by an Oath, or Bond of assurance, to provide for their safety
and security.

Printed in the Year 1646.

To the Reader.
I Have long since most earnestly desired (Christian Reader) that as there is a
harmony and consent in discords of Music, so likewise there might be a sweet
sympathy and harmony of Christian charity, and civil friendship in the minds
of all men, notwithstanding any discords of opinions touching matters of
Religion. And surely the best course that I can take to accomplish my desire,
is to convince thy conscience that liberty of Religion is lawful, and
allowable; which I am fully persuaded this short Treatise that I translate is
able to perform, if so be thou shall resolve to read it over with a mind free
from prejudice and disaffection: For I am sure that what of any moment can be
spoken for, or objected against liberty of Religion, that is here both strongly
urged, and fully answered. I dare say that every rational and equal judge
will grant, that he never saw as yet any Tract, of the same length, concerning
the same Subject, of like worth and estimation with this. Would thou have
strength of Argument, good method, neat composure, persuasive cloquence: All
these conspire and meet together here. If any blemish seem to be in this both
solid and beautiful structure, as it is set forth in an English dress, I am
the cause thereof, and not the Author. Be not offended (Gentle Reader) because
thou see the name of Catholics and Heretics attributed to them in this
Treatise, to whom it is usually given by the Papists, but rather be pleased to
observe, that liberty of Religion is here defended against the adversaries
thereof, even upon their own terms and conditions. For certainly no stronger
proof can be brought for the lawfulness and right of liberty in Religion, than
to demonstrate, that Papists, or other Sects may, and ought to grant it,
although it be supposed to be true in it self, which they conceit of
themselves, and all other men, who differ from them in religion. If thou ask me
the question whether it will necessarily follow, that Protestants ought as well
as Papists to grant freedom of religion. I answer, yes undoubtedly. For
Papists have some plea for themselves in the denial thereof, because they
believe, though falsely, That the authority of their Church is infallible, and
therefore that she cannot err in the judgment of the spirits, in her
interpretation of the Scriptures, and in her determinations of Controversies.
But Protestants, who hold that the authority of the Church is fallible, that
the greatest Assembly of Divines may err, and oftentimes have erred in their
judgment of the spirits, in their interpretation of the Scriptures, and in
their decisions of Controversies; and therefore allow the common people to
search the Scriptures, and to try the spirits by them as the only Judge, or
rather, to speak properly, as the only Rule, cannot have any reasonable
pretense to deny it: unless they will now at length renounce their principles,
and destroy the grounds of their Reformation and separation from the Church of
Rome. But whether tends this discourse? to show that a better Treatise, than
this which I translate, could not be set forth, to prove that Protestant
Magistrates are as much obliged as Papists, if not more, to grant a toleration
of Religion to their Subjects. So that now (judicious Reader) thou may
clearly perceive that notwithstanding those names of Catholics and Heretics
thou meetst with in every Leaf and vein almost of this Tract, the arguments of
it, and the answers in it against objections, war as strongly and directly for
us in this Kingdom against our Protestant adversaries, in the cause of
toleration and liberty of Religion, as it does for any Sect of Christians,
against any adversaries whatsoever: and that when thou have read it, there is
not more promised in the Title page, then is made good in the Discourse
thereof. Thus being mindful of my Authors brevity, and unwilling to offend thy
patience, I rest,

Thine in Christ. N. Y.

THE name of Catholics and Heretics is attributed to them, in this Treatise,
to whom it is wont to be given by the Church of Rome, that the Controversy may
be ended, yet notwithstanding without any prejudice, or hurt to the Cause it
self: For when as they which dissent from the Church of Rome, desire a safe
and sound civil peace may be allowed them, either it is to be proved, that
they are not Heretics; or that although they were, yet notwithstanding the
members of the Church of Rome ought to live peaceably with them. The former
Controversy cannot be determined, unless the one side, overcome by the
Arguments of the other, condescend to their opinion. Wherefore it would be
tedious to expect here an end thereof. But the latter may easily he decided,
yea and ought to be, even whilst the former stands in debate, and of that only
this Treatise takes upon it to discourse. Therefore the Author of this Treatise
puts the case, as if they were such, which dissent from the Church of Rome, as
they account them; but he does no more affirm it, then believe the truth
thereof.

CHAP. I.
Catholics ought to grant them, whom they deem Heretics, the liberty of
Religion which they promise, even then, when they could suppress them without
any damage, or hurt to themselves.

THat the Catholic Religion permits freedom of Religion to be granted
Heretics, and provision to be made for their safety and security, even for the
future, without any limitation of time, when they cannot be suppressed and
destroyed without detriment to the Church: both the writings of learned men,
and practice it self does testify: From hence it follows, the same Religion
ought always to grant, that afterward freedom of Religion has once been
promised Heretics, it should not then be taken from them, when they may be
subverted, and borne down without any damage to the Church.

For when Catholics give assurance unto Heretics, that they will not
oppress, nor molest them for Religions sake, they promise to do them no
mischief then especially, when they shall have opportunity to do it: For why
should they promise to abstain from doing that, which either they cannot do at
all, or which they cannot without much hurt and damage to themselves? Therefore
whereas promises, and faithful dealing require, that what is spoken should be
performed; it must needs follow, that Catholics, if they desire to avoid the
crime of treachery and false dealing, ought even then to suffer and tolerate
Heretics, when they could overwhelm them without bringing any trouble unto
themselves: And surely if conscience will suffer them to assure Heretics that
they shall enjoy liberty of Religion amongst them, without any limitation of
time, or expressly even for perpetuity; their conscience also will allow them,
yea require them to make that liberty safe and secure to Heretics constantly,
although they might conveniently be suppressed. Which that it may be made more
clear and evident, we must observe the nature of Covenants, and bonds of
assurance. When any one makes a bargain, and bond of assurance with another, he
promises to do that, which otherwise he could without any loss to himself,
yea perhaps even to his own profit, omit, and do the contrary. And he which
desires security may be given him, requires another to perform that to himself,
which otherwise he had liberty to leave undone, and perhaps the intermission
thereof might be more beneficial and pleasing to him. For covenants and
agreements were devised, to the end provision might be made for the safety of
our own interests and conveniences, even then when no external force or damage
can compel the other party, either to abstain from doing wrong, or to perform
that benefit and good turn he promises: for truth and faithfulness in
promises ought to prevail as much with us as compulsion. Wherefore whilst
Catholics give assurance unto Heretics that they shall enjoy freedom of
Religion for the time to come, and they likewise desire assurance of them: that
they assure, and these desire to be assured of, is, that for the future they
shall be secure from receiving any damage by the Catholics, when it might be
profitable to them to subvert and destroy Heretics. But if Conscience does
not allow Catholics to deal thus with Heretics, also it will not permit
them to make such Agreements as I have spoken of, at any time with Heretics,
much less to confirm them with the holy reverence of an oath. From whence it
will certainly follow, that all those Catholics have greatly sinned, who ever
made with Heritiques such Conventions: and that not only other Catholic
Doctors have erred, which approved of such Covenants when necessity pressed them
to it, but even the very Bishop of Rome himself, head of the Catholic Church,
who does not condemn those writings set forth by the Jesuits themselves, in
which such Agreements are allowed. Furthermore it would follow from thence,
that a necessity lies upon Heretics, if they would regard their own safety,
of plotting and endeavoring always, where and when they can, to destroy
Catholics utterly, although they would be contented for a while to live
quietly amongst them: because they know that Catholics, when they shall get a
fit occasion to oppress and kill them, cannot only make use of it with a safe
conscience, but also that they cannot but put it in execution without violence
to their conscience; and that by virtue of their Religion they are constrained
to suppress them, notwithstanding any promise whatsoever: because surely those
promises, howsoever confirmed with oaths, become then unlawful and of none
effect, when Heretics may be quelled and subverted without prejudice and
peril to the Church. Therefore unless Heretics be resolved to betray their
own lives and fortunes, they ought not to spare Catholics, if they can
overcome them: moreover, if there be any hopes to prevail by taking up of Arms,
they ought to lay hold on them, and not to stay till in process of time, and
by some sudden change, they become altogether unequal in number and strength
unto the Catholics; but to set presently upon them, and run rather the hazard
of a doubtful war, than expect a certain destruction from them. But if these
things seem strange and absurd to Catholics, and they make such agreements
without any scruple of conscience, and have the consent of their Pastors and
Teachers to do so, in those Kingdoms, Provinces, and Commonwealths where they
are not strong enough to contend with Heretics: it is necessary altogether
that conscience should permit them also to stand to those covenants, when it is
expedient and profitable for Catholics to break them. And verily, if Caliques
make such like agreements at any time, that they may prevent the bringing of
some discommodity and damage to their Church: they are bound also afterward
to remit and let go that benefit, which they may hope to gain by the downfall
of Heretics; For it is just and requisite, that he which reaped formerly
profit by conditions and compacts, should also afterward suffer some
inconvenience and disprofit, which bargains and agreements may bring upon him:
although there is indeed no inconvenience or discommodity herein, as shall be
proved very largely in the following Chapter. There remains yet thus much to be
said, That by the law of Nature thou ought not to do that to another man,
which thou would not have done to thy self: And on the contrary, we are
enjoined even by the Law of God and Christ, to deal with other men, as we
would be dealt with our selves, Mat. 8. 7, 12. But who amongst the Catholics
would be willing and contented, if Heretics, in case of some urgent
necessity, had granted them liberty in their dominions, That when that
Necessity is taken away, they should lay violent hands on them, and deprive
them of their freedom? Might they not call that perfidious and treacherous
dealing? and very justly. Why therefore do either they themselves deal so with
other men, or hold it fit and lawful to be done? I do not think indeed that
the moderate sort of men amongst the Catholics will say as much, which I will
forthwith intimate and declare: yet notwithstanding it is apparent that some
are so transported with hatred against Heretics, that they seem to hold, no
promise or oath at all is to be made good by Catholics unto Heretics; and
the same speech to be applied against Heretics, which Cicero spoke concerning
thieves and plunderers, in his 3. Book of Offices, to wit, that it is no guile
to keep back from them that price and ransom which a man promises to redeem
his life, No, although he swore that he would bring it to them: And if a
Catholic has bound himself by oath to perform any thing to Heretics, he
may take up that saying of Euripides, I have sworn with my tongue, but I keep
my mind free from the oath. For a Heretic is the common enemy of all
mankind, as much as a Robber, with whom no good man can have any fellowship
and commerce, and surely make ^o promise, nor oblige himself by oath unto him.
Yea, a Heretic is worse than a Thief, because this man only kills men's bodies,
but he destroys their scules. If this be so, Heretics had need take great
heed, and beware that they do not at any time believe any Catholics promises,
covenants, leagues, and oaths; but take them to be mere snares and ginnes,
invented only to beguile and circumvent them. But furthermore, what a horrible
thing is it, and unbeseeming a man, especially a Christian, to affirm, that
any man may swear with his tongue, and reserve his mind free from the oath;
that is, swear in words, that he will do such a thing, which he has not only
no purpose to perform, but even judges it a wicked thing to be performed by
him: What now will be esteemed holy, what inviolable, what sincere and
undefiled, if it shall be lawful to deceive with the reverend fear of an
oath? And is there any Christian man to be found, who does not stick to assert
and avouch, that it is lawful to take that holy and reverend name of God in
vain, and to confirm therewith a lie, and a very ungodly matter? It is true
indeed, that if a man shall promise any thing with an oath, which cannot be
performed without the guilt of sin and impiety, that oath ought to be broken:
but likewise it is as true, that we must never confirm that with an oath, in
the accomplishment whereof we must needs commit wickedness; and he ought to be
very sorrowful and penitent, who even through error and want of judgment
establishes a wicked matter with an oath; so far is it from being lawful for
any man to make good such an oath, which understands the haynousnesse thereof.
For no man truly should engage himself, no not by a simple promise, to
perpetrate and effect a wicked matter, much less to ratify an ungodly promise
with an oath. Certainly that man, which wittingly shall do so, is both a
perjured person, and guilty also of a twofold impiety: First, because he
promised an unrighteous thing knowingly; and then because he made no scruple to
confirm an ungodly promise with a most holy thing, and abused the reverend name
of God, to the end he might have a fit occasion to defraud and beguile others.
No necessity can excuse him in this point. For a Christian man should rather
die a thousand deaths, than condescend to such a sinful oath. Therefore that
speech of Euripides is unjust, and proceeded from a heathenish impiety; I swore
with my tongue, I reserve my mind free from the oath: That of Cicero is as bad,
That the ransom is not to be brought in to a thief, which thou shall promise
him with an oath to redeem thy life. Either thou must not swear at all, if thou
have no intent to perform thy oath, if thou think it dishonesty to make it
good, much more if thou think it a sinful thing to be done; or if thy
conscience tell thee thou may lawfully swear, thy oath should be truly kept.
For neither does God suffer himself to be deluded, nor him to go scotfree,
which takes his name in vain. And observe I pray, how far the judgment of God
himself, and pious men, differs from the opinion of Euripides and Cicero. God
had commanded the Israelites in times past, To destroy the Inhabitants of the
Land of Number. 33. 52.
Canaan, and to make an universal slaughter of Deuteronomy. 7. 2, 3.
them, not to make any covenant with them, nor to have any compassion on them,
and that by Jos. 9.
reason of the impious idolatry of those nations, and other most grievous
crimes and enormities. The Gibeonites, which were a part of them that were born
and bred in that land, went to Joshua and the rest of the people, faining
themselves to be no inhabitants of that land, but to come from a far country;
and prevailed by this wile with Josua and the rest of the Princes, to make a
league with them in the name of all the People, and to establish it with an
oath. What would they have said in this case, which hold it not lawful for
Leagues, Covenants, and Oaths to be kept with Heretics, although heretics
shall use no craft to overreach them, but shall transact all things openly and
before the sun, or rather in the sight of God? would they not have cried out,
that this wicked covenant was contrary to Gods express commandment? and
besides procured by deceit, and therefore void, of none effect, and utterly to
be broken. That Josua indeed, and the Princes of the people swore, but as it
were upon some certain condition, as if so be those things were true which the
Gibeonites had spoken, that is, if they were not some Inhabitants of the land
of Canaan: But seeing that is false, the People are not bound to observe their
oath. But Josua and the Princes of the people were of a quite contrary mind,
and the People after their instruction, and lastly God himself declared his
judgment to the contrary: For, three days after, they perceived their fraud,
and yet notwithstanding they spared them. And when as all the people murmured
against the Princes, they made them answer, We have sworn unto them by the
Lord God of Israel, and therefore we may not touch them, Jos. 9. 19. And
moreover God himself approved and confirmed this oath, neither permittted it in
process of time to be violated. For when as a few ages after, Saul had killed
some of them, God visited all the people of Israel with famine, neither could
his wrath be appeased for this deed of Saul, before seven of his sons and
nephews were hanged. But if God would have the Israelites to perform that
league and covenant which was made with the Gibeonites contrary to his own
manifest injunction, and gotten besides by deceit; why should not those leagues
and oaths be kept with Heretics, which they purchased without any guile of
theirs? when as they have no command from God either to punish or kill them,
much less so clear as that, which the Israelites received to destroy the
Canaanites, of which matter more shall be said in that which follows. But it
is most unjust, for those men to be esteemed as bad as thieves and robbers, or
even worse than them, and to be ranked amongst those men with whom no
fellowship or society may be entertained, no promise made and kept: which know
not themselves to be heretics, and would not be such if they knew it; but
most strongly believe that they hold opinions concerning matters of Religion,
which are true, pious, and altogether agreeable to the word of God, neither do,
nor purpose to do wrong to any man. For thieves know they invade other men's
rights, and that they sin against the law of nature which is engraven in
their hearts, and are not ignorant they do that which is evil; and that which
is of most force in this point, they disturb, violate, and destroy the peace
and tranquillity of other men: Therefore when as they offend against the laws of
a commonwealth, the punishments thereof are justly inflicted on them, and they
are punished by the Magistrate as breakers of that common peace, which God
ordained him to preserve. But Heretics, which live peaceably with other men,
and desire to live so for the future, neither know that they sin, nor that
they commit any thing against the laws of civil society. But if that reason
were to be regarded, whereby it is alleged, that they destroy men's souls,
which they are utterly ignorant that they do, yea are fully persuaded that they
do not: then it would prevail as much against infidels, such as Jews are,
whom notwithstanding Catholics suffer to abide in their dominions; and
against Mahometans, whom they permit to live in some parts of Polonia. But if
thou reply, that Infidels do not spread abroad their poison amongst others,
as the Heretics do: That I may pass over with silence, that even Infidels,
if they can, will draw other men over to their opinions; and that they do not
hinder it from coming to pass, but it happens either by reason of
Christians constancy, or the contempt and abject condition of Jews and
Mahometans in these countries, yet notwithstanding with the same venomous
conceits they infect their children. Who can have the heart to tolerate a Jew,
or other infidel in his dominion, that would slay his children? yet the
Catholics do, although they destroy their childrens souls. It is evident
therefore, that they which unwittingly destroy men's souls, as Heretics are
thought to do, are not to be dealt withal in like measure with those, much
less to be more grievously punished, which kill their bodies. If this argument
were of force, all Harlots were to be destroyed: for what? do not they destroy
men's souls, whilst they entice them to commit fornication? Does not Saint Paul
affirm, that Whoremongers shall not possess the kingdom of God? And John,
that whoremongers shall have 1 Cor. 6. 9. Gal. 5. 19. Rev. 21. 8. and 22. 15.
their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone? And yet
Catholic Princes, and Commonwealths in Italy, Spain, and elsewhere suffer
them to live under their protection: and the Bishop of Rome does not expel
them thence; when as they offend also against civil honesty, and transgress
the laws of chastity and modesty, which are ingrafted in the minds of all men,
but especially of the female sex by nature. Why therefore should Heretics,
who neither break the laws of nature, nor civil honesty, and do not so easily
allure men's minds to embrace their errors, as harlots do to a wanton love of
themselves, be worse dealt withal, because they destroy men's souls? why
should they be accounted such, with whom no fellowship may be admitted, no
rules of justice, no friendship observed? seeing otherwise they live honestly,
injure no man, yea endeavor to deserve the good will of all men, and as much
as in them lies, to live peaceably with all men. For, that I may cast the whole
matter as it were into this short conclusion: Whosoever observe the rules of
civil society, neither disturb the peace and tranquillity of other men, they
cannot by any just authority be ejected out of a civil society, neither should
they in any wise be denied peace and security. Wherefore, when as Heretics
are in every respect thus qualified and disposed, they should neither be
banished from a civil communion, nor peace and quietness be denied them.

CHAP. II.
Catholics may with a safe Conscience allow Heretics freedom of Religion,
and give them Security for it.

MAny are afraid, especially when no necessity compels them to it, to grant
Heretics freedom of Religion, and to take order for their safety: because to
do so, would be to show a liking and approbation of heresy, and to give them
authority to propagate and disperse abroad their pestilent and deadly Errors.
And yet notwithstanding, the same men, without any scruple of conscience allow
Jews, and in some places Mahometans (as I have said before) liberty of
Religion, and give them a bond of assurance for their safety: What, do they
perhaps by this means approve of the Jews and Mahometans errors, and of their
blasphemies against Christ? To approve of; and not to suppress by force; are
two different things. Neither verily have thou any cause to say, that the case
of Infidels, of which sort Jews and Mahometans are, is not the same with that
of Heretics: for that difference which is between them, is of no moment in
this point, where the question only is, whether or no heretics errors be
approved of, by granting them liberty of Religion. For in this matter the case
of heathens and heretics is one and the same: But as for that power they speak
of, which may be given heretics by granting them liberty, if they mean such a
power by which Heresy may be approved of and judged good and honest; such a
privilege Catholics can neither give Heretics, neither do Heretics
desire them to do it, but it is a license only of indemnity, and of being free
from civil punishment, which even he may give which does not only not allow of
heresy, but also very much abhorres and disallowes it. So a civil indemnity
and immunity is granted drunken and covetous men; for who punishes them for
those vices? although both sorts sin both grievously themselves, and do hurt
by their example, and much damage redounds by both vices unto other men, and
oftentimes unto the commonmealth. But who would say, that thou approvest of
their vices, and give them authority to commit those sins, which thou can
not; if thou shall promise them in good earnest that thou will not punish them,
if so be they do no wrong to other men. Many Princes do great wrong to their
Subjects, and nevertheless they are not liable to any civil punishment for
it, and their liberty would be violated if thou should punish them for it.
And truly that happens in every Dominion, especially that which is Absolute,
that the Magistrate should go unpunished for that injury which he commits
against him, over whom he has absolute authority. Now that liberty of Religion
which is allowed heretics, requires nothing else but that thou should not
hinder them by any force from attending their Religion, from exercising,
professing, defending, and endeavoring to propagate it without any violence;
nor that thou do any evil or hurt unto them for it, but refer the whole
business to God, that he himself may punish them when he pleases: That thou
leavest it to the Catholic Church, that it may as strongly as it can oppose
them with spiritual weapons, in which it is prevalent, whether they be
miracles, or reasons and arguments: moreover, if thou so think fit, that she
may correct them with censures merely Ecclesiastical; I say merely
ecclesiastical, not civil, lest violent hands be laid upon their bodies or
goods. When as Christians in the primitive times lived amongst Jews and
heathens, they truly did them no hurt, neither punished, or endeavored to
punish them with any civil punishment. Now they might bind themselves by oath
and promise to do that, which they did really perform; yet nevertheless no man
shall have cause thereby to say that they approved of the Jews and Pagans
wicked and blasphemous errors, or that they gave them such a license to
disseminate and promote their errors, which no Christian can with a good
conscience. But if thou alleadgest that the Christians of that Age could not do
otherwise, because they were not strong enough to deal with Infidels; but would
have done otherwise, if so be that they had been strong enough to contend with
them. What else shall thou hereby affirm, but that those Primitive Christians
were like serpents in the bosom of Infidels, who so long abstained from
hurting them, as they had not power to do it, yet ready so soon as they should
have a fit opportunity to afflict and repress them. By this means thou will
make their charity, desire of peace, and patience toward Infidels, fained and
counterfeit, which would forthwith break out into cruelty and war against them,
when Christians should begin to put confidence in their own strength. Hereby
Infidels will have very great cause given them to plot and contrive an
universal slaughter of Christians; for because they must expect and look for a
most certain destruction from them, notwithstanding any meekness and patience
whatsoever which is outwardly pretended.

Seeing these things are very absurd, and indeed ungodly to be uttered, and
injurious to the piety of those holy men which profess Christ and suffer
martyrdom for his sake: we must needs conclude, that the primitive Christians
would certainly have tolerated Infidels, although they might have been able to
suppress them. And moreover, That to tolerate Errors in other men, so far
forth, as not to persecute and afflict them with Civil damages and
punishments, whom thou might quell by force; is not to approve of Errors, be
they never so pestilent and ungodly. Consequently also, it is lawful for
Christians to grant them such a kind of freedom and indemnity, which nourish
and defend wicked Errors: for if it be lawful for thee to make good such an
indemnity and impunity unto those, which cherish and foment ungodly and
destructive Errors; it will be lawful also for thee to give them license for
it, that is, to promise them and give them good assurance that thou will as
much as in thee lies, preserve them harmless, and that thou will not bring any
damage or punishment upon them for heresies sake, or take order that they be so
dealt withal: but rather on the contrary wilt hinder them which are under thy
authority and dominion, and to whom thou can prescribe laws, from doing them
any mischief. For what thou may lawfully perform, that is, justly and
without sin; even that also thou may oblige thy self to perform, and give
another man security that thou will.

But some object that of Paul, Be ye not unequally yoked together with
unbelievers; For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and
what communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with
Belial? or what part has he that believes, with an Infidel? and what
agreement has the temple of God with idols? But this speech does not concern a
civil peace or conjunction, as that is between members of the same
commonwealth, governed by the same laws. Because both S. Paul himself, and all
other Christians in that Age, entertained such a peace and concord with
Infidels, both Jews and Gentiles, amongst whom they lived. Moreover, the same
Apostle elsewhere commanded Christians to live in peace, To. 12. 18. Heb. 12.
14. 1 Cor. 5. 9.
as much as in them lies, with all men. And wrote expressly to the same
Corinthians: I wrote unto you in an epistle, not to be mixed (that is, to have
no familiarity) with fornicators; Yet not altogether with the fornicators of
this world, (that is, Infidels) or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with
idolaters, for then must ye needs go out of the world, etc. There he evidently
permits Believers to have conversation with Infidels and Idolators, to trade,
yea even to eat with them, as appears by the following words. And is not even
now a civil peace admitted with the Jews? Are not Laws established for their
security? Are not Leagues and other Conventions made by Christian Princes and
Commonwealths, and by the Kingdom it self of Polonia, with Mahometans?
Therefore the words of S. Paul do not speak of a civil society and friendship,
and other such like agreements; but of another more near and inward affinity,
from which they may abstain, who entertain a civil friendship with one
another, and take great delight in living peaceably together, and showing
courtesy, and doing many good offices to one another, upon every occasion that
is offered. Verily Christians ought to do thse friendly offices unto all men,
although more especially to them which are of the household of faith, As the
Gal. 6. 10.
same Paul signifies, who will not have them to be yoked with Infidels.

Others bring another Argument. If he shall Mat. 18. 17.
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee a^ an heathen man, and a
Publican. But this place does not prove that at all, which they would have it:
For Christ will have us deal with him that will not hear the Church, as the
Jews were wont to deal with Heathens and Publicans. But the Jews did not expel
Heathens and Publicans the commonwealth or city; they did not persecute them,
they did them no shrewd turn, or inflict a civil punishment upon them: only
they were not wont to have a familiar conversation with them, and refused,
although they were invited, to come unto their tables: nevertheless they had
communication for buying and selling with them, and dealt with them in public
and private affairs? and if they came into their houses, they did not drive
them out, and truly they did not keep them from their tables if so be they
would needs eat together with them. Besides, Heretics and Infidels are not
spoken of in this place, but Believers only, which shall sin against their
brother, and will not acknowledge their fault, after they have been both
privately, and publicly admonished and rebuked by the Church for it. Their
case is not the same, which belong not to the Church, of which sort are
Heretics, especially such as are borne of heretical parents.

Some object that also of S. John, If there com^ 2 John 10, 11.
any unto you, and bring you not this doctrine, receive him not into your
house, neither bid him God speed; for he that bids him God speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds. But first of all, it is one thing to receive a man
into our house, and to bid him God speed; and another thing to drive him out of
the ^ingdome or city, and to lay violent hands on his body and goods. That in
those days, believers could do; this they could not; and therefore John
commands them not to do this, but that only. Moreover, mention is made there
only of seducers, whom he calls Antichrists, which did not confess that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, As appears by the foregoing words, and may be
perceived by many places of the first Epistle. But there are not such
Heretics in these times, as deny that: so far is it from being true, that
Heretics of these times may be cast into the number of those Seducers, which
endeavor contrary to the manifest truth, and the conscience of their mind, to
lead others into such a damnable error. Lastly, in such a case only John
forbids us to receive them into our houses, or to bid them God speed, when as
they come unto us to persuade and convert us to their Religion; not when they
agitate civil or private matters, and desire commerce with us is members of
the same Commonwealth.

Many urge that also for an argument against liberty of Religion, That God
commanded in former times, false Prophets, and th^se also that revolted to the
worshipping of false gods, to be killed. But first of all, it is one thing to
be a Heretic, and another thing to be a false Prophet, or to decline to the
worship of false gods. They which now adays are termed heretics, worship
none besides that true God, creator of heaven and earth, and Jesus Christ their
Savior; but only they hold different opinions from the Catholics concerning
him, or about sacred matters, and such as pertain to the worship of that true
God and Jesus Christ. Therefore they have not declined to the worship of false
gods, so far is it from being just that they should be reckoned amongst false
Prophets, which persuade other men to such a heinous crime: for those men only
were to be accounted false Prophets, which endeavored to persuade, that they
spoke by inspiration of some deity, and that their sayings were to be esteemed
oracles; which the Heretics of this age in no wise do. But that, that law of
God made against false prophets, and worshippers of false gods, is not intended
against those, who otherwise held the Law of God was to be kept, but were
infected with some other error, that may sufficiently show, because that in
former times among the Jews, who were affected with a vehement love and zeal
toward the Law, Heretics notwithstanding were tolerated. And verily even in
the time of Christ himself, and long before him, there were Sadduces, which
denied that there were Angels and Spirits, and were stiff opposers of the
Resurrection of the dead, and (as the Catholic Doctors report) rejected all
the Prophets besides Moses. And although the greatest part both of the People
and the Rulers believed them to err exceedingly, nevertheless they were not
expelled the city, neither exempted from being Magistrates, and bearing any
other civil office; yea they were not hindered from coming to the Temple or the
Synagogues. Why therefore should it be thought fit that Heretics in these
times should be killed, by virtue of that law made against false Prophets, and
worshippers of false gods? It may be added for a further proof, That they
which in old time seduced the people from the true God, to the worship of false
gods, or fell off of their own accord to it, could not but know that they did
that which was against the express law of God; because the law of God enacted
against that matter, was so clear and manifest, that no man could be ignorant
of the meaning thereof. But they which now a days pass for heretics, know
not, that they do, or believe any thing contrary to the Law, and other Oracles
divine; and if they knew it, would abandon all such opinions in Religion,
Wherefore those false Prophets, and Apostates also, were in far greater fault,
than Heretics of this Age are: and therefore it does not forthwith hold true,
that these men ought to suffer the same punishment which God commanded to be
executed against them. And thus much also may be addtd, That in those days
Prophecies were frequent and in force almost continually among the people of
Israel, by which evident testimonies were ever and anon published concerning
God and his will, so as no man could be ignorant what he ought to hold
concerning God and his worship, unless he would purposely shut his eyes, and
wink at noonday. But now Prophecies are ceased; from whence it follows, that
we may more easily fall into error concerning the true worship of God. Last of
all, all men know, that the civil laws of Moses do not bind Christians; of
which sort they are, which commanded a false Prophet, or an Apostate fallen to
idolatry, to be destroyed. That truly these laws, of which we now discourse,
do not oblige us, may easily be gathered from thence, That in all the New
Testament there is no such thing commanded, nor any where so much as lightly
touched upon, that either Apostates or Heretics ought to be afflicted and
brought to punishment by Christians. Rightly has Hierom declared in some part
of his writings; I have learned by the Apostles appointment, to avoid a man
that is an Heretic, not to commit him to be burnt. For in this manner Paul the
Apostle advises Titus: A man which Tit. 3. 10.
is an heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject. And certainly
he means such an heretic, who is condemned by his own conscience that he
resists the manifest truth which he acknowledges; as may be discerned by his
following words. How then should Christians be commanded to punish them, who
were led into heresy by deceitful arguments, which notwithstanding they think
invincible, and are affected with a simple ignorance of mind; or also being
born of heretical parents, sucked their error together with their mothers
milk. But so far is it from being true, that Christians are commanded to
trouble others for Religions sake, that rather we are often warned it shall
come to pass, that Christians shall be troubled and brought to slaughter by
other men, because of their Religion. God in times past brought the Jews after
such a manner into the land of Canaan, that after they had slain the
worshippers of false gods, they might possess their country; promising them,
if they should obey his law, peace, wealth, victory over their enemies, and
moreover such strength and succors, that they might without any great
difficulty suppress Apostates, if any should chance to spring up amongst them.
But we have learned of Christ and his Apostles, that the condition of
Christians shall be far otherwise: who were even Mat. 10. 16
themselves as sheep in the midst of wolves, and being grievously vexed and
tormented, suffered a bloody death for the truths sake: And they declared that
we also should be like sheep appointed to the slaughter; And affirmed, that all
Romans 8. 36
those which will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. For
such is the nature of the 2 Timothy 3. 3. 12.
Christian religion, that not many mighty men and of noble birth embrace it;
even as S. Paul teaches, God has chosen the weak and base 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27.
things of the world, and things which are despised, and things which are not.
How then could God enjoyne Christians to kill Apostates, that is, those which
should revolt from Christianity to a Jewish or heathenish religion, and go over
from men of low degree to Nobles, from weak to mighty men, and to their kind of
holy worship. But if so be they are not commanded to destroy them which
altogether forsake the Christian religion, much less Heretics, who
notwithstanding acknowledge the majesty and religious worship of Christ,
although they do not sufficiently understand it.

Many also object that, If freedom of Religion be granted Heretics, then
heresies will grow and increase. Yea verily they will more increase, if thou
strive to root them ou^ by force, especially if the minds of men be otherwise
bent to religion, honesty and virtue. Thus much experience it self has taught
us in these ages. The Protestant religion then increased most in France, the
Low Countries, and England, when persecution was opposed against it. Reason
shows as much: for they which endeavor to suppress another man's religion by
force, in so doing make their cause or religion to be suspected, and certainly
lessen the credit and estimation of their own religion; but cause that to be
well approved of, which they go about to ruin: for when they enter upon
violent courses, they seem to demonstrate that they distrust their cause, and
despair of victory, if the matter should be debated by argumentation,
therefore being destitute of reasons, betake themselves to force, and fly to
carnal weapons, because spiritual are wanting, to bring men's minds under
subjection: by which it comes to pass, that they purchase an opinion and
report of cruelty to themselves, and inflame other men's minds with hatred. They
on the contrary, which are troubled for Religion sake, easily get men's good
will and affection. But whither men's favor and affection, thither also for the
most part does their faith incline. I will not allege that now, That when the
grievousnes of punishment against offenders is exposed to the view, common
people are not seldom moved to compassion; most men not so much regarding and
laying to heart the deed, which either they never saw, or do no longer see; as
the terriblenesse of the punishment, which is subject to the sight.

But what shall we think will come to pass, if they be deemed innocent, which
suffer cruel punishments; if their life and manners be approved of; if nothing
be accused in them, but mere error of judgment? What if that also happen, that
the people observe some blemish in their course of life, which trouble them,
which they do not see in them so afflicted by themselves? It is certain, that
those which suffer for Religion sake, how erroneous soever it be, do show, that
they esteem all things less than God, piety, and their own conscience and
salvation: which is only the part of good men, and such a^ are very great
lovers of virtue, and fear God very much. It cannot happen otherwise then, but
that they should gain favor to themselves, and belief and authority to that
Religion which they so stoutly maintain, For this is the genius and proper
quality of virtue, to purchase undoubted credit to it self, and especially in
matters belonging to Religion: First, because (as I have said) men's favor
follow virtue; and belief of what is said, follows favor: And also, because
virtue is otherwise of it self sincere and undefiled, hating deceit, guile, and
lying. But who may not rather believe him, and assent to his doctrine, in whom
he perceives to be most candor and ingenuity? Furthermore, it is no ways
credible, that God, who is so much delighted with virtue and piety, and so
exceedingly rewards it, would deny the knowledge of true Religion to the better
sort of men, and grant it to the worser. Last of all, The greater Virtue is not
without just cause, thought to be the affection and proper quality even of the
better Faith. Wherefore, as I have declared already, They, which by suffering
any kind of cruelty and rigor for Religion sake, show forth most evident
testimonies of their own virtue; easily incline and draw over people which love
virtue, to their own side: They, on the contrary, which exercise cruelty
against them, lose the affections of the people, and diminish the credit of
their Religion, which animates and stirs them up to so much cruelty against
innocent and harmless men. That I may be silent, that those men themselves
which are afflicted for Religion sake, by how much the more honest and virtuous
they be, are so much the more confirmed in their opinion, and the more
vehemently inflamed with the love of their Religion, because they think their
own adversaries judge it uncontroleable and invincible by strength of Arguments.

From hence may easily be perceived what answer is to be made them which say,
that Heretics are enemies to the Catholic Church and Religion, wherefore
they ought to be expelled the territories and limits of the Church, and
Religion to be defended against them: That they are ravening Wolves, and
therefore to be driven away from the Flock: That they give the sons of God
poison to drink, and so destroy their souls, and therefore ought not to be
suffered to have conversation with them: and that they sell, and put by force
upon the weak and ignorant Infants of Christ (of which there must always be a
great number) that poison, in stead of the saving drink of their souls.

But be it so, that they be enemies to the Catholic Religion and Church; yet
seeing they do not invade, nor intend to invade it with swords nor corporal
weapons, they wage only a spiritual war with it: wherefore in like manner they
are not to be vanquished with carnal, but spiritual weapons, and to be driven
either from the Church, or brought into obedience thereof, by those weapons (I
say) wherewith the Apostles of old subdued the enemies of truth, overthrew the
strong holds of errors, and brought the world in subjection under Christ. 2
Cor. 10. 3, 4.
For so says Paul: For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the
flesh: for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God
to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and brings into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. But if thou would drive
Heretics by carnal weapons out of the Church; thou will not destroy such
enemies, but exasperate and provoke them, thou shall not lessen, but increase
their number; and though thou might at length utterly root them out by this
means, yet thou shall not hereby defend thy Religion, but pollute and defile
it. Long since did Lactantius give a right answer to the Gentiles, who thought
that those Religious exercises which they publicly perfored, were to be
defended by violence: Religion is to be defended, quoth he, not by killing, but
by dying; not by cruelty, but by patience. And a little after, If thou would
defend Religion with blood, with torments, with mischief, then it will not be
defended, but defiled and corrupted; For nothing is so free and voluntary as
Religion, and so onwards. Truly Christian Religion is not better known by
urging and pressing the truth, than by inculcating and exhorting men to
charity, peace, meekness, gentleness, bountifulness, and patience. It will
have the professors thereof to overcome their enemies, and not to be overcome
by them, with these virtues. It does not so defend the truth of matters
belonging to Religion, as that it would have them break the bonds of humane and
civil society for that purpose, which propagate and defend it: but rather it
more strictly obliges them to observe those duties, and to make good the law
of charity toward all men, and to love the bonds of peace. Therefore if thou
shall resolve to maintain the Christian religion by force, if by mirchief, if
by punishments; even by so doing thou will most of all offend against it. Let
the same answer suffice them who stick not to affirm, that Heretics are
ravening wolves, and ought to be driven out of the flock. Let them be driven
out indeed with the Crook of the Pastors of the Church, but not with a wooden
or iron one, but with one which is spiritual, and proper to the Ecclesiastical
function. Heretics do not tear the sheep with their nails, nor bite them
with their teeth: but endeavor to hurt the flock with Reasons and Arguments,
which in the judgment of Catholics, are deceitful: Let these therefore be
retorted and beaten off with stronger reasons, and let the sheep be admonished
to beware and take heed to themselves that they be not ensnared by them, as
Christ did, and after him the Apostles. By this means the flock of Christ will
be sufficiently armed against their violence; unless thou would say, that
the sheep were not sufficiently armed against the violence and incursion of
wolves, by Christ the great shepherd of of the sheep, and by his Apostles their
most faithful keepers, because that they neither used force themselves, nor
advised others to do it. Moreover, if thou make use of external force, thou will not thereby root out those scruples and doubts, which Heretics perhaps
have sowed in the minds of believers, but wilt add strength to them: Neither
will thou hinder them from being wolves, but cause them to abstain from
professing and detecting themselves to be such, whilst they in the mean while
covering themselves with sheep skins, may remain without any danger of
punishment present amongst the flock. But if thou usest Arguments only, and
Ecclesiastical censures, thou will drive the wolves from the flock; For if any
shall be more wicked than others, who notwithstanding whatsoever has been said
in confutation of their errors, will still be in love with them; when no fear
of punishment hinders them, will show themselves in public, and after open
censure and rebuke, will be excluded the ecclesiastical sheepfold, neither
shall have cause to charge any one as guilty of their dustruction, besides
themselves and their own stubbornness. Their blood will be upon their own
heads, as the holy Scripture speaks, Their destruction shall not be imputed
to their Pastors, because they admonished them, they armed them against errors,
and endeavored as much as in them lay to keep them in the path that leads to
salvation. Wherefore, as the Prophet says, those wicked ones shall die in
their iniquity, but the pastors have delivered their soul. Yet notwithsttnding
the Church will reap the benefit, for which also God suffers heresies sometimes
to spring up among the faithful, as Paul teaches, that they which are
approved, may be made manifest among them. Which benefit does not follow, if
heretics be violently suppressed; for by such dealing, even the wicked,
repressed by fear, will labor to carry the outward guize of believers, as
much as honest men, so that there may appear no difference between them: yea,
a heretic, who shall dare to rise up against an armed religion, and to
profess and defend heresy with the danger of his estate, or of life it self;
will show forth a greater proof of virtue, than he which, guarded with power,
opposes a heresy, or at least defends a Religion which is attended with
force and power: For neither can it then appear whether he persevere in his
true opinion, or defends it for the goodness of his cause, or to confirm his
own power, or for fear of another man's power. But on the contrary, he which
dares oppose himself against a Religion which is armed with power, or revolt
from it, and contemn all dangers for Religion sake, does demonstrate (as I have
said before) that he lightly esteems all things in comparison of God, piety,
conscience, and eternal salvation. By this time, that also is evident enough,
that the minds of believers, and of Christ's little ones, may be so prepared and
guarded by the care and diligence of their Pastors, especially seeing there be
so many, not only thousands, but even millions of them; that the poison which
heretics administer unto such, cannot hurt them, although no violence be
exercised against heretics. Neither verily may it be imagined, that
Heretics arguments are so plausible, that they may withdraw the more simple
and ignorant sort of men from the saving truth, which are lovers of truth, and
earnestly desire their own salvation; although the Truth, well expounded, and
armed with strong arguments, be opposed with those Reasons. For truth,
especially heavenly and saving truth, is of such a nature, that it sinks more
easily into a mind that is disposed to virtue, if it be handsomely propounded,
and confirmed besides with solid arguments, than falsehood and error: She has a
certain wonderful clearness and brightness of her own, by which she dazles
and overcomes their minds, which do not purposely refuse to take knowledge of
her; neither is she more approved of by subtle, than by simple capacities,
which are endued but with commonsense and apprehension. I thank thee (says
Christ) O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, Mat. 11. 25.
because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them to babes: And S. Paul: God has chosen the foolish things 1 Cor:
1. 27.
of the world to confound the wise. Therefore as yet no cause appears, why we
should think that a remedy against the poison of heresy, is placed in violence
and arms: but rather it appears that there is need of some other wholesome
antidote against the venom of Errors.

Perhaps some man may still object, that to grant Heretics liberty of
Religion, must needs wound and trouble the conscience of Magistrates, because
if liberty of Religion be permitted them, the Commonwealth will be divided into
factions, and a way laid open for discord, tumults, and intestine garboiles and
seditions: For the minds of the people are knit and united together by consent
in Religion; but by difference and disagreement therein they are divided and
distracted; neither can it otherwise happen, but that they who are zealously
affected to Religion, should rise up in arms against them, at some time or
other, whom they are fully persuaded do spread abroad ungodly and pestilent
doctrine. Neither truly the Conscience of Magistrates and Catholic Pastors
does permit them to quench the zeal and affection in the people to the
Catholic religion, which they ought rather to cherish and increase. Therefore
they cannot so bridle and repress the fury of the people which are inflamed
with a deadly hatred against Heretics, but that it will at some time or other
break forth in violence against Heretics. Yet notwithstanding in the mean
while it is the duty of the Magistrate to preserve safe and sound the public
peace, to hinder tumults, to take out of the way whatsoever may occasion them.
If he does otherwise, he offends his own conscience, and does not execute that
office which God has committed to his charge. Wherefore when as he either
cannot, or ought not to suppress the people fervently affected to Religion,
from rising up in violence against Heretics; there remains one course only to
be taken, which is, to expel Heretics, and to suffer and establish but one
Religion in one Country, and that to be the Catholic religion. These sayings
may seem to some man very plausible, yet if thou diligently observe, thou shall
find them to be such, which even experience it self does very much confute: for
so far is it from being true, that this is the way, and the only way, to free a
Commonwealth from tumults and seditions, that none is more apt and commodious
to raise them up; And it is a wonder to me that wise men have not yet learned
so much, or rather would not learn by experience, which is said to be the
school-mistris even of fools. If ancient examples be not powerful enough to
persuade thee, yet look upon those which are modern and of latter times, and
almost subject to thy view: Behold France, oftentimes swimming with the blood
of its own inhabitants, by reason of those wars which were raised for Religion,
which could never be ended till liberty of Religion was granted Heretics.
Look upon the Low Countries, and a war lasting so many years, which is both
lamentable, and famous, for as many great overthrowes of the Catholics, as of
Heretics. Behold Germany, or rather the sepulcher of Germany, which even to
this day is miserably troubled with a most cruel war. I shall think him
blind, who does not see, that by opposing Heretics with force, tumults and
wars are raised up, not quelled and prevented; But I shall believe him to be an
iron-hearted man, who is not troubled and grieved for such tragical and sad
examples. It were truly to be wished, that there were but one Religion in a
Kingdom, and that the true one; for neither is it a question, but that by this
means the minds of men may be more united together in mutual good will and
affection: Yet thus much we deny, that by diversity of Religions the minds of
the people are altogether so distracted and divided, that a civil concord and
a mutual good will between Inhabitants of the same city or kingdom, cannot
stand together with that difference in Religion. Moreover, if they which bear
rule in any Nation or Kingdom, would but prevail a little with their
affections to tolerate Heretics which are weak, they will knit rather and
bind the minds of Heretics in good will toward themselves; For that which
they in justice do, that, Heretics which are weaker in strength, will account
a courtesy, and ascribe it to their gentle disposition, bounty and
benevolence. Wherefore they which deny that peace can remain in a Commonwealth,
if there be diversity of Religions in it; They also must deny, that a weaker
party, which is of a different Religion, may be tolerated by the stronger in a
Kingdom: which whosoever shall affirm, they also shall excuse the Heathens,
who in former Ages would not tolerate Christians that were weaker than
themselves, because indeed they could not. As much is to be asserted and
avouched concerning Antiochus and other Kings, who in former times grievously
afflicted the Jews, over whom they had dominion, for Religion sake. But why
should that be denied to be feasible, which appears to have been often done, as
we see it now adays to be under the Turk himself, who permits Christians in
several parts of his dominions, to exercise their own Religion. Why do so many
endeavor, and some by writing books, others by word of mouth, to persuade the
Magistrates not to grant a Toleration unto Heretics, which are not so strong
as themselves in power? But why do they fear lest that be granted, which
cannot be? But perhaps they which think it cannot be admitted, judge of other
men according to their own disposition, and are led either with an over-hot and
preposterous zeal, or so enraged and transported with the wilfulness and
unrulinesse of their own mind, and confidence of their own strength, that they
think those which are not so powerful as themselves, may not be endured; whom
I believe they would permit, if they were more powerful. A civil peace
therefore may (as I have said) consist even where there is difference of
opinion in matters belonging to Religion. That is a known and a usual proverb
among the common people: Good men may differ in opinion even about the same
matters, without any breach of friendship. To which sense that also tends,
which is as common: A friend to the person, yet an enemy to the cause. Neither
does it less concern matters of Religion, than State-affaires. Moreover, if
the nature of the matter be considered; disagreement in State-affaires is more
hurtful to a Civil peace and concord, than difference in opinions about a
matter of Piety, which (if men would moderate and bridle their affections,
especially those which are most powerful) leaves the bond of concord safe and
secure in a Commonwealth, even for because it does not of it self concern Civil
society. So in former ages, Roman Emperors which embraced the Christian
religion, enjoyed a quiet dominion, although they permitted Pagans, which
opposed it. But heathennish Emperors, which tolerated Christians, had a far
more peaceable reign: Verily Christians were no hinderance to the continuance
of peace in the Commonwealth, although they did boldly and ingeniously profess
their Religion, and did much abhor that Heathenish impiety which was then
publicly exercised; and testified that they had rather die a thousand deaths,
than embrace and approve of it. Also some Christian Emperors tolerated
Heretics, such as the Pelagians were, and that at Rome too, without any
disturbance of the public peace. So also Germany remained quiet a long time,
in diversity of Religions, and had continued so even till this time, unless
either some very rash or ambitious Counsels had at length prevailed. That the
like is to be judged of the Low Countries, they will easily perceive, who are
not ignorant of the passages there.

But as for that which some men plead, that the zeal of Catholic religion
ought not to be quenched, but even cherished and fomented: which sometimes does
so incense the people, that they are led thereby to invade, plunder, and
demolish Heretics churches, oratories, and houses. Verily they show
themselves to be unacquainted with the affairs of the world, and to be not only
very little mindful of Christ, but also of civil laws: For is this a zeal
beseeming Christians, to invade other men's properties by force? to ruinate and
pull down other men's churches, by tumult, by sedition, without any command from
the Magistrate, before any lawful judgment has passed, and of their own accord
and pleasure to ruin and destroy other men? Then Christ wanted zeal; then the
Apostles wanted zeal; then all Christians which lived since them, wanted zeal,
who never did, nor purposed to do any such things: They suffered indeed many
such things, but they never did the like to others. That is not the zeal of
Religion, but the rage and fury of the people, often stirred up with hope of
prey: Unless perhaps thou may call it that, which Paul says is not
according to Romans 10. 2
knowledge, and as S. James speaks, is bitter: for this, as he shows,
raises tumults, and Jam. 3. 14, 16.
every evil work. That zeal which is joined with wisdom and knowledge, is of
another nature; for that wisdom does not suffer zeal to grow to seditions and
tumults, but it is most desirous of peace and quietness: whereof the same
Apostle says a little after, The wisdom that is from above is peaceable,
gentle, and easy ver. 17.
to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits. Wherefore it is so far from
being true, That, that Zeal which breaks forth into tumults, rapines,
burnings with fire, stripes and slaughters; is to be nourished and fomented by
the Pastors of Christian people: That rather it is by all means possible to be
suppressed, and brought within the bounds of modesty, meekness, and
gentleness; lest they which should be the heralds and messengers of peace,
become trumpets of sedition, and incensers of the public calamity and ruin.
So far also is it from being true, that the Magistrate ought to cherish this
licentiousness of the people, that he ought rather to restrain it upon all
occasions, if so be he would provide for the good of Religion, which detesteth
such sinful deeds; and for the tranquillity of the Commonwealth; and also
discharge that office which is committed to him by God, and satisfy his own
conscience. For nothing is more destructive to a Commonwealth, than to suffer
the liberty, reputation, goods, or life, even of a wicked man, to be obnoxious
to the lust of a tumultuous people. Therefore although Heretics were at
length to be restrained by force, yet nevertheless that were not to be
executed by the tumult and sedition of the common people, but in a settled and
lawful way of Judgment by the Magistrate. Wise Magistrates and good Princes
always take order, that offenders be not exposed to the licenciousnesse of the
people, which neither knows how to observe a just measure in punishment,
neither is more cruel to evil and guilty, than good and innocent men, and
never makes a stand where it began, but oftentimes creeps on farther. But if
then Heretics are not to be exposed to the zeal or fury of the common People,
although they were at length to be punished: how much less ought that to be
permitted, if they are not to be punished with Civil punishments.

Thus much I think fit to say yet, before I leave this point or argument; that
those which judge it not expedient to tolerate Heretics, because they
disturb the Peace of the Commonwealth by their difference in religion, do use
the same argument, which Infidels or Heretics may easily retort upon them in
their own dominions. Truly Haman used the like argument in former times, that
he might show that the Jews were to be rooted out, charging them also with
Treason, as that they contemned the Kings commands: which malicious accusation
proceeded from no other ground, then because the Jews would not obey in any
wise the Kings decrees in matters belonging to Religion: to which calumny they
are always obnoxious, which follow a different religion from that which the
supreme Magistrate approves of, and defends by force. For so it is written in
the Letters, which that Haman published in the name of the King: Haman declared
unto us, that in all Nations Hest. 13. 4
throughout the world there was scattered a certain People, that had Laws
contrary to all Nations, and continually despised the Commandments of Kings,
so as the uniting of our Kingdoms cannot go forward. Seeing then we understand
that this People alone is continually in opposition unto all men, differing in
the strange manner of their Laws, and evil affected to our State, working all
the mischief they can, that our Kingdom may not be firmly established.
Therefore have we commanded that all they that are signified in writing unto
you by Haman (who is ordained over the affairs, and is next unto us) shall all,
with their wives and children be utterly destroyed by the sword of their
enemies. Neither skils it any thing in this case, that these are Believers,
those Infidels; these Catholics, those Heretics. For if diversity of
religion disturbes the peace of the Commonwealth, the Catholic religion will
as much trouble it in a Heretical Commonwealth, especially allowing of the
slaughter of Heretics, as an Heretical religion in a Catholic: Yea, a
Heretical religion which disallows of any slaying, or prosecuting of
Heretics, will far less cause it, than the Catholic religion. And moreover
every man thinks that he has a right opinion and belief concerning religion;
and a Catholic is as much a Heretic in the estimation of a Heretic, as a
Heretic is in the judgment of a Catholic. Therefore if that reason be true,
which I confute, an heretical Magistrate cannot but think that his course to
preserve the peace of his Kingdom, must be to banish Catholics out of the
bounds thereof. But if Catholics like not this, neither let them think it fit
for themselves, to expel Heretics their Commonwealths.

CHAP. III.
Catholics ought to grant Heretics Liberty of Religion, and to provide for
their Security.

WE have showed in the foregoing Chapter, that the liberty of Religion, which
Heretics desire, requires nothing else, but that they may receive no hurt,
nor be afflicted with any punishment for Heresy: in one word, that a Civil
peace may be accepted of with them. But now the first argument we bring to
prove that Catholics ought to live peaceably with them, is, because they may
do it with a safe conscience, as has been hitherto sh^wne. But if Catholics
may with a safe conscience live peaceably with them, then they are bound to do
so. For thus says Saint Paul, Romans 12. 18. Heb. 12. 14.
If it be possible, as much as in you is, have peace with all men. And in
another place: Follow peace with all men. But yet both nature and common reason
besides declare, that any man ought to live peaceably with all those, with whom
he may; especially with such as earnestly desire, and importunately ask it. But
if Heathens also thought it good to purchase peace oftentimes even upon harsh
and unjust terms, how much more are Christians bound to accept of a just peace
offered them by others, even of their own accord, or grant it them at their
request? Blessed are the Peacemakers, says our Savior, for they shall be
called the children of God.

Secondly, if Catholics should deny Heretics liberty or peace, and should
hold it lawful to punish them, and so should punish them for professing that
religion which differs from the Cathoique, they would force them, as much as in
them lied to their own religion. But no man ought to be forced, or compelled by
outward violence to the Christian religion. First, because the disposition and
nature of religion, especially spiritual, and perfect religion, such as is the
Christian religion, is repugnant to compulsion. Rightly says Lactantius,
Religion cannot be compelled: And again, nothing is so voluntary as Religion,
which if the mind of him that sacrifices dislike, then it is taken away, then
it becomes none at all. And therefore Tertullian says, It is not the property
of religion to force religion, which ought to be freely embraced, not by force.
And then because by this means many are constrained to counterfeit and fain
religion; for that violence cannot cause a man to think otherwise then he does.
An opinion can neither be thurst into the mind by violence, nor extorted and
wrested from it. That is all force can do, to cause a man to approve of that
opinion in words, which he dislikes in his heart. But such a simulation and
hypocrisy is abominable to God, and ought to be also to all men; and it is
hurtful both to the Church, and to hypocrites themselves. To the Church,
because those hypocrites are secret enemies, whom the Church fosters in her
bosom as Serpents: For they cannot but hate that Church, by which they believe
themselves to be most unjustly afflicted, and desire, and if they can, work the
ruin and destruction thereof. It is hurtful to hypocrites themselves, because
it brings them to eternal destruction. Our Savior says of that evil
servant, That the Lord shall appoint him his portion with the hypocrites, there
shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth: And truly this punishment would befall
them, although they should think that this simulation and dissimulation were
lawful; but whosoever amongst them are more sincere and virtuous then others;
in doing so wound their conscience most grievously, and so sin most hainously
against God, because they Profess that religion which they hate and abhor in
their mind, and perform those religious exercises, which they condemn, and
believe to be displeasing to God. But he sins most hainously, which violates
his conscience. If he sins, and therefore is damned, who does a thing which is
otherwise lawful in it self, with a doubting conscience, as Saint Paul
teaches, he sins far more hainously, and more justly is Rom 14. 23.
condemned who does any thing directly against his conscience, and the
judgment of his own mind. Hence it is that Divines say (they are the words of
a most famous man amongst the Catholic doctors) that the conscience, though
it be erroneous binds, so that it is never lawful to do any thing against it,
but it behooves a man to lay it aside, and discharge himself of it by the
prudent counsel of reason, and of wise men; or if he cannot do that, he is
bound to obey it, to wit, if his resolution, and the matter in hand may not be
deferred. Wherefore they which force others to desert their own religion and
embrace the Catholic against their conscience, compel them, as much as in
them is, to sin most grievously. But how may he be judged free from sinning
greatly, who forces other men to sin greatly.

But some man may here object, (of which we spoke also in the former Chapter)
That God nevertheless commanded them under the Law, to punish those with
death, which should worship strange and false gods. Wherefore at least in such
a case, God would have men to be forced to the true Religion, neither would
have any regard to be had of that point, That Religion ought to be free; and
that many, by such means as force, may be driven to simulation, or compelled to
do any thing against conscience. We might answer thus: That it is lawful for
God, who as he is Lord of all other things, so also of our consciences, and of
whose will and pleasure the state and way of Religion depends; To swerve from
the ordinary path and method of things, and to ordain many things, which it is
not lawful for us to ordain or effect. But we will not now make use of this
answer. Thus much first we affirm; That even Catholic Doctors both ancient
and modern, have observed, and any one that will seriously bend his mind to it
will easily see, that the Jewish religion was carnal, and consisted most in
external matters; not spiritual and perfect, such as we have said the
Christian to be: wherefore it is no wonder that God would force men in some
respects by carnal punishments, to a carnal religion; and that the genius and
proper quality of Religion, which is, that it be free and voluntary, did not
show forth it self in every point in that Religion. But the proper quality of a
spiritual and perfect Religion, is of another temper, which requires most of
all the Mind of man: wherefore God would not have it established by external
force, nor by terror of Civil, but Eternal punishments: and a great deal rather
would have it imprinted and ingrafted in the minds of men by the love of most
holy promises. And in the next place it is to be noted, that the Jewish
religion was both so ordained and settled from the beginning, and afterward
continued and administered; that it may justly be affirmed, that violence was no
more offered to the consciences of the Jews, when they were deterred by
threatening punishments from worshipping strange gods, and from contempt of the
Law, than it is to their consciences, who, if they be Inhabitants of any
Kingdom, are deterred by threatening punishments from yielding that honor
which is due unto a King, to any besides their own King; or from the contempt
and breach of those Laws which are enacted and established by a lawful power,
and command no dishonest matter. For God appearing openly from the very
beginning in the mountain Sinai, so showed himself to be the only God, in the
sight of all the people, and published his Law unto them, that no man could
doubt but that he was both their only God, and so to be worshipped only as a
God, and that the Law of Moses came from him. From whence it came to pass,
that all the people, none making any opposition at all, made a covenant with
God by Moses concerning that Law. And then after the Law was now established,
God both promised that he would ever and anon raise up Prophets to the people
of Israel from amongst themselves, by whom the Jews might ask his advice, and
find out his mind, not only concerning matters pertaining to Religion, but
even such as belong to the Commonwealth, yea and such as concern household
affairs: And really also performed it, and had still a great deal more
performed it, if the people had remained constant in observing the Law. Besides
other prophesies and forewarnings, God ordained an ordinary way of asking his
counsel by the Priests Ephod, or Vrim and Thummim, as the holy Scripture calls
it. And he moreover revealed secret and hidden matters to such as sought ^ut
his will by lot, and showed what they were to do: and as often as the people
followed Gods counsel, all things succeeded prosperously with them; so that the
event it self declared, those answers came from God. Therefore the state of
things was in a manner, as if God had been a certain King among the people of
Israel, even in civil and earthly matters, dwelling in the Tabernacle as in a
certain Kingly palace, and abiding in the Ark, and from thence informing the
people of his will by the Priests, or other Prophets, as servants that were to
wait near his person. He gave answers about undertaking and waging of war,
about choosing of Captains and Commanders, and other such like matters: He very
often showed wonders, to declare that himself dwelt in the midst of that
people. Wherefore things were then so ordered, as if some King containing
himself within his own palace, neither suffering himself to be seen of the
common people, were approached unto only by his Nobles, gave answers by them to
the rest, and published statutes, and ruled the commonwealth according to his
own will and pleasure; and so would have a Kingly honor to be attributed to
none besides himself, and would have his Laws, commanding no dishonest thing
(as I have said) established with a threatening of punishment, to be obeyed by
all his subjects. By taking which course, he were to be thought to do no proper
violence to men's consciences, or to force them to simulation, but to hinder and
repress only the obstinacy and rebellion of his own subjects. But the
disposition of Religion is far otherwise now after that God would be sought to
no longer upon earth, but in heaven, and took away those manifest signs of his
presence, neither does uphold and preserve the Religion which he has ordained
after such a conspicuous and open manner; does not stir up Prophets, does no
longer give answers, but acts and orders all things more secretly, for so much
the greater trial of men's faith: For as the case now is, men fall more easily
into error, and violence is offered to the conscience, if thou shall make any
one quit his error by threatening of punishments, and force him to a truth which
is not demonstrated by such clear testimonies: And from thence also follows
this conclusion, That they are forced to a simulation, which is hateful to
God, who being not convinced by arguments and reasons, are compelled by force
to embrace a Religion, how true soever it be: In which point truly they have
hitherto so erred, who thought it meet for Heretics to be suppressed by
violence; that taking a middle course between a Legal severity, and a Christian
gentleness, they obtained the end of neither of them: For God in former times
would not have Apostates and worshippers of false gods, and contemners of his
Law, to be spared, but commanded them to be slain without mercy; for he
intended not this punishment as a remedy against their error, but as a
revengement against their unpardonable wickedness and contumacie. But those
which hold it requisite for Heretics to be violently dealt withal, because
they plainly see that many of them do not sin through stubbornness, but are led
away by error, those they think fit to be spared; but upon such a condition,
that they recall their error; although they see that they would never have
recalled it, unless they had been driven to it by terror of punishment, and
therefore that they rather pretend the Catholic religion, than approve of it.
Therefore they do not destroy those which have an evil opinion concerning God
and matters belonging to Religion, but only hinder them from professing it
outwardly, which the Law never intended. But whilst they punish those, or
deprive tham even of life, which dare not for fear of conscience renounce their
error, they neither perform the duty of Christian meeknes, nor obtain the end
thereof, which is that erroneous persons may be brought into the way, and be
restored. And that I may utter the whole matter in a word; by doing thus, they
tolerate the worser sort, and destroy the better: for they are better and more
virtuous, who, when they are not convinced of an error, will not renounce it,
for fear of wounding their conscience, and of offending against God; than those
which condemn in words against their conscience, an opinion, though in it self
erroneous, yet that which they believe to be true, and agreeable to the word of
God.

These things being thus declared, we will add yet some other arguments, by
which we may show, that Catholics ought to live quietly with Heretics, and
not to suppress them by force. I will not now make mention of those seditions,
wars and tumults, which might easily proceed from denying Liberty of Religion
to Heretics, especially in a Nation that is accustomed to liberty, that is
unapt to suffer any yoke or servitude, much more that, than which none is more
grievous, even that by which men's consciences are oppressed. We showed the
truth of this matter by most evident examples in the former Chapter, which
without our information any man may see. Neither verily is it necessary that
Heretics themselves raise tumults, even though Heretics be suppressed; A
sparkle of discord may take hold on Catholics themselves, partly by the
obligations of kindred, and laws of frieneship and alliance, by which they are
knit and allied to Heretics; partly because examples showed upon Heretics,
would in a short time creep further, For examples do not use to stop and cease
where they first began, and so much the less those of which we treat, if any
gain might accrue and rise to others by the oppression of Heretics: what,
shall we think that they will not find some specious pretense, who covet other
men's goods, to make those heretics, or abettors and followers of heretics,
whose riches they greedily gape after; especially if they shall perceive them
to be obnoxious, and to lie open to injury? But what shall I say of the
authority and dominion of the Clergy over the Politic State? The matter may
easily be discerned by the history of those times, which were before the rise
of heresies, How easily might a speech more free than ordinary, uttered against
the Ecclesiastical State, be drawn into the crime of Heresy? and that which
was spoken against the behavior or actions of Clergymen, be wrested to a
contumely and reproach of Religion it self? especially when thou should have
both thine Accusers and Judges out of the same state and order of men. Might
not even this very thing it self afford occasion to new motions and tumults?
But let others look to this. We would in this place have that called to memory,
which we spoke of in the former chapter; That by depriving Heretics of
Liberty in Religion, heresies are not only not suppressed and rooted out, but
even by how much the more honest the minds of any people be, by so much the
more they are increased: We add now thus much: That by denial thereof,
Atheism springs up in many men's hearts, which is worse than any kind of
heresy whatsoever. For, Conscience is suppressed and destroyed in those men,
in whom there is not so great honesty, and so great virtue and power of
conscience as there ought to be, when they are troubled for Religion; and so
hypocrisy, and counterfeiting of that Religion unto which they are forced, is
begotten in them, and so atheism and profanesse, which has no savor at all
of holiness and religion, springs up. But as for those men in whom there is a
greater honesty and integrity of mind, and a regard of conscience, and a fear
of God; in those men the love of their Religion is inflamed and increased by
persecution, as a fire is by casting oil into it: and it lays hold on (as I
may so say) with an open and light fire whatsoever comes nigh it, and
oftentimes creeps on further, for those causes mentioned in the former chapter:
concerning which point, Thuanus, a Catholic, wrote much (among other men) in
the Preface which he set before his Histories. But if thou say, that a
Spanish Inquisition is somewhere used, yet Heresies do not creep on farther
there: I would have thee also to consider, whether Atheism does not creep into
the place of heresy? Truly not a few even of the Catholics complain of that
matter, who are well acquainted with those countries: Although besides, many
thousands were found to be in Spain and Portugal, but a few years ago, of
those, who either took unto themselves the name, or had it given them by the
people, of Illuminated persons, and were accounted for heretics. But what
do thou think many foster privily in their mind? Experience it self does
sufficiently declare, that in Spain and Portugal, the Jewish and Saracenicall
religion could not for some ages be rooted out of men's minds by bringing in an
Inquisition.

But verily although there were not so great inconveniences, as I have
recorded, yet there would be others, which ought to dissuade Catholics from
holding it fitting for Heretics to be punished. For even that one thing ought
to prevail with them, which we spoke of in the former Chapter, that the safety
of the Church, and of Religion does no ways require, that heretics be set
upon by violence, which also the Catholics themselves sufficiently confirm,
when they affirm that the Church is founded upon a Rock, so that it can
neither by force, nor by guile be overthrown, which Christ signified, when he
said, The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Neither truly is it
agreeable to reason, that this stability, and immovable constancy of the Church
should consist in that, that she shall prevail by Arms and civil power over
her enemies: for because that then the contrary rather appeared, when that so
godly a building was brought from its first foundations to full perfection. The
Catholics themselves show another kind of supportance for it, that Spirit of
truth which is always present with the Church, which always upholds it, and
preserves it safe from all ruin. But shall we think that that Spirit of truth,
which in former Ages erected the holy building of the Church, maugre all the
opposition of Satan, and the whole world, and brought it to such a greatness
by impotent and unarmed men, and defended it against armed error and impiety,
is become now adays so weak and feeble, that he can no longer maintain his own
work without strength of Arms: and that he stands in need of that power to
defend religion and the Church, which he before subdued, otherwise without its
help, the Church must needs fall to ruin? But if the safety of the Church, and
of the Catholic religion does not require that Heretics be overwhelmed by
force, why do the Catholics hold it fit for them to be born down with
violence? For who can think, especially that is a Christian, that use is to be
made of violence, punishments and arms, without necessity? For it is the
property of gentleness to spare, where thou may spare; especially where so
many thousands of men were to be dragged and haul'd to punishment, so many
souls to be destroyed. Furthermore, the hope of that great benefit which may
proceeds from toleration of Heretics, ought to incline the Catholics to
more gentle resolutions. For by such a toleration they would purchase the
praise to themselves of meekness, equity, gentleness, and moderation, and
would gain their good wills and affections, which being once gained, it is an
easy matter to persuade them of the truth which is founded upon solid
arguments. Moreover, when Heretics are so born withal, they have a time to
recollect and amend themselves, and those errors which at the first view
seemed plausible, after their paint and color is by little and little
discovered; begin to less delight men, and at length decay: but truth it self
is strengthened by delay: and being after a manner dash: against falsehood and
untruth, by its own virtue and strength breaks it in pieces, and the
brightness of it by this collision shines forth more clearly. Wherefore, when
as in respect hereof there is no necessity of troubling Heretics, and of
provoking them with the terriblenesse of punishments, but hence from lenity and
gentleness there is hope of exceeding fruit and benefit belonging to the
everlasting salvation of so many thousands, yea millions; What Christian man
will be of so rigorous and cruel a disposition, that he can hold it fit to
exercise cruelty, rather then patience and gentleness toward those men?
Catholics ought to be led and moved also in this point by the examples of God
himself, whose children we profess our selves to be; and of Christ the Savior
of the whole world, who was wont to use very great lenity and gentleness
toward erroneous persons. God in former times declared in his Law, which in
other matters was severe, That all the people of Israel, and strangers, which
sojourned amongst them should be forgiven if they committed any thing through
ignorance; And truly, for this very reason, because they did it through
ignorance or error, not through pride, and stubbornness of heart. But what
shall we say of Christ, who came into the world for that purpose, That he
might save sinners? Paul writes of himself, that Christ Jesus our Lord put him
in his service, who was before a Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and an
Oppressor: but, says he, I was received to mercy, because I did it
ignorantly, through unbelief. Behold, he obtained pardon for so great sins as
blasphemy, persecution, reproaches and oppressions, wherewith he troubled and
afflicted the godly, because he did those things ignorantly, through unbelief,
and that at such a time, wherein the memory was yet fresh of those great
miracles, and infinite in number, which were wrought by Christ; when those
wonderful deeds of the Apostles were daily to be seen, when those faithful
persons themselves, whom Paul with an outrageous fury persecuted, were full of
the holy Ghost, and at least many of them famous and renowned for their
miracles. Neither did this bounty of Christ make a stand at Paul. For the
Apostle himself shows in the words that follow that place to Timothy, that
Christ would show an example in him of all long suffering, that others also
from thence might have a strong belief of so great mercy of Christ toward
them, If Christ did both bear with, in so great evidence and clearness of the
truth, a blasphemer, a persecutor, and contumelious person, and bestowed so
great a favor upon him, as to commit the most holy function of the
Apostolical office unto him, because whatsoever he did, he did it ignorantly,
through unbelief: Why do the servants of Jesus Christ refuse to tolerate
those, who at this time, wherein no man dares say the Christian religion is
attended with so great splendor and renown of miracles, may err indeed, and
perhaps blaspheme through ignorance, yet for all that, persecute no man, give
reproachful words to no man, nor trouble any man for religions sake. But that
it may yet appear more manifestly, by the example of Christ, that we ought
not to suppress Heretics by violence, and to haule them to punishment; let
us observe how he behaved himself toward Apostates. The Law, as we have
signified before, commands an Apostate to be slain without mercy: Thine eye
shall not pity him, neither stalt thou show mercy, nor keep him secret, But
thou shall even kill him, thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to
death. Will not they say here, that hold it fit for Heretics to be punished,
that this course is a great deal rather to be taken against those which revolt
from Christ, and when they have been his disciples, will now no longer be of
their company? Certainly, if Heretics were to be slain, who notwithstanding
profess and honor the name of Christ, and are ready to suffer a most terrible
and cruel death for his honor, although they do not rightly understand his
doctrine: Much more shall they be worthy of this punishment, who altogether
reject his doctrine, and do so forsake that faith which they had placed in him,
that they will not profess his name any longer, and be conversant amongst his
disciples. But what, did Christ teach us by his example, that we ought so to
do? and did he not rather demonstrate the contrary? We read in John, c. 6. v.
66. that after Christ had discoursed much concerning the eating of his own
flesh, and drinking of his own blood; Many of his Disciples being offended at
this his speech, went back, and walked no more with him. But what says Christ
to these things? Did he lead them violently to punishment, or thought it fit
they should? In no wise. Moreover he bespake those his twelve Disciples or
Apostles after this manner: Will ye also go away? as if so be he had given them
liberty to go away, if they would. Thou will say, that Christ had no
magistrate, nor people at his beck and command, to bring them to punishment:
But he had that divine virtue and power dwelling in himself, by which he might
be able to destroy them without any external force. And to have done it in
such a way, would not have been so liable and obnoxious to blame and
reprehension; because a punishment inflicted upon them by a Divine virtue and
power, ought to be accounted by them as a punishment inflicted by God himself,
and so to be acknowledged most just. Moreover, if such a course had been taken
in destroying them, the rest of the Disciples would have been stricken with so
much the greater fear of daring to revolt from Christ, and his holy religion.
Certainly if those Catholics, who hold it fit for Heretics to be persecuted
and destroyed, could have destroyed them by their Anathema, as by a thunderbolt
sent miraculously from God, they would in no wise have forborne to do it: And
it were to be desired, not only by the Catholics, but even by the Heretics
themselves in some respect, that Catholics might be able to do it; because
from thence they would be manifestly convinced that the Catholic religion
were true, and proceeded from God, and therefore would embrace it presently,
neither would suffer such a severe and powerful thunderbolt to be darted forth
upon them: and then no Catholic would fall into heresy. Why then did not
Christ do so, who had so great power to effect it? Was it not therefore,
because he judged it most averse and disagreeable to his most gentle and meek
spirit, and to the religion which he published, and to the purpose and will of
God, for performance whereof he was sent into the world? He came not, as
elsewhere he speaks of himself, to destroy men's lives, but to save them. Why
therefore do not his servants and disciples the like, before whom he sets
himself for an example to be imitated, who are or ought to be partakers of that
Spirit, who profess his most holy religion? They ought to call to memory that,
which our Savior himself once answered to his disciples, when the Samaritans
refused to entertain him: For when they asked him whether he would have them to
command that fire come down from heaven and consume them, even as Elias did?
Jesus rebuked them and said, Ye know not of what spirit ye are, for the Son of
man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. That is, he would have
his Disciples to be as mild and gentle as himself.

Before we leave this Argument, we would have Catholics to consider, what men
of great renown in former times amongst the Doctors of the Catholic Church,
thought concerning this matter, and what gentleness they held fit to be used
toward heretics, whom they believed to be infected with most pestilent and
blasphemous errors. After this manner Augustine writes concerning the
Manichees: Let them exercise cruelty against you, who know not what a labor it
is to find out the Truth, and what a difficulty it is to avoid Errors. Let them
exercise cruelty against you, who are ignorant what a rare and difficult thing
it is to overcome carnal fantasies, by the serenity and cleernesse of a pious
mind. Let them excrcise cruelty against you, who are ignorant, with how great
difficulty the eye of the inward man is healed, that it may behold its own Sun.
Let them exercise cruelty against you, who know not how great groans and sighs
must be uttered, before we can attain to some small measure of the knowledge of
God. Last of all, Let them exercise cruelty against you, who are deceived with
no such Error, as they perceive you to be deceived with. But I for my part
cannot exercise any cruelty against you, whom I ought so to bear with now, as I
did then with my self, and to deal with you in so great wisdom, at my
neighbors dealt with me, when I being outrageous and blind, erred in your
Sect. But of the Arrians, Salvian Bishop of the Massilian Church speaks in
this wise: Heretics they are, but unwittingly: in our esteem they be
heretics, not in their own; for they judge themselves to be so much
Catholics, that they bra^d and defame us our selves with the title of
Heretical impiety; therefore what they are to us, that we are to them. We are
sure that they are injurious to the Divine generation, because they say that
the Son is inferior to the Father: They think us injurious to the Father,
because we believe them to be equal. We are in the truth, but they presume
that they are. It is we that honor God; but they hold this to be the honor of
God, which they believe. They are undutifull, but they hold this to be the
chiefest duty of religion. They are ungodly, but they think it to be true
piety. They err therefore, but with a good mind, not through hatred, but
believe that they do honor and love the Lord according to his own will and
desire: Although they have not a right faith, yet they account it to be a
perfect love of God, to believe as they do. After what manner they shall be
punished, in the day of Judgment, for this very error of false opinion, none
can know besides the Judge. In the mean while God (as I believe) is patient
toward them, because he sees that though they do not believe aright, yet they
err with a mind and affection to be of a godly opinion.

Seeing then the case is thus, any man sees that Catholics, in the cause of
Heretics, ought to follow that counsel of Gamaliel, by which he sometimes
dissuaded the Rulers of the Jews from giving their censure, that violent hands
should be laid upon the Apostles: of which matter we read in the Acts: for we
read, that he thus bespake his companions in office: Refrain your selves from
these men, and let them Act. 5. 38.
alone, for if this Counsel, or, this Work be of men, it will come to naught;
but if it be of God, ye cannot destroy it, lest ye be found even fighters
against God. That counsel also of the householder is to be followed, who
forbad his servants to pluck up the Tares, lest the Wheat also chance to be
plucked up with them, but to suffer them to grow till harvest. Let not the Wheat
take authority unto it self, of plucking up the Tares by violence. For the
Tares also, which take themselves to be the Wheat, will resume authority to
themselves to pluck up the Wheat; and seeing the Tares grow up more plentifully
then the Wheat in the world, which is a field rather fruitful for Vice, then
Virtue and Piety; the Tares will more likely enjoy this power, then the Wheat.
But if there be such, who think they have no cause to be afraid, lest they be
plucked up by the Tares, because of their multitude, and strength, established
by the course of so many Ages, wherewith they may overcome their adversaries in
religion; they ought for that very thing to suspect themselves, and to be
afraid lest they may chance to be of the number of the Tares, because they
flourish and grow up so plentifully for so many ages together in such a barren
field for virtue: and lest they may chance to stray from the narrow and
straight path of salvation, which few find ou^. For thus says our Savior;
Enter ye in at the straight gate, for it is the wide gate and broad way that
leads to destruction, and many there are which go in thereat, because the
gate is straight, and the way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be
that find it. Yet furthermore, the uncertain courses of humane affairs should
be considered; Who does not see, that things of the highest degree are
oftentimes ^umbled down and brought low, and things of low degree get up by
little and little unto the highest; That things of great strength, and
confirmed by long continuance of time, are weakened; that weak things acquire
strength? Neither is it to be wondered at, when even those things which we now
admire for their greatness and strength, were formerly small and weak, and
rising from small beginnings arrived to this greatness. Wherefore none of them
who think it requisite to pluck up the Tares, can promise himself a perpetual
triumph over them; but every one ought to be afraid, lest what judgment he
gives against them, the same also may be applied against himself. Therefore
there is no greater wisdom, than by the counsel of the householder, to stay
till the last harvest, when both without any danger of Error, and without
damage to the Wheat, the Tares, by command of the householder being separated
from the Wheat, shall be cast into the fire; when neither the name of Tares
shall be given to the Wheat, nor the Tares take unto themselves either the name
of the Wheat, or deceive the reapers with the show and resemblance thereof. So
by this means the Tares will have no occasion by the deeds of the Wheat, to
pluck up the Wheat by violence: If they should nevertheless use violence, then
at length the Wheat scattered by violence will spread abroad his seeds the
farther, and come forth more abundantly, the Tares being by little and little
suppressed, until the harvest at last bring a total destruction upon them.

But some Catholic will allege; Suppose it be so, that Catholics ought to
live peaceably with Heretics, Is there any necessity therefore that assurance
be given them for their safety? We have hitherto both lived peaceably with
them, and are ready to do so for the time to come; but we will not have any
statute or privilege to be published, or extant for their liberty. It is
neither necessary for them that it should be done, when as they enjoy peace
without it, and may enjoy it for the time to come: Neither is it much for our
honor. For what? may they not put confidence in our promise, and our virtue
and goodness? May they not rely upon our friendship, or the obligations and
bonds of consanguinity and kindred?

This that is alleged might perhaps be of some moment, if so be Heretics
did not hear both threatenings uttered abroad by no small number, nor no
inferior sort of Catholics, against them, nor see Protestations hurtful to
their security, and perceive some men's endeavors tending to their overthrow,
or to the limiting and straitning of their liberty. If moreover examples both
ancient and modern, in other Countries, and also evident and manifold
experience of this very Age did not force them to fear such like matters.
Finally, if they had suffered no injury for Religion sake; if they had not seen
in this very Kingdom, their Temples, some burnt with fire, others pulled down,
private men's houses plundered also, some men slain, wounded, and violently
dealt withal. Wherefore Heretics do not in every point enjoy peace, neither
can assuredly promise themselves that they shall enjoy it, unless Catholics
give them a bond of assurance to confirm it: Verily even for that very cause it
may justly be denied that they do enjoy peace, because a privilege is denied
them for it; for that is no peace, to which security is wanting: but there is
no security, so long as Catholics refuse to grant a privilege and covenant
unto Heretics for their assurance in enjoying it, and whilst many either do,
or threaten many things which are altogether against their peace and
tranquillity. From whence it is to be understood, that Heretics do neither
require a superfluous matter, whilst they desire their Liberty may be
established by a public statute, and more fully confirmed by ordaining
punishments against breakers of the peace, and a Court of judicature and
justice for the equal trial of both parties. Neither do they desire a thing
which is dishonorable to the Catholics, but that which is honest, and
attended with a singular and exceeding great praise both of equity, moderation
and humanity, and also of discretion and wisdom: For what dishonor is it for
thee to oblige thy self by a public promise, and a registered law, That thou will do that matter, which thou may not only honestly do, but also art bound
in equity to do? But that this matter of which we now discourse, is of such a
nature, has been already sufficiently demonstrated. But if so be the fear of
Heretics were even superfluous, would it not be a man's duty in way of
courtesy and charity to hinder and take away all occasion of that vain,
indeed, yet great fear of so many thousands; and truly in such a matter, which
neither ought to be troublesome and grievous unto thee, if thou have a desire
to live peaceably with them, neither cost thee any labor or price. Why do not
Catholics grant them that, at their request, which they may freely grant? By
this means they will take away all occasion of suspicion and distrust, which
are two great plagues and obstructions to friendship, and the commonwealth;
And will oblige all Heretics both to themselves, and to their country, in
which they see that they may live safely and securely, and which they apprehend
to be no step-dame, which would expel them, but a mother. By this means they
also will engage them, That if in any country their power wax great, to give
again to Catholics assurance that they shall receive no harm, and to take
good order for their security; for which they are by no law bound to provide,
if Catholics will not take order for their security: For he which refuses to
give another man assurance of peace, and reserves a power unto himself of
oppressing him, when he shall find a fit opportunity to do it, leaves him in
like manner the same privilege against himself; and amongst whom there are no
laws and privileges of Peace, the privileges and rights of War remain
common to both parties. But there is no safety in War: We all pray to thee (O
GOD) for Pease.

FINIS.

