Divine Drops Distilled from the FOUNTAIN OF Holy Scriptures: Delivered in
several Exercises before SERMONS, upon Twenty and three Texts of Scripture.

By that worthy Gospel Preacher Gual^er Cradock, Late Preacher at All-Hallows
Great in London.

Deuteronomy. 32. 2. My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, my Speech shall distill as the
Dew. Job 29. 22. After my words they spoke not again, and my speech dropped
upon them. London, Printed by R. W. for Rapha Harford, at the Bible in Queens
Head Alley, near Paternoster Row. 1650.

The several Texts handled in the ensuing Work.
ISaiah 9. 12, 13, etc. Isai. 26. 1, 2, 3. Isai. 27. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Isai. 28.
15, etc. Isai. 40. 1. Isai. 65. 5, etc. Isai. 66. 12, etc. Deuteronomy. 4. Psalm. 83.
Psalm. 116. Micah 4. 1, 2, 3, etc. Habak. 2. 4. Matthew. 19. ult. Luke 18. 1. Romans
6. 14. Ephesians. 3. 20. Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, etc. Heb. 12. 18, 19,
20, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 9, 10, 11, 12. Jude 19. 2 Cor. 11. 3. Jerem. 6.
TO THE READER.
Christian Reader.
THou art here presented with a little Work, entitled, Divine Drops: Drops
indeed they may be called, being but small in quantity; but Divine and
Spiritual for their quality, as thou shall easily perceive, if thou peruse them
with a spiritual eye. They were several short Exercises of the worthy Author,
delivered in public before his Sermons; wherein thou shall find many Gospel
Truths, which may not only tend to thy spiritual profit, but delight, the work
being interwoven with variety of subjects. It is like a pleasant Garden,
wherein thou may gather choice of spiritual flowers: In one Bed thou shall
find the just anger of God provoked by sin, in another, the confidence of the
Saints in God their refuge; in another, the Hypocrite discovered; in another,
the comfort of Gods people proclaimed; in another, (if I may so speak without
offense) the spiritual fondness between God and his Saints described; and in
all, that which may by the help of Gods Spirit, tend to thy comfort and
edification.

I had spared my pains in prefacing, but being informed, that some (though very
unworthily) have incensed the Author against the publishing of these things:
For the Vindication of it, and my self, I have adventured these few lines. The
work was not gotten out of my hands, without the importunity of diverse godly
men; who having formerly enjoyed the ministry of this Reverend Preacher; and
now being deprived of it by his absence, since they could not enjoy him as they
would, desired to have him present, as they might, namely, in the perusal of
some of his works; and I hope that shall not offend him, that may do so many
good. Good is of a diffusive nature, and the better the good, the more it is
communicated. Some petty good things may be impropriated in the hands of a few,
but the best, even natural good things (without which Creatures cannot subsist)
are common to all, as the Sun, and the Air, etc. Good actions of good men
(especially that are intended for the public) are like the motion of the
water, wherein a stone is cast; there appears first a little circle, which
grows greater and greater, till it have overspred the whole. And though these
precious Truths were at first delivered in public, yet the Walls of one Church
could not contain many hundreds; whereas now by this means, the benefit may
reach many thousands. And as Job speaks of corporal food, the loins of the poor
blessed him for it; so I doubt Job 31. 20.
not, but the souls of many poor Christians may have cause to bless the Author
for these spiritual Viands, who never saw his face; and being written for the
Generation to come, the people which Psalm. 102 18.
shall be created shall praise the Lord.

It is true, the Word of God in the hearing of it, is like milk immediately
drawn from the breast, that has more strength, and spirits in it, then after it
has stood in the vessel; yet hearing is transient, and the memory treacherous
and frail, and apt to let good things slip: Therefore, though the Priests and
Levites had the Book of the Law, yet God commands the King to write him out a
copy of it, that he might Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
have recourse to it all the days of his life. Many excellent Proverbs of
Solomon, it is likely, had been lost (as some other of his Works are) had not
the men of Hezekiah, King of Judah, Prove. 25. 1.
copied them out. And I am sure, of late days, the Works of many worthy Men Dr.
Preston, Dr. Sibbs, Mr. Shute, Mr. Ramsden, etc.
, had been drowned in oblivion, had they not floated in such an Ark as this;
and for ought I know, the Truths here presented, had been useful to none, but
those that heard them, had they not been preserved this way. And if for our
unfruitfulness, our Halcion days should be turned into such as were the Marian
times; who knows what sweetness may secretly be sucked from such breasts of
consolation? Isal. 66. 11.


I confess, had the Author published the things himself, it is likely they
might have been more exactly adorned for circumstance; but it is his own
expression, That Gospel spiritual Truths have that self excellency, that they
have no more need of the Embroidery of humane learning, then a suite of Skarlet
to be laid with Copper Lace. The things are substantial, solid, and serious,
set forth in the Authors own Language and Phrase, without alteration, only
repetitions omitted, and not them neither, where they are emphatical: And I am
confident, whoever heard them delivered, shall find his very vestigia in the
reading of them, as many have acknowledged, that in reading his former Book
published, they called to mind what they had heard, though there were the
distance of some years between.

I have not (not ever did, in any man's works) taken the boldness to add one
piece of a sentence, or to diminish ought. The Lessons are wholesome and cordial;
thou shall herein find no lethal Gourd, that any should cry out, There is 2
King 4 40.
death in the Pot. If there be any material error, I desire to bear the blame;
if there be any literal faults, let the Printer own them; if neither, let them
blame themselves, who (without cause) have endeavored to prejudice the Work.

For my own particular, had I aimed at private gain, I could have employed my
time and pains with advantage that way in other things; but he who knows the
heart, knows I intended the public good in it; and if a Christian must
forgive his brother to seventy Mat. 18. 22.
times seven times, when perhaps sometimes he may wilfully offend, I hope I
shall easily obtain pardon, who if I have offended, it is in that, wherein I
expected encouragement; and if I be evil spoken of for this, it is for that,
for which 2 Cor. 10. 3.
I give thanks. I shall detain thee no longer from the matter, but commend it
to thy serious and judicious Consideration; and it, and thee, to the blessing
of him, who only can give increase to all good endevors, and rest

Thine, in Christian Duty, THO. SHELTON.

ISAIAH 9. 12, 13, etc. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand
is stretched out still, etc.
MY intention is not to expound this Scripture, but only at this time to take
occasion from the main drift of it, to instruct you a little in that we are
about. The main drift of it, is this, That here the Lord by the Prophet
threatens many, and grievous judgments that should come upon this people; you
shall see who they are in the Chapter. I say they were many, and they were sore
and grievous: And the Lord does begin (as his usual manner is) with some first,
and with the least; and when the people would not turn to him that smote them,
then the Lord would send another plague on them: For that is the meaning of
that phrase, His hand is stretched out still. They went on in wickedness, and
then the Lord sends another plague, His hand is stretched out still. The
stretching out of Gods hand is the executing of judgment upon wicked people
usually: So that he goes on with very fore judgments, as here in this Chapter
it is said, A man shall eat the flesh of his own arm, and yet the hand of the
Lord is stretched out still. A man would think that were the sorest that could
be; a man would think that were enough, yet notwithstanding the hand of the
Lord is stretched out still.

It is the manner of God throughout the Scripture, The manner of Gods proceeding
to, and in judgments.
to defer judgments a long while before they come, and when they come, he sends
them by degrees; but when they come, usually they are many, and sore; and it is
uncertain when they will end, as we see in Levit. 26. Amos 4. Isai. 5. And
here, and in some of the Chapters following, His hand is stretched out still.

Just so (beloved) it is with us at this time, as I shall Application to our
times.
show you briefly, (for I told you I would not expound, but take a word to
quicken your hearts, and mine, that we may speak unto the Lord more advisedly.)
You know, a little while agone, we thought that the Lord was coming to end the
wars. The Lord gave us victory upon victory, after many corrections, and
judgments before; and we thought they were now over, but we were deceived, as
we were many times before. You know God has been many times about to end our
miseries, but he has sent back for his mercies, and so he has done now; he
has very strangely called back his mercies, and loving kindness, and has
stretched out his hand many ways against us. God begins to raise up enemies
again, and to strengthen them; he suffers the enemy to break in among us,
besides all expectation: And how long, or how far God will stretch out his hand
that way, who knows?

Let me deal plainly with you: For this day we The cause of Gods judgment to be
sought in our selves.
should deal plainly with God, and our own souls; and however through the week
we look for Reasons and Causes of things in a natural way, who followed, and
who were the Commanders, and what were the Forces, and the like: yet it should
be the business of this day to judge of things spiritually, to see spiritual
Reasons.

And here we see in this Chapter, and many such, That God stretches out his
hand, while there is some continuation of sins, or some new provocation against
the Lord; therefore, (it may be God has many more ends in it, as doubtless he
has, but) certainly there is some strange provocation of God among us, that
the Lord deals so with us again. And all this, that we may now see, that the
miseries that are beginning to rise, they are but the stretching out of Gods
hand: It is Gods Those are wilful, provoking sins.
hand; and as of private persons, so of public Nations; it is not common
frailties that grieve the Spirit, but some wilful wickedness. When a man has
sin at the slaves end, and yet lets it come in to his bosom, and when he sees
sin through the Keyhole, and yet opens the door, and lets it come in: So in a
Nation it is not frailties and weakness; there will be whoredom, and
drunkenness (though these provoke God.) It is not so much this, as some wicked
provocations of God that are among us. Therefore in a word give me leave a
little to tell you what I conceive, what I fear rather, what is the reason why
God afresh and anew stretches out his arm, when we thought his sword was half
put up, yet now it comes out again, and God knows how far it will go, or how
long it will continue.

Beloved, we should be born with in searching our selves, and beholding and
confessing our sins, and the sins of those that are among us, especially in
such days as these, unless we will deal hypocritically with God, and proclaim
a fast day, and come to humble your souls, and no man look after his own sins,
and men not be allowed to bewail the common sins. I was considering, that the
Saints before, confessed their own sins, and the sins of others, of their
Princes, and Magistrates, and great ones; and the true prophets were bold to
tell them also of their sins. Therefore though I delight not (God he knows)
of any thing to speak of men's sins; and if I do, the Lord he knows, I am more
willing through his What they are among us.
grace to see my own then any man's sins, and to speak of them and bewail them.
Therefore I say, I hope you will bear with me if I tell you my heart (if I now
were on my deathbed) what I think (according to this blessed book) provokes
the Lord that now so terribly he threatens us again when we thought his anger
was over. Therefore I pray hear me, I shall be brief.

The first thing that I fear highly provokes God among 1. A formal practice of
penltential duties.
us (and as long as we stretch out this line of sin, he will stretch out the
line of wrath) That is, our formal humiliation, and repentance, and fasting
and such like things. I do not speak (neither can any man that has charity
think I speak) against humiliation, or repentance, or fasting, I desire to
practice it: but our humiliation, and fasting, and praying, and repentance, and
these things, they grow every day more formal then other, that truly there is
almost nothing but formality in the eye of spiritual Christians, and they
begin to loath it, how much more the Lord who is a pure Spirit, whose eyes are
brighter then the Sun? In Isay 1. you shall read that the Lord punished, and
chastised the people, that there was no whole part in them from the crown of
the head to the sole of the foot. Just as you do with an untoward child, one
while you strike him on the head, another while you whip him, another while you
cudgel him on the shoulders, till at last the child be all bruised and
wounded: so the Lord sent for the Assyrians, he sent sickness and famine, that
the Lord had not left an inch whole, and the people were very devout for all
that; they fasted, and prayed, and the Lord sixteen times in that Chapter
says, I will none of them, away with them, they are an abomination to me, they
are iniquity. They were so far from being reconciled to God by this kind of
fasting and humiliation, and the like, that doubtless they provoke God as
much, if not more then any other way. Therefore blessed is that man or woman
that mournes for this, not only on this day, but secretly before the Lord,
this formality. I fear the Lord may say to us as to those people in Isay 65.
this people take upon them to be holy, I am holier then thou, yet they are like
smoke in my nostrills all the day long. I fear our fast days are the most
smoky days in Gods nostrills of all the days of the year. Therefore the Lord
open our eyes, and the Lord find a way to deliver us from formality in these
things: If not, I fear the hand of God will be stretched out more and more.
That is one thing that in my serious thoughts I think God is offended with.

Secondly, as our formal humiliation, so our feigned reformation. It is the
scriptures word as Calvin shows, 2 A feigned reformation.
of reformation, It is that you have in Ierem. 3. 10. says the Lord, I
corrected Israel, yet for all this her treacherous siste Judah did not turn to
me with her whole heart, but feignedly. Here is a great deal of stir about
reformation, here is a great deal of cry, but a little reality. Look to our
congregations, to our ordinances, to every thing among us, you may put all in a
little piece of paper; There is a great deal of stir about the Sacrament, and
the mixed multitude, and the Service*book, and I know not what. We must speak
plainly before the Lord this day, there is a great deal of stir, and
abundance of people slain in the world, and ruined, and plundered, and Towns
burnt, and all for reformation, and people think there is a glorious
reformation, but God knows where it is, only there is a great stir about it:
therefore I say let every honest heart mourn before the Lord, we have shed
real blood, we have paid real money we have taken real pains, and brought
upon people a world of misery, they have need to have some real reformation,
that they may have some reality. I speak but a word, I desire you even before
the Lord that ye would think more of this then I speak.

The third thing among us that I fear draws out 3. Vices of ministers.
Gods hand still, it is the flattery, and pride, and covetousness, and apostasy
of diverse ministers, Their flattery, that is, diverse now are grown so wise and
so discreet now in such a time as this, when the Lord would teach us to see our
sins with a maul as we say, yet we will not speak, we will not deal plainly, we
will not tell men of their sins: We have opportunity to tell Magistrates, and
great ones, they would be told, and be thankful: but we are apt to sooth them,
and to flatter them, and if they humor us as we would have them, they are
brave men, zealous men, Oh, it is a sad thing! Then the pride and height of
ministers every day growing more and more, especially after a little victory,
there is a deal of preaching, and stateliness. I have no pleasure to speak of
these things, but I desire that we should be wiser.

And such covetousness, such shifting ways to multipliy livings, and to get
estates in the world; these are too palpable.

Then the apostasy of ministers, There are diverse ministers that were comforts
to Gods people before in the Bishops times, that would preach the will of God,
and comfort poor people: now there is nothing left but railing against Gods
people, calling them Heretics, and schismatics, that it is a wonder to think.
God sees this grow more and more, and if he should end our war and give us
peace, we were undone. God will keep it up to help to pull down the pride, and
covetousness, and ambition of Ministers, to bring them down low to love their
brethren, and to love honest hearts as before. The Lord do it, or else this war
will never end, or the end will be as bad as if it had never ended.

Another thing I fear, that there is a general (put 4. Hardness of heart.
me in if you will: for I may put in my self) hardness of heart, that grows on
us against reproof; people even Christians are grown so peevish that no body
must reprove, or admonish one another for matter of judgment or life; none
must tell another his fault, if he do, they will quarrel presently, he that
Pro. 29. 1.
hardens his neek, being often reprooved, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy. When men will not be told, magistrates, and ministers, and
people when they harden themselves daily that it is enough to imprison a man
with some kind of people in the most loving, and sincere way in the world to
tell them of their faults. This is the time when a man is made an offender for
a word, This is a misery: the Lord give us hearts like the bleeding heart of
Jeremiah, Jer. 9. that we may weep and mourn in secret for it.

Then fifthly, that that provokes God highly (I fear) 5. The vices of Officers.
is the covetousness, and self-seeking, and perfidiousness, among Commanders,
and Officers, That provokes God; as in reason it drew on the war, as in
Germany, the Mercinary soldiers; so also in a spiritual sense. And it is to
be feared that men grow to make a trade of war, and he that can get a good
place, the longer the war holds the better it is, and so they have devises to
make good his estate while he is in; and people learn every day to make a
miserable virtue of necessity, to make a sweet, and fine life of our miseries,
and when they come to the work, then such a one betrayed such a Town, and such
a one betrayed such a Castle, and such a one ran away from the Field, that cost
ten thousand pounds before he came there. As it troubles us in sense, and
reason, so it provokes God; and Gods end to keep on the war may be to discover
these wretches more and more, and to bring them to ruin. Therefore if there be
any Officer, or Committee man, or Soldier here, whatsoever thou art, thou art
a cursed man if thy heart delight in riches, and wealth that thou gettest when
they poor brethren and sisters are ready to perish in this time of need. Take
heed, it provokes God, and draws out the hand of God anew, and God knows how
far it will be drawn out.

Then also there is another thing that I fear (for I 6. Breaches and divisions
among the Saints.
speak of great things, not of ordinary frailties) that is the tuchiness, and
divisions among the Saints, that daily multiply and increase, and are no way
closed, and some talk, but there are few that take a serious course to close
them in any measure. Now these divisions, and wranglings among the Saints,
(whereas the Saints should be at peace, and by being so honor Christ by their
union) by these open divisions, many turn seekers, and many down right
atheists. The Lord will not bear this, he will whip them together, Woe to thee
that art a professor, that delightest in having any thing to dissent from thy
brethren: some people are never well, but when they have crotchets wherein they
dissent from their brethren with delight: woe to thee, thou have a foul cursed
heart; and though it be a truth and thou must needs dissent from them, yet it
would be a sorrow to dissent if thou had a godly heart.

Seventhly, such a deal of blasphemy, such heresies, for 7. Heresy and
blasphemy.
I may call them so (if any thing) such errors, and gross ones increase
daily, and hugely increase among those that seemed to be godly once and
professors, as denying the scriptures, denying Christ Jesus, denying the
resurrection, calling God every thing, and every thing God, confounding God and
the creature together, and abundance of such hideous blasphemous things, and
they grow on woefully, especially in our City: these things highly provoke God,
the Lord give us hearts, to mourn for them.

Then there is another thing all along, I fear, that provo^s God, that is, the
oppression of the poor Saints 8 Oppression.
both in soul and body: that throughout this Kingdom as far as ever I could see
or hear, in all these wars in any Town or City, if there be half a dozen poor
Saints, they pay as much as the Malignants to our men, and the other side come,
and ruin them; I never heard that they paid less, but more, beside loanes, and
contributions. These things go high, and though we take no notice of it, there
is one that takes notice of the cry of the oppressed, and the widow.

And then our self-love, and hardness of heart against the poor Saints in
their distress, that every one thinks 9. Self-love and hard* heartedness.
they have help too little for themselves, and their families. Indeed we did
help one another a little in the beginning of these troubles; but now the
miseries are so many, and so many are in distress, that we do not look after
them, but let them do as they can. And this is too rife in this city, that we
have not a constant care of those poor people among us that are either
strangers or inhabitants that are ready to perish with want in these times. And
it is the general disposition of people in this City, that if they can get the
enemy three or fourscore miles off, if they can keep the enemy at Newark, or in
Wales, or in the West in Cornwall, they care not, they lay it not to heart: but
if he come to Hertford-shire, or Cambridge*shire, then they will do any thing,
they will lend or give. There is a great deal of self-love, and of hardness to
poor people. Why should we not pity the poor Saints in the North, as those in
Hertfordshire? There are many, and many poor children. We have not bowels of
compassion, and in my apprehension that little there is, is shutting up more
and more.

There is another thing, and so let me draw to an 10. Prevarication in calling
evil good and e contrario.
end, and that is a thing that grows among us woefully, it amazeth me, and in my
conscience it would amaze me if I were a carnal man, if I were as once I was
in the state of nature. What is that? you have learned a way to pervert, to
call evil good, and good evil, both for things and persons, against light and
conscience. This is grown ordinary, as it is said in Isaiah, says he,
therefore Gods hand is stretched out, why so? They call evil good, and good
evil. We are as he said Rome was, let a man stay in Rome that knows how to
turn black to white and white to black: so, many times people rail at things
that in their conscience are the ways, and the will, and the things of God.
And such a person; because he is not favored in the world, when they come in
company, and see every body rail at him, they will do so too. There are few
people that in all places, and companies, speak as they think. The truth and
right is, this grows woefully, therefore the hand of the Lord must be
stretchedout still.

There is one thing more that I will not nor 11. Apostasy.
cannot say positively it is so, but if it should be so, I am sure it provokes
God highly, that is, a kind of a general apostasy (I fear) in the City of
London, examine your selves. The City of London a few years ago was famous over
the world for their zeal, and readiness. What a deal a do there was to get
Arms, and to lend Plate, and if there were a Malignant, you had him to justice:
then the zeal of the City of London quickened up the Parliament: but now the
zeal of the Parliament may rather quicken the City of London, that is my
thoughts and my fear. Therefore I wish that you would not make a mocking work
of this, when you talk of humiliation, and fasting, and keep people from their
trading; let us deal really with our selves, and if it be thus, let us desire
the Lord to help us to our first works, and our first love, and zeal for God
and his people.

Expositions and Observations on Isaiah 26. 1, 2, 3.
In that day shall this song be sung in the Land of Judah, We have a strong
City, Salvation will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks, etc.
IN the Chapter before, you shall read, The coherence of the words.
That the Prophet did pronounce sore judgments against the enemies of God and
his people; to wit, against Moab. And the judgment should be so sore; that the
Lord says, He will come forth against them, just as a man spreds his arms
abroad to swim: So God would open his arms (as it were) to smite them; and he
would tread them down like straw for the Dunghill.

And in this Chapter, the Prophet comforts the Saints, the believers: he gives
them some comfort to support their Spirits, when the Lord should come in
judgment against the wicked.

In that day shall this song be sung in the Land of Judah; we have a strong
City, etc.

God will do two things for his people in the day of his wrath, against his
enemies.

First, he will make them to sing: In that day shall this song be sung in the
Land of Judah. The world often sing, when the Saints mourn; and therefore the
world shall mourn, when the Saints shall sing.

And another thing is, In that day, when the Lord shall open his arms as a
swimmer for judgment: The Saints shall have a strong City, or Garrison, or
Refuge to go to, where they shall be safe. We have a strong City (that shall be
their song) Salvation will God appoint for Walls, and for Bulwarks.

Now, it shall not be an outward City, or an outward Garrison; but the Lord will
give them a spiritual Garrison: The salvation of the Lord shall be to them as
Walls, and Bulwarks. So that beloved, in few words, this is the lesson that I
would learn thoroughly, and would have you to learn from this Verse, that

In all the troubles, and calamities that are in this world, Observation. God a
sweet refuge.
the people of God have a sweet Refuge, or a safe Garrison to go into.

Let the judgments of God be out upon the earth, upon the wicked and
unbelievers never so much; and let the Kingdoms be never so miserable, yet the
Saints have a Garrison; they have a sweet place of shelter, of retreat, and
refuge, and safety, in the worst of times that can be in this world. You shall
see a blessed place to this purpose, Heb. 12. 25, 26, etc. See that you do not
turn away from him that speaks from Heaven (says the Apostle) whose voice
then shock the earth, but now he has promised, saying, Yet once more will I
shake, not the earth only, but also heaven. And this word, yet once more,
signifies the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are
made, that those things which cannot be shaken, may remain: Wherefore we
receiving a Kingdom, that cannot be shaken, or moved; let us have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably. Beloved, not to open the whole place, this
is that only I would observe from it, That there are times in the latter end
of the world, wherein the very heaven and earth shall once more be shaken: That
is, there shall be such troubles, and calamities now in the latter end of the
world, that men shall think that God is shaking, not only Kingdoms and
Nations, but Heaven and Earth, the whole Universe, and is ready to pull it
down. There will be such times says the Apostle, yet says he, We receive a
Kingdom which cannot be shaken. It is a blessed place, when all the Kingdoms in
the world shall be shaken, all the Earth, and all the Heavens (as it were)
shall be shaken too; yet we have received a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. The
Saints are in a Garrison, or Kingdom, that though all the world about them were
shaken, and totter, they are safe, and stand still.

Truly, I have often thought in my own apprehensions, that the Saints differ as
much from other men, as if you could suppose a man to live in the middle
Region, where there is no wind, nor storms, nor tempest: And you know here in
all the sublunary world, there is nothing but clouds, and rain, and storms, and
all weathers. If one were above in the middle Region, lot it rain, or thunder,
or hail, or be what it will here, he is safe, and quiet. Just so it is with the
Saints, they are in the middle Region, in a Kingdom; that though all the
Kingdoms of the world shake, yet they receive a Kingdom that cannot be shaken.

But, you will say, Where is this Garrison, that we may go into it? Where is
this Kingdom?

Salvation (says the Prophet) the Lord shall appoint us for walls and bulwarks.

That is, this Kingdom is not outwardly to be found, it is not an earthly
garrison; but it is a figurative speech, that they do find in the Lord by the
holy Spirit, such security, and such safety, as if they were in a garrison that
cannot be assaulted or taken.

But you will say, How can that be? This is a mere Idea, or Notion, which no
body can understand.

I shall show presently, how it can be, by the help of God. The troubles of a
man, the real troubles of a man, are in his mind, and soul, and affections.
Now if you could find a way to keep a man's mind, and soul, and heart, it were
easy to keep the whole man: For our trouble is not a little imprisonment, or
poverty: Paul, or Sylas, were in prison, and were to be hanged the next day,
for ought they knew; yet they could sing. The man is as his mind is; if we can
find a way to fortify, and garrison the soul and mind, and affections, it
will be easy to garrison the whole man.

But now, how shall we garrison the mind, or soul, How a man may be said to be
secure and impregnable.
or heart and affections? to use no critical distinctions, how shall we garrison
the heart of man?

You shall see that in Phil. 4. 7. The peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds, through Christ Jesus. There
is (says the Apostle) a peace of God that shall keep you, or as the word in
the Greek is, garrison you, shall set up a garrison in your hearts, and minds
through Jesus Christ.

What peace is that?

You shall see, if you compare it with the Gospel of John: When our Lord Christ
was going to Heaven, he told his Disciples, I will send the Comforter John 14.
7.
among you, and, My peace I leave with you; my peace I give unto you, not as
the world gives, give I unto you. My peace I give unto you, not as the peace of
the world. It is a legacy that we have in the New Testament from our Lord Jesus
Christ that is now in heaven; by the Holy Ghost there is a kind of peace that
comes into the hearts of the Saints, that passes understanding, not only the
understanding of wicked men, that they know it not, and apprehend it not, but
it passes the understanding of a godly man that has it. As we see in Isaiah,
there is a peace that comes, and quiets, and secures his soul; such a peace as
he never understood, or did suppose could come into his soul, according to
that, Neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered Isai 64. 4.
into the heart of man to conceive what God has prepared for them that wait
for him. That is, God sends this peace, (and many other blessings.) Such a
peace as a man never conceived in his heart; and this peace comes in, and keeps
the heart like a Castle, or sets up a garrison in the heart, it keeps the heart
and mind through Jesus Christ.

Therefore from that briefly you may learn a lesson or two, that so I may
proceed to that which remains.

Saints; that you would make To repair to this refuge.
toward this refuge, or this garrison here in all your troubles.

I am ashamed, and troubled, and have been truly, many years, to see Saints,
and godly people, when troubles come on them, to spend their wits, and beat
their brains, in finding refuge in outward things. O, if I were here, or there,
in such a Town, in such an Island, in such a Country, in such a place, I should
have it. Beloved, our song should be, Salvation God will appoint us for walls
and bulwarks. Our way is, when all the Kingdoms of the world are shaken, to
seek to get into that Kingdom that shakes not: That is, let England, and all
the world shake, I care not, so I have the Spirit of Christ, the comforter, to
bring peace to my soul, that may set up a garrison there, that nothing may
assault and trouble me. Then let all the world, let heaven and earth shake, I
am sure, I am safe; this is the way.

It is a common saying of many particular persons, Let a man not seek himself
any where without, in the opinion of men: So let not Saints seek refuge, and
shelter, and salvation, in outward helps; but if they should see the Kingdom of
England (which God forbid) involved in more miseries and troubles, and
desolations, etc. Lay this down always by thee; there is a Kingdom that cannot
be shaken. England, and Scotland, and Ireland are shaken; but there is a
Kingdom that cannot be shaken. Such a garrison is besieged, such a Town is in
danger, such a place is stormed; but there is a garrison, that the Lord has put
into the hearts of his Saints, that cannot be stormed or assaulted. Therefore
ply the Lord Jesus Christ by the Spirit of the New Testament, by his holy
comforter, that he would garrison thy soul, and put peace there. And then what
shall be the issue? I will tell thee, that thou with a holy joy, and
complacency, and delight of Spirit, when thou see the very pillars of heaven
shaken (as it were) shall sollace thy self in thy own garrison, and walk in the
streets of it, and be safe; thou shall triumph over all storms and troubles,
and all that is here.

Not because that a Saint is able to encounter those things that are here: For
a Saint is not able to answer, if you ask what he conceives will be the end of
these things? he cannot answer these things; but only he retreats to the
middle Region, as a bird, he flies above sublunary things; he can say, I cannot
tell what shall become of England, or Scotland, or Ireland, but I am sure I
know a back door that leads into a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, to go into
the middle Region, where no storms of the Air shall trouble me; and there I can
rest my spirit.

I always, for my part (with submission to the wise) apprehend it as a thing too
carnal, and too low for Saints to think to find a resting place in this world;
any place is heaven; in such an Island, in such a Plantation, and such a place,
let it be what it will. But a Saint that has this garrison in his heart and
mind, he is at peace. This garrison David had, when his enemies compassed him,
and he had no walls, when there were 10000 about him, he lay and slept: For
thou Lord sustainedst me, says he; The salvation of God was walls and bulwarks
about him.

If this peace of God be above understanding, how can it be otherwise, then be
above expression? We can therefore give but a hint of it; but such a thing
there is. The Saints walk in a green meadow by the rivers of waters, Psalm. 23.
in the spring all the day, and all the night long, in beholding the love of
God, and the Covenant of God made in Jesus Christ; the full forgiveness of all
their sins, the everlasting union between them and Christ, and through Christ
between them and God; and beholding the Spirit in its working within them, and
beholding the glory that shall be revealed at the last day, the Crown that
Christ shall bring with him: they walk safely and sweetly, and securely, though
all the Kingdoms of the world, and the pillars of heaven be shaken. As the
heathen said, If the world break about his ears, he would undergo it without
trouble. Not because he can answer these things, but withdrawing himself to his
place from them; I cannot tell whether the Kingdom shall stand, but I can go to
the middle Region, to Jesus Christ, where there is no storm. Learn that, and
lay aside your great projects, like the men of the world, of building Castles
in the air, for Garrisons: but labor to get into this Garrison. Salvation will
God appoint for walls and Bulwarks; Open ye the gates that the righteous Nation
which keeps the truth may enter in.

This is a speech just alluding to a Garrison; they use there to open the gates,
and to shut them; and when any body comes they bid them stand, and ask them who
they are for? What are they? One says he is a friend, and then they bid open
the gates, and let him come in; if not, to shut the gates against him.

Open ye the gates, says the Lord:

But none must come in but a friend; but who is this friend? It is,

The righteous Nation which keep the truth, they shall enter in.

The word in the Original, it is Truth, not Truth, not one, or two, or three,
or four truths, but the righteous Who have a right to Gods protection.
Nation that keeps the truths, let them enter in. That is the word, if you
will pass this Court of Guard, he that shall come into this Garrison, is he
that keeps truth with a good conscience, notwithstanding all the troubles
that befall him in this world, he shall enter into this Garrison.

Therefore I beseech you look to your selves. Truly it is unconceiveable, and
unutterable, what the joy, the comfort, the worth of that Garrison is, where it
is set up in the soul; yet there are no hypocrites, no partial obeyers of
Jesus Christ, and his laws, that shall enter into it. Therefore if I speak
Hebrew, or Greek (as it were) to you, that you understand not what I mean by
this Garrison, look to your selves, it may be you have not the word, and
therefore you cannot get in. It may be you walk not uprightly, you are not of
the upright Nation, and people, you keep not the truths. It may be you pick one
truth here, and another there that pleases you, that suits with your reason,
or your lusts, and corruptions, or with the stream of the world; you honor and
respect that, and for the rest of the truth, let you neighbors take it if they
will, you will none of it, if it bring shame, and persecution, and reproach.
That is the reason, when troubles come, you are at your wits end, you know not
where to go, because you have not the word, you keep not the truth of God. The
righteous Nation that keep the truth, let them come in, shut the rest out of
doors, 2 Pet. 2. there are a people that are cleansed from their sins by the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and yet after turn from the holy commandment.
Beloved, there are common, general commandments (as I may speak) and holy,
precise commandmens: Religion in every age has something in it that is
feasible to carnal men: and in every age it has some nicities, and
preciseness in it; there is somewhat superfluous in the eye of the world in
every age from the beginning. Now it may be it is ordinary with thee to look to
truths that the world acknowledges; to deal honestly in thy shop for the most
part; to come to Church, and repeat a little of the word, or the like: these
things the world commends; thou observest fast days, or thanksgiving days, or
the like. But there are other truths that are more precise and spiritual, that
worldly men do not apprehend, and these thou leavest as nicities. And that is
the reason many times when thou apprehendest miseries coming upon thy family,
or thy self, or the Kingdom, thou art at thy wits end, and know not where to
go; God shuts the gate against thee, thou have not the word, thou art not a man
or woman that has kept all the truths of God.

Therefore will you now labor to be a righteous Nation to be upright? It is a
word that has ran much in my mind; says God to Abraham, I am alsufficient
God, walk before me, and be upright. I did not think there had been so much
crookedness in the world as now I see. The world is like the word Isa. 7. young
Saplings, as the wind goes this way, they go this way, and when the wind goes
the other way, they go the the other way. It grieveth my soul to see how
unupright people are; even professors: what a deal of daubing, calling darkness
light, and good evil, that think one thing, and speak another, and go against
their conscience; it cuts my soul unexpressibly. Therefore it is just with God
to leave those daubing people; they go with the stronger side, and say as the
world says, and do as the world does, though it be contrary to their
understanding, and conscience: be sure, they shall never be admitted to pass
the Court of guard to come to this Garrison.

And for their comfort, those that come not to this Court, or Garrison in this
world, they shall never come to that in the world to come; if they come not
into this little Court of guard, they shall never come to the great one. It is
a miserable thing for a man to be left without the works: a carnal man is left
without the works, and sin, and the devil, and men may come, and undo him.
Therefore labor to be upright.

It is a principle in Religion that Christians should observe (and a principle,
that is a general grand rule) to call things as they are, to call a Spade a
Spade: but men, they call evil good, and good evil, and frame their
discourses according to the world, they speak according to the world though it
be quite contrary to their understanding, and in spite of conscience.

I am alsufficient God, walk before me, and be upright. What is that? Do not
turn aside to the right hand, or to the left; If thou will be my servant, thou
must neither be driven with fear, or drawn with favor a hairs breadth out of
my Commandments. This is uprightness, lay all the preferments, and honors in
the world on the one side, you shall neither draw them an ace from the truth of
Christ; and lay all the terrors, on the other side, you shall not drive them an
ace: Why so? Because God is alsufficient, there is the reason; as the holy man
Doctor Preston has at large well showed. Why should I be upright? Because God
is an alsufficient God. What is that? Men naturally bargain for gain, it is a
principle, and God expects not that it should be otherwise; if any man offer me
any thing to turn aside the breadth of a hair out of Gods ways, honor, or
preferment or the like, more then God will give, I had reason to turn aside,
and God would not be angry: but I am alsufficient, keep in my ways, I will
give thee more honor, and wealth, and riches, and preferment, then all the
world can. On the other side, could any creature do us more hurt then God, we
had reason to fear that creature: but God is the best friend, and the worst
foe, he can destroy body and soul as Christ says; therefore walk before me,
and be perfect.

There is a sweet place in Eccles. 3. 14. I know that whatsoever God does, it
shall be for ever; nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it, and
God does it, that men might fear before him. I know that what God does, shall
be for ever, nothing can be added to it, or taken from it: that is, if God have
a design to make you happy, all the world shall not take a dram of that
happiness from you; and if God have a design to make you miserable, all the
world shall not take one jot of that misery from you.

That men might fear before him,

That is, before him only: for if the creature could do me any measure of good
or hurt, it were but reason that I should fear the creature, and God too, but
whatsoever God does is for ever, nothing can be put to it, or taken from it,
that men might fear before him. All the world cannot do me a farthing worth of
good or harm; God only can, and he is alsufficient, therefore, let us be
upright before him. These are the two words I would have you remember, Pray the
Lord to stablish your hearts in his love, in his Garrison, that you may be able
to triumph over the world, That you may be able to say, Though all the Kingdoms
in the world be shaken, yet I am in a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. And when
you walk in the streets, and see such factions of men, and there is not a man
of a thousand but he temporizeth, and will say this week as the world says, and
the next week another way; Do not do so: walk wisely, and speak what you
should, and as you should, but call not good evil, and evil good: but walk
uprightly before the Lord, approve of that which is good in the eyes of the
Lord: Walk in the truths of God, and then God in distress will bid open the
gates; there is a man was upright in all the changes of the world, he called
not good evil, nor evil good; Open the gates that the upright Nation may come
in.

Expositions and Observations on ISAIAH 27. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
In that day the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong Sword, shall punish
Leviathan, the piercing Serpent, even Leviathan, that crooked Serpent, and he
shall slay the Dragon that is in the Sea.

In that day sing ye unto her, A vineyard of Red Wine.

I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment, least any hurt it, I will
keep it night and day.

Fury is not in me: who would set the briars, and thorns against me in battle?
I would go through them, I would burn them together.

Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me, and he
shall make peace with me, etc.


I Shall endevor briefly to pick a lesson or two out of this Chapter. In the
Chapter before, we have many blessed promises that God has made to his people,
and that in the times of trouble: And many threatenings of the wicked, How God
will come out against them, as he says, Chap. 25. And spread his hands in the
midst of them, as he that spredeth his hands to swim. That is, God will extend
his wrath and power to destroy the wicked; and in the latter end of Chapter 26.
The Lord comes out of his place, etc.

Now the beginning of this Chapter is but an enlargement and illustration of
that. The Lord will come with his sore, and great, and strong Sword, to punish
Leviathan the crooked Serpent, and to stay the Dragon in the Sea.

This Leviathan, whatsoever it is (which is scarce known) only we read in Job
of Leviathan, one of the terriblest creatures that God has made. It is
conceived to be the Whale, but it is uncertain; whatsoever it is, it is a
terrible creature.

The wicked that persecute the Saints, are called Leviathan, the piercing,
crooked Serpent: That is, those Gods vengeance against the wicked
great enemies of Gods people, those venomous, cruel enemies, those crooked,
deceitful enemies of Gods people; he will come with his great, and sore, and
strong sword to destroy them. So we see, be the enemies of God never so great,
never so cruel, or never so cunning, the Lord will destroy them. He has a
great, strong, sore sword. He has a great sword, in opposition to their
greatness; he has a strong sword in opposition to their strength, and he has
a sore sword, in opposition to their cruelty.

Therefore, O that God would teach you this lesson! A ground of our confidence.
Let your confidence get above the greatest enemies in this world. What though
men be wise, and crooked? as Solomon says; there were three things that he
knew not; one was, The way of a Serpent upon a Rock: Though men be so cunning
to betray the Church, that they cannot be traced, no more then a ship in the
Sea; or a crooked Serpent on a Rock; yet let your faith get on the top of them.
Say not, they are great, but there is a greater then they. God will bring them
down, and bring them to confusion. That is one thing.

In that day, sing to her, A vineyard of Red Wine, I the Lord will keep it; I
will water it every moment, I will keep it night and day.

This vineyard is the Church, and people of God. I will not stand upon it, why
it is called a vineyard. He calls it so principally, because the people of God
are a fruitful people. One sinner destroys much good, and one Saint does much
good. Were it not for a few Saints, you may let all your Armies, and Courts,
and every thing go: There is no good in the world besides; there are a few
Saints, and they are fruitful.

And also, because God preserves them, and keeps them; because of the Lords
care, I the Lord keep it, I water it every moment, least any should hurt it, I
keep it night and day.

See how God expresses his tenderness, and care of his (blessed art thou, and
I, if we be of them!) The Lord keeps, and preserves them; and he will do it
with all care. The Lord keeps not his Vineyard, as we keep his Commandments,
and Ordinances, and the things that belong to him. The Lord expresses his care
of his Vineyard, by the greatest expressions of care that any creature has;
therefore he says, he keeps them as the apple of his eye. That made David
boldly ask, Lord, keep me as the apple of thine eye. And the Prophet Isai h
says, He keeps them as a little bird that sits over her young. A Bird is a
fearful creature, and yet if you come to take away her young ones, she will
fly in your face.

Beloved, though we think the Lord minds us not, yet he has a wonderful,
tender, unspeakable care, in preserving us.

And I will water them every moment. Vineyards are hot, and must be watered, or
else they will be scorched by the Sun: So, our souls unless they were watered
continually, they would be scorched up.

What is this water?

The Holy Spirit. I will pour water upon the dry ground: That is, I will pour
my Spirit upon your souls. We are so apt to wast our graces every day, unless
God give us a new stock. And the earth in Spain, and Italy, and those hot
Countries, is not apter to drink water, then our hearts are to devour, and make
havoc of all the grace of God. And were it not for the blessed, constant
supply that God gives of his Spirit, the best Saint in twenty four hours, would
be as bad as a carnal man. It may be thou have a little quickening of God in
thy soul, but yet God must water them every moment.

Fury is not in me: who would set the briars, and the thorns against me in
battle? I would go through them, etc.

God expresses his goodness to his people. One would think it was a wonder God
did not destroy them: No, says God, Anger is not in me; For who would set
briars and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them. This is the
reason that God does not destroy thee and me; not because we are not sinful,
but because we are so wretched; if he should contend with us, he would destroy
us presently. Says God, All the imaginations of man's heart are evil; therefore
I will destroy the earth no more. It is the nobleness of Gods nature; that
nobleness that is in us, is but a poor thing, it is but a resemblance of that
at the best; it is the nobleness of Gods nature, he will not destroy a creature
that is too weak, and too small for him. Therefore of Niniveh, God says, There
were so many that knew not their right hand from their left, therefore he would
not destroy them. So our littleness moves the Lord to spare us, when our
wickedness would make him to destroy us. The Lord is a consuming fire. Put a
little stubble, or thorns, and briars, before the fire, and it will consume
them. O blessed God! that takes any argument to save his creature: And O
wretched Creatures we! that will take no argument to serve, and obey him. If
there be any good in us, he makes that an argument; if that be not there, yet
from our littleness, and weakness, any thing he will draw arguments of his
goodness from: Yet many times we are of such a temper, that we will not draw
one argument to move us to do that which is pleasing in his eyes. Well, he is a
glorious God, and we are like our selves.

Let him lay hold on my strength.

Let the poor bramble go, and lay hold upon the wall, I have strength enough to
destroy, and devour them, but I wish that they would lay hold of my strength.
There is a way, that all the strength that is in God, thou may make it for
thee, on thy side. All the power and strength that is in God, is against wicked
men that receive not Christ; but there is a way that thou may make that
party on thy side, thou may make God on thy side, Take hold on him, that is,
receive Christ, and then thou art in the Covenant, and all belongs to thee upon
that, and all the power whereby he made heaven and earth, and rules the sea,
and every thing, is thy power, it is for thee.

And make peace with me, and they shall make peace.

It is like the expression of some people that are wondrously given to love,
and peace, and though other people desire to quarrel, yet they will not
quarrel, but they will be friends: there is no neighbor so mischievous, but
they will be friends with them in spite of their heart; so says God, Let them
make peace with me, and they shall make peace. It is like that expression of
God, I will put my spirit in their hearts, and they shall keep my statutes.
That thy soul could creep along upon this blessed wall and make peace with him,
and lay hold of his promise and he says, thou shall make peace!

He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root, etc.

You see how sweet God is in afflicting his Saints, how he preserves them, and
hears them in whipping them. Here he shows three great differences between
Three differences in the afflictions of the godly and wicked.
the afflictions of the godly, and of the wicked.

The first is this, says he, have I smitten him, as I smote those that smote
him? Or is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him?
That is, the Lord does not lay such a weight of affliction upon his children as
he does upon wicked people, that is one thing, therefore he stays his rough
wind in the day of the east wind. No east wind blows on the Saints: for in
Scripture language that is the wrath of God. All the other winds are growing,
but the East wind, is cutting, and chilling.

Secondly, it is said, God will debate with them, that is, besotted carnal
men, as Pharaoh, and others, he lays afflictions upon afflictions upon them,
and they never know why, it makes him a sot, and he brayes him as a fool in a
Mortar: but I will debate with him, says God, I will reason the case, As a
father when he whips his child, will you do so again? says he, And, is this
handsome? The Lord never whips his child, but he debates with him.

Thirdly, the issue, and fruit of it, All the fruit is, he does it to take away
sin, he will make all the stones of the Altar as Chalk-stones; he will beat
them to pieces, that is, they shall pull down their Groves, and their Altars,
as you do Chalk-stones when you burn them, and beat them in pieces.

This should make us sweeten our thoughts of God; he is sweet in his
providence; in his Ordinances, in his corrections, we see what a good God he
is, how he draws water out of the Flint, he draws arguments of grace, and
mercy, and goodness, to save wretched creatures any way, in such a way that if
we were Judges we would condemn our selves. The Lord sweeten your hearts, and
raise up your souls to apprehend his mercy.

Expositions and Observations on ISAIAH 28, 15.
Because ye have said, we have made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we
at agreement, etc.
We have made agreement with hell.
NOt that they said so: but God brings in their thoughts, as in Job, Depart
from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy laws. That is the difference
between Gods book and men's books; men write books according to the words of
men, but the word of God is according to their thoughts,

Here are four or five things noted of wicked men. Four things observed of
wicked men. 1. Their v. in conceits.


First, we have made (say they) a covenant with death, and with hell we are at
an agreement.

The meaning is not, that they did draw writings between them, and hell: for
hell will make no agreement, but the meaning is, they were assured in their
conceits that they should be delivered from hell, and death, and misery. As a
man that has made a Covenant for his land, etc. and has got witnesses to it,
he has made sure, he has it in black and white: so there was a foolish
confidence in them; they assured themselves that they should escape, as if
death and hell had given them an acquittance, and had sealed it, and there had
been Covenants drawn between them and the Devil. That is one thing.

But, says God,

Your Covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell
shall not stand.

That is, you shall see that all those conceits are but vain. Just as if a man
should go, and make a Covenant with his neighbor, and buy his land, and he
should never tell his neighbor that he would sell it, this agreement would be
broken, and the Covenant would not stand. So, you build Castles in the air,
you make a Covenant, and agreement in your conceits, that you are safe, and you
hope the best, and God is merciful, but the day will come when all this will
be done away, As Job says, it is just as a Spiders web, that is, a fine thing
that she has been working all the week, and then the Maid comes to make clean
the house, and all is taken away with one stroke of a brush.

Another thing is, the Lord compares them here to Illustrated in two
comparisons.
hide themselves by the sea side, where the tide comes up. As you see sometimes
when the tide is low, there are green medows, and bushes before it be high
spring; and there they hide themselves, and the water comes and overflowes
their hiding place. If they stay there a while, and it may be are asleep, the
tide comes and drowns them all. Do ye not think a man were mad that should go
and hide himself in a hole of a bridge, and sleep when the tide was low, and
then the tide come in and overwhelm him: So it will be with thee, if thou
receive not Jesus Christ.

We have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves.

Mr. Calvin says, they may be compared to little chickens, or partridges, that
run their heads in a bush, that hide their heads from the Hawk; the Hawk sees
all their bodies, only in a conceit they hide themselves thus, that is, they
hide their own eyes that they may not see the Hawk: but they do not hide their
bodies that the Hawk may not see them. So men shut their eyes, and have many
conceits (O the Lord deliver us from it) this is the hope of wicked men,
drunkards, and whoremongers, and sottish creatures, that come not up to take
Christ.

The Lord after compares them to little children

The bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on it.

As little children, when they hear thunder, they run under the sheets and
blankets, and think they are very safe: so we conceive that we shall be
delivered. But truly all the shifts thou have, shall be no more to keep thee
when the Lord comes on thee for a drunkard, or an unbeliever, or a persecutor,
then the sheets, and blankets can keep them from a thunderbolt if God send it.

I, but these were but comparisons, and the people were ready to mock the
prophet for it: Says he, Mock not, least your bands be made strong, for I have
heard from the Lord a consumption determined upon the whole earth.

Give ear, and hear my voice, hearken to my speech. Does the plowman plow all
day to sow, etc.

This is the manner of the prophet Isaiah, especially when he speaks of the
miseries, and judgments, that shall come upon people, he mingles comfort for
the poor Saints. This he refers to the Saints that were upright. And to comfort
them, he takes a comparison from the Husbandman that plows the field. For the
creatures are Gods Characters: God has written his will in his word at large,
and he has written a copy of it (as it were) in the creatures, that by the one
we might be enabled to understand the other. For we understand not one line of
this blessed book any further then we are taught. Now God has so cast things
in this world, not only for the use and good of man, but he has cast things by
his creation and providence, in such a way, as that every thing might resemble
heavenly things. Therefore it is said, God has given discretion to the
Husbandman to do this: the Lord has ordered the earth so to be plowed, and
managed, and the corn so to be threshed, that thereby we might have a shadow of
spiritual things, comparing it with the blessed word.

Does the plow man, plow all day? God deals diversely with weak and strong
Saints.


What is the meaning of that? It is thus, you poor Saints, God plows you, and
harrows you, and if the Lord follow you with one affliction after another (that
whosoever escapes, you suffer, if not without, yet within, and sometimes you
have both) you think God deals wonderful strangely with you, Says he, look on
the plowman; if ever you see one plow, you will say, yonder man does but plow,
and harrow the land, and make it fit to sow, Barley, or Oats, or Wheat, he has
some end in it: they are the common heaths that lie unplowed: but where there
is good ground they plow it, and when he has plowed, it is his discretion to
sow. So it is, that when the Lord continues his afflictions upon thee, thou
should consider that God, that is thy good father, has some gracious
design to sow Barley, or Wheat, or Rye, to sow some grace more: And what though
he plow thee, or me, or another more then other men or women? Some lands are
plowed thrice, some four times besides the sowing, they are so tough, and
dogged. So some natures must be ofter, and deeper, and longer plowed.

Therefore stare not so much upon the affliction, but consider the gracious
design, and purpose of God to sow thee, and to do thee good. Thou, and I have
barren hearts, and there is little corn that is pleasing to him there:
therefore he means by the afflictions that he lays on thee, by such a
sickness, by such a perverse husband, by such an ungracious child, or loss
of estate, the Lord means to sow thy barren heart; and then blessed be his
name. If the Lord do that, thou may well suffer him to plow, and harrow thee
any way, with any instrument as he pleases.

Then he takes another comparison from threshing.

The Fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is a
cart-wheel turned about upon the Cummin, etc.

That is, the afflictions of the Saints, are also like the threshing of corn:
as there is no land that bears corn without plowing, no more can we enjoy it
without threshing, some more, some less, some one way, some another. Now
(says he) in the manner of afflictions you may observe two things from the
threshing of men; which was in another manner in those countries then with us:
It was trod out with the Ox, and they did bring a wheel, and horsemen to ride
upon their corn in those dry countries, And some was beaten with a staff, and
small corn they did whip out with a rod. So says he, there are two things to
be observed in the manner of Gods dealing, you that are weak people, weak
Christians, the Lord sees that you are little Fitches: Fitches is a little
grain, and Cummin especially, Christ calls them little things; yet little and
weak Christians are like Cummin and Fitches, God will not bring a Cart wheel
over them that shall bruise them to pieces, and make them worth nothing, but he
will beat them with a staff, and the Cummin with a rod; that is, where there
is a little, weak Saint, the Lord will take a little wand, a rod, a small,
light affliction.

But bread corn is bruised because he will not ever be threshing it, not break
it with the wheel, etc.

That is, sometimes also God means to lay all the afflictions (as it were) at
once upon his child, where he sees a strong Saint many times he brings his
horsemen, and his cartwheel, as he did with Job; you know Job had but a bout,
and so he goes over, and some of his days before and his days after were
comfortable, God brings strong afflictions upon his children.

The reason is, because God will not always be threshing, he will not always
afflict, for then the spirit of man would fail before him.

If thy afflictions be light, say, I am a little Fitch, or Cummin, if they be
heavy, say, they will be short; for the Husbandman, though he deal more coursly
with his Corn then with his Fitches, yet he takes it into his Barn, and lays
it up safe: so though thy afflictions be sore, thou may from the practice of
the Husbandman say, they will be short: therefore endeavor to learn a little
from afflictions, and how to carry and behave thy self like a Saint, wait
patiently upon God, to know Gods design and meaning.

This also comes forth from the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in counsel,
and excellent in working.

What is the meaning of that? That that made the Prophet cry out, that the Lord
was wonderful in Counsel, and mighty in working it, was this, to see the
harmony between Gods Works in his Books, and in his Creatures: O who would
think when a man is plowing, that there were such a mystery there! that he
should fetch a glorious mystery in afflicting his Saints, from a little Cummin.
This also is from the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and
excellent in working, that he reveals his blessed will in his book, and gives
such a glorious copy of it in the creatures, that we may understand the one by
the other. Thus have I showed you a little of the meaning of the word of God in
this Chapter, as I understand.

Expositions and Observations on ISAIAH 40. 1.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God.
YOu shall find that in the Scriptures, especially Consolation a duty.
in the New Testament, we are commanded to comfort one another, as much as to
exhort, and more then to reprove: It is very ordinary, Comfort one another.
Though the other duties to the Saints in the New Testament are full of
consolation: The Apostle from every argument, would have us draw comfort from
the coming of Christ, and every thing almost.

There are these four things that I shall speak of, Four things, hinder
Consolation.
that hinder the consolation that might be in your souls. If I take away those
hindrances, it is as much as if I did positively comfort.

faith, but) you have a faith of the Law, and not of the Gospel: You believe in
God, but not in Christ. My meaning is this, your says is begotten, and bred,
according to the doctrine, and principles of the Old Testament. It is good, and
true, but it is bred, and nourished, according to the principles, and strain of
the Old Testament: which (old) Testament (says the Apostle) is done away. You
need not stumble, you know my meaning, your faith is not yet come clearly,
according to the strain, and course, and frame of the New Testament.

You will say, There is but little difference between the old, and the New
Testament.

Look how they be opposed, 2 Cor. 3. Gal. 2. and in the Hebrews; that is the
main business to show the difference between the old, and New Testament.

Now that your faith is so, it will appear three ways. Which appears three ways.
Heathenish desire of sanctification, of holiness. Holiness is a blessed thing,
and there are none desire more earnestly, sincerely to be holy, then the Saints
in the New Testament: Holiness is upon the bridles of the horses of the Church;
yet there is a desire of holiness in the soul, that is, legal faith; that by
the earnest desire of holiness, a man may see the frame of his faith to be
legal. There may be a thirst that arises from a Feverish distemper of body,
that is not good. Therefore truly, a man may desire holiness, more then
happiness (as you are wont to express it.) He may desire holiness, and to avoid
sin, more then Hell it self, and any thing in the world. He may say, he would
not for a world, but overcome his lusts; and O that I could overcome my
frowardness, and my pride, and yet it may be a Heathenish kind of thirst. I
have known people that have gone every day to hear, and have wept, and desired
holiness, and yet out of a Heathenish desire of holiness.

Why; what is the meaning of this? how comes this about?

The soul resolving to be justified, and to find favor with God; partly by the
righteousness of Christ, and partly by some grace; not that it has, but that
it hopes to have: Therefore the soul, as a Feverish man reaches out, and
lays down this conclusion, I must be holy; and there are some things, if I
could reach them, then I should be well; and so the Fever grows higher and
higher. And God crosses him; for it is against the way of the Gospel. God will
do no good to us, if we go contrary to his glory: Therefore if we weep our
hearts out, we shall not have it, for it is a design of our own, says God,
You will not be content with the righteousness of Christ, but you will have
something to make it up; you will believe, and be holy, but you shall go my way
or not at all.

Now a Saint that is according to Gods mind, first upon believing in Jesus
Christ, and his righteousness, his soul is fully satisfied, and he is at peace;
He says, Lord, whether I be holy, or not, I see a full righteousness in Jesus
Christ to justify me, and to sanctify me, and pacify my conscience. And Lord
here I am, Thou know that I have nothing but my old nature; thou art wise;
all my sins are done away, do with me what thou will: If thou will put me to
pain, or into poverty, or into Hell, or suffer me to go in rags, all my life
long, do so: As a godly man said, If pride, and frowardness must have its work,
though I had rather go to Hell for the time; yet here I am, I rejoice in my
spirit, because I am accepted of thee. So, here is a desire of holiness, but it
is not Heathenish; as if a man could have no assurance, and comfort in his
soul, till he had gotten such a degree of grace. These are Feverish desires.

comfort is not right, that your faith is not according to the Gospel, because
of the startlings in your conscience after sin. That when God suffers the soul
to be overtaken, and to fall, the soul startles; that is, horror seizes
presently upon the conscience, and hardness upon the heart; there is a
startling, that makes a man that he cannot go on in his calling, that makes all
his neighbors take notice of him, as if he were not his own man. (Take it as a
general rule, the most, and the greatest dangers, or the most dangerous errors,
border nearest on the most glorious light.) It is blessed to startle at sin,
and to desire holiness; but I say, there is a Heathenish desire of holiness,
and startling at sin, that argues, That the conscience is not quieted in Christ.

You will say, when a Saint falls into sin, shall he take no notice of it?

peace till he have poured out his soul to God: But yet as a Son to a Father,
and his assurance is whole still. Thou art my beloved father, and all that is
befaln me; thou have suffered it, and have a hand in it. I confess Father, I am
an unhappy child; there is never a member of thy Son Christ, that thou have
more trouble with, then with me, there is none of them so vile, and so the
heart is all wholly poured out freely, and fully to the Lord. The other cannot;
but he is hardened, and startles at every thing, as a man going among wild
Beasts.

faith is not come to be right, by the defilements you have from the creatures:
Your faith is not according to the Gospel. When men are defiled with lawful
things. Nay, so much, that some men cannot eat, or go to bed; one while they
must eat of one dish, and not of two (though sobriety be a Gospel grace.) And
one while they must eat one meal a day, another while one meal in two days. I
have known one eat but one meal in a week; and let them eat little or much,
they defile their consciences. One while they must go so in their apparel with
lace, and after that, lace damneth them. Though sobriety be good, in clothes,
and diet, yet this shows that they are defiled; for to a good man every thing
is pure, but to others every thing is impure, because his conscience is impure;
that is, His conscience is defiled, and so he is taken prisoner; his conscience
is not sprinkled, and washed through the blood of Christ; therefore in these
things, he is tangled endlesly. Now if ever you will have comfort in your
souls, that is true and solid: for there may be comforts according to the Law,
but they will not last, they will be out upon the least breach; but if the Lord
frame your faith according to the Gospel, your comfort will be solid and
lasting.

faith according to the Gospel, labor to live by faith. Many of you have a
little faith, and true Gospel faith; but you do not live by it, you live by
sense. It is a proverb in Scripture, The just shall live by faith. I shall have
occasion to open that when I have more time, and therefore I proceed.

comfort short, is the slow coming of grace into your souls. You find grace
come in but slowly; you believe, and labor to believe according to the Gospel,
and yet grace comes but slowly and poorly; you have been so many years, and
have scarce any grace.

For your comfort, this is one thing; thou that have but little grace coming in
so many years: I tell thee, God says that grace is like the springing of the
sea; or the springing of the year. Now in the springing of the sea, when men
would have a tide for their passage, a man is glad to see a little turning of
the water first, it is so much the nearer: then he observes, and is glad to see
the Sea rise, and cover a few stones or marks, though it be little: but stay
till it be almost full Sea, when it is high tide, then every thing almost is
covered on a sudden, the tide over-runs all. Take it in the spring of the year
(for we should learn something from the creatures) about February, you are glad
to see the buds of Haw thorn; you look a week together, and it grows a little,
and you see no other, it is a sign that Summer is coming. In the beginning of
March it may be there are two or three things more, and they come slowly, and
you are glad to see them, and look on them every day. In April or May, the
Gardens are full of Flowers, and the fields full of grass; you know not what to
observe. So it is in experience, in the beginning the Lord makes a Saint glad
of a Primrose, of a little turning of the water, that the blood, that the
stream is turned; if he begin to hear the word, that hated it, and to rejoice
in the company of good neighbors, that hated it, two or three little
Primroses. But grace comes as the tide; stay a while, and thou shall see such a
flowing of grace in thy soul, that thou know not where to look; such a tide
of love, and joy, and knowledge, such innumerable lessons, that thou know
not where to look; Therefore wait upon the Lord, and thou shall see grace come
in as the tide.

experiences thou have had of God. Thou have had abundance of experience of the
Lord; and we are apt to forget: As Christ says, do you not remember the loaves
the other day, and do you now doubt whether you have bread? O yea of little
faith! Truly the very creatures will rise in judgment against us, that having
had so many experiments of God, we are so shie of trusting God, and thinking
well of God. Did thou ever see a Dog (let me instance in that vile creature)
(for God would have us learn from the creatures, and God has cast them so that
they should not be only for our use, but every thing in reference to his
Gospel, that we may not only occasionally draw such things that hap hazard
fall out, but to observe their nature, and qualities, and learn somewhat from
them) you see in a Dog, when he has abused you, it may be against his will,
and it may be you have beat him; he runs away, or he comes with fear, and is
very shie, and will hardly come to you: but take him in your arms, and stroke
him, and all his fear it gone; when you smile, he thinks you mean him no hurt,
he has no thought of your former anger. So we come many times to the Lord, and
are shie, and tremble, and fear, and think he means to hurt us, and what are
his thoughts? How often has God taken us in his arms and stroaked us, and laid
us down again, and yet we fear again, and are worse in many respects then the
bruit creatures. When the Master has the Dog, he may kill him if he will; but
he strokes him, and the Dog thinks his master means well to him: so, many times
God might kill us, and throw us into Hell, and catch us at advantage, yet in
stead of that he loves us, and imbraceth us, and lays us down again; and yet
we are so shie, we fear, and distrust him. We have not that plainness of heart
as that old Martyr said, I have lived eighty years, and he never did me any
hurt: So God many times has had advantage to have thrown us into hell, yet he
has kissed, and stroaked us. Why should we be so fearful, when afflictions,
and troubles come upon us? These things procure sadness, because we do not
trust in that God, that in our extremity has been friendly, and fatherly to
us. The Lord help you to lay up these few broken words in your hearts.

Expositions and Observations on ISAIAH 65. 5.
I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walks
in a way that was not good: after their own thoughts, etc.

Which say, Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou:
these are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day.


THe Lord does here reprove, or rather show his indignation against hypocrites.
Here is their description, they say, stand by thy self, come not near to me,
for I am holier then thou, yet they were a rebellious people, as we see before,
the Lord spread out his hands to them all the day long, and they walked in
their own ways, after their own thoughts. The thing I drive at, is, to
acquaint you with this;

How hateful, how abominable hypocrisy is to God.

Their hypocrisy was, that they thought, and they said Hypocrisy a hateful
thing to God.
to their brethren, stand off, I am holier then thou, come not near me, etc.
yet it was but outward holiness, and the Lord says, they are a smoke in my
nostrills all the day long. The meaning is not, as if God had nostrills, though
usually where you read of the anger, and wrath of God in the Hebrew, It is
said, Gods nose, God took this to his nose, when he was angry. But when he
says, they are a smoke in my nostrills, God takes the comparison from man, as
it is often in the proverbs, a sloathfull messenger is as vinegar to the teeth,
and smoke to the eyes, that is, very sore. So God says, hypocrites are as a
smoke in his nostrills all the day long, that is as smoke in a Kiln, or in a
smoaky house where there is a bad chimney, it is a wondrous troublesome thing,
especially if a man be driven to continue all the day, a man is not able to
bear it, the smoke will fill his eyes, and his nose. God takes the expression
from men, to show his indignation, and displeasure a against hypocrisy. My aim
is to make you sensible, how displeasing to God hypocrisy is.

Hypocrisy, take it in the grossest sense (though there be a hundred degrees of
it) is when men seem and are not, when you say, and do not, as some express
it; when you pretend to be that you are not, or pretend to be more then you
are; for so it is here, I am more holy then thou. That is hypocrisy, when you
seem what you are not, or in degree more then you are; yet that less degree is
as a smoke in Gods nostrills all the day long. It is abominable to God; and
that is the reason that Christ eight times in the same Chapter, Mat. 23.
pronounces Woe to you hypocrites, Woe to you hypocrites. It may be the Lord may
call an hypocrite: for an hypocrite is but a sinner though he be the worst of
sinners: but hypocrisy is abominable to God.

The reason is, because such a man Idolizeth every Proved from two reasons. 1.
The hypocrite honors the creature above God.
creature, and makes every creature more then God, he honors every creature
more then God. For he knows that God deals with his heart, he knows that God
deals with his heart, he knows that God sees his heart, and men, and children,
and every thing, sees his outward life: now he is more careful to please men
and creatures, and to carry himself religiously, and devoutly, as a Saint
before men, then he cares how to carry his heart before the Lord, which is as
if he should say, I do more honor, and respect every creature that sees my
outside; then the Lord God that views, and sees my heart. What can more provoke
God, when God is put below every creature, and every creature is advanced above
him? That is one reason.

Another reason is this, because that the name of God is more dishonored, and
his Gospel, and his Kingdom 2. Hypocrisy contributes most to Gods dishonor.
more scandalized by them, then by all the world besides. The Saints sometimes
dishonor God by weakness: but carnal men usually know in their consciences
that it is but weakness in such a Saint, looking on the course of his life,
and the frame of his spirit: but hypocrites, the world seeing sometimes their
base doings, are ready to curse them; Here are the men that go to such
Lectures, and such Sermons, and thus they cozen, and overreach, and all their
Religion is of the same stamp; they are all hypocrites, as this sanctified
brother, cheaters they are. This does transfigere nomen Jehovah (as blasphemy
signifies) it makes men pierce through the name of God, and of Christ, God has
so fastened it on my heart how abominable it is, that it cannot out of my
thoughts: therefore God may have an end in it, to reach some of you at this
time, though you have been as a smoke in his nostrills, though you have kept
God no a kilne (as it were) by your villainy, by seeming what you are not; or to
be far more then you are. For take it from God, for it is from him in a
special manner, let us all look to our selves, let us all consider our ways,
and let all take heed that we seem, and pretend not to be any thing in Religion
more then we are in our closets; That we may be able to say, O Lord, if I were
at thy tribunal, this is true, I desire thy glory, I seek thine honor, and
the welfare and advancement of thy people, and so whether I be well, or ill, or
live or die, I care not. Look to it, and woe, woe, woe, to those among us
whosoever they are, let them be Magistrates, or Ministers (I leave them to the
Lord to point them out) that drive on Jesuitical designs under the pretense of
Religion; They talk of Reformation, and I know not what, and a blind man almost
may see their covetousness, and self-seeking, and oppression of the Saints.
Whosoever thou art, thou have the worst end of the staff, be sure. The hearts
of the Saints are touched with the same loadstone as the heart of God, they
judge as he judges, and as God says, such people are a smoke in his
nostrills, so they are in the eyes of the Saints, they curse such. They pity
wicked men when blindly they go against the Saints: but when thou put the
best side outward, and pretendest to be holy, and thou know, thou could
eat all the Saints of God, and throw down the Worship of Christ, O there are
many prayers against thee, and there is a harmony between the hearts of the
Saints, and the heart of God. God says, ye are a smoke in his nostrills, and
so say the Saints. It grieves me more at the Jesuiticall designs of some, then
all the proceedings of the Cavaliers. Woe be unto them: there is nothing done in
secret, but it shall be open, there is nothing spoken in the ear, but it shall
be published on the house top; all their villainy shall come out.

And so in trading, a man must take heed of many professors (I hope the
generation of the Saints shall not suffer by it) in buying, and selling; a man
were better deal with carnal men, then with some professors in the City that I
have known.

I speak this to thy comfort that art such a one, though thou be the very heir
of hell, Mat. 24. they shall have their portion with hypocrites, as if hell
were their inheritance, Yet for thy comfort know that an hypocrite is but a
sinner, though he be as far from heaven as any. For there is that that
magnifies Christ's love, he came to die for sinners, and thy conscience tells
thee, I am the man that the minister meant, my trading is so, I know what
accounts I keep, and what wares I sell: though thou be, yet I trust God means
thee so well as to bring thee to Christ, and when thou art as bad as thou can
be, think yet thou art but a sinner, the Lord does but rank thee among sinners,
learn this short word, to see how hateful hypocrisy is.

Expositions and Observations on ISAIAH 66. 12, etc.
For thus says the Lord, behold I will extend peace to her like a river, and
the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall
he born upon her sides, and dandled upon her knees, etc.
THe prophet in this Chapter speaks of the calling of the Gentiles by the Jews;
what glorious times the last times should be when the Jews that were the eldest
sister, as the Gentiles are called the little sister in Scripture; we have a
little sister and she has no breasts; when this eldest sister should go and
carry the youngest, when they should go and call in the Gentiles, and feed them
and cherish them, as the eldest children use to do the youngest. They shall
bear them upon their sides, and dandle them upon their knees; as we see
children nourish one another, especially the elder do the younger. So they
should be tendered, they should bring all their brethren as an offering to the
Lord; they should bring them upon Mules, and upon swift beasts, and when they
could not go on foot, they should put them on hors-back, and if they could not
ride, they should put them in charets; and if that were too harsh they should
put them in litters, that is, they should do any thing to nourish them, and to
bring them up. We may well reason, if the children be so fond one of another,
as that they should carry them, and let them hang on their sides, and dandle
them on their knees, much more fond will the Lord be to those children:
Therefore in the next verse he says, As one whom his mother comfort, so
will I comfort you. God shows the dearness God and the Saints fond of each other
of his love, by those little sparks of love in the children of God one toward
another. But his love is very high, a kind of fondness, he will dandle them
on the knee. Why? Cannot he do them good but he must dandle them in the lap?
There is a holy spiritual fondness between God and his people. He is fond of
them, and they are fond of him.

It is not every Saint that is so; thou may be a Saint, and yet be a
stranger to all that I am to speak of from this text, But there is such a
thing. Because a Saint, if he be a right Saint, you cannot put before him any
pitch of grace and holiness, but he seeks to attain it. As when Christ's
Disciples came into the company of the Disciples of John, and John's disciples
knew how to pray, and they did not, say they, Lord teach us to pray. So you
need but put a higher degree of grace before a right-hearted Saint, and he will
be sick, and never be well till he has it. Therefore I will present you with
such a temper that is in some Saints, that they are fond of God, with a holy,
not with a sinful fondness: as your children, they are fond of you sometimes
with a great deal of sin; but this is a holy fondness.

First I will show you that it is so.

Secondly, I will show you which way God makes his children fond of himself.

Proved in five particulars.
suffer his father to go out of his sight. Beloved, one may be a Saint, and yet
may see his father, but as a child at nurse, once a quarter, or so. It is
ordinary with the Saints, they see their father it may be at such a Sermon, or
at such an ordinance, or in such a private chamber, where they have examined
their souls; and it may be they do not see him in a fortnight after: and they
make shift with grace received, with the impression of Gods love (when they saw
it) and with a little help of the creature, and the comforts of the world, to
hold up till they see him again: this is the life of most Saints. But there is
such a temper of a Saint, he is so fond of God that he will never let God go a
moment out of his sight, but he will cry after him. My meaning in a word is
this, that there is such a temper, if thou and I had attained it, that God can
never go out of ken, but I always behold him, and see him always beholding me
in the face of Jesus Christ; I am always with him. See it in the Saints, David
was a fond Child; Thou scest my thoughts, says he, and my speech, when I sit
down and when I rise up, thou know all, and whether shall I go from thy
presence? It was not in a hypocritical way that he might flee from God: but
when I awake I am always with thee, When I walk abroad, I have set God on my
right hand that I might not sin, when a man is always in view; when Gods eye
is always on him, and his eye always on God, what a blessed thing is it! Such
a Saint, let God but hide his face, and he is troubled, let God go but one hour
from such a soul, and he is ready to cry out his heart, as we see in a fond
child. That is the reason there is so much carnalnesse in the Saints, that
they have so many unsaint-like tricks, like the men of the world; Why? They go
behind Gods back, they think God is a sleep a while, and they may dispatch
their business; whereas Joseph said, how shall I do this thing and sin against
God? God was in the view of him, when he was with that wretched woman: so a man
would say, how shall I pretend my office is for the good of the public, and
for the glory of God, when it is to in rich my family? God may be out of sight,
and ken, and yet you may be Saints: but there is a more glorious life, when a
man always walks in Gods sight, God seeing him, and he seeing God. These things
are not for the head, but the heart. Now talk with thy heart a little, and see
what is thy temper, and thy way, and if thou find it not thus, tell God; the
minister said that there be Saints that live gloriously, that are fond of God,
that are always with him, sleeping, and waking, at bed, and board, they are
never out of his sight. Lord make me such.

never be still or satisfied with any creature. A child that is not fond, you
may give him twenty baubles whiles his mother goes to market, or does other
things, but if he be grown fond, a thousand of those will not satisfy him. So
a true Saint has much of God, and little of the creature; a man may be a true
Saint, and be much upon the creature, but when the soul grows fond of God, no
creatures, or rattles will serve, if God put the creature into his hand, he is
glad, but if God be away nothing will serve him: As a child that is fond of his
mother, give him a Rattle or a Cake while he is in her hand, he is glad, but
nothing will still him without her.

boldness in a fond child to ask any thing of his father, truly such a
boldness as were rude in a stranger; a child will sit in the lap of his
mother, and snatch a thing out of her hand: So people may talk of forms how
people should pray, and stand half an hour confessing of sins, and so come on
by degrees, but one that is fond of God with an holy fondness, he knows he may
leap into his fathers lap at any time, and fall into his arms, and ask any
thing without courting, and complement.

set their hearts, and to get off the guilt that is between them and God as a
cloud; they have much ado to get a little adoption to call God Father, and to
lay hold on the promises: but there is such a temper of holy fondness, that
there needs not all, or any of this: God and the soul are so well acquainted,
and always together, that as soon as ever he comes he can ask any thing, and in
a holy boldness snatch it: for the Kingdom of heaven is taken by violence,
therefore says God concerning my sons and daughters, Command ye me. A child
can command his father, and say, I must have a new coat, I must have a new
book, or I must have a ball to play with: so a Saint can say, Father, there is
a covenant, thou art my Father, and I am thy child, it cannot stand with thy
Truth, thou were not just if thou should deny me any thing that is good: O
this is a holy boldness! As a child can creep into his mothers breast, and
pull it out with his hand, yet because there is an inward love, she bears with
it, and smiles in his face. It argues a great deal of neerness to God when one
is always in a readiness to ask any thing. I have observed that souls that are
far from God, they must always go upon their knees, but a soul that is near can
pray standing, or walking, or talking, as that good man that you read of in the
Book of Ezra, he can pray with his hat on, he can pray in his bed, or where you
will, when he is is communion with God. It is a most glorious thing, and a
grace that I have seen in some Saints, and it has made my soul sick to have
it, to have a soul always in such a temper, they can speak a spiritual word at
any time, as it is said of Bradford, to have a heart so familiar with God, that
it can speak in a moment: A weak Professor prays, and he is put to it to the
utmost for his duty in the morning, and he gos behind Gods back all the day
till night, and unless he set aside all his work, and go upon his knees, he
cannot pray as he buys, and sells, and trades.

Fourthly, there is in a fond child a holy carelessness, of casting himself,
body, and soul, and family, and business, and affairs and all upon God, Be
careful for nothing. It is not to make careless Christians: but it is true in
one sense, when in a holy carelesnes, a man casts himself upon God. It is your
weakness, much of your dispute, concerning grace, and salvation, and
justification; a fond Child of God smiles at it; he can come near his father,
and catch him, and hold him, and say, I know whom I have trusted, on whom I
have laid my soul; As a man that puts his estate in another hands, can say, I
know whom I have trusted, A weak saint thinks little of, and cares little for
the service of God; but he cares much for his own safety, and security, and
salvation: a strong, fond saint takes less care for his own salvation, but he
cares much for the service of Jesus Christ. For (thinks he) let the Lord Jesus
look to that; he has taken on him to die for my soul, and he has promised to
receive it; and he has said he will not cast away them that come to him, I
have cast my soul on him, sink or swim, I will not trouble my head with that,
but all my thought, and care shall be how I may please Jesus Christ, and love
and glorify him. It is a blessed pitch of grace when a saint can come to that
carelessnes, that a man is not thoughtfull for his soul, when he has brought
it to Christ, leave it there, and think not of it, but think of the work and
will of Christ, and how to honor him. As suppose you meet in the way as you
travel, an enemy, a man that (it may be) stands there to destroy you, though
you meet him you know not his purpose, if you did, you would go another way;
now when you meet the man, there is one of these two things to be done, either
concerning your safety, or your carriage to Christ. Now a saint is apt to take
Christ's work, and lay aside his own; another man does not care in that case,
how he is pleasing to Christ, and carries himself to him; but his care is how
he may get off from his enemy, that he may not kill him, and take away his
life: that is our error; we should leave that to Christ, he has put an enemy
before me, and he cannot kill me without Christ give him power: but my care
should be, how to be pleasing to God, and so to speak, and think, and do. As
for outward things, and for the body; so for the soul, my care should not be so
much whether I shall be damned, or saved: I know into whose hands I have put
it; but my care should be, how to walk more holily and pleasing to Christ, and
for the edification of his Church and kingdom; this a child that is fond of
God will do.

God in Jesus Christ, he sees something of God in every thing. As they say of
love, one that is in love, sees nothing with her eyes, nor hears nothing with
her ears but love: so a Saint that is fond of God, bring him meat, he sees the
love of God in Christ in it; bring him clothes, or any thing, his eye is
fastened more upon the love of God in Christ, then upon the thing. As the
spouse in the Canticles (for the Canticles is a book of fondness between
Christ and his people) she hears one talk, I warrant you (says she) this is
the voice of my beloved; she is so fond of him, that she could not hear one
talk, but she says, It is my beloved, when she looks on the gallery, and the
lattice, I warrant you (says she) my beloved looks through that grate, and when
she sleeps, her heart waketh. It is a blessed thing when we do not eye things
in themselves, but so as we are able to see God in them.

And you shall know it by the various tempers of your souls: for sometimes you
are more spiritual, and sometimes more carnal: when you are carnal, you use
more of the creature, and never see God at all; but when you are spiritual,
you see God, and his love in Christ in every thing.

I shall now show you how God brings his children This fondness wrought four
ways.
to this holy fondness, and I would leave you longing for it; and I trust in
God to leave some souls sick, till God work, and bring up their souls to that;
I will name but only four.

The first thing is, that God utterly convinces a Saint 1. By disabling all
the Creation to this end.
of the vanity of every creature, and of every condition, he will never be fond
till then: God lets him suck one creature after another, and then he sees the
vanity of them. God puts him into one condition after another: O, says a
Saint, when he is sick, if I were well, I should rejoice, and glorify God: God
gives him health, and then he is in a worse temper. When he is poor, says he,
If I had to pay my debts, and to set up handsomely, then I should serve God; God
sets him up, and lets his heart go after covetousness, and says to him, Do
thou not see that thou art worse then thou were before? So God chaseth him from
one creature to another, and from one condition to another. If he would be in
the Country, God convinces him that he will be worse then in the Town; At last
he says, Lord, I have tried, and hunted all, and I see they are a company of
vanities. And sometime when he is sick in body, and shaken in soul, God appears
gloriously, and makes the worst condition better then the best: so God follows,
and traseth, and chaseth him from one to another, till he bring him to see
every creature vanity, and every condition; and, says a Saint, I do not much
care what condition, whether he put me in prison, or at liberty, whether I be
rich or poor; well or sick, so he reveal himself to my soul. You will never be
fond till you come to that, till God convince you of all conditions, and of the
use of all creatures, and tire thee that thy soul may say, God is all in all; I
am indifferent what creatures I have, or want, or what condition I am in: for I
have seen God to be all in all, I have seen nothing in riches, and in liberty,
but as God comes into a condition, or is absent, so it is sweet or bitter,
good, or bad. People that are professors in these sad times, they would not be
so reaching, and griping and undermining, for offices, and places, and
preferments, and I know not what, if they did see this.

Another way it this, that the Lord sheds his love into their hearts, Rom, 5.
he poures it out, as you would 2 By Gods pouring forth his love in their heart
pour out a Paile, or a Bucket of water; God so overpowers the heart with his
love, that there is no guilt, no hardness, no fear, no spirit of bondage at all
left in the soul. Beloved; why are not we more fond of God? why is not he more
dear to us? The reason is, because we have many hard thoughts of him, that he
may be an enemy as well as a friend, and I know not what he means: I look upon
him at a catch, as with a staff in his hand to strike me. There are abundance
of those thoughts in the soul, especially in affliction; some professors are
ready to say, God has found me out as an hypocrite, and plagueth me. In
afflictions, ordinary professors loose more, though they talk of getting. But
the Lord comes to some of his children, and so overpowers their hearts with his
love, that there is not one thought nor imagination in their hearts, but only
of love to him, and then they will be fond: for when they see pure love in God,
and nothing but a principle of pure love in them to God; what should hinder but
they should be fond one of another? There is a homely comparison, a woman that
has butter in a dish, she melts some of the butter; but if she take it too
soon from the fire, there will be a core, a knob in the dish left, and being
taken from the fire it grows bigger, till all be hard. So a weak Saint, by
studying the promises of God, and the love of God, it dissolves much of the
knobbinesse, yet there are some hard thoughts, and Iealousies, and suspicions:
but God comes at last, and melts all the butter together, all the knobbiness
that is in the heart, every thought, and imagination, of terror, and guilt,
and fear, that there is a clear, and pure principle of love to God, and then
the soul is fond of him.

The Lord takes a great deal of delight to train and bring up his child to be
more in love with him: God will so train and bring him up, that if he throw
him into the worst condition that can be for body, or soul, and shall say, what
think thou of me now? have thou any hard thoughts of me? says God: No,
says the soul, all is Love. As for instance, I will tell you a thing, the
worst on this side hell, I speak not of imprisonment* or shame, but God may
take him, and leave him to sin, and then the soul awakes, and thinks, good Lord
where am I? O what a hell have I in me! for there is a hell in the heart, if
God take off the vail of grace, if he draw the Curtain, there is nothing but
hell in the soul: There are many sins that thou have committed, that there is
not a soul in the world that has committed worse. This is true, says a Saint,
and do thou not think, says God, that thou art an hypocrite? and that I
shall damn thee for this? No, says the soul, I know I have nothing in me but
of thy Grace, and if thou draw the Curtain, all is hell; but there is nothing
but love, even then after sin, there is not one hard thought, it makes the soul
more fond: he says, it is true, I am so, and there is no devil that has worse
thoughts, but the more need I have to go to my Father, for I am thy son, I am
sure of that; and seeing that I am weaker then I was, I have the more need to
betake me to thy lap, and into thy arms, and so he grows more fond of God by
sin it self.

Nay, I will tell you a greater then that. What can that be? There is one
greater, and yet all this cannot quench the love and fondness that is between
the soul and God, that is, when God corrects his child with one sin for
another: It may be for his fault he lets him run to covet Places and Offices,
etc. and the next day after, the Lord suffers another lust to carry him as in a
Chariot to hell, that this may make him take heed how he looks after such
things. This is the worst between this and hell says God: Should I not now
come, and break thee in pieces as a villain? No, says the soul, this is a wise
design of thy love, and there is nothing but love in thee to me, and there
shall be nothing but pure love in me to thee.

Learn these things, beloved, There are many that come to hear, and all that I
can see from them, is, that if there be controversal, they dispute of that when
they come home, but lay these things to heart, as it is said of Mary, and beg
of the Lord to screw up your souls to that heavenly, blessed Life, that you may
attain in this world. 3. Assurance of conquest over all kind of enemies.


The third thing, before which a Saint will never be fond, is, God will
convince him of an absolute, perfect conquest over all his enemies. A child of
God will never be fond till he be secure, and he will never be so till God show
him by his Spirit, that he is more then conqueror over most of his enemies, and
that he is a certain conqueror over all. And this is by faith: for by sense
sin prevails over us, and if we say we have sin, we do not say true. But by
faith, when Satan is most severe, he is conquered, and sin when it is most
violent, he looks on it as a vassal at his foot, entreating pardon. It is said
in Daniel, that Christ came to bring in everlasting righteousness, and make an
end of sin. A Saint by faith sees sin ended, as hell, and damnation, and wrath,
and the curse is so, sin shall be out of doors. There is no damnation to them
that are in Christ. He has redeemed us out of the hands of our enemies, that
we might serve him without fear, as Zechary says, from all our enemies: and he
shall (as Malachy says) tread his enemies as ashes under his feet.

This is that that keeps a Saint under, he cannot come to the height of love to
God; because there is some enemy that over-tops him. This day, when he hears
that our souls are over sin, he is cheary: but when he comes home, there comes
a sin or a temptation, and breaks all, and he is at a loss. Now when faith is
scrued so high, as to tread on all enemies, on sin, which is the strongest: say
it be a strong temptation of covetousness, thou studiest to purchase and to
enlarge thine inheritance: suppose there be such a thing in thy soul, and it is
violent, and thou have offered to resist it, and thou can not: thou may
say, Sin, though thou be strong, and I cannot put thee cut, thou have bolted
the door, but thou art my slave, and in the blood of Christ, I am thy
conqueror; thou think to conquer me, but thou art my vassal and my slave.
And much more may he say so of Satan; Thou molestest me, but thou art
condemned, I am made Lord over thee in the blood of Christ. Grace, and sin will
mount as the bird and the Hawk, and the one seek to out-mount the other: the
bird for safety, the Hawk for prey: so grace and sin get one above another. O,
says grace, I would be holy: says sin, thou shall be covetous. I will pray,
says grace; but I will make thee my possession, says sin. When the soul
out-mounts sin, to the place where dwells righteousness, that Kingdom that
cannot be shaken; that I see all my enemies beneath: and when they are most
strong, and imperious over me, I look on them with a peaceable and quiet spirit

Last of all, and so I have done with this; notwithstanding all this the soul
could not be fond of God, but 4. By a spiritual ad hesion to the new Covenant.
as God gives him a spiritual understanding of the new Covenant; the enemies
will over-mount the soul else. As for instance, to give you but one
illustration, there are such pangs, and such a temper in the soul of a Saint,
as that sometimes, nothing in the world can give him satisfaction; there is
sin, and temptation, and it may be pain in body: and where is God, and the
spirit, and any thing to help? God can help, but who knows whether he will or
no? now I am in the hands of mine enemies: In comes the Covenant, O (says the
soul) it is true, I am in the hands of mine enemies, and God may choose whether
he will rescue me. He might have done, but now he is bound in an everlasting
Covenant, that (with reverence) God must help: time was when God might have
cast me to hell, and he was not bound to save me, but the case is altered, God
is bound to save me. Therefore says David, Though my house be not so with God,
yet there is a Covenant, this is my desire, and joy. Many times, the soul is so
that nothing can relieve it but the Covenant that God is bound, that God cannot
though he would desert him.

If you examine, what this Covenant is; and whereto it is? The Lord knows we
are apt to measure him by our selves, and so we do in every thing: we think our
thoughts, as Gods thoughts, and his thoughts as ours: therefore God is willing
to condescend unto us in our own way: for that God that contrived a way of
salvation before the world was, we may not fear but that that love will carry
us through: but God would come in our way, and take that way that one man does
with another: because we are apt to measure God by our selves, therefore he
comes and says, and if that serve not, he swears, and if that will not serve,
he brings a seal, and a Covenant, and then with men a man is safe enough: So,
Gods word had been enough; but because we should have strong consolation, that
must be conveyed according to our apprehensions, and thoughts: there God says,
and swears, and makes a Covenant, and binds himself, that we may see him bound.
Therefore says the Apostle in the Galatians, If it be but a man's Covenant,
none can dissanull it. As if he should say, I made this for your sakes, or else
I have one, and none can alter it: but foryour sakes I came down, and made a
Covenant like men; and There are three that bear witness, and that is enough
among men: therefore think my love will be constant to the end. So when a
Christian is at a dead lift, this relieves him, not that God can save him if he
will, but that God must, he is bound to save him.

It is a pitiful thing, when a man is in the hands of a thousand enemies; and
then can only say, peradventure God will save me and rescue me, but when the
soul sees that God must rescue it, and there is a Covenant made, and sealed
with the blood of Christ, and it is not possible to be broken, Gods Covenant is
to save me, and preserve me to his everlasting Kingdom. Thus I have briefly
showed you that fondness that is between a Saint, and God; and the book of
Canticles is (as I told you) nothing but a book of fondness (as I may say)
between Christ and the Saints. Therefore you should aim at the good of your
souls, and seeing there is such a condition, that there are Saints that are so,
desire the Lord to make you such.

Expositions and Observations on DEUTER. 4.
Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and judgments, which I
teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go in, and possess the land
which the Lord God of your fathers gives you.

Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall you diminish
ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I
command you.

Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baal-peor: for all the men
that followed Baal-peor, the Lord thy God has destroyed them from among you.

But ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God, are alive every one of you this
day, etc.


I Shall not go about to expound this whole Chapter unto you, you see it is
very long, and therefore I will not abridge my self or you of time for that
which is to follow: but only briefly take notice of a few things in this
Chapter which I shall touch upon: for they are sweet, and very serious words
that Moses speaks to the people of Israel. One thing is in the fourth verse,
says Moses, Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baal-peor: for
all the men that followed Baal-peor, the Lord thy God has destroyed them from
among you.

But ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God, are alive every one of you to
this day.

You shall read in Number. 25. 4. and in Number. 30. 15. that by the counsel of
Balaam the people of Israel were brought to commit Idolatry at Baal-peor,
Israel joined himself to Baal-peor; and the anger of the Lord was kindled
against Israel. They were brought first to whordom, and then to Idolatry, as we
may see in that Chapter, for which God cut off men and women about some twenty
four thousand. And yet in this great temptation, some of them did cleave to the
Lord, and those the Lord kept alive and destroyed them not: ye that did cleave
to the Lord your God, are alive every one of you this day.

So that,

It is a blessed and happy thing when people shall Observation
cleave to the Lord.

The word is taken sometimes to stick, my belly cleaves or sticks to the dust.
And so truly the word should stick a little upon our thoughts. Cleaving, it
implies or signifies two things.

It signifies, first to glue, to unite two things together into one, and so you
shall have it, Genesis 2. 24. They Cleaving to, implies two things. 1. A near
conjunction.
two shall be joined, and made one flesh, they shall be glewed (as it were)
together. So you have it in Ephesians. 5. And there is in that word, as that
reverend Doctor Preston, I remember, observes, it signifies a greater union
th^^ any other in the world. Indeed, there is a great union between two boards
glewed together: for I have heard Joyners say, it is sometimes stronger then
the board it self, as a broken bone is stronger when it is knit, then before
ever it was broken. It is an union more then marriage, more then between man
and wife, yet that is the greatest in the whole creation. Beloved, such a union
should be between our souls and Jesus Christ; we should not hang loose upon
Jesus Christ, we should be united to him as a man to his wife, yea something
more then that: And therefore says David when he found a loosnes in his heart,
O knit my heart to thee, that I may fear thy name. Knit my heart; as Ionathans
heart was knit to David. Will you learn this now? For our work is as Moses said
in another kind, I have laid before you this day life and death, and (says he)
at another time, I have laid before you judgments and statutes: so our work is
to lay before you the will of the Lord; now this is one part of it, that there
should be such a union between our souls, and Jesus Christ. And therefore learn
this, when thou go home, if thou find a loosnesse between thee and Christ,
remember this word, thou should learn to cleave to the Lord, and pray the
Lord to knit thy heart to him. When there is a loosnesse, that is, when many
times, other things run between thy heart and God, sometimes thy husband,
sometimes thy wife, sometimes thy money, thy wealth, thy cash has thy heart: O
pray the Lord to knit thy heart more and more to him.

But cleaving also is taken more usually, for sitting 2. A relative permanency
with
or abiding in the Lord, when others do leave him. It is a relative kind of
word, it is not simply ^^iting to God, or knitting to him: but when other
things are in competition with God, when (it may be) others follow other
things, and when both are laid before mine eyes, that I may follow the one or
the other, then when I abide with God, this is called cleaving to the Lord. As
I could give you diverse instances. Genesis 2. 24. A woman is to forsake her
father and mother, and to cleave to her husband: that is, a woman when she is
married, she has two sweet objects before her eyes, her fathers house, her
father and mother, and sisters and brothers, on the one side, and her husband
on the other side, and his friends and relations: now when a woman leaves the
one, and sticks to the other, this is properly called cleaving. You shall read
also in 2 Samuel 20. 2. the people of Israel, every man of Israel, went up from
after David. The people of Israel there, in a peevish humor, left David their
King, and followed Sheba the son of Bichri, but the men of Judah did cleave to
their King from Jordan to Jerusalem. There the people were divided, Israel
followed Sheba, but Judah clave to David. In stead of many I will give you but
one more, that is in the book of Ruth, you shall have there a good woman that
had two daughters in law, her sons were both dead, and so she was going to
return to her country, she was in a strange country with them, and she takes
her leave of her two daughters, Chap. 2. 8. Naomi said to her two daughters in
law, Go, return each to her mothers house, the Lord deal kindly with you, as ye
have dealt with the dead, and with me; that is, they had been kind to her sons
and to her, for they lived in a strange country, now Farewell, The Lord grant
that you may find rest, each of you in the house of her husband: Then she
kissed them, etc. And they said, surely we will return with thee to thy people,
we will go along, we will not leave thee, No, daughters (says she) do not so,
for I cannot bear other children for you to marry, as the law was then. If I
should lie to night with an husband, and have children, you would not stay so
long, therefore I pray abide, and go not. And it is said, Orpah kissed her
mother in law, and lift up her voice, and wept, and left her, but Ruth clave
unto her. Orpah was persuaded, and wept, and took her leave, but Ruth clave to
her, and said, Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after
thee: for whether thou go I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge,
thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God, Where thou dyest will I die,
and there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me and more also, if ought but
death part thee and me. So I say you see here, that when there was a
competition, a kind of parting, then Ruth abiding with Naomi, that is called
cleaving.

It is a glorious thing, that when the seeming servants The honor of cleaving
to Christ.
of Jesus Christ shall depart from him, when there is a division among
professors, then to be able to cleave to Jesus Christ. That you may understand
it, conceive that in the ways of Jesus Christ, many times there are such times
that abundance of hypocrites as well as Saints abide with him, they are
sometimes still, like the waters of Shilo, there is no persecution or trouble
in them, it may be there is a great deal of honor, and wealth, and riches with
them, and many times a great party of the world sticks to him; but there is a
little tripp, and step in the ways of godliness, when there is a parting, when
hypocrites like Orpah, shall weep, and repent, and so shall go with Christ no
longer: if they do, one shall loose his friends, another his trade, another his
wife, and shall lift up their voices and weep, and take their leaves; then is
the beauty of Christianity and the blessedness of a Christian, to be able to
cleave to the Lord in such a time as this is. This was the exhortation of the
good man Barnabas, that he gave to the people, as you shall read Acts 11. 22,
23. When he was come, and had seen the grace of God, he was glad, and exhorted
them all that with purpose of heart, they should cleave to the Lord. I have often
marvailed with my self, why Barnabas, that is said to be a good man, and full
of the Holy Ghost, coming as a stranger to a congregation of good people, where
he saw the grace of God among them; why he should choose this and no more, but
only pitch upon this exhortation, that seeing they were godly, and had
received the grace of God, he should say; I have no more to say but this one
word, understand it well, that is, that with full purpose of heart you cleave
to the Lord.

Indeed the reason was (as I conceive) if you compare it with Chap. 14. 22.
Barnabas was a man to whom God had discovered much of the doctrine of
Tribulation, and persecution that belonged to the Gospel. For take notice of
it by the bye, I look on the people of God, li^e the servants of God that did
go to build the Temple, some were appointed to hew stone, some to dig them
up, and some to carry them home, some to build them up, some to cast accounts
and to keep reckoning. So the Lord Jesus in his Kingdom (no man knows the
reason why) he cuts out distinct parcells of work to his people, and thereupon
supplies them with his spirit, and reveals truths to his people, some to
manage such a thing, no man knows the reason. God fastens the doctrine of
justification upon some, that they cannot rest night nor day, and one that may
be unwilling to die for another point, but not for that: Another about
Church Government, Another upon sanctification, none knows why; but God fits
them for their work by his Spirit, according to his blessed will.

Therefore we should not censure or slight godly men because our master does
not employ them about such a work, as he does us. It may be my thoughts are
upon sanctification, another upon justification. So God cuts out the work as
it pleases him. Now this Barnabas it seems did not speak much as we read of,
but he had a mighty apprehension of persecutions and tribulations that the
Saints should suffer in this world. Therefore in Acts 14. 22. he and Paul
confirm the souls of the Disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith,
and that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. In
every Sermon (as we may say) Barnabas had something to strengthen the souls of
the people to go through tribulation, and affliction, It may be another Apostle
had his Spirit upon another work. It may be in reference to this he gave them
this exhortation, desiring them with full purpose of heart to cleave to the
Lord, As if he had said, Now you are in prosperity (for so they were) and are
all ready to hear the Gospel, and receive it. O (says he) but there is a time
a coming, to try you, and you must not think to run to heaven between two
feather-beds: but as all the Saints before had their share, so every one that
will live in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. As there is a Statute in
heaven for all men once to die; so if you be Saints, you must live in
tribulation, and persecution, and that is the way; as Christ was made perfect
by sufferings, so you must come to salvation. Therefore when those things come,
I have not much to say to you, but O then remember to cleave to the Lord: for
then you shall see hypocrites in droves going away from Jesus Christ, and
leaving him, one stumbling at this, another at that; one is offended at the
Cross, that it takes away his credit, another for his profit, another his
liberty, another his trading: but brethren, I beseech you with full purpose of
heart to cleave to the Lord. See how a company in John 6. with one word
speaking went all away from Christ, If they had been called to fire from
Christ, it had been something; but he says no more, but you must eat my flesh
and drink my blood, and they all went away. Yet the Disciples (there was twelve
then) says Christ, Will ye go away also? Lord, whether shall we go? says
Peter, thou have the words of eternal life: so they abode with him, and clave
to him.

Says Barnabas, with full purpose of heart, that is, you must not cleave as
Judas: for Judas did then cleave to Christ, when all but the Apostles left him,
that we read of, but with full purpose of heart, the Greek word signifies with
full decree of heart, such as the Medes and Persians had, when they decreed to
cast Daniel into prison, though the King were otherwise minded, and had seen
his error, yet they told him a decree of the Medes and Persians cannot be
broken, it must be kept; the Apostle alludes to that, there must be such a
decree in the soul, of sticking to Christ, and cleaving to God, notwithstanding
all tribulations, and persecutions, and shame, and reproach, and trouble
whatsoever that befalls, that you may as soon break the laws of the Medes and
Persians, as bring the soul from that decree, As one said of old, they might as
soon stop the Sun in the firmament, as hinder that godly man in his course of
holiness, So let me entreat, and exhort you in the exhortation of Barnabas
that you would cleave to the Lord with full purpose of heart.

There are two great times in general when people 2. Special times of
cleaving to God. 1. In a general deluge of sin.
leave God, and then you must be sure to cleave to him, that is,

First, when a general time of sin comes up among you, as this of Baal peor,
there were twenty four thousand slain, for their sin at Baal-peor; sin when it
comes up once, is like a stream; truly the course of the world is but the
stream of sin in the world, and worldly men. Therefore you shall see that sins
in Nations, though they begin from little, see how men are carried away with
them when once they are grown strong! when once people begin to be proud and
high, and set themselves up, every one shall be so. I shall be laughed at if I
do not spend my money in vain things to maintain my servants, my coat, my
garb, and Coach, and the like. This pride is grown to a stream in the world:
and so for swearing, and so for drunkenness, and every other sin. Now I say,
when sin does in this manner break out, and thou see others carried with it
more and more, then take heed, then be sure thou cleave to God. Nay, there are
more spiritual sins then these, as it is said, Barnabas was carried away with
the dissimulation. When thou see general dissimulation in a Kingdom, to call
darkness light, and light darkness, and good evil, and evil good, to call
good men treacherous, and treacherous men good, to call blind, base,
superstitious men Orthodox, and Orthodox men superstitious, take heed then that
thou cleave to the Lord.

Then secondly, when persecutions, and sufferings 2. In times of persecution.
come, few men make account of it, we cannot make people sensible of it, what
they must suffer, they have false hopes; they think that though people suffered
in Queen Maryes time, and others may after, yet they shall go in peace. We must
suffer: talk of Reformation, and what you will; all honest hearts inevitably
shall have tribulation. Therefore let this word abide with you, that it be your
study, and earnest prayer to the Lord, when you see others run into sin and are
carried away for fear of this trouble, and that cross, and the other shame,
that then you abide with the Lord as Judah, Though Israel play the harlot, yet
let Judah be faithful with his God. Though such a man dissemble, yet why
should I do so? though such a one go against his own light, and conscience, yet
why should not I cleave to Christ? That is one exhortation, that you would
cleave to the Lord.

Expositions and Observations on PSALM 83.
1 Keep not thou silence O God, hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God.

2 For lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have list up
the head etc.


THis Psalm contains in it a grievous complaint of the prophet to God, against
the enemies of his Son, and of his people. Some do conceive that it was not the
prophet David, but Isaiah, or some of the prophets in the time of Hezekiah,
when Zenecharib, and other Nations that were confederate with him were coming
up against Israel. But however, a confederacy there was of the wicked against
the godly; and the prophet whosoever he was here, complains to God; and does
as it were

First, awaken God to hearken to his complaint, The parts of the Psalm.
Keep not silence O God, hold not thy peace, and be not still.

Secondly, he lays down the matter of the complaint which was the crafty
counsel, and the conspiracy of diverse wicked people, yea of Nations, some ten
Nations, against the people of God, the Israelites, and he lays down in
particular who they were.

Then thirdly, he does pray, or prophecy: for most of the prayers of the
prophets were prophesies also: he not only prayed that it might be so, but
prophesied that it should be so: that they should be as a wheel, that they
should be as fire in the wood, or as a flame of fire upon the mountains.

Lastly, he lays down the end, why he so prayed or prephesied, to wit, that his
enemies might be filled with shame, that they might seek the name of the Lord,
that they might be brought home to God. Or if they will go on and perish, that
others may know the name of the Lord, that they may know that thou whose name
is Jehovah, art most high over all the earth. And though their faces being
filled with shame, they will not fear the Lord, yet doubtless others will; and
when God shall bring confusion on his enemies, others will acknewledge the name
of the Lord Jehovah, and that there is no other in the whole earth. This is the
sum and substance of the Psalm. I shall endeavor to open the meaning of it a
little in particular.

First, concerning the prophets complaint, the prophets waking of God as it
were in those his complaints.

Keep not silence O God, hold not thy peace, be not still.

Or as the Septuagint renders it, O Lord (say they) who is like to thee? keep
not silence, O God, hold not thy peace, be not still.

And you must take notice, and it is worth observing, that when the prophet
says here, O God, he means Jesus Christ. That whereas ordinarily in the old
Testament, especially in the book of Psalms when you hear the prophet mention
God, or Jehovah, or the Lord, you think of God naturally, out of Christ,
whereas he usually means Jesus Christ; as I could fully clear it if I had
time. Let me give you one instance; In the last verse of the former Psalm:
Arise, O God, judge the earth, for thou shall inherit all nations. That is
clearly meant of Christ: for we know that God inherits all Nations; he made the
world, and he had the command and possession of it: but to God in Jesus Christ,
there is a time when God has promised that he shall inherit the nations, from
the uttermost ends of the earth. And therefore here by God is meant Jesus
Christ.

For indeed, ordinarily, and naturally you shall not find a people conspiring
against God properly: you shall see no wicked man but in some sort or other he
will speak honorably of God: but God in Christ, God in the mediator, God in
the Gospel, God in his Saints, God in Gospel ordinances, and the like: hence
are all the tumults in the world, and all the conspiracies against God, and his
Saints. Therefore if you compare this place, Thine enemies make a tumult
against thee, with Psalm. 2. Why do the heathen rage? Or why do they make a
tumult? (as some read it) and why do the people imagine a vain thing? the
Kings of the earth take counsel against the Lord, and against his anointed.
That is merely meant of Jesus Christ. So take notice of that, that carnal men
ordinarily do not speak or think evil of God absolutely considered, but the
worst of men speak well of him, when he gives them wealth they thank him, when
he gives them fair weather, they bless him; when he gives them peace and
preserves them in their journeys and ways, every one speaks well of God: but
God in Jesus Christ, God manifest in the flesh; God in the mediator; God in his
Saints, God in his ordinances, God in his commands, and the like: then the men
of the world use to make tumults, then they take crafty counsel together, and
conspire against the Lord, and against his appointed.

Keep not thou silence, O God, hold not thy peace, be not still.

You see the prophet looks upon God as one that in the midst of these
conspiracies, did keep silence, and hold his peace, and sit still; Not that God
does use to speak, or to stir properly as we men do: but the meaning is this,
that many times when his son Jesus Christ, and his laws; and his ordinances are
most conspired against, God (as it were) does keep silence, I mean Jesus
Christ, God in Christ, when his people, and ordinances are conspired against,
he keeps silence, and sits still, as though he would let his enemies do what
they would, and what they list; as though God did not see or heed which end did
go forward. The Lord often does this.

Keep not silent O God.

I remember that place in Isaiah 40. 27. Why say thou O Jacob, and speak
O Israel, My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my
God? The meaning of it is this, that when the enemies of God, as we see, Chap.
39. did oppress this people, they did pray to him, and looked for assistance
from him, but he was silent (as it were) or asleep: therefore they begin to say
in their heart, My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over
from my God: that is, Surely it is impossible that God should eye, and see my
ways, and how men deal with me while I am believing, and waiting, and praying,
and humbling my soul; no, my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is
passed over from my God; that is, my God has forgotten to give ear to me.
Beloved, there is a time when the Lord (as it were) gives cause to his people
so to think; that he is (as it were) asleep, and lets their enemies go on, and
none contradict them. I was thinking out of scripture that there are three
Reasons 3. Reasons of Gods silence in the danger of the Saints. 1. To try their
faith.
why the Lord keeps silence when his people are in danger, and sits still when
there is most need to give help and assistance.

One is, the Lord does it to try their faith, as we see clearly, Matthew, 8.
23. where it is said that our Lord Christ was asleep, There arose a great
tempest, insomuch as the ship was covered with waves, but he was asleep; and
his disciples came and awaked him, saying, Lord save us, we perish. We read
more fully in Mark. 4. and Luke 8. he left them, when the ship was covered with
waves, and they were rowing for their lives, their Lord was asleep the while,
and he said to them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose,
and rebuked the wind, and the sea, and there was a great calm. Truly, the Lord
will not suffer his people to be overwhelmed, that is certain, but he will
suffer them to come very near, that the waves cover them, and fear and horror
shall cover their souls, and all to try their faith. For faith is the evidence
of things not seen, take it in all senses, take faith for the soul or faith for
the body; and we live not here by sense but by faith; and as the Apostle says
of hope, so we may say of faith, If we see, why do we yet hope? If we did see
God present striking of wicked men when they consult against his children, this
were sense; men would see that it were better to stick to God then otherwise,
and there would be a world of hypocrites as Doct. Preston says: for every man
would be a professor. But God seems to sleep sometimes and keeps silence, and
leaves his people as he did this poor fishing boat here, to see if when they
see nothing they will keep faith to him.

I do find another reason in Isaiah 59, and that is, the 2. To try their
uprightness.
Lord does keep silence in the midst of the troubles of his people, as to try
men's faith, so to try men's uprightness, who will stick to God: as to see who
will stick to God by faith, so, who will stick to his cause, or his people out
of uprightness of heart. For if God should always appear for his cause, God
and his cause should have many favorites and friends: but sometimes God leaves
his cause, and leaves his people; and leaves his Gospel, and his ordinances to
the wide world, to see who will plead for it, and stick to it. As you see in
that place of Isaiah. Transgressions are multiplied says the prophet) in
transgressing, and lying against the Lord, departing from our God, and uttering
words of falsehood, judgment is turned back, and justice stands afar off,
truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter, Yea, truth fails, and
he that departs from evil makes himself a prey. And the Lord saw it, God was
as it were asleep, but he looked through the lattice, the Lord beheld it, and
he saw that there was no man, and he wondered that there was no intercessor.
That is, God suffered all this truth to fail, and Justice to fall back, and
every thing to go to wrack and ruin: God would see if any man would intercede,
any man among our Magistrates or Ministers, or Citizens, if any man would plead
for God, and for his people, and for his truth, but he saw none and wondered.
Truly God wonders, and men may wonder to see what abundance of people follow
God, and good lives in the time of prosperity, and when adversity comes, and
wicked men, and all the powers of hell conspire against godliness, to see how
few show themselves for God, God wonders at it. Therefore his arm brought
salvation unto him, and his righteousness, it sustained him: he put on
righteousness as a breast plate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head, and
he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with Zeal as a
cloak. The Lord comes and Arms himself, just as valiant soldiers in the wars:
when a party is gone forth, they stand to see what they do, how they come off:
but if there be none that will stick to it, but run away, they buckle on their
armor: So the Lord stands to see where is the man that will stick to it in
these cases, and if there be any, God rejoices in it, if there be none, God
himself comes in.

Therefore be sure of this, when the Lord suffers his Son, or any thing that
belongs to him to come to these low conditions, when truth fails in the
street, and equity is perverted; it is not that God means to suffer the wicked
to have their wills, for God has sworn that Christ shall reign, but to try us
a little space, whether we will courageously stick to God and his cause, or
basely for fear of men comply with the world. 3. For the compendious destrution
of the it enemies.


There is a third reason; God (as it were) keeps silence; and holds his peace
in the middst of the greatest troubles to this end, that God may (as it were)
gather the wicked into one faggot, into one bundle that they may be destroyed
together. There is a great deal of ado to gather the Saints in this world; and
truly there is some ado togather the wicked. So God withdraws himself from his
people, yet he has a hook in their hearts, he holds them up secretly by his
Spirit, that they shall not leave him; yet the world shall not see but that God
has quite left them, and all their Ordinances and his Gospel, and every
thing: and then the wicked come together and insult, whereby God may come upon
them at once, and destroy them, as we find ten Nations in this Psalm. And so
in Genesis, God stirs up the Nations against Abraham, and his posterity, and
there are ten Nations that God promises to cut off before Abraham at once, the
Perrezites, and the Iebusites, and the Canaanites, etc. So God heaps them
together, and burns them like stubble. Those that burn stubble have rakes, and
they gather it to heaps, and then they fire it. This is the way of Gods keeping
silence among his people, and sitting still in the midst of their miseries,
thus God gathers their enemies on heaps as stubble, that he may burn them
together.

Therefore from this that I have said, I have three words to say to you, and to
my own soul.

to awake God, to call upon his Name, to be earnest with him. Truly, there are
a generation of people now, I leave them to the Lord to judge them (as I shall
always) for we have all one master; but there is a people that throw away the
ordinance of prayer, and they profess to live immediately upon God without
ordinances, without prayer, and without all the rest. I do not know what their
perfections may be, therefore I cannot judge; but this I know as far as ever I
had experience, that the chiefest way of communion with God is spiritual
prayer; Build up one another on your holy faith, and Pray in the Holy Ghost,
says Jude. And therefore, though you be ancient Christians, and grow
spiritual, and see a great deal of formality in your prayers, as some pray so
many times a day, and that out of form; not that they should not pray so often
in a day, that is well; take heed that out of any pretense you be not remiss:
for truly, it is the readiest way to heaven, and to attain happiness, and the
clearest conduite to bring grace to the soul, and the love of God, and the
shining of his face, that I have yet known: I yet know no better; therefore
take heed of the temptations of Satan, that you do not upon any pretense either
throw away prayer or be remiss in it.

Lord should leave his Church, and people, as we know not what he will do; it
may be God is going to take a napp; let me warn you from the Lord, and his
word (for that is the excellency of the word; by it thy servant is forewarned)
take heed of distrust,, and unbelief, and impatience toward God: God does take
a napp sometimes; it is for his glory, and for your good; but yet cleave to
him; say as it is here in the Psalm. O Lord, who is like unto thee? Do not
think that the Lord will leave his people: for God has (you know) made a
Covenant with his Son that he shall inherit all nations, he shall subdue all
his enemies. under his feet. All the enemies hitherto that have risen against
his Church, God has subdued them, and either our Gospel is vain, and our
preaching vain, and our faith vain, and all vain, or else God will exalt his
Son, and his people, and Saints, and ordinances, maugre all enemies: though ten
Nations, as it is in this Psalm, fight against them, nay though ten thousand,
if there were so many in the world, God will awake, and subdue them, and if
there be no man in the world that will plead their cause, God will do it.
Therefore live by faith, and not by sense, take heed of living by sense, there
is nothing that more poisons, and imbitters our hearts, and spirits, and lives,
then the beholding of things by sense, that as one good man speaks, I wish
(says he) sometimes that I were quite bereft of reason that I might exercise
faith. We are used to sense, and such a man does this and this, and here is
conspiring in this and that place, and all to overthrow Christ, and the power
of the Gospel. What of all this? Look by faith what God has said, and
Covenanted, and promised, and keep up your spirits by faith.

Jesus Christ, to take heed of betraying Gods cause or people, or your own
salvation by your fleshlinesse; I mean, take heed you that have thought well of
God, and his people, and have spoken well of him, that when you see God sleep a
little while, and seems not to own them, take heed that you help not the
children of Lot; go not with the Moabites and the Tabernacles of Edom, and with
wicked men to conspire against the godly: if you do, know that if there be a
God in heaven, and if there be truth in this book, you are under Gods wrath, to
be gathered on heaps for the fire; There appears no fire yet, but be sure you
shall feel it hereafter; therefore take heed. The Lord will come (says the
prophet) as a bear bereaved of her whelps. If a man take away the whelps of a
Bear when she is asleep, and go away; when the Bear awakens you know what case
that man will be in, when the Bear sees him, and her whelps in his arms. So God
takes upon him to sleep, and if he see his little ones oppressed, and abused,
when he awakes he will be as a Bear robbed of her whelps. So much concerning
that.

Now the prophet having spoken to God, and desire him to awake, he begins to
tell him how the case stood.

For lo thine enemies make a tumult, and they that hate thee lift up their
heads, they have taken crafty counsel, etc.

The complaint was this in general, that they began to make a tumult. Why a
tumlt? The whole world is but like an Army, a Brigade of men (as it were) under
a General; and God is the Lord of Hoasts, that is the Lord of his Armies: now
when there is a tumult in an Army, they complain to the officers, to the
General especially; and he must come and suppress them. Therefore (says he)
thou Lord of Hoasts, that art General of the world; lo there is a tumult in
the world, a mutiny; what is it?

They that hate thee, have lifted up their heads.

That is, they are waxen proud, and high.

And take crafty counsel together against thy people, and consult against thy
hidden ones.

You see here the property of wicked people, when God does not restrain them
to consult, and conspire against the godly: for by the hidden ones are meant
the godly. So the Septuagint reads it, thy Saints, or holy ones.

They are called hidden ones, or secret ones (as some read it) because they are
precious: as in Exodus God The Saints Gods hidden ones.
calls them his treasure, my peculiar people, my treasure. And you know our
treasure and riches, we hide it, and keep it secret.

And they are called hidden ones likewise, because the Lord uses to hide his
people in the time of trouble, hide me in the hollow of thy hand (says David)
and hide me under the shadow of thy wings, in another place.

They are called hidden ones (I think) principally, because the world knows
them not; because the Devil always has some vail upon the eyes of the wicked,
that they are not able to know the Saints as Saints. 1 Ioh. 3. Now we are the
sons of God, and the world knows us not. It is the clearest note of a man
truly carnal, that has nothing of God in him, he will tell you that he knows
not who are Gods children and Saints, and who are not, the Devil has so many
ways, and nicknames; as to call them Lollards, and Schismatics, and
Puritans, and now there are more nicknames then ever. So God has his Saints,
and people, they are his treasure, and peculiar ones, but he hides them from
the world: for it is not in the apprehension of wicked men to persecute the
Saints as Saints, but they persecute them as Schismatics, or heretics one way
or other; yet it may be they may be Gods hidden ones. Therefore what you do
against Gods hidden ones, you do against him. I beseech you take heed how you
consult, and conspire against people that make any profession of Religion,
though you think they be heretical, or Schismatics, and it may be they are
so, and it may be they are Gods hidden ones: it may be because of my
fleshliness I think him to be an heretic or a Schismatic, and it may be he is
a Saint, and child of God, and one of his hidden ones.

In the next verse he lays down the conspiracy, what it was that they
craftily consulted of.

Ver. 4. Come and let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of
Israel may be no more in remembrance.

The desires of the wicked are not to suppress one, or two, or a few of the
Saints (though indeed they light upon a few, and God never suffers them to
touch all) The maine design of persecutors.
but the maine design is wholly to root out godliness, and the people of God,
that they may not be a Nation.

For if you consider the ground of persecution, it is not any one particular
thing in a person: but the design of Satan (whose part they act, who is the
old serpent) is to overthrow the whole Kingdom of God to destroy the seed of
the woman: therefore whosoever sets himself against one, his aim is (if he
observe his own heart) if he could to destroy all. And in the times before,
when men durst speak the language of their hearts, Bonner would say, I wish
that all the heretics were in a sack in the midst of the Sea. And many Bishops
among us have gloried, that they had not one Puritan left in their Diocese. And
some of late have bragged that they hoped their would not be room for one
puritan in England; before those scurvie names that are rife among us now came
up. It may be if we observe we shall hear some of the same phrases still,
though the words be altered the design is the same. Come, let us cut them off
from being a Nation.

You see that Satan is not willing to have one Saint on earth, not one
ordinance, or one Gospell-sermon. It is too low a design for Satan to aim at
a particular person. Just as it was with Haman in the book of Hester; he might
have punished Mordecai if he would, but it was too low a thing, he would cut of
the whole seed of the Jews, that there should not be one left. That is the
reason that Pareus, a learned man gives, why the Saints are said to be a people
that are not, 1 Cor. 1. because the people of the world wish that they were
not; the world desires that they were not nor any thing that belongs to them.

Therefore I beseech you take this caveat from the Lord, that you would take
heed how you carry your selves against the Saints, though they be but some few
particular persons; though it may be there may be some weakness in them that
may provoke your corruptions: for if you once begin to fall on persecuting, to
oppose Christ Jesus or his people, though you begin with a few, first one, and
then another, you will unawares fall into the tide, into the stream; to set on
the whole design of the Devil, that is, to cut off the people of God from
being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more remembered. It is an
easy thing to fall into the stream of persecution. There is no man that sets
himself against the whole Generation of Saints at once; but first he quarrels
with this professor, and then with that; and it may be there is a reason to
dislike this, and pretended reason to dislike the ways of that, till at last
he come to be an absolute persecuter of all godliness.

The prophet tells the Lord what the design is, and then does press God
forward; in verse 5. he tells him of their consultation again: he had spoken it
three times before, and here again. They have consulted together with one
consent, they are confederate against thee.

The prophet would have God hearken to him, and take notice of his complaint
from two arguments.

The one is from the depth of their conspiracies, and their diligent and
earnest consultation.

And the other was, because whatsoever they did against his hidden ones, he
tells God it was against him. God persecuted in the Saints.
So that (beloved) it is a great argument with God to awaken and stir him up
against the wicked, and to help his people; when the wicked consult, and plot
together. It is a sore thing when men occasionally and accidentally, and
Ignorantly fall into the stream of the wicked, to do things against the
Saints: but it is more grievous when they consult, and are confederate, and
associat themselves together, and beat their heads, and brains together, and
lay snare upon snare, and design upon design, against the hidden ones of God.

Know beloved, and be sure that there is no consultation so secret but God
knows it; there is nothing so hidden, but it is open to the backbone before
him, as it is Heb. 4. It is a thing of jealousy that God will not suffer, when
people consult together against God and his people. It is enough, and too much
that often times ignorantly, and rashly we speak and do against the Saints (as a
man out of frailty may do) but if we go to consult once, there are thousands of
Saints that will awaken God, and wish God to come to the consultation.
Therefore whatsoever we do of ignorance, God may pardon, and pity: but take
heed of all conspiring, and consulting against the Saints. And remember that I
warn you this day, that if you hear that there is any meeting against the
Saints, that there is a design going on to root them out in this, or that
notion: for I love not those names, nor plead for this or that way, but when it
is against the Saints, as a blind man may see in such ways as the world uses.
I beseech you that come here to hear God, Take warning; have nothing to do with
their conspiracies and plottings: for God will not brook that.

They are confederate against thee.

It is an old common truth, commonly known to the Saints, and to the world too;
whatsoever you do against the Saints, you do against God, he that touches you
(says God) touches the apple of mine eye. In all their afflictions he is
afflicted, and (says the Lord Christ) the reproaches of them that reproached
thee fell on me; in another case. And that known place Acts 9. when Paul was
going on a design to Damascus to persecute the Saints, the Lord Christ met him
by the way; and said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? He does not say, why
do thou go to Damascus, and arm wicked people to destroy my children? He
speaks not such a word: but he says; Thou persecutest me. For the poor Saints
they are under covert, they are married to Christ, and we cannot defend our
selves, but we are married to one that will defend our suit, and what is done,
he takes it as done to himself, and will accordingly judge them that do it.

Whatsoever good you do to the Saints, the Lord takes it as done to him; and
whatsoever evil you do to the Saints, the Lord takes it as done to him; Mat.
25. When I was hungry you fed me, when I was naked ye clothed me, when I was
in prison you visited me, And they shall say, Lord, when did we see thee
hungry, or naked, or in prison? In as much as you did it to one of these little
ones, you did it to me. Whereupon Calvin says, that God, and his Saints, God,
and the people of God are one. We are too subject to forget Christ in his
members; we think not that we offend Christ, when out of imperiousness, or out
of heat or the like, we offend a poor Saint: and we think not that we help
Christ Jesus directly when we help a poor Saint, if we did, we would be more
wary in the one, and more ready and forward in the other.

The prophet having entered his suit, and complaint in general, he comes to
particulars, and tells God who they are that had done this. God might say, Who
are these that conspire against me, and against my people, and hidden ones?
Lord (says the prophet) I will tell thee who they are.

The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmalities: of Moab The particulars of the
complaint opened.
and the Hagarens; Geball, and Amon, and Amalok, the Philistines and them that
dwell at Tire.

He names some ten Nations, that joined together against one poor Israel. It is
a thing you should observe that when the people of God are conspired against,
God rests not in general complaints, but he will know who they are. As I told
you, he is the Lord of Hoasts, the great General. When there is a mutiny the
General asks, what Officer, or what Corporal, or what Sergeant, or who did
begin the mutiny? and it is a fearful thing when a poor persecuted Saint
shall bring thy name as a persecutor before the God of heaven. When a poor
Saint shall go home and say, There is a confederacy in London, a conspiracy
against the Saints of God; and when a poor Saint shall say, such a Magistrate,
such a Minister, such a man in such a street, such a woman set her husband
against the Saints, and against thine ordinances: it is a fearful thing.
Therefore I remember a blessed woman, if it be true that is reported of her in
the book of Martyrs, that when the wicked abused her, and reproached her, and
oppressed her, she would say no more but this, I will go home, and tell my
father: give over, or else I will God, and tell him: there was all, and that
was enough: for he would presently take it up. A man may better bear a pound of
dirt on his feet, then a grain of dirt in his eye; the Saints are the Apple of
Gods eye. And a poor Saint he need say no more, but there is such a man
delights in nothing but confederacy against the people of God; he delights in
nothing but to have them oppressed; he need say no more.

But let us a little view these Nations that were joined together; they were
very numerous, very many. The best place in the world will afford company
enough if a man will conspire, and plot against the Saints. It is no argument
for a man to say, Such a Gentleman, and such a Magistrate is in, and such a one
has put his hand to it, and they plead for it; that is not enough, here are
ten Nations, people enough, A man must not go with a multitude to do evil. It
is rather an argument that the thing is evil when there is a multitude,
especially when it is a multitude of people that are set upon no good, that the
most are whoremongers, or drunkards, or covetous men; when there are a
multitude of such, then the multitude is an argument rather that the design is
naught, though they be not thoroughly acquainted what it is.

But let us look upon them in particular.

First, The Tabernacles of Edom were there, they are first set down. Now who
this people of Edom were, you shall see Deuteronomy. 2. They were the seed of Esau,
God had forbid the children of Israel when they were going up to Canaan, they
that should not distress Moab, and Edom, but should buy every thing for their
money; they should not plunder (as we use to say) nor do any thing
unrighteously; because God had given Mount Seir to Edom, a people that had
received abundance of kindnesses from Israel, and when they passed through their
country, though they were a wicked people, yet they paid money for their very
water, as it is in the beginning of Deuteronomie. And the Holy Ghost put them
in the forefront, that Edom of all others should do it.

The Tabernacles of Edom.

That is, the Soldiers that lived in tabernacles, or tents: for they used
tents in their Armies, as we see clearly, Judge. 7. There was a cake comes, and
throws down their tents. The Tabernacles of Edom; that is, the Soldiery, part
of Edom, they were they that did this.

Beloved, they of all others the Lord takes notice of in conspiring against the
Saints, who have received kindness from the Saints.

How many men have we seen in England, that have received many courtesies in
their wants of the people of God, and when they have been in distress
otherwise; yet after all their purposes, they have come to cut their throats,
God takes notice of them more then others, Therefore 2 Chronicles. 20. 11. you shall
read of Moab, and Amon, and those of Mount Seir, they were coming to fight
against Iehosaphat: Iehosaphat enters the suit to God; he sets himself to seek
the Lord, and among the rest of his arguments, this is one, behold (says he)
how they reward us, to come to cast us out of the posession that thou have
given us to inherit, you shall read in ver. 10. And now behold the children of
Ammon, and Moab, and Mount Seir, whom thou would not let Israel invade, when
they came out of the Land of Egypt, but they turned from them and destroyed
them not. (says Iehosaphat) When we came out of Egypt, thou commandedst us
that we should not destroy them, and that we should pay for every thing we
took; and behold how they requite us. There are few wicked people, but they
receive courtesies from the Saints: but when they turn persecutors (it is a
pitiful thing, consider of it) in the black roll of the accusations of the
Saints, the Lord will have them put in the first place. The Tabernacles of Edom.

And the Ishmalites. That is, the seed of Ishmael, that presecuted his brother
Isaac, and jeered him, and laughed at him.

And of Moab. Moab was one of the children of Lot.

The Hagarens. That is, those that came from Hagar: for though they were the
same people, sometimes they are called Ishmalites from their father, or
Hagarens from their Grand mother Hagar.

Geball. Geball, they say, was a Nation near Zidon where Solomon sent to fetch
gold.

Ammon. Ammon, was one of the sons of Lot by incest.

Amalek Was one of those that first fought against Israel, Exodus 17. that God
swear should be cut off, and God sent Saul to do it, and he did it not, and he
after was cut off by an Amalekite.

The Philistines. We read of the Philistines often.

And them that dwell at Tire. Tire was a rich City spoken of by the prophets on
the Seaside.

Ashur also is joined with them. Ashur, that is, the Assyrians that came from
Aser one of the children of Seth.

They have helped the children of Lot. That is, they have helped Moab, and
Ammon, they have strengthened their Arms against Israel.

Selah. That is, take notice. Of what? that they were numerous, that did it,
and that they were in the first place that had received kindnesses of God
people. And take notice that those that acted most in it were the seed of godly
men, they have helped the children of Lot. Many times the children of Gods
people the chiefest persecutors.


Beloved you see by experience many times the children of Godly people are the
feircest persecutors. All the rest, Geball, and those inhabitants of Tire, they
were profane people, they did but help the children of Lot, it was they that
set it on foot, and carried the design, a kind of rotten professors, that are
persecuters of godly people.

I have often thought, if thou be the child of a godly man or woman; though thou
have many privileges that others have not, thou have more cause to fear then
others have: for usually it comes to pass, that that Religion that was in
power in the parents, is only in form in the children: they learn their
fathers Religion by head, that they had by heart; they pray as their fathers
did, but there is not that Spirit; and they can hear Sermons, but there is not
the heart of their fathers, and mothers: so, for a time they keep a form of
godliness that will not last, and then on a sudden they fall into the stream of
persccution; and then all that head*knowledge that they have, serves them for
no other stead, but to make them more desperate, and skillful in persecuting,
and opposing, the people, and the ways of God. Thus you have the Nations set
down that do this.

Now the prophet come to pray unto the Lord further, or to prophecy: for the
prayers of the prophets were prophesies usually.

Do unto them, as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, as to Jabin at the brook
Kison, which perished at Endor, they became as dung for the earth, etc.

The prophet prays, or prophesies against them two ways.

First, he desires God that he would punish them according to those patterns
and examples of justice that he had showed in former times.

Do unto them, as unto the Midianites. You shall read of them in Judge. 7. The
Midiantes were as Grasshoppers for number, and Gidion with an hundred men, that
had Trumpets in their hands, comes upon them, and makes them all flee, and as
they were fleeing, God put every man's sword against his fellow, and so they
slew one another. Do unto them, as unto the Midianites, that is, dash their
heads together, make their policies to cross one another. As we have seen in
our days, all the conspiracies of the wicked turn to the ruin of themselves.
Thus the Bishops came to ruin, God put them one against another, that their
own plots and policies did overthrow them.

Do unto them, as to Sisera. You shall read of him in Judge 4. he had nine
hundred Chariots of Iron going into the field, and all his men were defeated,
and he fleeing for his life; Iaell, a poor woman, as he was asleep in the
tent, comes, and nails him in the Temples, and kills him. Do unto them, as
unto Sisera, that is, be they never so strong, and have Chariots of Iron, thou
can make small means, a nail in the hand of a silly woman to be their
overthrow.

Do to them, as to Iabin, at the brook Kison, which perished at Endor, they
became as dung for the earth That is, they were so contemptible, that they were
left as a heap of dung upon the earth, and no man to bury them; and this I say
is not a mere prayer, but a prophecy what the end of such people will be.

Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb. Those were princes of the
Midianites; you shall read in Judge 7. how they were destroyed.

Yea all their Princes like Zebah, and Zalmunna. Those were two great Princes
that were slain by Gedeon, Judge. 8.

Who said, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.

Those wicked men that would destroy the people of God; and rule in the house
of God; that would take the houses of God in possession, and ruin them, do to
them as to Zebah, and Zalmunna.

Then he comes and speaks more plainly, and desires God to punish them, or to
let his judgments fall upon them, and those judgments he sets out by three
comparisons.

The first is, O my God (says the prophet) make them like a wheel.

And make them as the stubble before the wind.

And make them as the fire that burns the wood, and as the flame that sets
the mountains on fire, etc.

O my God, make them as a wheel. Some conceive, the meaning is, make them as a
wheel going down a hill, that give it but half a turn, and every motion will
add strength to its course, the longer it runs down, the stronger; so the
meaning is, let their own devises; and designs, tumble them further and
further into misery; let every thing they do, help to throw them down to hell.
That is true: but I rather follow the Hebrew word that signifies any round,
uncertain, or light thing: for all do not read it as a wheel. So the meaning
is, O my God, let them never solidly be able to conclude any thing, but let
them be so unstable that they may do, and undo, and say, and unsay; let them
not prosper in any thing, but do thou dash all that they do, let it be as a
feather or a light thing; tossed up and down in the air. That is a thing that
we see God many times does, he makes the counsels of the wicked though they
have wise heads, learned heads, and number enough, yet all produce but a
feather, and all vapors into air.

Let them be as stubble before the wind. That makes me think that the word
wheel is so to be understood because of this expression: he does not say, Make
them as stubble before the fire (though that be true, and it is so expressed in
another place) but as stubble before the wind. And all do not read it stubble,
but conceive it many be meant chafe or any light thing. I adhere to these
rather; and so it comes to the same thing, Make them, and all their designs,
and plots as chafe before the wind; let them not go on in a steady resolution,
and course; but dash and confound all their projects and policies, and bring
them to nothing.

As the fire that burns the wood, and as the flame that sets the mountains
on fire.

That is terrible: the meaning of it is, as we see in the verse following;
Lord, let thy tempest and storm make them afraid: Let thy judgment come on
them and devour them, as the fire does Goss, or Heath, or Fearne, or furrs,
that one would think a whole mountain were burning when a child does but set
fire on Fures; so let those terrible judgments and storms of thine take them.
And whereto? Two ends of Gods judgments on the wicked. 1. To work shame in
them.


There are two ends for it.

First, that it may fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name.
There are no people so wickedly, and mischievously bent against the Saints,
that they should desire God to ruin, and destroy them; only, they may desire
God to send his tempest, and storm on them, that they may learn to be afraid,
and seek the name of the Lord. As Steven, when Saul, and the rest stoned him,
says he, Lord lay it not to their charge. There is nothing more improper and
unbecoming a Saint, then revenge; and a Saint that has been a slave, and is
redeemed, and kept from the pit by the Lord Jesus Christ, he should not desire
the destruction of any creature; he has had mercy by the Gospel, therefore he
should have mercy on every creature. And truly a man that knows his own desert,
and his nature, and his ways, and knows how much grace and mercy God shows to
his soul, he should not desire the worst man to go to hell, and perish.
Therefore take heed least there be any spirit of revenge in any of Gods people,
though the wicked conspire never so much: but desire that the Lord would make
all stubble that they do, as a wheel, as a vain thing; or if he will send a
little fire of affliction upon them, to make them seek his face; this is the
utmost we should desire.

And if God will not do this, that they may be bettered, yet

That men may know that thou, whose name alone is Jehovah, art the most high,
over all the earth. 2 To work amendment in others.


Some understand it, as though it were meant of the same people; for the word
Men is not in the original; that they may know that thou, whose name is
Jehovah. But that is not allowed, and approved by the generality: but they take
it in general, and the original will bear it better; that the name of Jehovah
may be known, though they will not know it: it may be God may blast their
counsels, and they will be at it again; and God may cast fire among them, and
they will not be ashamed: yet others will, they will take notice how wicked
people conspired against the people of God at such a time and in such a place,
and God made it as a bubble, and plagued, and punished them, and sent the
Pestilence into their Cities, and families; they will not learn; but there are
other people that will worship Jehovah, that will fear the Lord by seeing his
judgments on others. As David says, When the wicked are taken away as dross,
my flesh trembles for fear of thee, I am afraid of thy judgments. When he saw
the wicked took away as dross, with the fire of Gods judgments, he feared.
Therefore learn not to desire their death, only to pray for them, and to
believe that all their plottings against the Saints will be as stubble, and as
chaff, they will come to nothing. And if the wicked will not learn by seeing
God to cross them; as he has crossed all their designs in our age (blessed
be his name) yet do thou take notice how God went against such people, and such
a Nation that rose against God; God crossed, and blasted them: and be sure that
God will do so to the end, to all that rise against him and his people. Only
take notice of Gods ways in the world, to fear him, and trust in him, and to
wait for him to come and do what thy soul desires.

Expositions and Observations on PSALM 116.
I love the Lord because he has heard my prayer, and my supplications:

Because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.

The sorrows of death compassed me, etc.


I Promised if the Lord would give me strength, to speak a word unto you this
afternoon, concerning the mercies of God unto us in the victories of Scotland,
but especially of Bristoll, because we have more knowledge of it, and more
relation to it, the most of us. And therefore I would briefly from this Psalm,
take occasion or ground of what I have to speak to you. Two things briefly I
see here laid down in this Psalm.

The first is, the Psalmist does express the great mercy of God to him, in
some special deliverance. And that he does illustrate by the misery he was in:
for he was in a very low condition, full of tears, and prayers, and sorrows,
and his feet were ready to fall, so the Lord heard his prayer, and delivered
him out of his troubles, whatsoever they were. That is one thing, he takes
notice of the great mercy of God to him.

The second is, he does consider, what he should do to God: now God having
delivered him, what is his duty? For it is a known lesson among us, that the
mercies of God require somewhat from us (though all be by his grace) And those
are here laid down in the Psalm, they are various, I will love the Lord, I will
call upon him while I live, I will walk before him in the land of the living,
and diverse such duties he lays upon himself in consideration of Gods great
mercy to him. Now I have not time and strength to go over all, which are many
in the Psalm, and therefore I will only tell you a few thoughts that I have
concerning Gods mercy in bestowing Bristoll upon us again, and that according
to David's method here, which is the most natural, and the most usual by the
Saints.

First, to take notice of Gods goodness in that mercy.

And secondly to consider what is our duty.

Concerning the first, there are abundance of mercies and kindnesses, couched,
and wrapped up together in that. It was not only the taking of a Garrison, but
there are abundance of mercies in it, and mingled with it, you Gods mercy in
the taking in of Bristoll considered in five respects. 1. In regard of the
potent opposition.
especially that are concerned in it, and are godly, you know: but in my eye
these are the chief that I see, and am affected with.

The first is. I look upon the greatness of the mercy, I see that all were
great things in, and about it, there was no mean, inconsiderable thing in it.
I know it is a great City, the second in the Kingdom; and I know also, there
were great works to keep it, I know there were great, and strong, and numerous
soldiers in it. There were great resolutions in those soldiers, And I am sure
too, there was great misery in the City among the poor people, and round about
the City, and has been these two years, the plague, scarsity of provision, and
other things. And no man doubts but it is of great consequence, if the Lord
make it a blessing to us, if the Lord sanctify it, it will be of great
consequence, not only to those parts (being the chief City in that part of the
Kingdom) but to this City and to the whole State, and Kingdom, I see nothing in
it but great things.

And therefore me thinks that he that should do this for us, surely he must
needs be a great God, that pulled down the great pride of that City, and the
garrison in it, that must throw down those Bulwarks (as it were) And therefore,
let us exalt God, let us conceive of God according to his greatness: for
surely, he that did that work there, no man will doubt, or deny that it was
God, and that God that did it, any man that will seriously consider of the
work, will say he is a great God: therefore let us glorify him in his
greatness.

Another thing very observable that we should take 2. In regard of the hazard
in storming.
notice of, is, that the Lord has there preserved our friends, preserved our
Army in such a wonderful manner in storming that City. I have no skill in war,
but I think there are no people that go about storming, but they resolve to
lose many a man, therefore they will do any thing rather then storm, if it may
be gotten otherwise, and to storm such a City, such Forts, such strength, such
a Castle, double lined in some parts, and to do it by no very great Army
neither, and that the Lord should please to preserve them, that so few should
be slain or wounded, it is a wonderful mercy. For truly (beloved) when there
were but a few in the City, when the other side sought it, they had it not so
cheap, it cost them the lives of many hundreds of them: but this was the Lords
goodness to his poor people, and truly we may say as David does here, he has
inclined his ear to us, and heard our prayer.

Then a third blessing, that I take notice of in it, is, 3. In preserving it
from the Pestilence.
that God should preserve our friends from the pestilence. We always conceived
that if they had that City, they knew not what to do with it, because of the
pestilence, that might ruin, and destroy the Army after they had took it: and
as we hear, though they be in the same houses, and quarter where the sickness
was, and have lain in the beds where men have been sick, yet we hear little or
nothing of the infection coming among them. Surely, this can be no other but
the finger of God, considering how hot, and violent it was.

Then I look upon it further, as to consider what 4. In that this succeeded a
series of mercies.
mercies there had gone in a straight line before, and how this comes after,
mercy upon mercy, God adding always greater to the less. This has not been
Gods way with us hitherto, but if God heard us in one mercy, he gave us a
correction presently, if we did get one garrison, we lost another, if we have
one victory, we lose another. Now that God, that is a Zealous God, should go
on, and not see iniquity in his people, and pass by their infirmities, and
should go from on Fort to another, and from one garrison to another, and bring
in this great City to the rest. I speak of it, because the chief thing in this
City is to desire to see the glory of God as Moses did, to desire above all
things to see God, perfect God. We know God is perfect, and uses not to work
by halves: but God has hidden that attribute in a great measure among us. He
gave us many overtures of mercy, but he called for them back again, and so
presently turned our joy, into sorrow. It has been familiar in all his
dispensations to us, for these two, or three years; Now that the Lord should go
on from one thing to another, without interruption, and cast nothing in by the
way to imbitter our mercies, and to go from less to greater in this manner, me
thinks the Lord has showed himself a perfect God, as he did to our fathers
before, and that is a glorious attribute.

Besides, it is not a little mercy that the Lord has 5. In respect of a
confiding Governor.
inclined the Parliament to bestow a governor upon that City that they may
confide in: that is a greater mercy, then we can now speak of.

And truly if you will give me leave to tell you what I think (for we may happily
judge of Gods mercy in this, because of our concernment further then some of
you) it is a great mercy in our apprehension, that the Lord has cleared his
people that came thence. For when they came up, I remember well, of all people
that came from any part of the Kingdom, as I apprehend (pardon me if I
misapprehend) the Bristoll people, and those parts (though they received much
kindness from this City, which they are bound with thankfulness ever to
acknowledge, yet) they lay under a blurr, because they were looked on as faulty,
and defective, and negligent, that they lost the City, and endangered the
Kingdom. That truly besides their losses, and sufferings that you cannot
imagine unless you had suffered with them) this was not a small affliction, to
see so many frown on them, and to add affliction to affliction, as though if
they had been more valiant, and courageous, they might have kept the City, and
have saved it, etc. I meddle not with the commanders, and governors; but I
speak of you that are here, and the good people of Bristoll that use to be
here: I say the Lord has restored the poor people, to their home at least
(though that be naked enough for them) and has taken away their reproach, for
though we said before, that we did what we could to save the City, and stood
out, yet it was generally thought, that we might have done more: but now it
appears to the world, that now there were many more then we had, at least three
for one, and there were two years works, forts, and lines built more then there
was then, and we kept them out three days in storming, and I hear not that
they did one. As soon as we lost the City we capitulated, so did they as soon
as they lost it. I say not but that we had weaknesses, and (it may be) from the
greatest to the least wanted skill in mannaging it: but I know (and I should
know as much as one^ that the people of Bristoll were valiant from the least to
the greatest. The Lord has taken away the reproach: for whereas all others in
the Kingdom were pitied, many frowned upon Bristoll men after all their
sufferings. There are many other things that are not now expedient to insist
upon. I leave it to your serious consideration.

And what the goodness of God is to us in the victory in Scotland, no man
(though we know it but in general) can be ignorant, how that Kingdom being
subdued, the enemy would have been over us, and all the three Kingdoms would
have been gone in the eye of reason: but God has sent them seasonable relief
beyond all expectation: A great mercy!

Now from all this, I will tell you my thoughts, what you, and I should learn.

First, for ever hereafter we should learn patiently to wait upon the Lord,
when we have made our prayers to him, and he has made his promises to us. We
had many promises in our eye, and we made our prayers, but when the Lord gave
the City into their hands, we thought the promises, and our prayers were lost;
neither did we see, or could understand, how any thing should become of them
but only shame, and reproach. For we boasted of God in the Pulpits, and in the
streets, and at our work, that the Lord was our God, and would help us, and yet
the Lord turned it against us, and there were few of us that had so much grace
as to wait patiently on him, and to know that though nothing appeared the
vision would speak and would not lie. But now we are convinced of our folly,
and we see that God has fully answered those prayers of Bristoll. For those
prayers I believe did speak loudest, of all the prayers in England, in getting
that City, And I value one of those prayers more then an hundred now, for they
are old prayers in store, stale prayers are good. And they were prayers from
broken, afflicted spirits, and believing hearts. And now you see how the Lord
has graciously provided food, and raiment for his people, and done the souls
of many of them much good, and in due season restored their dwellings, and
habitations to them. Therefore there is a word in Romans 10. that I did think to
open. The Apostle there comparing the righteousness together, he says, ver.
5. that the righteousness of the law is thus described by Moses, The man that
does these things, shall live in them. That is the language of the law, he that
does these things, he that keeps the law shall be saved. But the righteousness
of faith (the way of faith, as the Apostle calls it, Gal. 3. or the way of the
Gospel) speaks on this wise, it has another kind of language, say not in
thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven? or who shall descend into the deep?
But what says it? The word is nigh thee, the word of faith which we Preach.
That is, this is the language of faith, that Jesus Christ has fulfilled all
righteousness for us. And how do we come to know this? Here is the word, and
then the Spirit of faith; this is the language; this is the way of the Gospel,
the way of faith.

But you will say, What is that word of Faith that this is grounded on?

The Apostle chooses one Scripture, verse 11. in stead of all other as there
are abundance of Scriptures setting forth the Gospel way: but he takes this as
one of the chief among the rest) whosoever believes on him shall not be
ashamed. He takes it out of Isaiah 28. whosoever believes on him shall not be
ashamed. He takes (I say) that as one of the chief Scriptures of Gospel, that
is to be the foundation of the way of faith: and though you may apply it for
the soul, and principally so; yet you may for every thing else, that this is a
general and sure rule, he that believes on God shall not be ashamed. So the
Lord has removed our reproach. We heard with our ears jeering of God, and
Preachers, and Preaching, but now blessed le God we need not blush, we may own
our prayers, and stand to our preaching, and glory in the promises of God: he
that believes shall not be ashamed.

Therefore, hereafter, though God does delay a long while, (as this was about
two years, and a monety) yet notwithstanding learn to believe in God still,
wait upon God patiently, and either the whole Gospel will not hold, or else
this will: for this is the pillar of it; he that believes shall not be
ashamed. The patient abiding of the meek shall not be ashamed. If God see a
man meekly, and patiently wait for him, his waiting shall not be in vain, and
though it be long in our eyes, yet a thousand years with God are as one day,
and one day as a thousand years. And the delay of a thousand years is as it
were but a day, yet he brings about all his promises of mercies sweetly for his
glory, and the good of his people.

Therefore, whatsoever we would have for his glory, and the good of his people,
let us follow God, and rest on his word. Remember that Gospel pillar (I say
not promise, but pillar) he that believes shall not be ashamed. That is one
thing.

Another is this, that we should (but God knows when we will learn it: for
people are further, and further from learning it every day) me thinks learn
hence a little in due order and manner to honor the Saints, and people of God.
A man would think so: but blind men cannot see. We know that there is an Army,
the generality (I hope I may say so of them) being godly people: an Army (I
think truly, I may say without disparagement to any other fearing God, and
seeking his honor, as much as any Army under the cope of heaven these five
hundred years. Blessed be God that put it in your hearts to reform them, if
there be any evil among them, it is one of the most glorious works that ever
you did. Now it is no disparagement to God, that under God, and in God we
honor his people. Therefore woe to them that call light darkness, of which to
this day the streets are full all the week long, notwithstanding the humility,
the love, and unity, the self-denial, and all the graces that are to be seen
as clear as the sun in the firmament in this Army, yet you shall have people,
and many that would be called professors to reproach them, and rail, and say,
A scandalous aspersion upon the Army, that when they had got the power they
intended to rule both King and Parliament. The admirable graces observed in the
Army by the Author long since.
they fight for their own ends, they seek themselves, they are no friends to
the Parliament; they mean to get a little power, and then to rule King, and
Parliament too. O blasphemous speeches! Beloved, for my part, I have not been
there often, but I saw more grace, in that small Army (poor wretches) then in all
the Kingdom besides.

First, I see more love there, their love is true love, and it is love to one
another as they are Saints, as they are honest men; and not as such a one holds
a faction this way, or that way. If one man be wounded, they will all venture
their lives to fetch him off; and if one be sick, every one contributes to his
wants; there is abundance of sweet love: There is unity: here is biting, such a
one is a Presbyterian; another is an Independent, another is an Anabaptist:
there is no such biting there: They look not in men's mouths, as men do in
horses mouths, and say is he a Presbyterian, or an Independent? but is he an
honest man, a godly man? if he be, he is a companion for any godly man.

We are the most miserable men in the world, this poor City: if a man had as
much grace as Paul had, if some Independent see him, and say he is inclining to
Presbytery, or if a Presbyterian see him, and say, he is inclining to
Independencie, then let him go, and cut his throat. The Lord pity you, that so
Christ Jesus in the souls of people may be the object of your love. Is there
grace and Christ there? be there what there will if there be not that, I have
nothing to do. Now if one that is carnal join with me, or another, or a third
man in faction, we take him. The Lord pity us; it is not so in the Army, It
would do you good to go among them twenty four hours to see the unity that is
among them. I say, learn to honor the Saints.

Then there is a spirituality there, there is a thing that may be called
spirituality in the Army. There is not only a profession, and duties, etc. as
we have here, but a kind of flower of godliness, some sparklings of their
graces; there is not only grace, but grace flying. As when I was in the Army,
I saw some glory shine in their graces, that would dazzle a man's eyes almost as
the Sun, an excellency of grace, the spirituality of grace. We strive about
low, carnal things, about this and that, but they, about the mysteries of the
Kingdom of God, you may see it gloriously.

And then what self-denial is there! Who lives there by plundering, and
stealing, as many have done; and do? And then, when honor is got, how does
every one study to cast honor on his brother, and not on himself! and studies
silence not to have his name mentioned, but that God may have glory, O it is a
glorious thing.

And then what fidelity! If there were nothing in them of all those things in
that flaming manner, yet me thinks their fidelity as subjects should make them
honorable,

How?

I will tell you how; because that having no encouragment almost, but railing,
and scoffing, and contemning of them, and raising reproaches on them, etc. and
the liberty of their conscience threatened day by day, and impaired very much
every day by those that stay at home here, and eat the fat the while; yet
notwithstanding they do not (as diverse have done) lay down their Arms, and
say, I see my conscience will be in slavery when all is done, and I have
ventured my life: therefore I will go beyond Sea, as many godly men have done:
but they resolve, I will die for the Parliament, let them take away my liberty,
and make me a slave, yet we will do it, all the reproaches cannot discourage
them; it is the joy of their souls, when they hear of a skirmish, or a fight,
they leap. What a glorious spirit is on English men!

Therefore (I beseech you) take heed of calling light darkness, there is
nothing that provokes God more: take heed of raising, and nourishing a cursed
reproach against the Saints. I say not against Independents, or Presbyterians,
or Anabaptists, but I say against godly men: I will stand to it, there is the
hatred against Christ, and godliness in them, and then they put it upon
Antinomians, and Presbyterians, and Anabaptists, and Independents: but they are
blind wretches that hate godly men, and seek to ruin the Kingdom, and to cut
the throats of them. Therefore take heed, honor those that God honors, If God
have honored them, and they honor God, and love God, let us in and for God
give them honor also.

Shall I teach you another word (and so I have done) Learn hence by experience
(though it be not the best mistress) to set forward godly men (as much as you
can) to the work. It is not a dallying time; the Kingdom is almost sunk, and we
have made experiments of men, and things to try conclusions, till we have
almost ruined the Kingdom, though we see it not here. It is not a time to dally
when the Kingdom gasps, you know there is a party of wicked men at Oxford: here
was a great company of treacherous men chosen for the Parliament that went to
the King: Then we have had experience of all Committees, what things are done
by men that are not right, that are not godly, I mean, not that are not of
this or that faction, but that are not godly.

O Learn, and O that God would teach England and London, and all to be wise at
last, that now in all places, and Offices, and occasions of war, and at home,
and in Committees and any thing. Look not how I may please my Landlord, or how
I may please such a Gentleman, but if he be a faithful godly man, O set him
forward. That is the way to save this poor Kingdom, you will never save it as
long as you say, I have such a kinsman, and he shall be a Colonel, and I have
such a Cosen-German, and he shall be a Committee man, you will never do good
so. Therefore if God would, and O that he would put it into the hearts of the
Parliament to employ godly men in this Army, that lay idle before, and did
nothing: you see how the Lord has wonderfully blessed them, you see things
done that have not been done in our age before, such successions of victory,
and worthy actions. Therefore employ godly men, faithful men, Presbyterians,
or Independents, look not at that, but see if they be godly men. Let us pray to
the Lord that God may do it, that God may put it into the hearts of all so to
do.

I shall say two or three words more, and so I have done.

One is, from this of Bristol, learn to believe that the strongest afflictions
will work for our good. We know this was a strong affliction, a sore affliction
that had confounded. There was not a man of us when we came out of Bristol,
that could render a reason, what God did mean in shaming our prayers, and our
preaching, and in scattering the poor Saints: it amazed us, we knew not what it
meant, yet now we see plainly that God did mean to do our souls good; God has
done the souls of many of his people good, and God will do their bodies good,
and every thing shall be for the best; and we hope also, that they now knowing
what the cruelty and oppression of the Enemy is, it will make them more
careful to save the City, whereas before, all the world could not make the
generality confident to the Parliament: but now we see God was wiser then we,
therefore if God bring strong afflictions on our selves, or our wives, or
children, that we know not what to make of them, let us learn to be quiet and
patient, and to see that God means us well, and that it shall turn to our good.

Another thing is this, that you may learn a little for your souls from it, to
reason from the greater to the least, and from the least to the greater, it is
the ordinary way of Scripture, If God has given us his Son, shall he not with
him give us all things? So, I say, thus me thinks you and I may reason, that
the Lord that has battered those Forts, those Castles, or done as good as
broken them, that all their preparations these two years could not keep them,
but God has thrown them down; why should I not hope that God will batter down
the bulwark in my heart? I prayed, and you prayed that God would deliver that
Castle and Forts and those things to our Forces, and they were strong and
mighty, and God did it, and shall not the Forts and Bulwarks that Sin and Satan
has in my heart be thrown down? Truly, that should help our faith a little to
follow God to throw down the one as he has the other. Those strong hodls,
those strong lusts that are there, unbelief and worldliness, and pride, and
wantonness, and such like things that are in the souls of people variously.
Methinks this might increase our confidence, and stir up our more earnest
prayers to God, that he would be pleased to throw down these, as he did the
Works of Bristol, and to make way for the King of glory to come into them.

And I could wish lastly, that you would help poor Bristol people a little, as
much as you can to settle them comfortably in their habitations according as
the Parliament gave order, for they will find naked walls there; and if there
be any thing, the Plague having been there, it may be they dare not go in.
Therefore encourage them, pray for them, and if it be in your power any way,
help them a little, for they are but a few that are here, and weak. Pray for
them that they may have good Officers, and good Common-Counsel-men, and good
Ministers, and the like, you have more friends that live here, and it may be
more understanding then they have, and now is the time if you can do any thing,
help them a little in that: otherwise for them to go home, among a company of
carnal Aldermen, and carnal Common Counselmen, and carnal Ministers, what help
shall they have? Therefore pray for them, and help them, as God shall give you
opportunity.

Expositions and Observations on MICAH 4. 1, 2, 3, etc.
But in the last days it shall come to pass that the mountain of the house
of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be
exalted above the hills, and the people shall flow unto it.

And many Nations shall come and say, Come and let us go up to the mountain of
the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the Law shall go forth of Zion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong Nations afar off; and
they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up a sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn war any more.

But they shall sit every man under his vine, and under his fig tree, and none
shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts has spoken it.

For all people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we will walk in
the name of the Lord our God for ever, and ever.


HEre are four or five things that the Lord The blessings of the later times.
promises in the latter times.

One is, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in
the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted. That is, the Church and people
of God and the things of God shall be exalted in this world above all other
things. You know now that the power of Christ is beneath all other powers, and
the Kingdom of Christ is beneath all other Kingdoms, and the people of Christ
are beneath all other people, and the Ordinances of Christ are beneath all
other ordinances: but in the latter times, the Mountain of the house of the
Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains. The time shall come when
God shall raise his Church, and people, and his laws and ordinances, and every
thing of his, above the world, that the Saints shall be more glorious, and more
respected then all the people in the world besides.

And therefore you that are Saints: be not troubled to see Christ so low in the
world, it grieves them to see how every base thing gets over Christ, to see how
Christ and his things are trampled on in the world. Christ is as a Worm, thou
worm Jacob, every child may put his foot upon the head of a Worm: so are all
the things of God, and have been hitherto, but in times to come the Lord shall
raise his Mountain above all other mountains.

Another thing promised is, that in the last times, Many Nations shall come and
say, Come let us go up to the House of the Lord, and to the Mountain of the God
of Jacob, etc. that is, when Christ and his Laws, and Ordinances shall be
exalted, there will be a greater Harvest among the people then ever there was
before.

First, In respect of the extent of it, Many Nations shall come and say.
Whereas now, most of the Nations of the world are ignorant of, or enemies to
the things of Jesus Christ: there are few Nations that hear of the Name of
Christ: but then many Nations shall come, many Nations that lie in Paganism,
and Heathenism, and darkness, God will find a way to spread the savor of the
Gospel to them.

Secondly, then there shall be a great deal of willingness to come to Christ in
his holy Ordinances, they shall say, Come let us go up to the mountain of the
House of the Lord, and they shall flow to it. Now you know what a deal of
preaching there is to bring home one soul to God; a man may preach, and preach,
and searce ever a one brought home to God; the Lord pours but a little of his
Spirit with preaching, we are to bless his Name for any, but the time shall
come, that as soon as the people hear they shall obey.

The people shall flow unto,

The word is taken from the Tide: there are two things meant by it,

First, That then abundance of people shall come in to the Lord, for the Tide
comes in with waves, and abundance of water, it comes not with a little water,
but with multitudes.

Then it comes with strength and power, that goes through all opposition. We
see now it is not so, the Lord gives but little of his Spirit, and therefore
there are but few that come in to God, and of those few, many of them, every
little thing turns them off, one is afraid of persecution, another of the loss
of his estate, another of the loss of friends, another of the loss of his
grace, but then they shall flow.

Another thing in this Promise of this glorious Harvest is this: as they shall
flow, so also they shall be enabled, their hearts shall be enlarged to learn
abundance of the Will of God, and molded to a willingness to obey it. This is
not accomplished yet, They shall then say, Come, let us go to the house of the
God of Jacob.

He will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Now you know there
is but little teaching. Indeed God teaches some few wondrously, more
abundantly then we can teach, but yet there be many, though we speak much, and
though they live under the Ordinances, yet they learn little; and then that
little that they do learn, there is very little power that goes along to frame
their hearts to do it, but then they shall say,

We will walk in his ways. There will be a power, that when the Saints hear the
word from God, they shall not be always wishing, and woulding, and say I would I
could do so: but there shall be a power with the word, whereby they shall be
enabled to do it.

Another thing promised in the last times is, that,

They shall be at their swords into plow-shares and their spears into pruning
hooks, etc. The Lord will end these wars that are among the Nations, that make
the lives of people and of the Saints uncomfortable. And especially (as I take
it with submission to the people of God that are wise) that the wars here
principally meant are wars for Religion, as appears by the verses following,
they shall be at their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning
hooks. They shall then give over wars, and live peaceably together; whereas you
know now most of the wars in the world are about Religion. The Turk would come,
and subdue Christendom to set up the worship of his Mahomet, the Pope would
destroy him to set up his Religion; and so all over the world there is a
disposition, that with fire, and faggot, and sword, and spear; we would bring
men to worship God, every man according to his own fancy, But (says he) then
there shall be no such wars, every man shall sit under his own vine, and under
his own figtree, and none shall make them afraid, The mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. Then they shall be quiet, there shall not be such persecuting in the
world.

For all people will walk, every (...) in the name of his God, and we will walk
in the name of the Lord our God for evermore.

That is the reason why I think it is meant of wars about Religion: because it
is said, all people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we will
walk in the name of our God also. That is, people shall not be forced to
worship this or that God, or this way, or that way, with sword, and spear, but
they shall all sit under their own vines: that shall be the fruit of that
abundance of teaching that there will be, every Nation will walk in the name of
his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever.

Not (beloved) but that the Lord Jesus has left, and does still continue to
the end of the world a way of spiritual censure, and punishments for people
that sin against him. It is not meant that people in the last times shall go
where they will, and do what they list; no, we have ordinances in the Church
given by Christ for the correction of those that walk inordinately; we are to
deliver our selves from them, and to deliver them up to Satan. But in respect
of the main course that the world has been in, and is to this day, they shall
not then be under censures for those nifles, and trifles, as hitherto the way
has been by fire, and faggot, and sword: but (says the Holy Ghost) it shall
not be so then, every one shall walk in the name of his God, and we will walk
in the name of the Lord our God for evermore.

Then here is another mercy.

In that day says the Lord will I assemble her that halteth, and I will gather
her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted, and I will make her that
halted a remnant, and her that was cast afar off a strong Nation, and the Lord
shall reign over them in Mount Zion, from henceforth even for ever.

That is, we may know the worth of mercies, by the presence of miseries; we see
now some halting, some running into errors, and blasphemies, and we know not
what to do: but then the Lord will make them that halt a remnant; the Lord will
gather the people that halt and go aside, and he will settle, and confirm them
in the truth. These are the thoughts of the Lord, and the counsels of God
concerning the last days. Therefore we are the while to wait patiently for the
Lord, and to pray earnestly that God would make good his promise to us: and not
to loose our selves (as we are apt) to see the disorders and confusions of
Churches and Commonwealths in these days. But as people that are in a storm,
we should look when the cloud will be over, that the Lord will give fairer
weather, and remove all these things, when the last, and blessed, and best
days shall come. And this is the chief thing that the prophet here aims at.

Expositions and Observations on HABAKKUK 2. 4.
But the just shall live by his faith.
I Will not stand now to show you what a just man is. Only in a word take
notice that the just man here meant, is not a man that is just in his own sight
or in his own personal righteousness, or just in the esteem of the world:
though men be so called, and not improperly: he is a just man that deals
justly: but the just man in the Gospel language, is a man that though he be
not greatly esteemed in the world; and though he has many things that make him
seem less just then many moral men that seem just, yet according to the law of
God he is just, we are to declare him so, the Gospel declares him just,
because God has received a righteousness whereby he calls him just; he calls
him just, because Jesus Christ is The just man lives by faith four ways. 1. In
respect of justification.
made righteousness to him. Now the just man lives by his faith four ways.

He lives by faith, first in respect of justification; there is a light that
the Saints have, that whereas, as sinners they were dead before in trespasses,
and sins, they now see themselves acquitted of all their debts, they see Gods
justice satisfied and his law fulfilled, and they see themselves just men:
whereas they were dead in law before, now, in law (or in Gospel as it were)
they are alive again. For so it is, that every man, and woman among us, though
he be never so honest, or civil, or faithful in holy duties, etc. yet if he
be not justified by the righteousness of Jesus Christ, he is a dead man in the
language of God, and according to the law of God. Just as a man at the bar
that is condemned to die, he is a dead man in law, though the sentence, as
Solomon says, be sometimes delayed, and put off, and not executed: he may be
reprived a little, from one year to another, but he is a dead man, that is, he
is an unjustified man: so if God has not given thee the righteousness of
Christ, and a heart to lay hold of that, be what thou will in thy self, and do
what thou can of thy self, yet thou art a dead man, and those that lay hold
of that righteousness are living men. This life is much spoken of Romans 5. how
we are dead by the first Adam, and alive by the second Adam, that life is our
justification, verse. 17. By one man's offense, death reigned by one, much more
they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.

There is secondly, a life of sanctification, Ephesians. 4. they were strangers
from the life of God; that is, the life 2. In respect of sanctification.
of holiness, and their hearts were heardned, and carried away with
lasciviousness, etc. Thus a man comes to live by faith: for all that thou
do, though thou account it holiness, and the world may account thee a holy
man, yet if every grain of thy grace, and holiness do not come from Christ by
the power of faith, thou art but a dead man, and all thy works are but dead
works.

Then thirdly, the Saints live by faith, that is, the life 3. Faith is their
assurance.
of assurance (as I may so call it) the Saints they hold their assurance of the
former by the power of faith (not by sense) for a while at least: they know
they are Saints, how do they know it? by faith: they know they are justified,
how do they know it? By Faith.

True it is, when God gives them the knowledge of sense, they must not shut
their eyes one day that they have it, but our eyes are so dim that we are ready
to mistake; so that the maine course of a man's life is by faith from Gods love
in Christ in the free Covenant, which Covenant consists in such promises, which
promises speak to me by such ordinances as this, and the Lords Supper, etc.
This is a third way.

Fourthly, and lastly, the Saints live by faith, that is, in all afflictions
they do bear up their spirits, and are supported 4. It is their support in
afflictions.
by the power of faith upon the word, though there be nothing seen, and appear.
A natural man cannot hold up, but sink, further then there is some sensible,
visible thing to hold him up: but the just, those that are Saints, they have an
art, a mystical art, whereby when they see nothing, but have a word, wherein
God has promised to do this, or that for them, they can bear up themselves,
and so go on as cheerfully as if they did enjoy, or as if they did see their
deliverance. Thus Habakkuk, we read, this proverb. verse 1, 2, 3. The vision is
for an appointed time, in the end it will speak, and not lie: though it tarry,
wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry, Behold, his soul
which is lifted up, is not upright in him; but the just shall live by his faith.

There was a vision that did promise good to this people, but this vision must
tarry a little, it must not be performed presently: but they might say, how
shall we do in the mean while? The just shall live by his faith. Though there
be nothing seen, yet notwithstanding they shall bear themselves, and carry
themselves cheerfully, and comfortably, and contentedly by beholding the truth
of the business, and the sweet expectation they have of it, as if it were come
already. You have the proverb repeated by the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, in this sense, yet a little while, and he that shall come will come,
and will not tarry. You have need of patience, says the Apostle. They were in
great afflictions, there was a promise that God would help them, but what shall
we do in the mean while, while the grass grows? In the mean while the just
shall live by his faith; he shall drive on and carry on the work, and bear up
himself, and his spirit, and his comfort, and all on the word of the Lord, and
he shall do all this by his faith. So that this being the lesson shortly
(though I be not able yet to clear this fully to you: for truly this is a
lesson wherein we still shall want light, we are not able to see it perfectly,
it is from faith to faith, says the Apostle. That is, we come from one degree
of faith to another to live by faith: there are many kinds, many degrees of
living by faith) Now this is it that I would commend to you, and exhort you to,
that you would seek the Lord, and study the Scriptures, that you might come to
this, that you may live by faith.

First of all, in the grosser part of it, concerning sanctification (that is an
easy thing to be understood) that you would not regard, or weigh any thing in
all your profession, but what does come from Jesus Christ by faith. Truly, much
of our Religion, is a natural kind of Religion, and much of that which is
like good in us, does not spring from Jesus Christ, and whatsoever is not from
him, will never be accepted by him. We have many moral virtues from old Adam,
that we gild over, and account them graces, but God loathes them. We have many
duties that we have taken up in the imitation of others, by good education or
the power of the letter Preached to us, and yet this is not the life of faith,
it is not holiness by faith.

And therefore, let us not (like many professors) study the muchnesse of
Religion, or the plausiblenesse of it without; as that I am able to preach, as
other preachers do, and you are able to pray in a day of humiliation as other
professors do, this is nothing: but let us labor that that little holiness
that is in us, may clearly proceed from the Lord Jesus Christ. One had better
have a Garden of a few true, and pleasant Flowers, though there be but a few,
then to have a Garden with some Flowers, and a world of trash like Flowers,
there is no pleasure in it. Now, I fear that much of thy best duties spring
from old Adam, much of thy best prayers, and much (it may be) of that Religion
whereby thou art accounted a professor: much of it, I fear, is nothing but old
Adam, and his ruins screwed up, and varnished, or gilded, and not from the
Lord Jesus Christ.

And therefore remember this, that as drunkenness, and whoredom, and those
gross, and scandalous works of darkness, are called dead works, so every
grain, every stamp of good in thee, if it be not from the new Adam, it is but
a dead work. I could show you how you shall know the one from the other, but
that the time is short, and I must not hinder other occasions; Therefore I
leave that upon your thoughts that you may pray to the Lord: Lord; I do not
care how men conceive of me, I care not though I be among the least of all
Saints, as Paul says, if I be reckoned the least of all Saints, so that that
little Saint-ship, and holiness that is in me flow from Christ, that it be a
grace from his grace, and light from his light.

But the other truth is wondrous hard to express, that we should in respect of
justification, and assurance learn the Art of living by faith, that when the
Lord shall take away all comfortable objects of sight, and sense, that we can
see nothing, we cannot pray at all; we see corruption upon corruption, and
waves of temptations one upon another, and no working within to relieve us,
that I am able then to live by faith; that is, to see a righteousness in Jesus
Christ, and to build upon his word, and Covenant, to hold my self, and my
assurance still, I am a son still, everlasting life belongs to me still, though
I feel, and see nothing, but hell, and something worse if it may be, yet
notwithstanding I am a Saint, and I am righteous, and just, and the Lord is my
father, and has reserved everlasting life for me.

Beloved, the life that Christians ordinarily do live, it is a life mingled
with faith, and sense: for if God give me free grace, why should not I rejoice
in it? If I clearly see the first fruits of the Kingdom of heaven, why should I
exclude my reason not to conclude that there is more grace behind?

But there are other Saints that have a mixture of faith and sense, that take
away sense, and their faith is gone, their faith is grounded upon sense. And I
have often times looked in to my soul, and thought why the Lord suffered me to be
carried away with corruptions, and to be overwhelmed with temptations, whereas
he hates these things, and I hate them, and I weary him, and they weary me, and
he can help it, and I cannot; why he should do thus, to suffer me to pray, and
I cannot overcome? There are many reasons the Lord has given in to my soul
from time to time: but of all reasons this is the chief, that the Lord thereby
would inure us to live by faith. The Lord comes many times when we are
compassed about with grace, and holiness, and can go as you do into your
Gardens, and take now one Flower, and then another, and make a posie of grace,
I behold my love to the Saints, and my delight in God, and my uprightness in
my calling, and I make a posie of them, God comes and dashes it all, every jot,
and what shall I say now? Now for a man to be able to take up a promise that
the just shall live by his faith, that is, I am still as just as ever I was,
and I am assured of it (in a sort) as much as ever, without the least grain of
any thing felt or seen, and I bear up my profession, and all my works, as if I
had those views of graces that once I had, now all is gone. Whereas, ordinarily
when God dasheth all this way, what is the fruit of it? Then a man concludes, I
am an hypocrite, I am a damned creature, I cannot believe, then I must sit in a
holy moping, why? because sense is gone, faith is gone almost, faith stays no
longer then sense, and that is a sign that you always lived by sense: God takes
occasion many times to dash all that ever is in us, and that ever has been
done by us; God will write hypocrisy upon it, he will make us read so at
least, do thou see what thou art? There is no creature more carnal; and in
that thou have done, there is this crookedness, and that hypocrisy, there is
this guile, and that, all is naught. Then the Lord by this teaches one to go a
high-lone, without crutches; one of these faintings teaches one to go without
a staff, alone. And therein also is the glory of God, that is glorious in all
his works of creation, and providence, glorious in war, knapping the spear
asunder: but his glory in the Gospel is more, that usually when God has
showed a Saint his confusion and wickedness, to magnify his grace the more,
then ordinarily, God takes these times to do more for a poor soul, then ever he
did at any time: the Lord will then give a new seal of the pardon of sins, and
new discoveries of the mysteries of the Gospel, and of Jesus Christ in the
midst of these confusions. But it is the hardest thing in the world, to live
clearly by faith when sense is gone; there is that I drive at all this while. I
see poor creatures moping every where, and when sense is out, then their candle
is out, as Job says, How often is the candle of the wicked put out? So, that
Saint that lives by sense, his comfort is no longer then he sees, and feels
grace, he has assurance of Gods love no longer then he feels grace. So there
are but few of you that have a root of faith, that in all the ebbings, and
flowings of grace, your comfort, and strength, and assurance by Faith goes on
in its course as before. Now desire the Lord to bring you to this clearly,
that according to this blessed proverb you may live by faith.

Expositions and Observations on MATTHEW 19. ult.
But many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first.
THe occasion of this speech of our Savior was, there was a young man, a very
rich young man that came to Christ, and would learn the way to heaven of him.
And our Lord he cuts him out a task too hard for his carnal heart, among the
rest, to give all that he had to the poor. The young man was very sad, and went
away, because he was very rich, It may be a poor man might have done it: but
the more riches men have, the more loath they are to part with it. Whereupon,
says our Lord, you may see how hard it is for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, A Camel may go through the eye of a needle as soon.
Whereupon his Disciples replied in a vanting way, crowing over the man, Master,
what shall we have? we have done gallantly, we have forsaken all that we have,
and have followed thee; what shall we have therefore? Says our Lord Christ,
You shall have a large reward I confess, I say unto you. Ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the Throne of
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones. And every one that has
forsaken houses, or land, or children, or father, or mother, or wife for my
names sake; shall receive an hundred fold here, and shall inherit everlasting
life. For, says he (he puts this correction upon it) here is a large reward,
as if he should say, if the young man had followed my advice he had been no
loser, nor you shall not, but many that are first shall be last, and the last
shall be first. As if he should say, I would not have you to be proud, and to
crow over that poor man that is run from me, because you are old Disciples; it
may be that man may come back again to me, and be my best servant when you may
run away: for many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first.
And thereupon our Lord in the next Chapter, on purpose to this end to bring
down their spirits, he expresses himself in a whole parable of a man that
hired servants, and he that came at the last hour received as much as he that
came at the beginning of the day; he takes down their spirits from being too
high over poor sinners. So that is the lesson that I desire you seriously to
consider of, the text it self shall be the Doctrine, that

Many that are first shall be last. I say, many sinners, and slow professors,
shall be first, and foremost in the ways of godliness; and many old professors
that have been once zealous, shall be last, and lowest in the forms of
Religion and godliness.

I need not tell you that there are several forms of godliness. There are
(as John says) fathers, and young men, and children; there is the weak, and
the strong, the spiritual, and the carnal. Now God (I say) has cast it so
that ordinarily the weak shall outrun the strong, the child shall go before
his father, the young, green, slow professors; shall be in heaven, and the way
to heaven before the old professor, and they that were first shall be last, and
they that were last shall now be first. For the opening of it, it is to be
understood two ways.

First of all you are to understand this, that the first shall be last, and the
last first, not as an universal, general rule, that every young professor
shall outstrip an old: but the way to Heaven is so narrow, that in the
profession of Religion, abundance of them do fall away. And few men fall away
at the first: but when the trial comes, when the Sun arises, as our Lord
says. So a learned expositer upon it says, that it may be thirty, or forty,
or fifty, or sixty years among professors, there may be many hypocrites, and
there are more that have but a common work of the spirit of God: thereupon our
Lord speaking only to professors such as they were, Matt. 13. where he says
three of the four were rotten, and come to nothing, and the fourth only hold
out. Some men's sins are open before (says Paul) and some follow after. We see
it by some men setting out in Religion, they never come to any thing: but some
men's sins follow after. Some men go far, and walk gloriously, and afterward are
discovered. And truly, it is a rule among the best of our ministers, that
seldom or never, hypocrites go out of this world undiscovered: And hence it
comes to pass by the falls of hypocrites, and those that have not a saving
work of grace, that great ones fall away, and little, low ones outstrip them.

Secondly, it comes to pass that the first are last, and the last first,
because the Lord for reasons best known to himself for the most part so casts
it, that even among true professors, true Saints, the most part of them when
they grow ancient (in Religion especially) they take a napp before they go
hence. They go as travelers in the way, that go out betime in the morning, but
take a bait of two or three hours in the way, and so slow travelers get
before them. There is not one in ten ordinarily, but has a shrewd napp when he
is ancient in Religion, before he go hence. Thereupon we see the ten Virgins,
Matt. 25. The wise Virgins slept as well as the foolish, they all slept: but
the wise Virgins awaked in time, and got up again, and the foolish slept it
out. And while they are napping and sleeping, the first becomes last, and the
last first. For we may not think that all such ancient professors, that they
have no grace. We see now, are there not some Magistrates, and many Ministers,
old non-conformists, that are now generally napping, and sleeping, that you
would think there were nothing of God in them? we may not think that they
belong not to the Lord, and that they have no grace. This is the time when many
simple souls get into Christ, and the knowledge of Christ, and have further
enjoyments of spirit, and communion of spirit with him, then those grave
Ministers, and Commonwealths men, that before held out Religion more then
others: yet we are not to think that they have no grace.

Therefore of this briefly, there are these four or five practical lessons
that we should learn.

The first is, that all you that are ancient Christians, 1. Use to avoid
security.
ancient professors, if ye stand, to take heed least ye fall. How should this
me thinks make an ancient Saint watch? how should he avoid security, when it is
ordinary for old Christians to take a napp, and so not to be higher in Heaven;
they lose much of their glory in Heaven; nay they lose their honor here, ye
some men think them to be hypocrites. Therefore stand on your guard: say not,
we have been professors, twenty, or thirty, or forty years, as ordinary
professors bragg of their standing in Religion. No, but remember this lesson,
there are many first that shall be last: therefore walk watchfully, and
circumspectly. Think with your selves, and O that the Lord would open the eyes
of ancient Christians in this City, to see poor souls of a year, or half a
years standing, start up, that have more of Christ in them, and more clear
knowledge of the Gospel, and love him more, and his Saints, and do more for
him then they do. O look about thee, and consider with thy self that though
thou be ancient, and before that man or woman in Christ, yet thou may come a
great while after him to heaven for all that. Therefore, says Paul, I press
hard to that which is before. It is a comparrison from men that run in a race.
As the heathen Poet says, when a man runs in a race, he never looks on the
horses that are behind him, but if there be one before him he looks to that.
Beloved, look that if thou be before others, take heed that thou come not to
the goal after them.

Secondly, let ancient professors, ancient Christians 2. Not to contemn others.
learn not to despise, and contemn weak Saints, young beginners, nay not
sinners themselves: I have observed it to the grief of my soul, with the
bleeding of my heart, a great deal of contempt, and disdain in the brows of
some ancient Christians against some weak Saints: take heed of it: for though
thou be first, and great now, thou art honored now as an excellent Prayer in
London, as one excellent in a day of humiliation; who knows whether thou that
art first may not be last? Therefore contemn not weak Saints. No, nor
sinners, there is many a man that may be in the Alehouse, a drinking, and
swearing, and whoring, and his queen with him, that may be in heaven before
thee, therefore be tender to sinners, especially if it be a Saint that has any
thing of God in him, consider he that is first may be last, and the last may be
first.

Thirdly, let weak Saints, and young beginners, learn 3. Weak ones not to bear
themselves unreverently
hence also, as on the one side (that I may put in that caveat) not to behave
themselves unreverently toward the ancient. I would not have old Saints to crow
over the young, muchlesse the young over the ancient: Says Paul, rebuke not an
elder, but rather exhort him. If we in preaching must not speak so sharply to
ancient Christians, whether elders in Office, or rather in Religion (as I
believe it is) we must not rebuke him, but speak with reverence, so much more
young Christians must speak reverently, of ancient Christians, and not say,
there goes such an old professor, and such a one says, the first shall be
last; and so despise him. No, but as God has put the law of nature that the
young shall observe the elder, and the junior shall respect the senior: so in
grace and Religion, people must observe their duty. Therefore young women must
learn of the old, and old women should be teachers of good things to young
women, not given to wine, etc. beware of petulant, wanton carriage toward old
professors.

So, on the other side, be not discouraged by seeing the Neither to be
discouraged.
graces in ancient, strong Christians. It is an ordinary thing for weak Saints
to be more discouraged at the graces of strong Saints then at any thing else.
As a weak eye that looks on the Sun can see just nothing; so many a weak soul
has the testimony of Gods spirit, that he walks uprightly in his family before
the Lord: but if he fall into the company of spiritual Christians that are
full of the Spirit, full of the Holy Ghost, he comes home, proclaiming himself
an hypocrite all the way as he goes. Do not that; for God has cast it so, that
the first shall be last, and the last shall be first: therefore though I be
weak, who knows but that God may make me equal to that glorious Saint?
Therefore as he is not to be secure and proud, so I am not to be discouraged.

Fourthly: learn also this lesson (for it is of especial use in these times:
for this is the age when old professors 4. Not to judge others.
set themselves to sleep) learn hence, not to judge of Christians, old
Christians, old professors to be hypocrites, because that they have taken a
napp. I may not think that that man whom I have known to be the first man for
Religion, of all the Justices of the Peace, of all the Gentlemen in the
country, of all the ministers in the County: because he is now the least and
last of all the gentry, or ministry, or the like, I may not (a^ the ordinary
fashion of men is) conclude that there is no grace in him. It is an ordinary
thing among us, you have instances every where in this case: but rather
conclude this, that many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be
first, God has put the one against the other, that we should find nothing
after him.

God delights in variety of works, and he has cast it so, that ordinarily
professors should be like the Angels or Jacobs ladder, some up, and some down,
the young going before the old, and the old coming behind the young, and as
soldiers in training, wheel about, and go behind one another. God in wisdom
has done so; therefore I will not say, such a Magistrate, or such a minister,
or such a Gentleman does not belong to God, because he is not so good as he
has been, he was once the best, and now he is the least, he may be the Lords
notwithstanding all this. We must remember this, or else we shall make
hypocrites of all the world: for there is no Christian but has his failings,
and if we conclude so, then God will have no Saints. It is a blessed means of
meekning the heart toward napping Christians.

Then lastly; let there be a kind of equality, and spiritual 5. To preserve a
correspondencie and equality.
correspondencie between all Saints (O that God would have it so) that as the
younger should not carry themselves unreverently to the elder, so the elder
should not despise the younger: but as there was an equality in their gathering
of Mannah, they that had much, had nothing to spare, and they that had little
had no want: so the Lord delights in equality among the Saints, God hates to
see Christians, that have much knowledge, to brow-beat weak Saints, God hates
it. Let us love a kind of equality, and spiritual correspondencie: For we are
all one body, and have all one head: the greatest member cannot say to the toe,
I have no need of thee: the greatest Christian; if he be as an eye in the head,
he cannot say that he has not need of the weakest Saint: there is something
that may do him good, if he could see it.

To end this, I will give you the expression of Calvin on Romans 16. 16. Salute
one another with an holy kiss, the Churches of Christ salute you. The
observation of Master Calvin upon this place is this, that the Apostle had
before saluted a great many strong Saints by name, and commended them for some
excellencies, one for one thing, another for another, Priscilla, and Aquila as
helpers in Christ, and such a one for such a thing he gives commendation; now
because he names not all, least the weak should be offended, therefore, says
the Apostle, salute one another with a holy kiss. It was their manner before
their supper, they had feasts of love, and before their feasts of love, they
did always salute one another with an holy kiss; they kissed one another, and
it was a Ceremony that God appointed to this end, to show that there was a
kind of equality between all the Saints, that the poorest could not be kept at
a distance from the rich, and the youngest Saint that the other day was a
drunkard, or whoremonger, was not to be despised, but was kissed of the old. So
that kiss linked them together, that though there was difference, yet this
kiss levelled them.

Beloved, how far, this ceremony should be practiced by us, or we are bound to
it, is more then I can tell, or any that I know: but that is signified by it
holds, that there should be a blessed correspondencie between all the Saints,
and some kind of way, whereby a man that is in Christ, be he never so weak,
may know that Christ accepts him, that the greatest Saint, and most glorious on
earth, accepts him also. And not as the factious custom of disputing
professors is; that never take notice of, but scorn hundreds of poor Saints,
that have not those gifts, that cannot talk swelling, proud words, as Jude
says. All that are Christ's should be dear to us as they are dear to Christ, he
loves them alike, he paid as much for them as he did for us; and God is their
father. And Christ provided foreseeing the disposition of men in latter times,
that of all Saints we should take care of the weakest: therefore says Christ
to Peter, Peter, love thou me? love thou me? love thou me? Lord, thou
know all things, Well, I see thou love me, as thou love me feed my
lambs. We are to feed the sheep too: for Peter was a Sheperd, but we are to
feed the lambs of Christ especially. In Mat. 18. you know what care Christ
takes of his little ones, he compares young professors to little Children, and
if any offend one of them, it were better that a Millstone were hanged about his
neck, and he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. If you should see a man in
the midst of the Sea with a Millstone about his neck, it were a miserable
condition: so it is a sad condition of high, and lofty professors, that
brow-beat weak Saints, that will not correspond, or condescend to them of the
lower sort, O, says Paul, who is weak and I am not offended? who is offended
and I burn not? I will say no more of that, remember many that are first shall
be last.

Expositions and Observations on LUKE 18. 1.
And he spoke a parable to them, to this end that men ought always to pray and
not to faint.
I Do find beloved that now a days the devil has wondrous designs in the
world, and truly one of the greatest that I know among us is this, that he
endeavors to cheat us of the ordinances of God, and to bring us from them one
by one by degrees. He has brought us from repetition of the word, and from
singing of Psalms, and many from baptizing of the infants of the godly, and
diverse from the supper of the Lord, and from hearing the word of God preached;
and now he comes and begins to bring people from praying, or calling upon the
name of the Lord: therefore let us do as Rehoboam did, when he had lost Ten
Tribes, he went and strengthened the two that remained. Beloved there are but a
few ordinances that remain, and they are almost gone too, therefore let us do
our best to keep those. One is praying, or calling upon God; which our Lord
Christ diverse ways, by precept; and example, and parables, etc. does exhort his
Disciples to, to pray always, and not to faint. So that this is it that you
should do well to consider, that

Prayer, or calling upon the name of God in Christ, is an ordinance, and a
perpetual ordinance of God.

And though (it may be) many of you do not doubt of it, and therefore you think
why should I speak of it? Truly, no more did not I doubt of it, yet I have had
many thoughts of it: and though we doubt not of it, yet the considering of it
out of the word may stir us up to do it more then we do: for I am afraid,
though many of you doubt not of it, yet many of you are slack; and though you
believe not what the others say, yet you hearken so much to them as to slacken
of what the old Saints did, and of what your selves did before, you do not set
your selves so earnestly, and so frequently, and follow God so hard in prayer
as you have done: this I greatly fear.

For I find many times that the devil plays a double game, that when he comes
to take away an ordinance from people, to cheat them of it, he knows that some
are so giddy, that he can gull, and cheat them clearly, and he knows this that
those that he cannot cheat yet he can cast them into a kind of remissness. As
for instance, he has taken away from many, singing of Psalms, prasing God
according to that manner that the Saints have had for diverse ages, whereas
there is no particular manner in the scriptures for the outward thing: now as
he has brought many that they will not sing at all, so there are many that are
indifferent; and so for baptising the infants of the godly, and so for hearing
the Word; and so for praying. The devil has a dilemma, if you will do so, so
it is, or else do this; so I say while some giddy heads, or hearts are throwing
away the Ordinance of prayer. I am afraid there is a general remisness, or
carelessness growing upon your hearts, therefore I shall show these two things
concerning prayer.

First, I shall show you that it is an Ordinance of God, Prayer an Ordinance of
God. Prayer a perpetual duty.
that it is a duty, that it is the duty of a Saint.

Secondly, I shall show you that it is a lasting duty, a duty to be performed
in all ages until the coming of Christ, and that briefly and plainly.

For the first, That it is a duty, consider any duty in the world, and
whatsoever you would have to prove it a duty, I dare say it is clear in the
Word concerning this duty of Prayer, that, and much more, you cannot name any
duty in the Book of God, any external duty that is underpropped, that has such
foundations, such clear ground-works for it as the duty of Prayer.

There are four main grounds of duty, and one of Four main grounds of duty.
them many times is a sufficient ground for any one, as

First, that it is a thing that the law of Nature has 1. The (...) of Nature.
written in the heart of man, to call upon God, it was written in the Creation.
There are many duties among us that are not so, under the Gospel, especially.
Now that you see in all ages, all kind of people call upon the name of their
God. As in the ship where Jonah was; the Heathens by the dictates of Nature,
they awake Jonah to call on his God, and they were calling on their god: it is
a thing in the law of Nature. And (by the By) that is the reason why we may
pray with carnal men, though we may not receive the Lords Supper, because the
Supper of the Lord is an Ordinance by institution, the other is a natural
Ordinance or duty. Now when a man does a Natural duty, it is supposed that it
is in the heart of a wicked man, and he does but what he ought when he does it.
A carnal man when he prays he sins, not in that he prays, much less do I sin in
doing the duty with him, in doing what he ought: But wherein does he sin? In
the manner, that he prays without faith, it is his fault and not mine; and so an
hypocrite that prays without faith: when I do the duty, I look that the thing
be good, but for the manner of his heart, and spirit, that is for him to look
to. So a man may pray with carnal people, though he may not receive the Supper
of the Lord, because that is an Ordinance by institution, and is only for the
Saints. That by the by.

Secondly, There is this ground for it, for prayer 2. Command of the Word.
we have more precepts then for any other duty, Christ Jesus says here, Pray
always, And the Apostle, 1 These. 5. he bids us pray evermore, pray always, I
need not stand to prove this.

Then you have also presidents for it, almost in every 3. President and Example.
Saint in the Book of God; you seldom hear of a Saint, but he was a praying
Saint. And let me tell you this, that Saints, and Churches, or Assemblies, (for
so the Greek word is indifferently) and people that call on God* with a pure
heart, they are Synonomies. Sometimes Paul says, Grace, mercy, and peace to
the Saints, sometimes to the Churches, and sometimes to those that pray, and
call on the name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 1. 1. It is a thing so proper to a
Saint, that it is usually taken for the description of a Saint. Therefore in
Zech. 12. where there is a Prophecy concerning the conversion of the Jews;
says God, I will pour on them the Spirit of Grace and Supplication. What is
that? That is, they shall be converted. To have a spirit of Supplication, a
praying heart is the same as conversion: to convert the Jews is to give them a
spirit of Grace and Supplication: As soon as Paul was converted, Act. 9. when
Ananias inquired of him, he was praying, therefore you have examples enough. 4.
Promises entailed on it. Psalm 50.


And then you have Precepts for it, and Promises to it, all along in the Book
of God; Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee; So in the
new Testament, John 14. And in the Epistles of John; If we call upon God, he
will hear our prayers, and grant our petitions, and if you ask any thing in the
name of Christ, you shall have it. You know these things; only I mind you, as
Peter, and the rest of the Apostles often minded them of what they knew
already, least they should be carried away with the error of the wicked. That
is one thing; it is an Ordinance, you see four great pillars under it, it has
the Law of Nature, there are Precepts, and Examples, and Promises to perform
what we pray for: And there are threatenings to those that do it not, Curse the
Families that call not on thy Name.

Secondly, I said it was an everlasting Ordinance or duty, and you may see that
three ways.

First, If you look upon the old Testament, you shall see there all the people
of God, they practiced it, I need not instance in any one place.

And secondly, you will easily grant, that if you look upon the times of the
new Testament, the dawning of it in Christ's time, (for that was the dawning of
the new Testament) there you see Christ prayed whole nights, and before day he
was on the mountain seeking God; and there are many Parables, one in Luke 11.
and another here, wherein he exhorts his disciples to be earnest with God, and
though God as it were seem as if he had no mind otherwise to do it, yet by the
very importunity of prayer (for that is the drift of that Parable in Luke 11.
and of this) the Lord will be entreated. Then come after to the times that the
new Testament was fully set up; you see when Christ was gone to the Holy of
Holies, there they prayed, and called on God continually, all those Churches
did call upon God, there is nothing more clear.

Nay, thirdly, (for there is the main hint of it) in the last times, in these
times, and in later times then these (though these be called the last times)
the glorious times that shall be just at the end of the world, the people of
God will be a praying people in those days. I will give you but one place,
Zach. 12. that is clear concerning the conversion of the Jews in the last
times, that they shall look on him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn
every family apart. Now the Jews are not yet come in, neither are those
glorious times yet come to the Jews and Gentiles that shall follow upon their
coming, yet it is said when they shall come in, praying shall be in such
request in those days that even the conversation of the Jews is called a
pouring on them the spirit of grace and supplication.

Therefore say not now, the last times are come, and these are glorious times,
and we can live immediately upon God without Ordinances, etc. No, those times
are not come, and yet when that time is come, they shall have a spirit of grace
and supplication to call upon God. And therefore I beseech you, let not the
devil steal away any of your Ordinances, for I tell you again, and again, he
drives on a wonderful design among you in that respect. And of all Ordinances,
labor to keep Prayer: for cast off Prayer, and cast off Saintship; for to be a
Saint, and to call on the name of the Lord with a true heart, are the same. I
will call thee no longer a Saint then thou call on God. Therefore
notwithstanding all pretenses look to that. Some object, God knows our wants,
and what need we pray? Says our Savior, Mat. 5. Your heavenly Father knows
what you have need of, and yet Christ taught them to pray. We must manifest our
obedience notwithstanding that God will do one thing when we pray for another:
that is a foolish objection, because we know not what is good for us, neither
how to pray according to the mind of God: but if it be according to his mind,
and for our good, God will not deny it to us.

But the maine Engine that the devil has to cheat us of this Ordinance, is,
that there were times when there was need of Ordinances, and these beggarly
rudiments, (this is the language of some) these carnal Ordinances, it is true
they were good in the times of the Apostles, and those former times, but now
glorious times are come for Saints to live immediately on God, and therefore
there is no need of them.

I told you that when the Jews shall be called there will be need of these
Ordinances; and though as we grow more perfect in glory, so we have less need
of them; therefore as we are more glorious, and have more of the Spirit of
Glory in the new Testament then they had in the old, so we have fewer
Ordinances then they; and when we shall come to heaven, when she shall be full
of glory, we shall have no Ordinances for ought I know: but yet we have
infirmities, and the Lord knows what is best for us, and we have a great deal
of flesh, and carnalness, and we shall have in a great measure till we be in
heaven: therefore God in mercy affords us these Ordinances, and helps to deal
with him, and to keep our Communion with him, and to live in, and from him:
Therefore I pray you without partiality and prejudice weigh the Word of God,
whether this be not the Will of God, and then take heed how the Devil cheat you
of this blessed Ordinance; for truly I may say, as Christ said, Now is the Ax
laid to the root, to the root of Prayer, and if the Devil take away that, thou
art no more a Saint, my life for thine, if thou once throw away calling on God.
Therefore learn that word, and endeavor to keep up the Ordinances of God: and
you that do not, but are grown into remisness by the Opinions that are abroad
concerning this duty, I beseech you renew your care and diligence every one of
you in public and private to seek the Lord.

And consider with your selves whether there be not a greater remisness on your
spirits then before, did you not set your selves oftener and more earnestly
apart to seek God before, then you do now? If it be so, in the name of God, say
as David, O how sweet is thy Word! by it thy servant is warned. Now this is the
goodness of God, the sweetness of his Word that has warned thee when thou were
going to undo thy self, and to throw thy self away: Therefore set thy self to
it, and let not the sin of others in throwing away of Ordinances, make you
remiss in using them, either throw them away quite, or use them as the
Ordinances of God, for the careless use of Ordinances is abominable to God.

Expositions and Observations on ROMANS 6. 14.
For ye are not under the law, but under Grace.
FOr ye are not under the Law.

There are three things in which a Christian is subject to be under the law,
and so to be scourged by it, and if he can get himself in those three things
Saints under the Law in three respects
out from it, then he is wholly clear. The Saints are under it partly, either

In respect of their Persons. Actions. Afflictions.

For their persons, that is, we do conceive that we do 1. As to their persons
deal with God in some measure according to his law, we think that God does
deal with us according to his law, and that we deal with God in some measure
according to his law. Whereas we should conceive that God does not look on me,
or speak to me, or deal with me at all according to the law (Christ having
fulfilled it, and I being dead to it) but only in reference to grace, so I deal
with God as he is my Father, as he is revealed to me in grace in the Doctrine
of the Gospel: so that if we could conceive that our persons are fully
justified, that all my weaknesses thoughout the day, or week, or year do not
make me according to his Law one jot more unjust nor all my good does not make
me more just, for Christ Jesus his Death and Resurrection does that wholly,
therefore my person for ever is freed from the power of the Law, and if I sin,
grace may call me to account for it, and whip and scourge me with his Ferula:
but for the Law, what have I to do with that? what have I to do with a husband
that is dead and buried? what have I to do with the Covenant of works that
Jesus Christ has fulfilled and cancelled?

Therefore get your persons clear of the Law; for that is it that evidenceth
many times that you are not, because when you sin against God, then there
arises storms within you that were once without you, on Mount Sinai, that
blackness and darkness, then you fear you are hypocrites, then you find wrath
in your consciences: as often as you find wrath, (that is the work of the Law,
for the Law works wrath) it shows clearly that your persons are not quite
freed from the Law, for though there should be sorrow, and more kindly, and
abundant sorrow then ever you felt before, and care, and other things, yet even
that wrath, and horror, and hardness of heart, and risings of spirit against
God, will testify that in some measure your persons are under the Law.

Ye are not under the Law.

Secondly, Your actions I (say) should not be under 2 In respect of their
actions.
the Law, for as one says, as our persons are justified fully by Christ, so
are our actions; that is, whatsoever action I do, or commit, however that
action may not be pleasing to God according to Grace or the Gospel, it may not
be an acceptable sacrifice, as all our actions should be, yet notwithstanding
we should not conceive that our actions are to be squared and measured
according to the rule and life of the Law, which is the Covenant of works. As
for Instance, when a man is under the Law, whose actions are under the Law, he
labors all the day long to please God, to serve, and obey him, but if he fail
but once or twice that day in his duty, there is some confusion whispered in
his soul that all is lost, there is more trouble for that one failing, then he
has comfort for all that he has done that day; that is just the Law, for the
Law says, if he fail in one he is guilty of all. Now if a man be under grace,
he rejoices in his sincere endeavor to honor God, and he rejoices in the
passages of that day, that he has had communion with God, and where there is
weakness, there would be a sweet, clear mourning for it in reference to God as
a Father, and not to have the heart estranged from God, and straightened. Our
actions in a great measure are under the Law. Our actions are freed from the
Law in this life, but we know not our freedom. They are freed thus, all arise
either from flesh or spirit; for those are the two beginnings, the two first
beeings of all. Now those of the flesh (for a Christian may do an action that
is purely flesh, that has no good in it, then) that is a sin, Christ Jesus
has done it away. Now if it be an action that arises from his holy Spirit,
that flows from the principle of Jesus Christ that is in him, the Lord accepts
of it, that is done already, if he were able to do it, yet it comes too late;
but only he does it as the honest upright endeavor of a loving child to a
dear father. So, could we measure our actions according to that rule, our lives
would be more holy, and more sweet and comfortable.

Thirdly, our afflictions, or sufferings, (it were well 3 Relating to their
afflictions.
if we could get out from under the lash of the Law in all these) there we are
deeply under it; as soon as ever we are whipped, then we say, God has found me
out, and it is true, God may whip me for it, because I will not take notice of
it: though God will not hide his countenance, and his smiles from his child,
one jot further then he must needs do it for fear of cockering him: therefore I
know if God frown, and hide his face, that God loves me, and he would show it:
but I have a base heart, that at such times as that would like some sin, and be
wanton, otherwise, God has no delight to hide his face a moment. Now all my
afflictions, and sufferings, I am not to look on them under the Law, that is,
as though God in reference to these had a purpose to satisfy himself, and his
vengeance, and to let his wrath fall upon me, (that is clearly to frustrate the
death of Christ) but I am to look on that as fully satisfied, and done by
Christ, and God is more faithful then to be paid twice: but I am to look upon
all my afflictions, as proceeding from the love of a dear father, and I can
take notice of many sins that displease him, and he has many Gospel-ends to do
me good: therefore in afflictions I admit not one hard thought of God, but love
him more for his favor in the Gospel. If we see afflictions under grace aright,
then afflictions do exceedingly kindle love to God, and increase our communion
with him; and whereas they make us run from God, they would make us run to him,
and delight in him, but we are under the Law, and that makes our persons and
actions, and afflictions to be a burden. O that the Lord would help us to get
clear of it, that every one would labor to get his spirit, his person, his
actions, and his corrections, and all clear of that, and dead to that.

But ye are under grace. Grace in this place (as I conceive) has a very large
extent, and is not taken only for that favor of God, as it is usually in
Scripture, but there is something meant by it, that shall be equivalent (in all
respects to a Christian) to the Law, for ye are not under the Law, but under
Grace: they are opposites.

Now what that is that is meant by it, I conceive, and can give diverse
Scriptures also if I had time, that by Grace here is meant the whole Doctrine
of the Gospel. Indeed the substance of the Law is contained in it; for the
substance of the Law is one and the same for ever. I say the whole Doctrine of
the Gospel, that is called Grace; because it is a gracious Doctrine, it is a
Doctrine full of Grace. The stream, and the maine thing of our Preaching, is,
or should be the Grace of God, the love of God, and the goodness of God. If it
be taken for the whole Doctrine, as that in Tit. 2. The grace of God has
appeared to all men, teaching us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to
live holily and soberly, etc. Grace, that is, the Doctrine of Grace or the
Doctrine of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 6. I beseech you receive not the grace of God in
vain, that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel, which has in it grace and mercy,
and life and salvation, and the like. Grace and the Law are opposites, as we
see John 1. The Law came by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. So
grace in this place is to be understood in a large sense.

You are under grace, That is, not only you are freed from the Law, and you
are now in a condition wherein God will have mercy on you, and save you, but
far more then that. For beloved, as the Law has Precepts, and Commands, and
Teaching: so Grace has its Precepts also, and commands as well as Promises:
therefore he says, The grace of God teaches us. He says not the grace of God
tells us, and promises us, or the like, but it teaches us. Grace has a
School, as the Law had: the Law had a School, and those that lived under it,
according to its method it did train and teach them: so a Christian now in the
School of Grace, under grace, he has all that was good, or necessary in the
Law, and much more, that it is sufficient in all respects. For a Christian if
he be under grace, there he shall have Precepts and Promises, and Directions,
and Comforts, any thing that is necessary for him. So that it were well if you
would endeavor to conceive, that the only master you have is Grace, the only
rule by which you walk is Grace, it is the Gospel, which implies in it all the
substantial Precepts of the Law: so in that respect we are bound to the Law,
and the Law is of use, and will be to the end of the world.

Now then I would conclude with this, to show you a little concerning this
Argument, Sin shall not have dominion over you, because ye are not under the
Law, but under Grace. There are three main Reasons Sin has less power over
those under grace upon three reasons.
why a man that is under Grace, that is, clearly freed from the Law, why sin
should have less power over him, then when he was under the Law: for those that
live under Grace, though they be not perfect, yet they are eminently holy in
comparison of what they were, and of what others are that are under the Law.

Grace has clearer and more spiritual instructions, and directions to holiness
then the Law has. It has what the Law has, but it teaches a great deal of
exactness that cannot be expressed: for what the Law teaches, we may express it
by natural understanding, and you by natural understanding may comprehend it;
and if you miss it, we may by natural understanding convince you of the breach
of the Law: but the precepts of the Gospel are spiritual, and cannot be
conceived by natural understanding. I say, the course of a Christian, the main
walk of a Christian under grace is such, that a natural man cannot see, or
understand which way he goes, because a natural man conceives not the things
of God. By the Law a man may convince, and show it clearly; but the precepts of
Grace are so sublime, and spiritual, that they must be understood spiritually.
And thereupon, being that the Precepts, and Instructions, and Directions of
Grace, being clearer and brighter, and higher, that is the reason why a man
under Grace is brought into fuller obedience to a freer service then a man
under the Law.

under grace, there is a kind of ingenuity, a Spiritual ingenuity of the
heart, yet though it may be there are not so many Covenants, and Resolutions,
and Vows, and the like, yet there is a kind of ingenuity, that understanding
the grace of God, he cannot sin as another does that is under the Law, and that
is the meaning of those Phrases of the Apostle, how abhorrent such a thing
would be: As for instance, Shall we continue in sin that Grace may abound? God
forbid. As if he should say, our hearts are against it, we cannot endure to
render an answer of all Gods grace and goodness in such a manner as that; and
so in 2 Cor. 5. whether we be mad or sober, The love of God constrains us:
for we thus judge, that if one died, then all were dead, that we should not
henceforth live to our selves but to him that died for us, That is, this is,
our reason, we have a kind of ingenuity in us that makes us thus reason, that
if one man did come, and die, and purchase everlasting life, we cannot but live
to him that died for us.

That is the reason why a man under the Law, that it may be is a Swearer, a
Drunkard, a Spendthrift, and this consumes his soul, and body, and family, and
all; and he knows this, yet notwithstanding he goes on, he cannot help it, why?
because he is under the Law, because when he has had his pleasure all day, the
Law whips him at night, and thereupon he hardens his heart, and it grows more
and more against God, and his Commandments: Now if God would let it into his
soul to see what Christ has done for him, and how righteously the Law is
fulfilled through Christ, and thereupon he is freed from Satan, and sin, and
death. If God would show him the hope of his calling, and the glorious
condition that he stands in, there would be such an ingenuity that he could not
do it, he need not make Vows and Promises that he would be drunk no more, but
he would abhor to do so basely and unworthily to so gracious a God that had
done so wondrously and incomprehensibly for his soul.

Lastly, There is a power in grace. The Law, was a voice of words; it did teach
just as the Commandments upon a wall; a poor man may come in and read them, but
his heart is not the warmer, there is no disposition to observe the Law: but
Grace comes, and in some measure gives a blessed power and strength to do that
it teaches, therefore says the Apostle, Sin shall not have dominion over you,
because ye are not under the Law but under Grace.

Expositions and Observations on EPHESIANS 3. 20.
Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us.
THe Apostle ends his Prayer for the Ephesians in a general manner, with a
kind of Thanksgiving. Now to him that is able to do exceeding abundantly
according to the power that works in us.

According to the power that works in us.

There is a mighty power that works in the Saints; and you shall see that
power Ephesians. 1. 19. says he, I desire that you may know what is the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward that believe, according to the working of his
mighty power. It is not weakness, but power, and not a small power, but a
mighty power, a great power, an exceeding great mighty power. That works in
you. The Saints are strong creatures. If you ask, what this power is? you shall
see in the verse following; The power which wrought in Christ when he raised
him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in heavenly places, far
above all principalities and powers, etc. That is, the power of his holy Spirit
that dwells in us; greater is he that dwells in us, then he that dwells in
the world. We have a greater power in us, then can be from the world, or hell
against us. And that power is illustrated here by the raising of Jesus from the
dead, and setting him up in heavenly places. There was no active power that
ever God expressed, that can be compared to that of raising Christ from the
dead; It was a power, and a great power, and Gods power too to make this world,
and it is a power to preserve it: but that power is not comparable to this,
when Jesus Christ was dead, under the curse of the Law, and under the wrath of
God, and under all our sins, under the malice of men, and under a great stone
that was rolled on him, and for a dead man to be raised up through all those
oppositions of heaven, and earth, and hell, and to be set in peace at the right
hand of glory, and majesty on high. It must be an exceeding great power.

The Saints do not consider what strength they have, If thou did consider
what strength thou have in thee, thou would not be afraid to hear a Cross,
thou would not be discouraged to attempt any work for God, thou would not
be dismayed at the threatenings of men, no, nor at the temptations of the devil:
there is such an exceeding great and mighty power that works in them that
believe.

This power, is the power of the Spirit of God; for that is the power of the
most High; the holy Ghost shall overshadow thee, and the power of the most High
shall come upon thee. The holy Ghost is the power of God which dwells in the
Saints. And therefore my aim is to fasten that word on you, and to show you
how you come short of that life, and strength, and grace, that otherwise you
might have, for want of magnifying, and exalting the Spirit of God, which is
the Conduit, the Intelligencer, that which brings light, and life, and strength
to our souls from God. The Spirit of God is lightly esteemed, therefore we have
little grace: a low esteem of the Spirit will keep a Saint low all his days.

I thought to have instanced in a few things wherein you undervalue the Spirit.
One is, that you do not hearken enough, nor regard, and observe enough the
teaching of the Spirit of God; and that is one cause why we are left to our
selves, and do so often miss the will of God. For I know not (according to the
Covenant of Grace) why a Saint should at any time miss the will of God, but
that he does not observe his Leader; For I will give you the Spirit (says
Christ) that shall lead you into all truth: Now if you observe not this Leader,
this Teacher, it is very just that you should be left to wander, and go out of
the way.

If a Christian would observe his way, and observe his leader, a Christian
might easily find when he is in, and when he is out; for truly, if a man would
ask himself, Why did I miss the will of God so often, since I have such a
Teacher promised me, and given me by Christ? he must needs say, that oftentimes
I did not observe him, I did not hearken to him, I hearkened only to men, and
not to the Spirit of God. And so he would easily find, when he began to give
over harkning where he left the teaching of the Spirit; for in my apprehension
a Saint follows the holy Ghost with a kind of sagacity (if I may compare it
with reverence) just as we see the Dog follow the Hare: there is something in
Nature that the Dog knows which way the Hare went, when a wiser creature knows
not: so, there is something in a poor Saint, that when all the wise men in the
world know not which way God went, a Saint can tell: Only the Dog may hunt
upon a cold sent, and think the Hare went that way, and it grows colder and
colder, and he misseth: So a Saint shall find when he misseth the will of God,
that the Spirit of God has not left him, unless it be very rare, as the Spirit
left Christ to be tempted in the wilderness, so he may leave thee to pull down
thy pride, and to humble thee, Isay, that is rare: but ordinarily, the Spirit
leaves not thee, but thou let go thy leader, and thou go all the while
on a cold sent. A Saint, though he headlong follows this, or that conceit, yet
notwithstanding he may know when he comes to look upon himself; surely I went
upon a cold sent in those things: though I followed them headlong, and giddily,
it was not of the Spirit, it was not the same teaching that I had ordinarily.
Therefore observe your leader, hearken to the Spirit of God: If God give you
him as a master, he expects that his children should learn, and see when you go
in the way of the Spirit of God, and you may easily find that, if you will
avoid headlongness, and giddiness, and rashness.

I speak not this as if the Spirit were contrary to the Word, as some men to
advance the Spirit, set the Word and Spirit by the ears; but the Spirit leads
by the Word.

That which I chiefly intended to show you, was The power of the Spirit set out
in four things.
to give you a few instances, that you may have a little light, to see the
exceeding greatness of the power of the Spirit working in you. I shall not show
in all respects, nor in many, as I might, but only in a few. I will instance
in these three or four things. As first, 1. In dictating a world of prayers to
us.
that you may see the greatness of his power, what a world of prayers does the
Spirit of God put into thy heart, that thou art never able to utter with thy
mouth? All the wisdom in the world cannot make one spiritual petition; we may
make forms of Prayer; but now the Spirit of God, that knows the mind of God
(as the Apostle says) that makes prayers according to the will of God, and he
prays with sighs and groans unutterable. I speak to them that know the working
of the Spirit: how many thousand prayers does God put into thy heart that it is
impossible for thee to utter with thy mouth? Thou can not speak to God one
petition of forty that the Spirit puts into thy heart. That some conceive to
be the meaning of that in Romans 8. The Spirit prays with sighs unutterable, not
because of our weakness, but because of their strength, and they are so
numerous, they are so many, that when a poor Saint goes to pray, one petition
stops another, and throngs it out that he cannot utter it.

If the Lord should hear only those prayers that thou make with thy mouth,
thou would be but a poor man, but the Lord respects the prayers of the
heart: Therefore I say, to have power to make one prayer, and to have such
innumerable sighs and groans in the soul too, it must be an exceeding great
power.

Secondly, consider this, how much the Spirit of 2. In supplying us when we
pray not.
God does for thee, and in thee, that thou never prayedst for, nor never
could pray for, no, not so much as in heart. If the Lord did answer all the
prayers of heart and tongue, that we make throughout all the year, a man would
think that were a great matter; but surely they are so few, considering our
wants, and they are so confused and blind, that I am confident, if God should
deal with thy soul and mine, according to our prayers all the year, we should
be miserable creatures all our lives. God exercises us to pray, and many of
them he answers in their kind, and he is pleased with our obedience in every
thing: but surely, God has a higher rule of doing us good, and the Spirit of
God works in a more methodicall, and wise, and merciful, and blessed way, then
we can pray. I have sometimes wondered that God has made promises to answer
many prayers that we make; but I wonder more that God should grant things that
we pray not for. This is the exceeding greatness of his power.

Thirdly, consider the exceeding greatness of his 3. By teaching us inwardly*
power in this respect, in his teaching, how the Spirit of God teaches his
people and servants, he teaches them above what they are taught outwardly by
men. As thus, Cast with thy self, suppose thou had every Sermon that thou
have heard in thy life, and every Lecture that thou have heard on the week
days, and on the Lords day, that thou had them in order and method, suppose
they were written in thy heart, and fresh in thy memory, that thou did
understanding and remember every Sermon that thou have heard (which no man
does) a man would think such a one to be a very knowing man. Truly if thou
had it so, thou might be a miserable, confused, blind man for all that,
for all that ever thou have heard preached, thou might be a blind creature:
for alas! our teaching comes with so much weakness and dross with it, and one
says, and another unsaith; and if we consider it in a natural way we shall
never be made knowing men by all outward teaching in the world. But now the
Spirit of God comes in, and he is pleased indeed to make use of it, that we
shall teach outwardly; but alas! the Spirit of God reads such a Lecture in the
heart of a Saint, and clears things, and orders things, and assures things, and
settles things that are right, and discovers things that are not, and
inlargeth, and sweetens, and quickens them, that it may be a man in hearing one
Sermon of an hour long, may be taught more, then another man in hearing Sermons
seven years together. This is the exceeding greatness of the power of the
Spirit of God; that truly (beloved) I have often thought with my self (I speak
not to disparage our teaching, and your hearing, but) our coming to teach, and
you to hear, it is as your sending your little children to School, to keep
their clothes clean, and to keep them from play, they learn nothing (in a
manner) for your money, only they are obedient to their Parents, and are
quiet, and are in the School where teaching is. So you come to hear, and we to
teach; but all our teaching in a manner is by the Spirit of God. Therefore it
is a wonderful thing to see how quickly the Spirit of God will make a Scholar
ripe; how in a quarter of a year, nay, in a month almost the Spirit of God
will fill him with all spiritual learning, whereas the best preacher in the
world, let him Preach concisely and exactly in a natural way, he shall not
teach him the tenth part: Nay, we reach you, we preach it may be four or five
Sermons, and we open it as well we can, poor earthen creatures, and when we
come to look on it a quarter of a year after, we find that those notions that
it may be were so confused and poor while we were teaching you, that there is a
glorious piece made in your souls, by the Spirit of God, though our Notes when
they were done, were scarce worth the burning, we are so poor and frail in
teaching, and you in your outward hearing, therefore there is an exceeding
great power that works in you that believe.

Fourthly, and lastly, (for I speak this to inhaunce, and 4 By working our
works in and for us.
advance the Spirit of God, as Paul says, we are not debtors to the flesh, but
to the Spirit, you ow more to the Spirit then you are aware of, consider in all
the good that you do, in all the good works that you do, how wonderful passive
you are in the doing of them. We have a saying, It holds true, I gainsay it not
in a sort, that a man in conversion is passive, and afterward he is active,
that is, God in a man's conversion works on a man as a dead creature, only he is
rational, but he suffers and works not with God, but when he is converted, then
a man has a principle of life. God works, and man works, man works with God,
and it is a true comparison, we were then passive, now we are active. But in
respect of the principle, by which we move, and walk: truly a Christian may
say, I am altogether passive in a manner in all that I do. God carries a man's
tongue to speak, and his hands to work, and his feet to walk, God carries a man
in good many times, and glorifies himself many times, and a man knows not how
in the world he comes to do it, or why he did it, or how he came about it; so
God does many glorioous things by us, and we are not aware, This is the Lord,
this is the greatness of his power.

God in some actions, he either carries a man, and does his work by a man,
without a man (as it were) or else he does it above him. There is no good
almost that thou do, but thou shall clearly see that it is above thee, that
it is God, thou were never able to speak, or to do or to go through any such
thing, but the Lord went through with it. It may be some of you understand not
what it is to do a thing without you, it is too spiritual; but there are
Christians that may, and can say, God did it without me, I was as a block, I
know not how, I was scarce active with God, God did all. O great and glorious
is that power, look which way you will, what that power is in changing thy
nature, in destroying old Adam, what that power is in resisting temptations,
what that power is in wrestling, and prevailing with God, what that power is to
uphold thee in the wicked world, and to preserve thee to the last day. Consider
it every way: it is great, wondrous, glorious, and mighty, and exceeding mighty
is that power that works in them that believe, even the power of the Spirit of
God.

The Spirit is called power, Power it self (as it were) not that I deny the
person of the Spirit thereby, as if the Spirit were nothing but the energy or
working of God, that is not the meaning; but he is called power, because (as it
were) he is nothing but power, whatsoever he does, he does powerfully, and
gloriously, and effectually; Angels work in little, common, outward things;
mark the difference between the assistance of the Spirit, and of Angels. The
Angels are ministering spirits sent out to wait upon the Saints. How do Angels
work for us? Angels make not prayers in us, Angels never subdue one sin in me,
they can never bring peace to my conscience, and soul; Angels converse not in
spiritual things, but in outward things; Angels keep thee that thou dash not
thy foot against a stone, they keep thee from breaking thy neck, they keep fire
from thine house; but spiritual things are done by the Spirit of God: the
exceeding greatness of power is by the Spirit. Therefore consider of this word,
be not such poor, low-hearted creatures, to be afraid of every ill, and to be
discouraged from going about any good thing. I say, consider the power that
dwells in you, and endeavor to give glory to God, to magnify the blessed Spirit,
that works in you, to admire it, for the more you admire the Spirit, the more
vile you will be in your selves, and the viler you are in your selves that you
attribute all to the Spirit, the more glory God shall have, and then things
will be as they should be, in the best order for God and man.

Expositions and Observations on EPHESIANS 5. 1, 2.
Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children, and walk in love, etc.
THe Apostle in this Chapter, and especially in that going before, exhorts the
Saints to walk worthy of their calling, that is, to walk humbly and meekly,
etc. toward God and men; and there he shows sometimes the good they should
follow, and the evil they should leave, promiscuously, which is meant by
walking worthy of their calling. And here in this first verse, says he, I
beseech you be followers of God as dear children. He puts in this motive to all
the holiness he speaks of before, and after; that as dear children of a blessed
father, they would hearken to him, that they would hate all the evil, and
cleave to all the good he had proposed to them, so that the Lesson is this, That

Our spiritual privileges should as much engage us to holiness, as they should
help on our comfort.

My meaning is this; you know in this wicked world wherein we are, this is one
Gospel way, that we use and practice, and have been taught, that whenever we
came near the Lord (especially then) we should endeavor to raise up our souls,
by the consideration of our Gospel-priviledges, and the relations between us
and God. When you and I come to pray, we study as much as we can to look on him
as a father (and we do well) and to look on our selves as sons and daughters,
as those that are in Christ, as those that have their sins pardoned and covered
in him: to look on our selves as the Spouse and Wife of Christ. And all the
relations we can make out, and all the privileges that are laid down in
Scripture, we seek to own them whereby to get up our souls to some joy and
comfort before the Lord, and this is a good and blessed thing when we do so;
for the Lord would have his children, as to live holily, so he delights to see
them live comfortably: The Lord takes delight in the prosperity of his people.
But here now, you and I miss, we do this out of a kind of Self-love, because
we would have comfort we make use of our privileges, and plead our relations,
but we should also make use of them to move us to holiness, and to resist sin
and evil, as well as to raise us to comfort and consolation: And thence it is
that we are so often foiled with sin, because we walk as men, as the children of
men, as the Scripture says; we forget in what a station God has put us, in
what grace and glory we stand through Jesus Christ. Therefore when we are
walking, and conversing in the world, we look on our selves as men, we think of
our neighbors what they would have done in such a case, and it may be we
think of natural reason, it may be of corrupt reason; but we do not state our
selves all the day as sons and daughters of God.

Man naturally does not love to reflect upon himself, which (says Dr. Preston)
is the difference between a man and a beast: take two or three children, it may
be one is a Lords son, and another the son of a Beggar, they reflect upon
themselves, you shall see by their carriage; the poor child carries himself
respectively to the other, the other carries himself disdainfully to him. So
all people, every one has a kind of conclusion upon himself from natural
considerations. Such a one carries himself high, he reflects so upon himself.
Why? he thinks he is a man of such parts, of such fortunes, and breeding and
feature, and the like, and he carries himself accordingly: It is so with all
mankind. Now if we would have the Spirit of God shine upon our souls, and draw
such conclusions always that lie in our breasts, that I am a son, a daughter of
God, one in Christ, married to Christ, bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, that I may walk all the day thus clothed with these reflections: then
when we come to sin, when temptation is offered, it may be the devil will say,
such a one did it that is wiser then thou, and such a one that is a fellow, of
the same calling, then, this positive actual reflection upon the soul that thou
art in Christ; this would make thee say, O, but how shall I do it? Jesus Christ
died for me, Jesus Christ has washed me in his blood, I am one with him. What
if the children of darkness do so, is it fit for a child of light? what if
sinners do so, is it fit for a man that God has called out of sin, and out of
the world, is it fit for him to do so?

We seldom carry those reflections about us when The Saints should reflect upon
their high condition.
we go abroad among the snares of the world, therefore we fall into sin: for
the older we are in grace, the more full of snares the world is. I could show
that you can name no place in the new Testament, where our privileges, and
relations are mentioned: but as the holy Ghost mentions them to raise up the
soul for comfort, so expressly to stir us up to holiness, 1 John 3. 1. Behold
what manner of love God has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
sons of God! I am persuaded that the Primitive Saints in the new Testament, did
generally look upon themselves, distinct as a Common wealth, and a people
redeemed out of the world, and in the light of that they did so walk, they did
always speak so of themselves, We are the first fruits of the spirit, we are the
sons of God, we are redeemed and bought with a price. We are the sons of God,
but it does not appear what we shall be, but when he shall come, we shall be
like him; O this gives comfort; but what then? what follows? He that has this
hope purifieth himself as he is pure. This hope is somewhat like that reflection
I am speaking of, when there is an actual hope in the soul of being with the
Lord, and an actual positive persuasion that I am the Lords, then a man will
purify himself as God is pure. I might mention a hundred places in the new
Testament, 2 Cor. 6. Come out from among them, separate your selves, and touch
no unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be your father, and you
shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. This is very
comfortable, that we shall be his sons and daughters, and that he will be our
Father. What then? In the beginning of the next Chapter, Having therefore these
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. If we be the sons and daughters of God,
and he be our Father, therefore we should be holy in soul, and body, and
spirit. I remember a little Story of a great Monarch (though I do not much
trouble you with them, but it does a little illustrate what we speak of)
walking with his son, a Prince; the great Emperor seeing little poor children
to play and tumble in the dirt, he said to his son, Why do not thou go and
play with them? Says he, I would, if I did see any Kings and Princes children
play with them, he reflected upon himself that he was a Prince, a Kings son,
and it was not fit for them to tumble in the dirt. So you may say, when you see
Drunkards, and Whoremongers, and Extortioners, if the devil tempt you in your
hearts, and say, Why do not thou do so? why do not thou get money as yonder
man does? or labor to be great in the world? O, say, do the sons of God use to
do so? to cozen, and cheat, and be drunk, and lie? If the Saints did so, then
it were another thing, but shall I that am a Prince, that am a son of God,
shall I be a Scullion, and wallow in the dirt? Therefore I say it is enough to
an honest heart to propose a pitch that is above him, that he never attained,
and what will he do? he will seek, and not give over till God have wrought it:
God wrought it in most of the Saints of old: therefore let us labor with the
Lord, that we may have such considerations always about us.

O how gloriously should we walk, if we had still actual considerations, I am
a son, I am a daughter of God! How humbly should we walk toward our brethren?
how weaned from this world? what Pilgrims would we be here upon earth?
doubtless we run, and lanch into the world by forgetting of our relations and
stations; so that as in Genesis 6. The sons of God married the daughters of men.
We walk as the sons of men, and miscarry as the sons and daughters of mem. If
we did always walk, and look upon our selves as the sons and daughters of God,
we should in some poor measure express something of the sons and daughters of
God in every word, and carriage, and action toward God and men, etc.

Expositions and Observations on PHILIPPIANS 2. 1, 2, 3.
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies;

Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind.

Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind,
let each esteem other better then themselves.


THe Lesson that the Lord gave you and me lately to consider of, and to do, was
rightly to love the Saints, to love Saints ought to love though they be not
beloved.
our brethren, and the way, you remember was, that we should not make that the
ground of our love to our brethren, because they love us, but because we are
beloved of God; we should love, though we be not beloved of men.

He that will not love his brethren, till he be loved of them, nor no further,
nor no longer then he is beloved, he shall never love them much, nor love them
rightly at all, because all goes upon a wrong ground, and by a false rule: And
therefore we should set upon the practice of that duty in these times of
division, that whatsoever man I look on as a Saint, or see the Image of God in
him, I should endeavor to bring my heart to love him: If he love not me, let
him look to that, I shall not answer for that, that shall be laid on his score:
but if I love not my brother, that shall be laid on my score, and as my
account, so my comfort, I mean true spiritual comfort, both here and hereafter,
it is not in this, that I am much beloved, but that I love much. I spoke to you
of that more at large then, and I hope you will endeavor to bring your souls to
be doers of this blessed truth, as well as hearers.

There is one thing more which is here laid down in this Scripture that we must
endeavor to do, though when I speak of doing, when we teach you any spiritual,
Gospel duty, you must understand it in a Gospel way; not as though (I say) we
can do this or that, but we through the grace of Christ may do any thing that
is commanded in the Gospel. Therefore go not home, and say, we are dead, and
can do nothing, etc. To what end are all these precepts laid on us, but that we
by the power of the holy Ghost may do them? Therefore I say, there is one thing
more for us to do before we can come rightly to love the brethren: truly, there
are many things, but that that I am now upon, is the foundation; (what is for
the building of us up I meddle not with now) for till we come to do this, we
cannot love at all, we cannot go one step in this blessed work; and that is it
I shall endeavor to tell you now, says the Apostle, Fulfill my joy, and be like
minded, If there be any consolation in Christ, or any comfort of love, if there
be any fellowship of the Spirit, if there be any bowels and mercies. The
meaning is, the Apostle exhorts them to these duties upon these motives, to the
following duties upon the foregoing motives, As if he should say, for the
consolation sake that you feel in Christ Jesus, that is sweet and dear: for the
comforts sake that you feel, when you love, how full your souls are of comfort!
for the sake of that sweetness and pleasure that you have in the fellowship of
the Spirit: If there be any bowels of mercy in you, any sweetness of the mercy
of God in your souls, or any workings of mercy, or pity, or affections in you,
grant me one desire, at which I shall exceedingly rejoice, that is, be like
minded, and have the same love, etc.

The Apostle does here, as it is usually his manner, when he exhorts to any
thing, he tells them not, Do this, or you shall be damned, do this or else you
are hypocrites, or else the curse of God will fall on you: for he carries that
clearly in all his Epistles that there is no damnation to them that are in
Christ, and you are are not appointed unto wrath, says he, but he presses
them unto it out of the sweetness, and dearness of spiritual things that they
apprehended. Indeed to press them from arguments of hell or the curse, that
would have fastened a spirit of bondage on them. To press them from worldly
things, those vanities would never have moved them, therefore he takes the
choicest things always, as Job says, I spoke to my servants, and to my wife,
and she answered not, though I besought her for the children of my body, that
is the dearest thing between man and wife: so the Apostle desires them by such
things as these, by the coming of the Lord Jesus, that is the sweetest thing to
a Saint; says he, by these sweet and dear things. I talk not of hell, and it
is in vain to talk of worldly motives: but for the sweetness that is in
spiritual things, and for that price sake, and the dearness that is of them,
and in them, I beseech you grant me this request, that is, that ye

Be like minded, and have the same love. That is, mutual love each to other,
and be of one accord, and of one mind. This is the Motive that I Mutual love
enjoined.
shall open.

But how shall we come to love one another, or to love mutually? O (says he)
Let nothing be done through The means to attain it.
strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better
then themselves. I told you, a man is to lay this as the foundation of his
love, to love because God loves him, not because he is beloved of men. Now that
he may do so, he must lay this also as a general rule in his soul by the grace
of Christ, that he account himself, and looked on himself as less then any other
of the Saints, every man must account another better then himself. A man must
look upon himself, nay, I say more, he must be content that others look upon
him as the least Saint, or else he will never love his brethren aright.
Beloved, this above all things, I find (it may be you find more) to be the
greatest enemy to love, high-mindedness, that you look upon your selves, either
as the greatest of Saints, you think you are some body: or else you look upon
your selves as of the second form, near to the greatest. Therefore you shall
observe by experience, that when you come to love any Saint, if you find that
though he love you, yet if he love another better, and account more of the
Image of God in ^^other then in you; you always account that love no better then
hatred: you say, such a man hates you, why so? because he loves three or four
better then you. This is pride of heart in a man, he had as lieve a man should
hate him, as love one Saint in the world better or before him, it is a sign of
a devilish heart: If there be a Saint or two in the Family, or a woman, or a
servant in the Congregation that is more respected then he, he thinks such a
one does not love him, he concludes, I am not beloved. There is such a
desperate pride, (as pride is a desperate thing always in spiritual, and in
earthly things) in the heart of man, that makes him so desperate, that if he be
not loved to the height above all others, that he accounts all love hatred.

You will not be right till you come to this, that Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. I am
the least of all Saints, says he; and 1 Timothy 1. 7. I am the greatest of all
sinners; you will never be in a right frame, in a Gospel frame to love your
brethren, till when you look on sinners, you account your selves the greatest,
and when you look on Saints, you reckon your selves the least. Therefore this
is a plain, short Lesson. I mean not to speak much of it, but truly it needs a
large comment on your hearts, it needs a great deal of setting home upon your
spirits.

Therefore let us every one look to our selves in this, let us consider our
condition, my condition that I stand in, and yours where you are. Is not this
the frame of my soul, and the disposition of your souls, that you never love
another, nor never esteem another love (for both go together in a proud heart)
unless he look principally upon you ^^^ve all others. Beloved, it is much for
thee and me, if we understand our selves, what we are, and rightly judge of our
selves, and our course, and how things are really in us, and before the eyes of
him that searches the hearts; it is much for me if the poorest Saint give me
but a smile, or a good look, yet this is our disposition, if the Saints do not
observe us, if one go by and do not observe us in the street, and put not off
his hat, and speak, and give us idle visitations when he knows not what to do,
he loves us not. It is a great deal if a Saint do but come over the threshold,
or look upon me in the street.

This is that that breeds endless quarrels (for they are here put together,
Strife and Vain glory, and the like) for thou will be always like the Salamander
feeding upon some quarrel, for every man naturally has some one thing that he
feeds on principally; children feed on one cate more then another, and so do
men, some upon Husbandry, some upon Navigation, some upon Policy, every one
upon one thing or other. All men have some one thing that carries the stream of
their hearts; some Professors, the very stream of their spirits goes in
quarrelling with others, they no sooner end a quarrel with one Saint; but they
begin another, they can no more live without jangling and quarrelling, and
strife, then the Salamander can live without fire. This is the reason, a proud
heart therefore can never close with the Saints, it cannot be content with a
little measure of love from the Saints. A Saint if he be as he should be, can
love though he be not loved, and can rejoice wonderfully if he have the least
measure of love from others. The Lord make this short word spiritual, and
powerful to thee, and me: If this lesson were rightly learned, a world of
division among the Saints would cease.

Expositions and Observations on HEBREWS 12. 18, 19, 20, etc.
For ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that burned with
fire, nor unto blackness and darkness and tempest.

And the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words, which voice they that
heard entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more.

(For they could not endure that which was commanded, and if so much as a beast
touch the mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through with a dart.

And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake.)

But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels.

To the general assembly, and Church of the first born, which are written in
heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and the spirits of just men made perfect.

And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling
that speaks better things then that of Abel.

See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not, who refused
him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him
that speaks from heaven.


THe Apostle in these words does compare The old and new Testament compared.
the old Testament, the old Covenant with the new: or (if you will) the estate
of the Saints under the old Covenant of Sinai, with the glorious estate of the
Saints under the new Covenant. Therefore he tells them, Ye are not come to that
mountain that burned with fire, that mountain that might be touched, you are
not set under the old Covenant that was terrible, in which there was nothing
but that that was terrible, that brought horror upon all that feared God in it:
but ye are Come to mount Sion, to the glorious state in the new Testament; and
there is nothing but what is amiable, and what is beautiful: for that is it
that I mean to pitch on: you shall observe in the description of the Saints in
the old Testament, under the old Covenant (I mean not the Books of the old
Testament, I suppose you know what I mean in that Proposition) I say there was
nothing in all Gods administration with them, but it was full of terror, it was
terrible, it begat horror in them; and there is nothing in the state of a Saint
that is rightly settled in the Gospel, but what is thoroughly amiable and
beautiful: and therefore you shall see how the Apostle reckons them: First, for
the old, he says, they were come but to a Mount that might be touched, that
is, an earthly mountain, a mountain or hill, as one of our hills. And that
burned with fire, that was terrible. And there was blackness and darkness, and
storm, and tempest, covering the heavens and the hill, this was terrible. And
there was the sound of a Trumpet, you know that signifies war. And there was a
terrible voice of words also, and so terrible, that they that heard it,
entreated that they might hear it no more. And the Lord was so strict, that if
but a beast touch but the hill that was black and dark, he was to be stoned, or
thrust through with a dart, he was to be killed; nay, Moses himself that was to
be the Mediator of the people in that Testament, he did exceedingly fear and
quake. So that there is nothing in that old Covenant of works, that God says,
is done away, Heb. 8. there was nothing in the old Testament, but what was
terrible and full of horror. To come a little more particular; there is nothing
in the state of a Professor who is yet on Mount Sinai, as many Professors are
who are not yet dead, but alive to the Law: they are not freemen, they are not
sons and daughters, they have not the principles of the Gospel clearly wrought
in them; I say those people, take them in the bulk, and frame of their
profession, there is nothing in their whole life, in all the course of their
profession but what is full of horror, and terror. If they look upon God, they
see him more or less as an angry Judge, ready to stand at the catch to consume
them. If they look on grace in them, that is so little, that they continually
conclude that they are hypocrites. If they look on sin, they look every moment
when God will be avenged on them because of it. If they look on affliction,
they say, Now God has found me out, I knew it would be so that the wrath of
God would be on me. If they look on Christ, says he, He does not belong to me,
and the Promises are not mine. A man that is a Professor on Mount Sinai, as far
as he walks in the Covenant of works, or as it were by the Covenant of works,
so far of necessity his soul within is as Mount Sinai was without, that is,
full of blackness, and darkness, and storms, and tempest; inevitably, and
unavoidably, it will be so.

Therefore clearly, this is the reason of all the troubles, and horrors, and
terrors, and uncomfortableness of your spirits, because you have one foot on
Mount Sinai, you are not come up to Paul's pitch, I through the Law am dead to
the Law; you are not dead to the Law, you are not delivered from it, I mean the
Law as it is a Covenant of works, and no otherwise, for I know this, no
trouble, nothing can befall a Saint that is rightly principled according to the
Gospel, but it is exceeding amiable: If there be sorrow for sin, or any thing
that you account bitter in it self, if it fall on such a soul that is endued
with such a principle, that is as sweet as any thing else. I may say, (though
it be Nonsense to carnal ears) his sorrow is as sweet as his joy, his sorrow
for sin is as sweet as his joy for mercies, if he be one that is rightly
transplanted from Mount Sinai to Mount Sion: Therefore see how the Apostle lays
it down, look on it, and you shall see nothing but what is truly amiable.

But ye are come to Mount Sion. Now Mount Sion was a beautiful place, says the
holy Ghost, the beautifullest place in all Jerusalem, where the Kings house
was; David's house covered with gold; Therefore, beautiful things in Scripture
are laid down by the name of Sion; and usually it is called the Virgin Sion,
for fairness and beauty. Ye are come to Mount Sion.

And to the City of the living God. What is that?

The heavenly Jerusalem. Not to the old Jerusalem that was subject to be taken,
and to be burned, and subject to pestilence, and famine, and sword, but to the
heavenly Jerusalem, the Jerusalem that comes down from heaven.

And to an innumerable company of Angels. You are come now to the place where
there are Myriads of Angels. In the state of the Saints in the new Testament,
there are innumerable companies of Angels that God has ordered to wait on
them, to protect, and preserve, and to save them. In the old Testament we read
of one Angel here, and another there; one Angel was sent to Sennacheribs Camp
to destroy it, but here is an innumerable company of Angels; this is the state
of the Church in the new Testament.

To the general assembly, and Church of the first born. I cannot go over all
the particulars, but if you read All things amiable to a man rightly built upon
Christ.
them over, you shall see that there is no object but what is thoroughly
amiable, and that is the only thing I would commend to you. Let him be a man
that is rightly laid upon Jesus Christ, and has the right knowledge of him
according to the Gospel, by his holy Spirit: I do not say that there is a
little, but there is nothing that he can conceive or imagine, but it is sweet
and amiable, and pleasant to him, as

For instance, look which way you will, if he behold God, there he sees
infinite sweetness, how he is his Father, reconciled to him, and full of eternal
bowels of affection toward him before the world was, one that loves him
infinitely, and takes care of him perpetually. If he look on Jesus Christ, he
sees that he is his husband, he is one with him, as Christ is one with the
Father. If he look upon the Ordinances, he sees them as blessed pipes, that
have many sweet promises to convey more of the love of God, and of his Spirit
to his soul; If he look upon the creatures, he sees the glory of God upon them
in creating them, and the goodness of God in providing them for him, and he
tastes the love of God in them. If he look on afflictions, he sees them as
sweet, wise, and seasonable corrections from his heavenly Father to bring him
nearer to him. If he look on sin, as sin is the transgression of the Moral Law,
he sees all forgiven by the righteousness that is in Christ, and all nailed to
his Cross, and he knows that sin in him shall work for the best, that it may
make him prize the grace of God more, and come nearer to God. If he look on
persecution, and the plotting of wicked people against the Church; a Saint that
is rightly set in the new Testament, he sees nothing but what is beautiful, and
amiable.

Not but that there are objects that in themselves are not amiable; as sin is
not amiable in it self properly considered, neither is affliction, but he has
such a glass, the Lord casts such a light in him through which he sees every
thing, the light of the Gospel, through the holy Spirit, that there is nothing
but joy and comfort. That is the reason that the Apostle commands, which is a
strange command, Rejoice, says he, in the midst of afflictions, rejoice when
ye fall into diverse temptations. And rejoice, and again rejoice, Phil. 4. And
presently after, Let your patience and moderation be known unto all men. As if
he had said, Ye are in great afflictions, yet rejoice evermore. If these
Philippians had been as we are, and had had those principles of Mount Sinai in
them, they would never have rejoiced in those great afflictions: but having
clearly the love of God in them, and justification rightly placed on Christ,
and the principles of the Gospel rightly planted in them, there was no
affliction or temptation whatsoever, but they could rejoice in it: Rejoice
evermore. I do not know whether you yet fully understand it: the Lord teach
you, that you may know what is the hope of you calling, what a glorious
condition God has called you to.

I will conclude with three or four words of Exhortation to you from this
Lesson, that every object that a Saint that is in the new Jerusalem can behold,
is altogether amiable. The uses are here mentioned in the Chapter before.

Then in the first place learn not to faint under afflictions: 1. Use Not to
faint in afflictions.
for that is the reason the Apostle brings this in, do not so much strive, or
struggle how to get out of afflictions, as to get more Gospel light to see
afflictions, for that is all one, nay, better then the other. Therefore if the
Lord do but give you a little Eyesalve, that is, his Spirit to look on them,
you shall see no gall, nor taste, nor see any misery or evil in them at all.
That is the Use that is here spoken of. Therefore what ever thy afflictions be,
labor to understand rightly their nature, and thy station in the new Testament,
and no doubt but thou shall bear them through.

Another Use that the Apostle teaches us is this, 2. Not to undervalue the
glorious condition of Saintship.
and me thinks in my apprehension it is a very considerable word, Beware least
there be any fornicator, or profane person among you, as Esau, that for one
morsel of meat sold his Birthright: for, says he, we are not come to the Mount
that might be touched. I apprehend the meaning to be this, that this being so,
the estate of a Saint being so glorious, then beware you that are Professors,
least any of you be so profane as to sell your birthright, that is, all your
glorious privileges, and unconceiveable happiness in your condition for a mess
of pottage* that is, that you do not relinquish basely these mercies, to
forsake your own mercies, as Jonah says, to embrace some lust or other, either
to embrace the world, or to fall to wantonness, or drunkenness, or any thing
else; and so to bargain as Esau, that sold all his blessed title in the new
Testament, and in Jesus Christ for a mess of pottage: Beware of that
profaneness, for profaneness is not only when men commit gross evils (as we
say) but this is a profane man, though he be a Professor, and walk civilly,
that (though but in his heart) is willing to exchange the blessed estate that
God has called him to for the best happiness in the world. There are many
profane, men that are not whoremongers and drunkards, but are ready every day
if the devil come to cheapen to give up their birthright for a mess of pottage.
Take heed you sell it not, if you did understand it rightly, you would not sell
it for ten thousand worlds, that condition and happiness that God has called
you to. All the things in the world that can be presented to you, are nothing
to the peace of the Kingdom of heaven, be they what they will in themselves,
and yet you han^er after ambition, or lusts, or somewhat, and go sell your
birthright for a root of bitterness, for a mess of pottage: for base things, I
say, (and I am sure there is no Saint here that knows what the happiness of a
Christian in the new Testament is, but will say so) that all the glory, and
riches, and happiness in the world is no more in comparison of the riches and
happiness of a man estated in Christ in the new Testament, then a mess of
pottage is compared with an inheritance. Therefore beware of it; desire the
Lord to deliver you from a profane heart.

Thirdly, here is another Use that the Apostle 3. To encourage weaklings.
makes of it, therefore this should encourage poor, weak Professors, that are
every day ready to faint, Wherefore (says he) lift up the hands that hang
down, and the feeble knees, and make strait steps to your paths, least that
which is lame go out of the way. The meaning is poor souls that are beaten out
(as it were) as a ship in the sea, all the week with temptations, and
afflictions, and injuries, and reproaches, and threatenings, and persecutions,
that their hands almost fall, that they are ready to say as David, I have
washed my hands in innocence in vain. This is the way to keep up thy spirit:
Labor, as Paul prays, Phil. 1. to know the riches of thy calling, to understand
the glorious condition that God has called thee to here. I speak not of that
in heaven hereafter, but the glorious estate here, if thou had eyes to see
it, and a heart to judge of it, then you would not be so tormented all the week
long with a few temptations and afflictions, and so be ready to give up, as
David said, I shall one day perish by the hands of Saul, so, I shall one of
these short days prove an hypocrite, a profane man, I am so haunted with
temptations, and so followed with sins and lusts. No, beloved, study that
blessed estate, what Mount Sion, what the heavenly Jerusalem is, that City of
the living God; that God has called you to, and that will support thee.

Then, that I may conclude, Lastly, this is the use 4. To study peaceableness.
the Apostle would have us make of it, to follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see see God. That is, if you do understand
aright your spiritual condition, the happiness of it, which is unspeakable,
then surely you will be peaceable people, you will be at peace with all men;
for this is a general truth to me, that our frowardness does generally arise
from some distemper of our own souls within, I mean, when a man sees that God
is angry with him, he is angry with others: that is certain always, if God look
strangely upon him, he will look strangely upon others, if God quarrel with
him, he will quarrel with others: but if God smile upon the soul, and shed his
love into the heart, and set his love upon him, he will not be angry with any
that are without (I mean with a carnal anger) that is the reason that when a
man's ways please God, the stones of the street shall be at peace with him. Did
you ever see the stones of the street angry with you? but the meaning is, when
a man's ways are cross with God, and he has a guilty conscience, a guilty soul
has no true peace, he is ready almost to fall out with the stones in the
street, he quarrels with his servant, with his horse, with every thing, because
he has an unquiet spirit within, when a man pleases God, the stones shall be
at peace with him, that is, he shall be at peace with every thing. Why so?
because there is an infinite, unspeakable quiet in his own soul.

That is the reason we have so many Professors among us that are so bitter and
cruel, to others, some they call Presbyters, and some Independents, and diverse
other Professors, you may pick them out in every Congregation that are so sharp
and terrible to others, if they cross them, or dissent from them never so
little What is the reason? because there are abundance of Professors that have
one foot on Mount Sinai, they walk by the Covenant of Works, they have patched
a feined rotten peace in them with God in Christ, and so many times there is
blackness and darkness within, therefore they are ready to wrangle and quarrel
with others without.

But God has called us to Mount Sion, where is that? where the swords are
turned into Pruning hooks, and the spears into Ploughshares, sighing and
sorrow is gone away, and there is no ravenous beast there, meaning the glorious
estate of the Saints in the purity of the light of the Gospel; all our ravenous
spirits shall be taken away, for it is impossible, that soul that has the love
of God shed into it, and the peace of God rightly planted in it, it is
impossible but that soul should be mild, and calm, and meek, and merciful, and
loving, and courteous to all, and be at peace with all, and peaceable to all.

And for holiness, Follow holiness, says the Apostle, this would make you
holy, if you did understand your condition rightly: O, if you were persuaded
that God did love you from eteruity, and that his Son did die for you, and that
you and he are as really one as he is one with his Father, and that all the
treasures that are in Christ are yours, etc. this would inevitably work in us a
holy frame of heart, and disposition. Therefore the Apostle usually calls on us
to be holy from such motives, I beseech you by the mercies of God, and by the
consolations of the Spirit do this and that, and leave that and the other evil.
That is the reason we are lame in holiness, because our principles are so
confounded, and the Gospel of Christ is not spiritually, and rightly, and
orderly, and distinctly planted in us, or else we would be more holy, and look
on sin in another manner then ever, and hate the appearance of it, and cleave
to that which is good.

These were the Lessons that I thought of from this Scripture. Desire God to
enlarge them when you come home, for Truths use to breed in the soul. Therefore
the Spirit of God is compared to a Bird, the Spirit sat on the waters, as the
Bird does on the nest to hatch her young. The Spirit of God (with reverence)
will hatch such truths as this in the hearts of his children, that though it be
confused, and rude in the beginning, yet the Lord by his holy Spirit may break
it out to a glorious, and powerful light to our souls.

Expositions and Observations on 1 PETER 1. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

Of which salvation the prophets have enquired, and searched diligently, etc.

Which things the Angels desire to look into.


THe Apostle speaks of the salvation that Godhath given unto us, and Christ
has purchased for us in the New Testament; and he says it is such a glorious
salvation that all the prophets in old time, they have been groping after it;
they have spoken much of it, but understood little of what they said, but spoke
for our sakes, that is, principally for us: and the very Angels desire to look
into that salvation. The Apostle sets out the glory of that salvation thus: the
prophets inquired after it, and the angels desire to look into it. So the word
then briefly is this, that

The very angels of God, they do earnestly desire to know, and understand the
mysteries of the Gospel, the salvation that God has given to sinners by the
Gospel.

The Angels are wondrously taken with the knowledge The desire of the Angels
after the mysteries of the Gospel.
of the glorious mysteries of the Gospel. True it is, for themselves, they are
not more saved after the manner as men are; but yet the glory of it is so
great, and the glory of God by it, that the very angels desire to look into it,
the Angels study it.

Now, how do they study it?

Compare this with that Ephesians. 3. 8, 9, 10. Unto me (says the Apostle) God
has given this grace that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable
riches of Christ; And to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery
which from the beginning of the world has been hid in God, etc. To the intent
that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places, might be made
known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God. The Angels no doubt know that
that we cannot comprehend, and they have a great deal of that intuitive
knowledge, as we say; but this I would teach you, that the Angels are willing by
the Church, that is, by Gospel preaching, by the ordinances of God set up in
the Church, they are willing to learn, and by the help of them to pry into the
glorious mysteries of the Gospel.

Not only the good Angels, they are present here Both good and bad Angels.
(that is certain) waiting upon the Saints; but also the evil angels, that is,
the devils, they desire to look into the Gospel, they do learn the mysteries
of the Gospel by Gospel ordinances, by preaching. For good and bad Angels are
of the same nature by creation, though some fell, and others did not. This
mystery of the Gospel was hid from Angels, from good and evil Angels. And
though they know diverse things of God, and their own happiness, yet the
glorious things of God in the Gospel, and New Testament, they are content to
come down among us, and hear and learn of the Church, and of the ordinances. We
are not able to comprehend what senses Angels have, or that we shall have when
we are gone hence to the Lord. Therefore there are two or three things that we
should learn from it.

diligent, and careful to To be diligent hearers of the mysteries of the
Gospel.
hear the mysteries of the Gospel when they are opened to us. If angels come
down (as it were and learn this wisdom by the Gospel, who is so great but he
should stoop to pry into these glorious mysteries? And if the devil (though he
learn it that he may the more dishonor God by it) hearken to every tittle, and
use of it, and improve it, how careful should we be? If the good Angels learn,
though their salvation be not by it; but only the glory and the mystery, and
beauty of it; how much more should I hearken, whose salvation, or damnation it
is for ever? If the Devil hearken to every doctrine and use, that he may
dishonor God, and hinder my soul, how much more should I hearken, that I may
honor God, and resist the devil and save my soul?

wisdom and watchfulness against Satan. Truly the devil To learn Caution
against Satan.
was a gross fool, in the times of Popery I mean, there was but little
preaching, therefore he had but little knowledge of the things of the Gospel:
but as the light of the Gospel grew clear, so the devil grew wiser. And he
has laid aside all the temptations that he had a hundred years ago: for he can
never catch men that way, for the generality, and now he has gotten spiritual
temptations: for as the Gospel breaks out for the enlightening of the Saints,
to bring glory to God, and save their souls; so the Devil gets more light, and
knowledge whereby he may more dishonor God, and damnifie the souls of men. The
devil is the same now as he was then to dishonor God, and damn souls; and the
way generally is the same to bring men to sin: but for the special manner of
it, the devil drives a new trade, nothing like as before: before it was to
invocate angels, and dead Saints; that was gross. Now you think you are safe,
because these things are gone; but the devil has got the Spiritual knowledge
of every lesson you hear, and he knows how to beat you with your own weapons,
the devil has temptations on the right hand, and on the left, now he brings
men to be puffed up with spiritual knowledge, he hears precious things in the
Gospel, and an intelligble man is much taken with notions, and the devil takes
him that way. He sees the doctrine of justification breaking out, and it is
glorious, and men are taken with it, therefore in way of thankfulness men shall
swagger as the world does; and whereas before they were something like
professors, even to the world, now they shall walk in all looseness, and
wantonness. I say not that all do so: but there are some, and woe to them, that
turn the grace of God into wantonness. I am not able to tell my thoughts how
fine the temptations of Satan are grown by this salvation; by every Sermon he
increases his knowledge, and will to the end more and more, and those
temptations that take us now, our children will laugh at them, because
knowledge shall increase. Therefore take heed of pride, and arrogancy, walk
humbly, and hearken to advice, for thou have an enemy that learns more at one
Sermon, then thou do at three.

glorious Jewel the Gospel is, what a glorious pearl, when the angels come To
make us admire the glorious Pearl and riches of the Gospel.
down to study it. The Angels in heaven see God, and for ought I know they have
as much happiness as ever they shall have; they are sent down to the Saints to
wait on them, and that they that it concerns not should be so taken with it, it
must needs be a glorious Jewel. Therefore some conceive that the Cherubins in
the law: there were two Cherubins over the Ark on the mercy seat, one looking
toward another, God ordered it so, so as they were prying as it were into the
mercy seat: and some conceive they were a type of the Angels prying into the
glorious mysteries of the New Testament, looking one at another, and wondering
(as it were) It is a glorious Jewel.

Therefore let us praise God for it, and endeavor to use all means to keep it
up. Many devises the devil has to pull it down (though he get nothing, but
make himself more miscrable) so there will not be such wanting still. To
instance in one, take heed of Idolizing discipline, and government, that is, so
to give our selves up to seek a government, that we care not what hindrance we
do to the Gospel the while. As there are some here among us in hindering the
poor Welsh Ministers from preaching to the people, only because they suspected
them to be Independents: this is but the beginning of sorrows, if men may have
their will for discipline and government, we shall loose this Gospel which the
Angels pry into: discipline and government is good, but we must not loose the
Gospel for it, keep up that.

And beloved, if ever the Lord set peace among you, think of those poor
countries that have not this Jewel and Pearl. If God raise men, you may find
out some way or other, whereby to maintain them. And it is more then allowing
them maintenance: for you are to stickle with that generation of wicked men
that for every trifle and nicity hinder poor people from enjoying the Gospel,
and pretend either it may be he is not a University man, he is no master of
Arts, it may be he has Greek, and Latin, and not Hebrew, though he be full of
the Holy Ghost, and yet the people must be starved. Let us do what we can to
prize, and advance the Gospel, hold it up before every soul. If the Angels
come down from heaven to pry into our Gospel; how much should we prize it, and
not suffer people that we shall curse seven years hence that we bless now,
that would cousen us of the Gospel: be not cheated of the Gospel: it is a
precious Pearl; it is all that this poor ruind, tottered Kingdom has left: for
peace, and wealth are gone, and there is a foundation of a new war laid, only
God has kept up the Gospel in England as much as in any kingdom in the world,
Beware of men, of wolves in sheeps clothing, beware of all the instruments of
the devil that would beguile you, and your poor children of this Jewel.

be forward, and ready to every good work; though it do not much concern you.
Truly there is a loveliness in To be ready to every good work.
good works, though they concern not me, and my good, yet I should have a hand
in them, I mean, though they concern not my calling. There is a disposition in
men, that they will meddle with nothing, but their end is their profit, or
credit. The Angels pry into our Gospel; what have they to do with it? They
love to see the wonderful wisdom of God in it, and to see Christ woing
sinners, and take them in his Arms, it is nothing to them, yet they rejoice
that poor sinners should be saved, and they rejoice to see the justice of God,
and the wisdom, and mercy of God, how sweetly they be reconciled, and glorified
in his Gospel. So let us, when any good work is to be done, though I, and my
family be not concerned in it, yet let us go among them, and do what we can.
This is the Plague of this age, that many are about doing of good, that is
certain, but there are some wheels of their own ends in it. I cannot say it of
every Officer; but in any Office or place in the City, you shall have some that
have wheels of their own ends that move all, and if that be away, all stands
still. Let us love good works for good works sake: for the beauty of the work.

Expositions and Observations on JUDE 19.
Sensual, not having the Spirit.
I Am not now in an Expounding way further then I must of necessity to show who
these are that are said not to have the Spirit; but only I shall pick out a
Lesson for you, you may easily see if you read the Chapter, they were a
generation of Professors, of whom Peter speaks much, They despised Magistracy,
they were spots in their feasts of love, clouds carried about with every wind,
Wells without water, Trees, whose fruit was withered, twice dead, and plucked
up by the roots, for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness. You see what
their qualities were, and you may see what their misery should be; compare Jude
with 2 Pet. 2. Among the rest of their properties this is one, they have not
the Spirit. This is the last of all that the Apostle names, They are sensual
not having the Spirit. And he usually reserves the greatest things last in his
eloquence and way of speaking. Now then the Lesson is this, That

The greatest difference (that I know) in all the Book of God, between Saints
and Sinners is, that the one has the Spirit, and the other has not.

There are a thousand differences even in Scripture, but they are none of them
so substantial as this, that a Saint, is a man that has the Spirit, and a
Sinner is one that has not the Spirit, one that is without the Spirit.
Therefore the Apostles when they were Preaching, and met with any Disciples,
and Professors, they asked presently, Have ye received the Spirit? It is not
meant only, nor chiefly of the common gifts of the Spirit, but certainly it is
meant principally of the spirit of holiness, Have you received the holy Ghost
or no? So our Lord Christ speaking of the world, and the Church (to see what a
blessed thing it is to see heavenly things in the language of Scripture, a
thing that if we could grow up to, we should overthrow a thousand distinctions
in Divinity; we mistake things, taking them in the old Notion) John 14. what is
the difference between the world, and the people of Christ? I will send thc
Spirit which the world cannot receive. The world are men that have not, nor
cannot receive the Spirit of God, and the Saints are those that do, and have
received the Spirit of God. You read in 2 John 2. 18. of men that had made a
great profession that were fallen off, that were fallen away, says he, They went
out from us, because they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they
would have continued with us. There are many fallen away, says he, but they were
not of us. Why? What are you? might some say: We (says he) have received an
unction, an anointing, and it abides with us. And ye need not that any should
teach you, that will teach you all things. They that fall off, they were not of
us. Why? they have not the Spirit of God, therefore they were not of us. So
when the Apostles preached, sometimes it is said that some of them believed,
and some did not; and at other times it is said when they preached that the
Spirit of God did fall upon the people, that is, they were converted, they were
born again, they were made Saints. So in Romans 8. where the Apostle speaks of
being in Christ, and out of Christ, which is the great point of all, and
salvation and damnation hangs upon it. This is his language, they that are in
Christ, walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. So in the language of
the spirit of God, the maine thing that belongs to a Saint, it is not as we
ordinarily account it: there are a hundred things that we call Religion that
God does not. A drunkard may be stricken with terror in hearing the word, and
we say such a one is converted, and it may be not; and there are hundreds of
other people that may pray twice a day, and hear Sermons, and repeat them, and
out of a natural principle of devotion may have affections: this is not
Christianity, or Gospel Religion. There are abundance of professors among us,
that the Holy Ghost will not own, because they have not the spirit.

Therefore the maine way whereby we may judge of a Saint or a sinner, is
whether he have the spirit of God in him or no. O such a one does great things,
he prays, and hears, and reads, and disputes much: I but has he the spirit,
or no?

But you will say, How shall I look for that? How shall I know that?

I will tell you how; A man may know the spirit The Spirit in us to be known by
its own evidence.
in himself clearly by the evidence of the same spirit, And a man that has the
spirit may know the spirit in another by the spirit. There is a kind of
Sagacity among the Saints, whereby they having the spirit are able (though not
expressly, and clearly) to behold the spirit in another.

We are the sons of God, but the world knows us not: worldly men know not the
Saints from Schismatics, and Heretics: and usually spiritual people receive
those names from the world, Schismatics, and Heretics, and the like. But a
man that has the spirit of God, he can see as clearly as a natural man can
with his eyes. How can a poor lamb know the dam among a thousand? There is a
Sagacitie in nature, and so there is here in grace, they have the same spirit.
As when Elizabeth, and Mary were talking, the Babe in Elizabeth's Womb leaped,
hearing the words of Mary, that then had the Lord Jesus conceived in her. I
give you but a little resemblance from natural things. The Saints know it, and
their fellowship is in the spirit. Our communion is in God, and not in such a
Covenant; or merely in outward duties: but our communion is with the Father,
and with his son Jesus Christ, and in the spirit with all his Saints.

Therefore labor for the spirit of God. Truly, God is now coming, I am
confident it is his design in these latter times to exalt his spirit, and to
pull, and throw down every thing that exalts it self against the spirit, that
stands in his light, and Eclipseth the glory of it. And though the world which
cannot receive the spirit of truth, do either blaspheme, or else do set little
by it, yet surely it is the will of God that all his children should honor it.
These thousand years learning, and natural parts, and moral good works, and
supersticious good works have been exalted. Now in these later times, Our Sun
shall be turned into darkness, and our Moon into blood. That is as the learned
Calvin.
interpret it, all the glorious things that we had before the pouring out of
the spirit, that we made Suns, and Moons of, God will blast them.

I speak not against learning simply, it is useful, especially in a
Commonwealth: but as far as learning intrencheth upon the spirit of God, God
will blast it: learned men shall be laid by as Ciphers, God will blast their
labors, that we might honor the spirit. There is one place that comes to my
heart with much sweetness, Psalm. 119. 96. I have seen an end of all perfection,
but thy law is very broad. We have seen an end of all perfection of learning,
of common gifts, of natural parts; we have seen God blast these one after
another: but Gods law is very broad. The moral law, the law of the letter is
broad, much more the law of the spirit of life in Christ, that is extolled more
and more: therefore all must down to extol the spirit of God.

Truly Religion is a hundred ways mistaken by people, I could give a hundred
instances, especially in your Catechismes, where it is asked; What is Religion?
It is such, and such. Christian Religion, or Gospel Religion under the New
Testament consists of two things, Christ crucified, and the pouring out of the
spirit of God. These are the two pillars of our Religion in the New Testament.
And this is all we have to preach to you, and as far as any thing has not
relation to these two things, it is not the Ministry of the Gospel, it is not
Gospel Religion.

We speak much of reformation, and it is to be desired; but among other errors
in Religion this is one: many think that the main point in Religion is the
setting up of government; whereas our main reformation is in pulling down, and
not in setting up: for we have a world of institutions set up that will never
hold. And among those latter institutions that good people have set up. I
believe that there are not many will hold: but these will, the Doctrine of
Christ crucified, and the pouring out of Gods spirit. And as many as tend to
this; and flow from this, without scruple I think we may die for them. But when
our Bibles have gone through the hands of Papists so many hundred years, when
a man shall come to die for it, he is afraid that such a thing may be crept
into the text, and a thousand such thoughts of Athiesme will come upon a man:
but when a man can say, this is Christ crucified, and Christ pouring out of his
spirit, let the particles, and the words run as they will, this is the maine
that will hold.

As the Gospel was intended, and designed for simple men more then others, so
(with reverence) the Gospel is a more simple, plain thing then most men in the
world conceive. The Gospel needs not the thousand part of the distinctions,
and definitions, that the schoolmen have, and that men multiply. It is a simple
story concerning Christ crucified, and how the Holy Ghost was poured upon men,
and this was preached by fishermen as God gave them utterance, and it was
prophesied of before. If Religion be a simple thing, taught by fishermen* with
the pouring out of the Spirit, then there need not all those disputes
concerning the Arts, etc. For my part I think learning to be a very good thing
to perfect a man's naturalls: but I think on the other side that a man that
savingly, and clearly knows Christ crucified, and the pouring out of the
spirit, he is the fittest man in the world to be a preacher.

We should know things a thousand fold better, and clearer then we do, if we
would judge of things as God judges of them; if we would use the language of
the Scripture, and the notions of the holy spirit in the Scripture. If we would
know a Saint from a sinner (as I said) a man that is the Lords, and another
that is not, this is the maine way, the chief essential difference, the one
has the spirit, the other has not. It is not so much whether yonder man pray,
or fast, or preach, or repeat, or whether he does many good outward moral
things, but whether he has the spirit of God; though it be now almost a
ridiculous thing to name the spirit of God. We should I say distinguish man
from man by the spirit.

And labor in a special manner to assure our selves that we have the spirit
of God. We should not rest in this, that I have left such sins, or I do such
duties; but go on still, till I come up to this, that with all humility, and
thankfulness I may say, God has given to me of his holy spirit, the spirit of
Jesus Christ dwells in my heart* Paul was humble, and modest enough in his
expressions, yet he could boldly say he had the spirit, We have the earnest of
the spirit. And John could say so of other Saints, Ye have an unction, or an
anointing, 1 John 2. and that was the blessed spirit.

Truly (beloved) it is a comfortable thing (in respect of himself) for a poor
creature to see many stumble at the word of God; whereas if we would resolve to
be wise in the wisdom of God, and to speak of things as the Scripture speaks,
to look on things as the Scripture looks on them, to use those phrases, and
expressions, and those notions, we should understand many mysteries in
godliness, which now are little less then stumbling blocks to us: because
there is a kind of thwarting wisdom in us that is cross to that.

God is now (I told you) about to exalt the spirit, yet not in a way contrary
to the Scripture, but the spirit in the Scripture I mean. Therefore learn this
lesson, to strive for this as the chief thing, to find the spirit of God in
you, dwelling and working in you, because as in the Old Testament there was one
great promise (to wit) of the Messiah, the Lord Jesus, that was the great
promise, and all other promises belonged to that. So in the New Testament there
is but one great promise, the promise of the father as Christ calls it, and
that is the pouring out of the Spirit.

Therefore as the Lord has been teaching us of late years to know his Son
Christ crucified, the doctrine of justification, where our righteousness lies,
etc. So let us not think these speculations enough, but take the other maine
thing that is as great as this, the doctrine of the spirit. That I may as well
find the spirit working in me, as to know without that Jesus Christ died for
me.

If Religion were stated aright, I mean Christianity, Christian Religion under
the New Testament; not in books, but the life of Christianty, it would be to
know Christ crucified, and to enjoy the spirit of Christ: that when we read the
New Testament, and cast up the bill of account when we have done, there is the
sum of all; the two hinges that all goes on. Therefore take heed of being
deceived by notionall knowledge of things only without you, though it be never
so glorious. For if thou be a Saint, thou have the Spirit of God really
dwelling in thee in its measure, as truly as in the Lord Jesus Christ, as it is
in Ephesians. 1. the latter end, the spirit that works in them that believe.

O the spirit of God is a glorious thing. It is that that not only makes the
grand difference between a Saint and a sinner, but even in a godly man, the
spirit is all in all in Religion. Let the spirit but stir in him, though he be
never so dark yet all is light before him. Let the spirit come and comfort him,
though he be in chains of Iron, though he be in the greatest misery in this
world, yet he can sing Psalms. Let the spirit be given him, and then not only
faith, and the promises, but graces, and common providence, every thing speaks
the love of God to his soul. But let the spirit withdraw from him, if the Lord
take away his spirit but for a moment, even from the best Saint, his body and
his soul are no better (If I may speak it) then a mere carrion. I allude to
that of James, The body without the soul is dead. So take the body and soul
without the spirit of God, it is dead. Dead? What is that? Thus, take a living
body (that I may follow the comparison a little) there is no living body but he
can do something: though some can do more then others, yet every living body
can do something, he can sit, or walk, or talk, etc. And as he can do some
good, so he can resist some evil. If a man be dying almost, if you go to pour
water in his throat, he can turn his head aside. But let the soul be away, he
can neither do any good (I speak now of natural, civil good) or resist evil.
So it is with the soul, let the Lord take away his spirit, and we are quite
flat: Let the Lord propose any good work to do, let any part of the will of God
be presented, there is no stirring at all in the soul toward it, the heart
lies gaping, and is dead; Let any lust or sin come, any temptation though it be
never so poor and feeble, there is no resistance, there is an inrode into the
soul without any opposition, let pride, or frowardness, or filthiness, or
covetousness and worldliness come, there is nothing to resist it, because the
life of the soul is away, which is the spirit of God.

And is not this an excellent thing then, for a man to have the spirit of God
dwelling in him? that when good is proposed to him, the spirit may (as it were)
switch him, It is a homely expression, but I have found it by experience. As a
jade with a good switch is set on to the journey, or to his business; so when
the soul of a man has somewhat within to switch him to cause him to close with
good things, to lay hold on them, to attempt them at least: Whereas when the
spirit is away, there is no stirring; the soul is as flat, and as dead; as
water in a stinking ditch. This is the excellency of the spirit. Therefore you
that have it, prize it. There are some that if they had it again as once they
had, they would prize it, and praise God for it, and would now give a world for
it. Therefore you that have these stirrings of the spirit in you to make you
close with good, and to resist evil in some measure; bless God, and praise his
name for it.

That is the thing I drive at, that you may see the use and worth, and
excellency of the Spirit of God in your souls. When the Spirit of God is away
from the soul, all the seals of Gods Love, and the signs of his Favor, they are
cut off at one dash as it were; I mean thus, when the Spirit of God dwells in
the soul, you could read the love of God in every Ordinance, you could see it
in every Grace, and in every Promise in the Word of God, in every thing: and
you could see one while your election with joy, and another while Gods
everlasting love with joy, and another while the death of Christ, and another
while your union with him, another while your Redemption, and Reconciliation,
and Gods Love sealed in all these; Nay, in every creature you could taste the
Love of God, in your clothes, and your meat, and every thing: But let the
Spirit of God be gone, and all these are gone: Take all Promises and Mercies,
and Sacraments; they seal not one spark of the Love of God, but they are all
dead, speechless things, that signify and speak no comfort at the best, and it
may be horror, that a man may read (I had almost said) his Reprobation, in that
which a few hours before he could have read his election in; and those
Scriptures all along that he could sweetly have seen the Will of God in, and
could say, that which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has
entered into the heart of man, that I have seen, he can shut his Bible, and say,
and almost swear that he understands not one tittle in it. That soul that when
he had the Spirit could spring with joy unspeakable and full of glory when he
came before the Lord to call upon him, either in public or in private, and
could pour his soul into his fathers bosom, that could have prayed a whole
year, if he had had time and strength to continue, he is not able now to speak
one word to the Lord.

And more then so, he is not now deprived only of all light, of all Knowledge,
of all assurance, of all comfort, of all strength, either to do good, or to
resist evil: but there is positive horror in the heart, positive fear, and
terror, and darkness: a bondage to unbelief seizing upon him; That as our Lord
says, The Spirit is like wind, that no man knows whence it comes, or whither
it goes: So he feels a misery in his soul, that he knows not whence it comes,
or where it will end: As it was said of the Powder plot, the Powder Treason,
that there should be a blow given that none should know whence it was: so he
sees a blow given to his soul, and the life of it, and all that is good and
excellent in it, and he knows not whence it is; he can say, that his soul is no
other then a plain hell, for there is no positive evil in hell but it is there,
and there is no privative evil, no evil of deprivation of any thing that is
good, but he feels it there; so that in all our Religion, our Graces, and
Duties, and Assurances, and Evidences, the Spirit of Jesus Christ is the life
of all.

Therefore no wonder that David (who was a Type of a Gospel Christian) should
say, Create in me, O Lord, a new heart, andrenew and restore thy holy Spirit:
as if he had said, since thy holy Spirit went away there is an annihilation,
all that is in me is annihilated. He does not say, mend, and repair, but
create: I see not so much as a stump of Grace, a root, or a habit, or any
thing, but all is pulled up, and thou must create in me a right spirit:
Therefore learn that the life of all your Comfort and Assurance, and
Profession, and Graces, and Duties, and all, is the Spirit of God: It is but
the turning of Gods hand to say, Come back my holy Spirit from such a soul;
leave him but one three hours, and then he will be according as I have told
you: therefore says the Apostle, we are not debtors to the flesh, but to the
Spirit. If ever you find comfort in an Ordinance, you owe thanks to the
Spirit, if ever you have a little assurance of Gods love, whom will ye thank
for it? Ye are no debtors to the flesh; he does not mean you are not debtors to
sin, there is no man but he knows that he owes nothing to sin; but, says he,
not to the flesh, that is, principally to any thing that is not the Spirit, to
fleshly wisdom, to natural parts, to our best abilities, and endeavors. If
ever you have gotten any thing by Sabbaths, or Sermons, or the company of the
Saints, it was not from your own wisdom, or pains, but you are debtors to the
Spirit of God, it is the Spirit that wrought it; therefore prize the Spirit of
God you that have it: O if you could but borrow the eyes of poor souls that had
it once, and have it not! O how happy creatures would you think you are
notwithstanding all outward miseries, because Jesus Christ by his holy Spirit
dwells in your hearts! but we know not the worth of it till we want it, and then
we can prize it, and would give a world for it.

And then labor to please the blessed Spirit, take heed of provoking and
grieving of him, the Spirit is a more dainty Spirit then you are aware of, you
may easily vex, and grieve and fret it, do not dally with sin: Christians make
a dallying with sin, which is altogether unworthy of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ: one dallies and flickers like the Fly about the Candle, with one last
one while, and another with another, and still the Spirit is grieved, and then
you know where you are.

You little think when you are dallying and trifling with lusts, and do not set
forth the strength of Christ in you against them, little do you think what
bitter fruit you have along with it: It may leave you so low, that you know not
whether ever it will come again, and there is the misery of all miseries; how
do I know but that God has cast me off, and left me, and will never see my
soul more? because when I was tempted to pride, and frowardness, or
worldliness, I gave way, and did basely, and spoke unworthily. Have a care of
this, this is the will of God, and it is for your warning, that since God has
made you happy, you would take heed that you make not your selves miserable,
but that you would be careful not to grieve the blessed Spirit whereby you are
sealed and comforted.

Sin is like that Italian Fig, that Physicians say (how true I know not) they
can poison a man in a Fig, and take the poison, and it shall not work in a
month, or, in two months after; So a poor Christian sins, and breaks into
frowardness, to rail against his brother, and backbite, and yet he finds the
comfort of the Spirit fresh, but it may be a week or a fortnight after when he
goes to shake himself as Sampsom when he went against the Philistines, when he
has sinned, and thinks to go with the same boldness to God in prayer, he finds
his strength weakened, and the Spirit gone, and then all is gone, his Life, and
Prayers, and Seals, and Comforts, and Evidences, and Assurance, and there is
nothing but a careass left made up of flesh: And whatsoever is born of flesh is
flesh. A man would think it were a ridiculous phrase, we observe it not, flesh
is abominable to God. Flesh, what is that? I have lately seen a dead horse, one
of the ugliests sights that ever I saw, it was full of huge, monstrous Vermin,
abominable, that I cannot fitly speak of it, and I wondered why it should be
so, and I concluded because it was flesh, when the flesh was gone there would
be none of that stink, and filth left; so in your souls and mind, there is a
piece of flesh for every Vermin, and the devil may come with seven spirits
worse, and may say, there is such a soul, there was the Spirit, but now there
is nothing but flesh, come fellow devils: Therefore beware of grieving the
Spirit, it is easily grieved: It is not the greatness of our sins that grieves
the Spirit, but the baseness of our hearts in sinning in little things, it may
be in wearing Apparel, or Lace, or Open breasts, in trifling things with a
sinful disposition; that which we account a trifling lust may grieve the Spirit.

Therefore, I say, you that have it prise the Spirit, and you that have it not,
labor to have it, and endeavor to please and to entertain the Spirit: for the
Spirit and Christ are the same as it were, they are taken one for another;
Christ dwells in us, and the Spirit dwells in us, and says the Spouse in the
Canticles, I will take my beloved, and bring him to my mothers Chamber, and let
none call my beloved, or wake him till he please; Study to give all contentment
to the Spirit of God, cross him not, thwart him not, vex him not, but entertain
him, for he is your life, and you are nothing but flesh when he is gone.

It may be God has other designs in it, otherwise when God takes away his
Spirit, and leaves my soul in desertion, if I did not think God had a design in
it for his own glory and my good, I should utterly sink; Therefore God
sometimes takes away his Spirit, to the end that we may know the worth of the
Spirit, how to prize it, and to pity people that have it not, and to please it
with more carefulness if God ever give it us again.

Expositions and Observations on 2 COR. 11. 3.
But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.
I Shall not expound it, but only out of the presumption I have of your
goodness, and the love of God in you, that you will hear a spiritual word in
any shape; therefore though brokenly, and confusedly; I would take occasion
from these words to exhort you to stick to the simplicity of the Gospel, my
meaning is this, that

The Gospel is a far more simple and plain thing then most people conceive it
to be.

Truly (beloved) I think that our growing now we The simplicity of the Gospel.
are come out of Antichrist is not to grow in higher notions, and speculations
of things, but to grow more simple in the worship of God. We shall be less
curious a great deal when Christ shall set up his worship, then when Antichrist
set it up. Our growing in knowledge is not as honest Doctor Preston says, to
know new things, so much as to know old things in a new manner. The Gospel is a
plain, simple thing. There are these three reasons I shall give you. Argued
from three reasons. 1. The matter of it.


First I find that the matter of the Gospel is a plain, simple thing, not of
ens, and non ens, and notions that none can apprehend them, as people every
where discourse above the Moon. I understand not their words, no not
grammatically, not in the letter, and this is their high, and glorious light.
But I see the Apostles preached Christ, they tell a story of a man born of the
Virgin Mary, apprehended of the Jews, and he was a public person, and bore
the sins of his people, and he was put to death, and rose again for our
justification. In the preaching of the Apostles in the Acts we find none of
those Chymeras, and Ideas, and distinctions that we generally find professors
now aiming at. But to know plain Christ crucified in a spiritual manner. As
compare, 1 Cor. 2. with Philip. 3. we shall see clearly, Paul says he knew
what the world did not know, that eye did not see, nor ear had heard, and what
was that? Christ crucified, and the power of his resurrection, as he opens it,
Phil. 3.

And besides, as we find it is a plain, simple thing: 2. The instruments
divulging it.
so we see the Lord chose simple people to go, and preach it, he chose
generally fisher men, and such poor men, and women sometimes. Rude men, in a
manner without learning; these were to go and tell a simple story of Jesus
Christ, and him crucified, etc.

I find also the parties to whom the Gospel is directed, 3. Those to whom it
was directed.
2 Cor. 1. not to the learned, nor to the wise, but to the base and foolish; to
base things of the world, and despised things, and things that are not. And so
we find by experience, that the Lord sends the Gospel to poor silly people:
the simplest people most commonly understand the Gospel of Jesus Christ best.

Every body seeks to dress the Gospel, and to make it more curious, but few
labor to reduce the Gospel to its native simplicity. One Generation dresseth
the Gospel most bravely with humane learning. Though I will not simply speak
against humane learning, it is good, as fire when it is put on the hearth; so
humane learning when it is put in its own place, it is a good thing; but the
use that men make of it, to dress the simplicity of the Gospel with it, makes
it abominable.

Others dress the Gospel, and multitudes now adays, (I speak not to censure
them, or out of spite against them; but rather out of a zeal I have, that you
and I may be found at the last day in the simplicity of the Gospel,) they make
a jingle of the Gospel, they sublimate it, as though it were as the
Philosophers conceits were, Notions above the Moon, or things that they cannot
conceive what they be, existent, and consistent, and visibility, and
contrariety, and forms, and I know not what. Thus the Gospel is perverted. I
have been troubled more, then modestly I may speak to a Congregation, to see
how the plain Gospel of Jesus Christ; preached by Fishermen, to simple people
of Christ crucified: That people should sublimate it almost into air, to
nothing; that all things is God, and that God is all things; and that God is
essentially in us, and we in him: And we must do all things to God passively,
and not actively. Such a metaphysical kind of Gospel, and such terms as
confound your souls, and bring them in the end to nothing.

Therefore I exhort you to stick to the simplicity of the Gospel: And do not
think it is a small thing; it is a great business that I exhort you to. Why so?
Because I find that there are many souls that make shipwreck of their own
salvation, by flying too high above the Gospel of Jesus Christ: They lose
themselves, they run through all Religions (as some say) and at last come to be
nothing at all. And I am sure of it, they destroy the faith of others, I am
sure of that, almost by experience, as Paul says of Hymeneus and Alexander,
They destroy the faith of many. That when a poor tenderhearted Christian hears
them talk so high, and is not able to understand literally a word that is
said, says he, I have nothing in the world, I never knew God aright, because I
see that I cannot understand a word of this, and a world of evils more.

And I have observed, and do observe it, That usually those kind of people
that are so led, when they, have such Chymera's and Notions in their heads,
they nullify all Religion besides, and all but that is nothing; and one
Chymera carries the bell one quarter of a year, and then that is laid aside,
and then they have another notion, and that is all the Religion; and then away
goes that, and then there comes a third. These destroy the faith of poor souls
in Christ crucified, and justification by him, and holiness to him; and all
holy duties in the Gospel by the Spirit: this is destroyed.

Therefore my Exhortation to you, is, and it is a blessed word that I have
thought much of, in Romans 12, Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind
not high things. Mark that word. We have a kind of expression in our times of
higher and lower light; and (which is more, immodest) people attribute the
higher light to themselves: We are of the higher light, say they. Says the
Apostle, Mind not high things. How? It is not meant in carnal things, that is,
Mind not to get high Offices, or places, or preferment, or the like. But he
speaks of spiritual things, as it is clear, if you compare the third verse. For
I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you; not to
think of himself more highly, then he ought to think, but to think soberly,
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. As if he had
said, I find many among you, that sublimate the Gospel almost into air, in
high conceits, and Idea's, and notions, and leave poor Christ crucified, and
the simple Gospel preached by fishermen. I would not have you wise, above that
which is meet; not to mind high things, but condescend to them of the lower
sort. The excellency of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, is the plainness of it; and
that is the reason, that you mar it with any kind of dressing, because it is
excellent in it self If a man have a suite of Skarlet that is extraordinary
good, all-to-be-laid with copper lace, it mars it, because the cloth is good of
it self. So all dressing of the Gospel, marrs it, because it is excellent of it
self.

When you meet with people that tell you, that all your Religion is nothing,
and tell you Chymera's, and high things that may shine bravely for a while:
Think of this, I must not mind high things, but condescend to them that are
low. Therefore the Apostle in those times, when the Gospel was preached, and
perverted by Philosophy, and oppositions of Science, falsely so called, many
fine tricks they had to adorn the Gospel; he calls them always to Christ
crucified, and tells them, that was the height, and depth, and breadth, and
length of all knowledge; as the height, and breadth, and length, and depth of a
board, or of a thing; it is the whole dimensions of a board, it is the whole
board. So the knowledge of Christ crucified, is the height, and depth, and
breadth, and length of all knowledge; that is, It is all knowledge to know Christ
crucified in the simplicity of the Gospel. He opposes not Philosophy to
Philosophy, or Science to Science; but he says, Ye are complete in Christ, and
calls them to his death, and resurrection. So keep close to that.

I speak it the rather, because where there are such notions started up among
us daily now of late, they clearly draw us from Christ crucified. A Platonical
kind of Religion, a kind of Heathenism, a kind of consideration of God in
his own nature and essence without Christ. Beware of this ambition. It is
enough for you, and me to know Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and the power
of his death and resurrection, according to the simplicity of the plain Gospel
once preached by fishermen, to foolish and base people, and things of no worth.

Therefore I beseech you stick to Christ crucified, and to the simplicity and
plainness of the Gospel. I would not have you to stick in the Letter, and to go
no further, but labor for the Spirit of God through the Letter, to be in your
souls. I know God many times by these broken words, may do your souls good; but
this is a thing, that I confess my soul is so full of, that I am not able to
express it, to vent, and open my self. The mischief, and misery that befalls
people, by soaring above the Scriptures, above the plainness and simplicity of
the Gospel, ye hear that they do themselves, and others; and the safeties, and
security, that will be to your souls in keeping to the plain, simple way of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ.

I had another short lesson, but I am loath to thrust out one duty with
another. It is a rule, by which, I would always walk: I cannot now handle it,
but only mention it to you; and if God lead us by his blessed Spirit, we may
learn a little of it. I thought to show you

The Oneness that is betwixt us, and Jesus Christ.

Methinks it is a more glorious Truth, then we have judged it to be, that poor
Saints are one with Christ. The Lord Jesus Christ is anointed, and so are they;
we have the same unction with Christ; we have the same name with Christ; we
have the same Offices with Christ; we have the same love of God with Christ; we
have the same Spirit with Christ; and the same Kingdom with Christ in Heaven.
The Church is the fullness of Jesus Christ. Christ is not properly a Christ
without his Members. This is a glorious thing to consider, how the poor Saints
and Jesus Christ make up one complete Body. He is no Christ (as it were) were
it not for his members: The Church is the fullness of him that fills all in
all. It is said of the oil that was poured on Aaron, It ran upon the skirts of
his garments. So Christ being anointed, that oil runs on us. As he is a
Prophet, so are we; as he is a King, so are we; as he is a Priest, so are we;
only with this difference, That in all things he might have the preeminence.
He is the highest King, the best Prophet, the most excellent Priest. But
otherwise, whatsoever Christ is, that are we; whatsoever he has, that we have;
nay, we have his name. So also is Christ, 1 Cor. 12. We, head and members, are
called Christ: And the least Saint of God, is a Prophet, as well as the
greatest; and a Priest, as well as the greatest; and a King, as well as the
greatest. Nay, he is as real a Prophet, Priest, and King, as the Lord Jesus
was, only in all things he must have the preeminence. We have a share in all
his actions; we are one with him in his graces, in his life, and death, and
resurrection, and ascension: There is nothing in Christ; there is nothing that
Christ is, or has, but we are one with him in it.

Therefore this use we should make of the Scriptures; not to be as babies
always, to read a Chapter morning and evening; but you that are experienced
Christians, when you have a truth hinted to you, be always at the Scriptures to
beat it out. As for instance, go home now, and study that Oneness, that Union
that is between Christ, and us, and beat it out to the utmost, and what the
excellency of the Spirit of God in the New Testament is, and not to tie your
selves to read so many Chapters a day, but be always studying the Scripture. As
David says, Blessed is the man that exercises himself day and night, in the
Law of God. Thus the spiritual man does, not so much read Chapters, as compare
Scripture with Scripture, and is bolting out spiritual truths, till they be
fully fixed and fastened upon his soul. I shall, it may be (if God will)
explain that union to you further, in the mean while search for it; and so I
shall leave it here, and hear what the Lord has further to say to us.

Expositions and Observations on IERE. 6. 1, 2, etc.
O ye children of Benjamin, gather your selves to fly out of the midst of
Jerusalem, and blow the Trumpet in Tekoa; and set up a sign of fire in
Beth-haccerem; for evil appears out of the North, and great destruction.

I have likened the daughter of Zion, to a comely and delicate woman, etc.


I Shall desire leave at this time, a little more familiarly, then usually, to
tell you what I conceive is the will of the Lord, because I do not expect to
speak to you any more.

I remember a little before the Lord had brought us together, before the
desolation of that Bristol.
City, (which indeed was greater then any man can imagine, unless he had been
there present) the Lord by his providence guided me to expound, Matthew. 24.
concerning the desolation of Jerusalem, little thinking, or imagining, that the
desolation of that place had been so near. And now that word that was then
spoken by providence, was (as I perceived afterward) a very great stay, and
refreshing to the souls of the people in their trouble. By providence also,
(not by any way of prophecy, I never was addicted that way, but by providence)
reading this Chapter in my family, and seriously considering of it, me-thoughts
the Lord represented to me in a way, a little more then usual, the state of
this City, wherein you now live, and are to live; and that by the state of
Jerusalem, which is here laid down throughout the Chapter. For though we cannot
tell you now of Cities, and Kingdoms, as the Prophets did, by revelations and
visions, and the like; yet what is written, is written for our instruction. And
the Lord has given us examples of his judgments, that we may learn from them,
what to think, and how to judge of other places, and Cities, and Kingdoms, that
are parallel, that are like to those that the Lord has visited, or destroyed
heretofore. Therefore I shall briefly lay down the condition of Jerusalem, as
it is here in this Chapter. Here are things spoken promiscuously, because here
in the Prophets, there are but the heads (as it were) of their preaching;
therefore for method, and your memories sake, I will digest the condition of
Jerusalem, and what is here said of it, and about it, into these heads briefly.

But first of all, before I speak of Jerusalem itself, ye are to observe the
condition of the Prophet that the Lord had set among them, which is laid down
at Verse. 27. I have set thee for a tower, and a fortress among my people, that
thou may know, and try their way. The Lord compares the Prophet to a tower
in the City; that is, a watchtower: A tower for strength, as it is Iere. 1.
18. I have made thee an iron pillar, and brazen walls: That though he preached
contrary to their corruptions, yet they could not touch him. And a tower for
watchfulness, because the Prophets did watch as out of a tower, all the City,
and all in it, and the enemies that were against it So the Prophets were called
Seers in those days; eying the sins of the people, and eying the judgments of
the Lord, and eying what comfort on the otherside God gave to any among them.
The Prophets, I say, were towers, and should be still. They are called trumpets
here, I will send a trumpet, and cause it to blow, but the people will not
hearken. They are watchmen, to give warning to the people; so they should be: I
leave it to you to judge, (for you know the state of this place better then I)
whether we be so, or no.

The next thing in this Chapter, is, The state of Jerusalem, what kind of
place it was, I mean, in respect of the building of it, and the situation of
it, (for I mean to gather up the whole Chapter in a little method) take it as
it is described, Verse 2. I have likened the daughter of Zion, to a comely and
delicate woman. His meaning is, not for any spiritual beauty in her, as appears
in the whole Chapter; but in an outward sense, in respect of situation and
gallant building, it was a magnificent place, and no man was able to count the
towers about it. It was a stately gallant place, and therefore was like a
delicate woman. A stately place, full of case, and pleasure, and trading, and
good creatures, and altogether exact, as a delicate Gentlewoman, nothing was
wanting: so Jerusalem was; and yet for all that, you afterward see how the
Lord did deal with her. So, by the way, let me tell you this (for I speak in
the sight of God) That the greatness of your City, the fairness of it, the
riches of which you were wont to boast, how you did rule all Kingdoms besides,
you could make Kings, and Parliaments, and do any thing; you have such Ships,
and Towers, and Armies, and Armed men; you see what God says of Jerusalem,
when he was going to destroy her, I have likened her to a fair delicate woman,
and yet all could not excuse her. If the Lord come against you, all your
riches, and power, and trading, and gallantry, cannot excuse you.

Thirdly, Here is all the good in Jerusalem, the Religion, and godliness; the
Lord acknowledges that too, and the Lord will not forget any good thing among
them; that you shall see in Verse 20. To what purpose comes there to me
incense from Sheba? and the sweet Cane from a far country? your burnt-offerings
are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto me. Jerusalem did not forget
the service of God, they had their worship, and sacrifice, and they had sweet
Cane from Sheba. The Lord complains in Isaiah 42. that the people did bring him
no sweet Cane; it was their manner in their sacrifice. I acknowledge, says God,
you have a great deal of Religion, and you talk of Reformation among you, and
Government, and Discipline, and I know not what; yet notwithstanding, this
shall not hinder, but for all your villainies and wickedness, this is the City
to be visited for all this. It is not a little grain of Wheat that can cover a
Mountain of Chaff. It is not a little formal, fained, hypocritical service of
God, and a quarter, and talking, and a clutter about Reformation, that can
hinder the proceedings of God against a people that are really sinful, and that
have really and grievously revolted.

The fourth thing here laid down, though promiscuously (that I shall endevor to
gather up for you orderly) it is the sins of Jerusalem. I shall speak of no
more then is laid down here, and they are in this place four. Here are four
great sins that God mentions.

The first is, the oppression; observe that word in Verse 6. For thus has the
Lord of Hosts said, This is the City to be visited, she is wholly oppression in
the midst of her. He says not, There is oppression in the midst of her, or
in her, but she is wholly oppression. As if he had said, She is built with
oppression, her very fabric is oppression: She is oppression it self,
oppressing the poor, and the Saints, and the upright in heart; there is nothing
but railing against, and slandering of them, as we see after.

Now the Lord opens that, She was oppression; that you may know the meaning of
it, he tells you after. As a fountain casts out her waters, so she casts
out her wickedness: violence, and spoil is heard in her, before me continually
is grief, and wounds, says the Lord. She is oppression; as a fountain casts
forth water. What is a fountain? It is a hole in the Earth that casts out
water; so says the Lord, I see nothing in Jerusalem, from one day to another,
from one year to another, and from one end of the City to another, but
oppression. I see one oppress another: I see it full of wounds and griefs, and
bruises, especially to my poor Saints, there is nothing but oppression. And I
leave you to judge this day, whether this City, at this time, be not so: She is
wholly oppression, from the least to the greatest, there is almost nothing else
to be seen.

Then, the second sin the Lord lays down, is in Verse 13. That every one is
given to covetousness. Mark that word, and let every one of your own
consciences apply it. For, from the least, even to the greatest of them, every
one is given to covetousness. O, this covetousness! there can be no
Reformation, either in Church or Commonwealth, as things are, because of
covetous people. If there be any good course taken by Magistrates to reform any
business in Courts or Offices, because of the covetousness of people, the
business is marred, you all know it. And so far outward Reformation of
Churches, and the like, because of covetousness, you all know that the business
of Reformation is marred; Ministers have lost themselves: There are many godly
men that had room in the hearts of Gods people, some in this City, and in the
Assembly, that had room in the hearts of Gods people before these times, and
before they had all things in their own hands, and became reformers of the
Church; now because of covetousness all is marred, that no business can be
looked upon. Now the Lord look upon us; and indeed, though we see not him, he
sees us, and looks on us.

Then, the third sin is laid down in Verse 13, 14. that is, The false dealing
of the Prophets, the Ministers. From the Prophet, even to the Priest, every one
deals falsely. How is that? They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my
people slightly; saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace. The Prophets
deal falsely, they are become hypocrites; they tell the people, they are in a
gallant way of Reformation; when the Lord knows, both according to Scripture,
and sound Reason, they are in the way to destruction; they tell them now, the
Church, and Reformation is going up, when the poor Kingdom was never in such a
sad condition. They deal falsely, that is, hypocritically. What a stir is there
here about Schismatics and Heretics, and about Reformation; and what
consulting, and working, in the City, and elsewhere; and yet when there is any
work to be done really for God, no body minds it. I will give you an instance,
as clear as the Sun: There has been of late, a great deal of consulting, and
making Petitions, and Remonstrances, and Representations, and Modelizing the
Common Council, etc. And yet we have had the Superstition of Christmas, worse
then it has been this four years to my knowledge; every one shutting up their
shops, and giving themselves up to Superstitious ways, that we thought had been
dead.

Come to the Ministers, and Assembly: Is there any complotting to draw people
from false, gross Popery? No, they deal falsely: There is no assembling or
meeting about that; but the Ministers let the people go. I speak it with the
grief of my soul: If it were on the Mountains of Wales, it were no wonder, but
to see people here to go in droves to Popery! I behold it as I go along in the
street, and think I, with a heavy heart; how neatly does Popery become this
City? They go in their best clothes, and make gallant cheer, and they are ready
to throw stones, if any open their shops. It is not the people so much; but
where are our Prophets? they lie as if they were dead all the while. This is
dealing falsely, it is not plain, square dealing with God. If people did hate
Schism, (as there are Schisms, and Blasphemies, I favor them not) they would
hate profaneness, and all other evils as well: But this is false dealing, and
juggling; this shows their design: If they did hate one, they would hate all; if
they did seek Reformation in one, they would seek it in all: But this is false
dealing, the Prophets deal falsely.

Then fourthly, here is the sin of the people laid down, grievous revolting,
horrible backsliding from God, the people grow worse and worse; it was time for
God to take them in hand, in Verse 28. This people are all grievous revolters:
They were for God, but now they are revolted. In this City, four years ago,
there was abundance of Reformation; how did people hugg poor Saints, when they
were persecuted in other Countries? they did cloth them, and feed them: And
these Superstitions of Christmas, were almost quite out of the way; but we are
gone back, we are as bad as we were twenty years ago. A poor Saint dares hardly
appear at Guildhal, though he be not a member of a Church, yet they cry An
Independent, an Independent; as if he were an Owl among Birds. And strangers,
godly men, that have seen us within this half year, they think we are grown
mad, and have wished, I would to God, I could get over the line to go home.
London is grown the worst place in the Kingdom; it was not so, three or four
years ago. Men did love the Saints, and were ready to save the Kingdom; but now
there is a bitter root to destroy the Saints, and to lay stumbling blocks; we
are grievous revolters. For matter of sin, we are as like Jerusalem, as may be.

I, but will sin destroy a people? I pray observe in the next place, The
carriage of Jerusalem under their sins. What was that? There are three things
laid down in their carriage: For it is not only sin that ruins men, but their
carriage under it. It is not faling into the water that drowns a man, but his
unwilness, or unskilfulness to get out.

In the first place, they were not ashamed in the least measure for all these
things. Were they ashamed? He puts it to the question, and answers himself,
Were they ashamed, when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not
ashamed, neither could they blush, says the Lord, for all this wickedness.
Were they ashamed? As if he had said, If they had been ashamed, I had been
somewhat satisfied: If the people had mourned for their grievous revolting, and
backsliding, and oppression, and covetousness, in the midst of them, it were
some comfort; but they were not ashamed, they cannot blush.

Then the second thing is this, That as they could not be ashamed, so they
would not hear, nor receive any instructions to amend their ways; therefore the
Lord would turn them as a dish is turned, upside down, Verse 10. To whom shall
I speak, and give warning, that they may hear? Where is any Creature that will
hear, notwithstanding all this? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they
cannot hearken: behold, the Word of the Lord is unto them a reproach, they have
no delight in it. This was their condition: The people were full of sin, and
they had no delight to hear the Minister of God sincerely to lay open their
sins; nay, it was a reproach: they reproached the Minister that should do so;
they would question him, and throw him into the dungeon, as they did Jeremy,
for showing them their sins. So in Verse 17. I set watchmen over you, saying,
Hearken to the sound of the trumpet; but they said, We will not hearken: That
is, They said so in their hearts at least. And so in Verse 19. Hear O Earth,
because they have not hearkened unto my words, nor to my Law, but rejected it.
And judge whether this be not our condition.

Then thirdly, and lastly, This is the aggravation of their sins; as they were
not ashamed, and would not hear one word. So lastly, God was weary, as it were,
he was tired with correcting and afflicting them, and yet they did not amend.
For that is the drift of that place, Verse 29. The bellows are burnt, the lead
is consumed of the fire, the founder melts in vain; for the wicked, or
wickedness, or mischief, is not plucked away. That is, says the Lord, I was as
a founder blowing with the bellows, till they were worn out: The very fire and
all is consumed, and the dross is not taken away. Some particular men
especially have had many afflictions, and so after afflictions upon others in
the Kingdom: There have been touches of Gods rod; and truly we are worse. Now
thus you have the sins of Jerusalem, and the carriage of this people, under
their sins.

In the next place, there is the dealing of God, with this people, because of
their sins. And the first thing i^, God prepares war: That is, set down from
the beginning of the Chapter, to Verse 7. Hew down trees, cast a mount against
Jerusalem: This is the City to be visited, says God. God comes to visit
Jerusalem, he looks upon her, as if a Carpenter went to a Wood to choose Timber.
This is the Oak that will serve to make such a beam. So God looks on all
Countries, the Amonites, and Amorites, etc. But this is the City fit for
judgment; therefore, says he, Hew down trees, prepare war. I will not be
peremptory in this; but the Lord may do it: He has done it with others, like
our selves. Hew down trees, prepare war against this City. If the Lord should
say, London is the City to be visited, Bristol has been visited, and most
places in the Kingdom, but now London must; there my wrath shall be poured out.
The Lord grant that it may not be so, but I greatly fear it.

Secondly, The Lord brings them to imprisonment, the Lord took them prisoners,
Verse 11. The husband with the wife shall be taken; the aged with him that is
full of days.

And then comes their plunder. Their houses shall be turned to others, with
their fields, and wives together: For I will stretch out my hand upon the
inhabitants of this Land, says the Lord. O, if the Lord should say, This is
the City to be visited, and make war against it, and then take you prisoners,
take the aged men, the Aldermen, Common Councellers, and all prisoners; and
then plunder all, and say; their fields, and their wives shall be turned to
others: That were sore, that you should not only lose your goods, but your
fields; that your houses, and trades, and shops, should be taken away, and your
very wives. Thus the Lord did with others, I will not say, that he will do so
with you.

Now, there were stumbling blocks in Jerusalem before it was destroyed; so
there are in this City; it is filled with stumbling blocks; every little
difference in opinion is a stumbling block, that some men become Atheists,
because every Saint does not agree one with another. And then there is the
fear, and horror that did fore-run this misery, Verse 24.

But in a word, the course that the Lord would have them take; and that
therefore I shall speak of, that you may beseech the Lord, that this poor City
may prevent those evils.

One thing is, the Lord would have them seriously, and sincerely humble
themselves before him, to acknowledge their sins, and bewail them. Verse 26.
Says the Lord, O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow
thy self in ashes; make thee mourning, as for an only son. Not a formal day of
fasting, and humiliation; for that is almost become all form: but really humble
thy soul, and call upon the Lord, that the Lord would be pleased to turn away
his wrath.

Then the second thing laid down, is, That we should hearken to instruction, Be
thou instructed, O Jerusalem, least my soul depart from thee; be ready to hear
the Word of the Lord, be ready to hearken what Gods will is, how he may be
glorified, and we preserved.

Then thirdly, here is a word that I exceedingly desired to open, but I must
but name it, Verse 16. Stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your
souls, says the Lord. This is the way to save you, Stand in the ways, ask for
the old way. What is the meaning of the old way? That is, Jesus Christ. That
was the old way of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Jesus Christ, and the way of
righteousness, and holiness, and truth. He alludes, as I take it, to the
Patriarchs; for that is called the old world, and the old way. Says he, Ye are
not like your fathers heretofore. Abraham, he was not covetous, and full of
oppression; they were willing to hear that which was for their good; and they
were not the worse for their afflictions. Look to the old way, and labor to get
such a Spirit as the Saints had heretofore, that were in Jesus Christ.

What of all this? notwithstanding this counsel that the Lord had given them,
what if they will not turn to him? what if they will not amend? Then there is a
terrible word that we read of in Verse 8. Lest my soul depart from thee. It is
not sin only that makes Gods soul depart from a people, nor their hardness,
nor wickedness; but when they refuse all means, and helps, then his soul
departs from them. Therefore, Be instructed, says he, lest my soul depart, or
lest my soul be disjoynted, as it is in the Margin. What is the meaning of
that? It is a terrible word; we have that word expounded in Ierem. 15. 1, 2.
See what it is for to have Gods soul to go from a people. (I believe that Gods
soul is not gone from us, if we will hearken to him, and do not give our selves
up to wrath and rage against Gods people.) Then said the Lord to me, Though
Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind, or my soul, could not be
toward this people. There is before the ferventest, blessed prayer for this
people, that I know in the Book of God, Jeremy prays: And now their
destruction was coming, says the Lord, Though Moses and Samuel should come
before me, my heart could not be on them. I have put them out of my heart, my
mind and soul is gone from them, I will never be troubled more with them. What
follows? Cast them out of my sight; let them go forth. And if they say, Whether
shall we forth? Then thou shall tell them, such as are for death, to death,
such as are for the sword, to the sword, such as are for the famine, to famine,
and such as are for captivity, to captivity. Let them go whether they will;
some of them will be hanged, some killed, some to the sword, some starved; they
can come to no good, because they are gone out of my sight: My heart, and soul
is from them; that is the last gasp; that is hell above ground.

Therefore the sum of all is, That we hearken to God; for these things were not
written for Jerusalem only; but for our instruction, God has laid down their
sin, and wickedness, and their oppression, and the blessed remedy, that they
should have taken; and if we take it not, but go on in our wickedness, we see
what we may expect, That when that shall come on us (which God if it be his
will forbid) you may remember that you were told before.

I have one thing in my sad and serious thoughts, to comfort me, that this
shall not befall this City, and that is this: That the Lord dealt with them
according to the administration of the Old Testament, and so went by Cities,
and Nations; but now every man, and every person that calls upon God, is
respected in every Nation, and City whatsoever. But this comes in, and cools it
wonderfully, and puts me to a nonplus. If we in this City did go according to
the administration of the New Testament, I am persuaded, that the Lord would
not send desolation upon the City; but because we would go according to that
old administration, we have chosen it, and said so, and do so: Now as they
chose that administration to deal with God, he chose that to deal with them;
for the Lord will deal frowardly with the froward, the Lord will deal with men
according to their own law: Those that sin against the Law of Nature, shall be
punished so; those that sin against the Law of Moses, shall be punished so;
those that go according to the administration of grace, shall be dealt with
accordingly. Now we are going according to the old administration, more and
more; for we are settling like the Jews in an outward, formal Reformation,
without heart. Now it would be terrible, if the Lord should choose our own
administration, and give us according to our own heart, I hope he will not: But
this lay heavy upon my spirit, to tell you of; therefore, the Lord direct you
to make the best use you can, that if it be his blessed will, this place, that
is the honor and glory of the Kingdom, and the refuge of the Saints, that the
Lord would not come against it.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
Page A Abiding. ABiding with God in evil times 72 Actions. Saints not under
the Law in their actions 157 Afflictions. Afflictions of godly, and wicked, how
different 31 Afflictions turn to the good of Saints 119 The life of Faith in
afflictions 130 Saints not under the Law, in regard of afflictions 150
Afflictions not to be fainted in 194 Amend. All should amend, when the wicked
are punished 104 Angels. Angels pry into Gospel mystery, 201 Angels, good and
bad do it ibid. Apostasy. Apostasy a provoking sin. 11 Assurance. Life of Faith
in Assurance 130 Awake. Christians duty to awake God. 86 B. Betray. Not to
betray Gods cause 88 Blasphemy. Blasphemy a provoking sin 9 Blessing, see
latter Bristol. Gods mercy in recovering Bristol. 107 C Christ. See cleaving.
Christ makes all things amiable 192 Cleaving. Blessedness of cleaving to the
Lord 70 Honor of cleaving to Christ in ill times 73 Special times of cleaving
to God 77 Comfort. What should help Christians comfort 175 Conceits. Vain
conceits of wicked men 33 Confidence. Ground of a Christians confidence 27
Consolation. Consolation a duty 40 Four things that hinder consolation ibid.
Covenant. Spiritual understanding of the New Covenant, effects of it 66
Covetousness. Covetousness a provoking sin 237 Creature. The vanity of the
Creature, why discovered 61 Conjunction. Conjunction of those that cleave to
God 70 D. Difference. Difference of Gods dealing with Saints 36 Difference
between Saints, and sinners 208 Discouraged. Weak Saints not to be discouraged
143 Distrust. Distrust in times of danger to be avoided 87 Division. Division
among Saints, a provoking sin 9 Duty. See Consolation Four grounds of Duty 149
E. Enemies. Assurance of victory over enemies, the effects of it 64 How God
destroys his enemies 85 Equality. Equality that should be between Saints 144
Evil, see good. Example. Example of Saints a ground of prayer 150 F. Faith.
Faith, the want of it, what it does 40 Faith, the life of it 44 Faith, how God
tries it 83 Faith, how the just live by it 128 See Affliction, Assurance,
Sanctification. False. False dealing 237 Fondness. Holy fondness, between God
and the Saints 54 Holy fondness in five things 55 Fondness wrought four ways 61
Formality. Formality in duties, a provoking sin 4 See Reformation G. Garrison,
see Mind God, see Hypocrisy, Persecutors Good. To call evil good, a provoking
sin 11 See Afflictions, Work Gospel. Gospel precepts highest 162 Gospel
Mysteries to be attended 202 Gospel riches to be admired 204 Gospels simplicity
225 Government. Government, how to be affected 204 Greater. How to argue from
less mercies to greater 120 Grace. Grace weak, how to comfort it 45 Grace, what
meant by it 160 Of those that are under Grace 162 Power in Grace, more then the
Law 164 H. Heart. Heart hardened 8 Hidden. Saints Gods hidden ones 90 Holiness.
Holiness desired on wrong grounds 41 Right laboring for holiness 198 See
Comfort. Hypocrisy. Hypocrisy hateful to God 48 Hipocrites honor creatures
above God 50 Hypocrisy dishonors God ibid. I. Judge. Saints not to judge one
another 143 Judgments. Manner of Gods proceeding to judgment 2 Cause of
judgments, what 3 Judgments, why sent 103 Ingenuity. Ingenuity of right Saints
163 Justification. How to live by Faith in Justification 128, 133 K. Kiss. Holy
Kiss, what 145 L. Latter, Last. Blessing of the latter times 122 First, shall
be last, how 138 Law. Saints under the Law, how 156 See Persons, Actions,
Afflictions, Gospel. Learning. Learning humane, wherein useful 211 Life, see
Faith, Sanctification. Lord, see cleaving. Love. Love of God, what it works 62
To love, though we be not loved 181 Mutual love, how attained 184 M. Mind.
Garrison of the mind, what 16 Mingled. The life of a Christian mingled 133
Ministers. Ministers sins provoke God 149 N. Nature. Duties grounded in nature
6 O. Officers. Officers sins provoke God 8 Oppression. Sin of oppression 236
Ordinance. Prayer, an Ordinance of God 149 Ordinances not to be neglected 152
Ordinances needful 153 P. Patience, see waiting. Peace. Peace to be studied by
Saints 196 Perpetual, see Prayer, Persecutors, Persecution. To cleave to God in
persecution 78 Persecutors design 91 God persecuted in the Saints 93 Children
of the godly, may prove fierce persecutors 99 Persons. Persons of Saints, how
under the Law 156 Power. Power that Saints have 166 The Spirit called power,
how 173 See Grace Prayer. Prayer, a perpetual duty 151 Prayer, whence it
proceeds 169 Wants of prayer, how supplied 170 See Ordinance, Nature, Precept,
Example, Promise. Precept. Precepts ground of prayer 150 See Gospel Promises.
Promises ground of prayer 151 Protection. Protection of God, who have right to
it 21 Pride. Pride, how discovered 185 R. Reflect. Reflect acts hard to man 177
Saints to reflect on their estate 178 Reformation. Formal Reformation, a
provoking sin 5 Refuge. God a refuge 14 To repair to God, as a refuge 17
Religion. Religion, wherein it consists 211 Riches, see Gospel Revolting.
Revolting, a provoking sin 239 S. Saints, see Weak, Sanctification Life of
Faith in Sanctification 129, 131 Saintship to be prized 194 Satan. Grounds of
Caution against Satan 202 Security. Security, why to avoid it 140 Self-love.
Self-love, a provoking sin 10 Shame. Judgments sent to shame men 103
Simplicity. Simplicity of Religion 212 Simplicity of the Gospel 223 Sin. What
sins provoke judgments 3 Carriage of Saints, fallen into sin 43 Saints carriage
in a deluge of sin 77 Aggravations of sin 240 Silent. God silent in danger, why
83 Soul. The soul of God departs from incorrigible sinners 244 Spirit. Spirit
powerful in Saints 166 Spirit undervalued, how 167 Spirit, wherein powerful 169
Spirit differs Saints and Sinners 208 Spirit, how known 210 Spirit to be
labored for 213 Spirits excellency 215 Spirits grieving dangerous 220 Spirit to
be prized 221 See Word, Teaching, Work, Power T. Teaching. Teaching of the
Spirit 170 Testament. Testaments compared 188 Trouble. Trouble in Saints,
whence 190 V. Vengeance. Vengeance of God against the wicked 27 Union. Union
between Christ and Christians 229 Upright. Uprightness, ground of it 22
Uprightness, how tried 84 W. Waiting. Ground of waiting on God 112 Weak. Weak
Saints not to be contemned 141 Weak Saints, their carriage to stronger 142 Weak
Saints to be encouraged 196 Word. Spirit to be advanced as speaking in the Word
168 Work. Who works in, and for us 172 To be ready to every good work 206

FINIS.

