KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE, Or, a PLAIN DISCOURSE of the CHIEF THINGS necessary
to be Known, Believed and Practiced in order to Salvation. Drawn up, and
Principally intended for the Use and Benefit of NORTH-CADBVRY in SOMERSETSHIRE,
By SAMUEL CRADOCK, B. D. and PASTOR there: Sometime Fellow of Emmanuel College
in CAMBRIDGE.

August. lib. 15. de Trin. cap ult. Domine Deus, quaecunque dixi de tuo,
agnoscant and tuit Siqua de meo, and tu ignosce and tui.

LONDON, Printed by J. Hayes, for John Rothwell at the Fountain in
Goldsmiths-row in Cheapside. 1659.

John 17.3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man
lay, than that is laid, Jesus Christ. Act. 20.20, 21. I kept back nothing that
was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you publicly,
and from house to house. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks,
repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Eccles. 12.13.
Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. Heb.
12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord. John 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them. 2
Pet. 1.12. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance
of these things, though ye know them, and be established in the present truth.
John 5.39. Search the Scriptures. 2 Timothy 3.15. -- Which are able to make thee
wise unto Salvation. V. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness. TO THE REVEREND, Doctor DILLINGHAM THE Master, and his worthy
Friends the Fellows OF EMMANVEL-COLLEDGE in CAMBRIDGE.
Honored Sirs,
IT may seem strange that I should adventure to dedicate so plain a Discourse
(calculated for this meridian) to so Learned a Society; But the Providence of
God having by your free choice placed me in this Charge wherein I stand, I take
my self obliged to render an account to you (above any others) of this my
undertaking. I have found by sad experience, in those few years I have here
lived, what extreme need my people have of some such help as this, to be ready
at hand to admonish them of those things, they are to Know, Believe, and
Practice in order to their salvation: As also to acquaint them with such
Scriptures (collected together under several Heads) as declare Gods mind and
will concerning those particulars. I could not therefore satisfy my self,
without endeavoring to minister to their necessities in this kind according as
I was able, especially being persuaded that a Book of this nature left in every
family might (through the blessing of God) be a very proper means of their
instruction for the present, and might teach them also hereafter, when my mouth
will be stopped with dust. This consideration (among others) engaged me in this
work; in which at first I did not intend to be so large; but handling such
variety of Subjects, it has swelled to the bulk you see. You may perceive by
the whole that the great Master Builder has appointed me to labor in the
foundations. And blessed (yea for ever blessed) be his Holy Name, that he has
accounted me worthy to be employed any way about his spiritual building. I
shall not need to make any apology for the plainness of my work, if it be but
sure and well laid. Such as it is I humbly present unto you, as an evidence of
the great desire I have (according to my poor ability) to feed the people
committed to my care, with knowledge and understanding, and to guide them in
the way wherein they should go: As also to testify to the world my great
Obligations to that Religious and Eminent Society. God Almighty bless your
College with his choicest blessings, and grant that Real Piety, and all
Useful Learning may flourish within your walls from Generation to Generation,
This is the earnest Prayer of

Honored Sirs, Your much obliged Servant, SA. CRADOCK.
North-Cadbury, May 5th. 1659.
TO THE INHABITANTS OF NORTH-CADBVRY in SOMERSETSHIRE.
My loving Neighbors and Friends,
OUR Blessed Savior intending to give Peter a charge of his Lambs and Sheep,
enquires first concerning his sincere love to him, John 21.15, 16, 17. Simon
son of Jonas, love thou me more than these? he says unto him, yea Lord, thou
know that I love thee: He says unto him, feed my Lambs. V. 16. He says to
him again the second time, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me? he says unto
him, yea Lord, thou know that I love thee, he says unto him, feed my Sheep.
V. 17. He said unto him the third time, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me?
Peter was grieved, because he said unto him the third time, love thou me? And
he said unto him, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.
Jesus says unto him, feed my Sheep. Which words plainly intimate thus much
unto us, that Ministers who are called to take charge of Christ's Flock, had
need of much love unto him; no service about them being approved, if it flow
not from this fountain ( but be undertaken for by-respects) and there being no
possibility without this love well to endure the many blasts and storms they
will meet with (from without) in the discharge of their calling, nor the much
toil they will have, even from the flocks themselves. The truth is, the pains
and labor and sufferings of the Ministerial Function are so great (where it is
conscientiously discharged) and there are so many other ways wherein we might
make our lives more comfortable (as to worldly contentments) that he must needs
be a man of great ignorance and inexperience (or intends not to be
over-diligent and faithful in his Ministry) that takes on him that sacred
Calling, merely for temporal advantages. But whoever lifts up his heart to
think how much our dear Lord and Savior has done for him (who endured the
Cross, and despised the shame to redeem mankind) and shall consider what
glorious rewards he propounds to those who turn many to righteousness, surely
cannot grudge to be employed in the work of so gracious a Redeemer, or to spend
and be spent in his service. This consideration has drawn me often to think
with my self by what means I might best promote your everlasting welfare. And
after many serious thoughts, I have judged it exceeding expedient for your
benefit, to draw up a discourse of this nature, and to give to every Family
among you, one of them. And I bless God that has put it into my heart to set
about it, and has enabled me to perform it. 'Twas your benefit, and the
winning of your souls to Christ that was the grand motive to this undertaking.
And if that great business (through the blessing of God) may be any way
advanced thereby, I shall never repent of my pains, but shall very much rejoice
that the Lord has enabled me (in any measure) to be serviceable to you in the
furthering of your salvation. And that you may the better know how to make use
of this Treatise, I shall acquaint you in brief with the whole design thereof.

In the first part, I have couched together in three Chapters the chief and
necessary things that are to be known and believed concerning God, our selves,
and the Mediator between God and man. That so those that have a mind to know,
may (in short) be informed of the main things they are so deeply concerned to
be acquainted with. And because it is of exceeding great consequence, that
people should well understand how the things they profess to believe are
grounded on Gods Word, I have collected together most of those Scriptures that
are scattered up and down in the Book of God (upon which the Articles of our
Faith are founded) and have reduced them to several heads, and printed them at
large, that so they may be as several constellations, or clusters of Stars,
giving you the more light, and clearer assurance of the things they are brought
to prove. This course I have taken also in the second Part, in reference to the
things that are to be practiced. My intent herein being, that my Book should
fully inform you what is Gods mind and revealed will concerning those
particulars I treat of, which may be of singular use to you in several respects.

1. To strengthen and confirm your own belief of the Articles of the Christian
Faith; to awe your Consciences with the authority of Gods Word, and to engage
your hearts to the practice of those things that shall appear to be your duty.

2. To enable you to instruct your children and servants in the Principles of
Faith and obedience from the Scriptures here set down to your hands; which
every one is not able readily to find out that has not some such help.

3. To secure you against Errors now so rise among us. Seeing you may hereby
defend the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and confute the enemies of
truth, as our Savior did the Devil, by alleging the Sacred Scriptures for the
things you believe and practice.

In the Second Part I treat of the things that concern your practice. And
because consideration of our ways, and examining the state of our souls to
Godward is a matter of so exceeding great use, that scarce any thing undoes
Mankind more than the neglect of it, I begin with that. And oh that I may
prevail with you to a conscientious Practice of it. I have heard of a Gentleman
that uPon his Deathbed laid this one command upon his wild Son, and engaged
him to the performance of it by a solemn promise, that he should every day of
his life be half an hour alone: Which this young man constantly observing, and
spending* his half hours retirement (at first) in any kind of vain thoughts, at
last he began to ponder with himself, why his Father should enjoin him this
penance; and the Spirit of God suggesting to him, that his intent therein could
be no other but to bring him to consider of his evil ways, and whither they
tended, and what would become of him hereafter if he went on; it pleased the
Lord so to set those thoughts home upon his heart, that he became a new man: Of
so much advantage is consideration, and frequent taking our selves in private
to think of the state of our souls.

In the three next Chapters I handle the Doctrines of Repentance, Faith, and a
new nature and reformed life, being indeed the main things wherein the power
and life of Godliness consists. And therefore I entreat you give the more heed
unto them.

In the Fifth Chapter I treat of maintaining a daily, close communion with God,
and show,

1. How we should awake with God in the morning, and so begin the day well.

2. How we should pour forth our souls in secret prayer and thanksgiving unto
him; private prayer being every ones duty, and a great help to Holiness. And
that people may not be slight and formal in these duties, and so offend in the
manner of doing them, I give some Directions for the right performance of them.

3. I show how we should diligently read the Scriptures, the Oracles of God,
which are able (through the operation of the Spirit) to make us wise unto
salvation.

4. How we should live continually as in the sight and view of God.

5. How we should live by Faith, in ten particulars.

6. How we should be diligent observers of the Providence of God, that so we
may order our services of prayer and praise accordingly.

7. How we should practice the great duty of daily watchfulness, continually
watching;

1. Over our thoughts, that we lodge not sinful thoughts in our minds.

2. Over our Affections, that we allow not any sinful motions, and stirrings in
our hearts, but labor speedily to suppress them.

3. Over our words, that we offend not (as we are exceeding apt) with our
tongues.

4. Over our actions, that they may be such as proceed from a right Principle,
are conformed to a right Rule, and are directed to a right end. These are the
things we must watch over.

Next I set down what are the things we must watch against. In the general, all
sin whatever. But in particular,

1. Those sins we are most inclined unto by our own temper and natural
constitution.

2. The sins we are most exposed to by reason of our calling, condition, state
and course of life.

3. The sins of the times and places where we live.

4. Against all occasions and temptations, that we foresee are like to endanger
our souls.

5. Against dishonouring God by the immoderate and undue use of lawful things.

6. Against Error; where the danger of it is showed, and some preservatives
are given against it.

In the next place is showed, how we should watch for opportunities of doing
and receiving good: And some Motives to watchfulness are propounded, and the
Chapter shut up with these two Directions.

1. That we should besides our solemn prayers, send up frequent, mental,
ejaculatory prayers unto the Lord for his Grace, help, and assistance.

2. That every night we should retire, and reflect upon all our actions, and
whole behavior in the day past, and so set all at rights between God and our
souls before we go to sleep.

And because, whoever desires to grow in Knowledge and Grace, must
conscientiously make use of, and improve the means of Grace that God affords
him, therefore in the Sixth Chapter I treat.

1. Of the careful observation of the Lords day. Showing why we should observe
it, and how. For my part I never saw true Religion and the power of Godliness
thrive in any person, family, or Parish, where the religious and conscientious
observance of that day was neglected.

2. Concerning hea^ing the Word; where directions are given;

1. How we are to prepare our selves before we go to hear.

2. How we are to behave our selves in time of hearing.

3. What we are to do after we have heard. And oh that I might prevail with you
to read these Directions often (especially on Saturday-nights) that so you
might come prepared. The great reason of the unprofitablenesse of preaching,
and that Sermons do no more good, is, because people come without preparation.

3. Seeing that Heavenly duty of singing Psalms and lifting up the praises of
the most High, is now by some questioned (as indeed what is not that tends to
Gods Glory and man's good?) I purposely handle that subject, and prove it to be
a duty under the Gospel, answer the Objections against it, and give some
Directions for the right performing of it.

4. Forasmuch as Christians might exceedingly benefit one another by Religious
conference; thereby warming and enlivening one another, and provoking one
another to love and to good works,

In the next place I speak of that duty, and set down some Rules concerning it.

Lastly, Because without meditation it is not to be expected the Word should do
much good, nor that the soul should ever thrive in Knowledge and Grace, I show
the excellency and benefit thereof, and give some Directions for the practice
of it.

The Seventh Chapter treats of the danger of frequenting, and unnecessarily
conversing with bad company, whereby many have been everlastingly undone. A man
that prays to be delivered from temptations, must not wilfully run himself
into them. And because it is the duty of all true Christians both for their own
peace sake, and that they may adorn the Gospel of Christ, to serve their
generation in some honest and commendable way (avoiding Idleness, that great
snare of the Devil.)

In the eighth Chapter I discourse of diligence and conscientiousnesse in our
particular places and callings.

And that the Name of God may not be blasphemed by the ill lives and practices
of such as profess themselves Christians;

In the Ninth Chapter I treat of just and upright dealing in Trading and
Commerce, giving some Rules both to buyers and sellers, and show the necessity
of making restitution of, or satisfaction for ill gotten goods.

The Tenth Chapter contains the duties of Governors of Families, which I
desire all that are in that relation often to read over, and seriously to
meditate upon. There is a great duty lies upon them, and greater than they
usually are aware of. They may be exceeding instrumental of the salvation of
those under their care, if they discharge their duties as they ought. But
through their neglect of the Worship of God in their houses, and their ill
lives and examples they prove too often an occasion of the ruin of many in
their Families. And because very much of the life of Godliness consists in a
faithful discharge of relative duties,

The Eleventh Chapter shows the duties of Husband and Wife.

The Twelfth of M^sters and Servants.

The Thirteenth of Parents and Children.

The Fourteenth of such as are in office and of Inferiors.

The Fifteenth of People toward their Pastors and spiritual Guides. O what an
honor would it be to Christian Religion, if all they that call themselves
Christians, would endeavor to walk uprightly and faithfully in their
respective places.

And seeing it is a real kindness, and an excellent expression of true
Christian friendship, to keep one another off from the pit of destruction, and
to help one another on toward Heaven,

In the Sixteenth Chapter I treat of that great and hard duty of Christian
reproof and admonition, which if it were prudently and faithfully discharged,
would (by the blessing of God) much abate sin in the world, and exceedingly
advance Piety.

The Seventeenth Chapter contains the duties of rich and poor. Many duties
belong to them both; and both have great temptations, therefore they had need
be careful to discharge the one, and avoid the other.

The Eighteenth Chapter speaks of the duties of Young and Old. Ministers find
by experience that the Word has the greatest operation on those that are
young, who have not contracted such strong habits of sin, nor so long resisted
the Grace of God, nor so much provoked him to give them up to their own hearts
lusts, as many ancient people have done, who have lived a great while in an
unconverted state, under the light of the Gospel. I have therefore showed young
persons the danger of delays, the advantages of turning to God betimes, and
answered the Objections that many are apt to make against it. And because a
Minister is also to have a care of the souls of the Ancient, and (to his utmost
skill) to endeavor their salvation, I have laid down several awakening
considerations for them to think upon, I have showed them the danger of vain
presumptions and groundless hopes of Heaven. I have set down some of those
false grounds and sandy foundations whereon many ancient people build their
hopes of happiness, that so they may be undeceived, and may look better about
them to secure their souls, while there is time.

In the Nineteenth Chapter there are Directions given for the healthy and the
sick. To deal wisely and faithfully with sick persons in order to their souls
welfare, is one of the hardest pieces of the Ministerial work, and requires
much skill to perform it aright. And seeing a Minister is not ever at hand to
visit such sick persons as may need his help (and many times they stand in need
of much help and instruction) I have drawn up such directions as I judged
needful for them; which they may m^ke use of, when they cannot have the help
and assistance of a Minister. I have showed how they should examine themselves:
And that they may not slubber over that great business, but may come (in some
measure) to discern the multitude of their sins, and the manifold ways,
whereby they have offended God: I have set down a Catalogue of the duties
commanded and sins forbidden in the ten Commandments, as also the sins
against the Gospel: That so people may not only in general say they are
sinners, (and yet when they come and profess to humble their souls, and to
confess their sins unto God, can find few they are guilty of) but may see
themselves to be exceeding vile and sinful: I know it is very unpleasing to
people to search their own Consciences, and find themselves great sinners: They
had rather sit down with a false peace, than arraign and terrify themselves in
this manner. But who that is in his right wits, would content himself with a
shadow of repentance, or a shadow of Faith, without finding the substance and
truth of these Graces in his soul, when his everlasting welfare depends upon
it. Those Directions there mentioned may be of use also to all persons, who
desire at any time more solemnly to humble themselves before the Lord for the
sins of their life past, and more especially before the receiving the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper.

The Twentieth Chapter contains a discourse of the four last things, Death,
Judgment, Hell, Heaven. There I show the necessity of Learning (even in time of
health) that great art and skill, how to die well. Next, what the Scripture
declares concerning the day of judgment, and the everlasting state both of the
righteous and the wicked: And methinks the serious consideration of these
weighty matters, should hugely affect us. O did people oftener think and
consider of those things, they would live at another rate than usually they do.
All the businesses of this life would seem small and little (even like
childrens play) in comparison of securing the soul to all eternity.

Thus (My Loving Neighbors and Friends) I have given you a short draught and
scheme (as it were) of my whole Book. What entertainment it will find with you,
I know not. I can in some measure of sincerity say, that an hearty desire of
your eternal happiness first set me upon this work. And now (throw the
assistance of God) it is finished, my prayers shall not be wanting that it may
do you good, yea, much good. If any of you will not afford leisure to read it,
nor time to consider of the things therein contained, but after you have had it
a little while, shall throw it aside, then I desire you seriously to think
before hand, what account you will be able to give to God of this your wilful
neglect, when you shall stand at his dreadful Tribunal. For my part, I have no
other design upon any of you, but that you may attain eternal life. My great
desire is that true Plety and Godliness, that that Religion that saves souls
may flourish among you. My desire and endeavor is that where the saving work
of Grace is begun upon any of your hearts; it may be carried on daily, and that
you may increase and abound more and more in the fruits of holiness and
righteousness, to the praise and glory of God. And where this blessed work of
conversion is not yet begun, my hearts desire and prayer to God is that it may
be wrought, if it be his holy will. You see the plot and design I have upon you
is of so innocent a nature, that you have no reason in the world to go about to
defeat me in it. It Is my duty to show sinners the evil and danger of ignorance
and ungodliness. It Is my duty to persuade, entreat, and be earnest with them
to leave the tents of sin and Satan, and to come in to Christ, that by him they
may have pardon and life, And O that I could even compel them to come in, Luke
14.23. Were it in my power, not a soul among you should refuse or stand out.
But if (notwithstanding all my prayers, entreaties, and endeavors) many among
you will still prefer a life of brutish sensuality, before the life that
consists in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: If Satan that
cursed murderer ( who you know labors to ruin you soul and body for ever)
must still be preferred before that blessed Savior, who suffered and endured
so much to redeem mankind, and offers you salvation on so fair terms: If
neither the joys of Heaven, nor the torments of Hell can affect you, but the
pleasures and profits of this world must still ingrosse your minds and hearts;
remember what I say unto you, it will one day cut you to the very soul to
consider that you were showed the way to eternal life, and invited, persuaded
and entreated to walk in it, but you would not. O Neighbors, think with your
selves (I beseech you) that it is but a short time, and your souls must be
either among Saints or Devils. Does it not concern me therefore to be earnest
with you, and in all seriousness to call upon you, to work out your salvation,
now while you have time? For the Lords sake, as ever you intend to see Gods
face with comfort, remember these few following directio^s.

1. Take heed of a loose conversation, of living to the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, Romans 8.13. Now the
works of the flesh are manifest, Gal. 5.19. Which are these, Adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lalciviousnesse, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, and such like: Of the which I tell you before, as I have told you
in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God. Never comfort your selves with the hopes of Gods mercy in Christ, if ye
live in known and wilful sins. The holy nature of God will never be reconciled
to sinners, while they go on in their sins. And Christ came to destroy the
works of the Devil. He came not to save men, by bringing them to Heaven in
their ungodliness, or to Glory in their sins, but to destroy their sins, that
would keep them out of Glory. If he save us, his Grace must have dominion in
our hearts. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

2. Take heed of worldly-mindednesse. I do not go about to persuade you to
idleness or negligence, in your Callings, but to take you off from the eager
and inordinate love of this world, which duls and deads the heart to Heavenly
things. Beware lest ye be the thorny ground. Look to it, that the cares of this
life do not choke the good seed that is weekly sown among you. Some people give
up themselves wholly to the world, and thrust God out of their hearts and
houses; Take you heed of that. Believe it, that man that has the main bent of
his heart set upon pleasing God, and whose great end is to be happy with him
for ever, will be careful only so to converse with this world, and only so to
mind things temporal, as he may not lose things eternal. He will first and
chiefly seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness. He will look upon all
outwartd things as accomodations only in his passage, but at Heaven as his home
and happiness. He will cordially desire and endeavor so to walk in his
particular Calling, as he may be faithful also in his general, and may secure
his soul to eternal life.

3. Be careful to get a distinct and clear knowledge of the things that concern
your salvation. Ignorance will not excuse any man when it is caused by his own
negligence. The main things that concern salvation, you may know, if you will
give your minds to it. God has not left you in darkness, take heed of
shutting your eyes.

4. Take heed of neglecting or slighting the public Ordinances, and means of
Grace. To have no appetite to the Word, to apprehend no great need of it, and
to find no profit by it, is a mark of a dead and graceless heart.

5. Take heed of formality and resting in a mere outward performance of
religious services. Learn to distinguish between Religion the end, and Religion
the means. Religion the end is, To attain a gracious frame of Spirit, to enjoy
God, to fear him, love him, and have our natures conformed unto him. Religion
the means is, to perform such religions duties and services as God has
appointed for the attaining this end. Now if we rest in the means, i. e. in a
bare performance of religious duties, without desiring to enjoy God in them, or
laboring to get our hearts into a better frame by them, and aiming at those
higher ends to which they were appointed, our services are rather a mocking of
God, than a true and sincere worshipping of him. It will do us no good to be of
the right Religion as to external profession, if we be slight, and formal, and
perfunctory in the duties of that Religion. Take heed therefore of having only
a form of Godliness, and denying, or secretly hating the power thereof. What
will it profit any man to be thought godly and religious, if God know him to be
ungodly? Our Savior has told us that except our righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (and yet theirs was outwardly a very
strict religiousness) we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5.20.

6. Take heed of contenting your selves with mere civil honesty, and a fair,
just outward conversation. This is very commendable, yea and necessary, but
this is not sufficient to salvation. Without regeneration and true conversion
there is no salvation to be expected. Not only loose livers, but mere civil
persons need a further change. There are many people that applaud themselves in
their own righteousness; they give every one their own; they defraud no man;
they pay what they owe to all men. Do they so? I am glad of it. But let us a
little examine whether they be so just as they pretend. Possibly they give
every man his due, and would not defraud any man willingly or knowingly of any
thing. I commend them for it, But do they give God his due? They owe their
hearts to him: They owe sincere obedience and spiritual worship to him: They
are bound to love him above all, and delight in communion with him, and to make
Conscience of the duties and services he requires. They ought to fear and
reverence his holy Name, to delight in his Word, to sanctify his day, to
attend upon his Ordinances, to be tender of his honor, to decline all ways of
sinning against him, either by wicked thoughts, irregular affections, sinful
words, evil actions. Their whole life ought to be a living unto God, and his
Glory ought to be their end and aim in all their undertakings. They ought to
renounce the devil, the world and the flesh, and to serve him faithfully all
their days. Now then come, and let us consider, Do they do thus? Do they
indeed give every one his own? Do they give unto God, what of right is due unto
him? They make Conscience of being just toward men (and they do well in it)
but are they careful also of paying God what they owe to him? And what kind of
righteousness call you this, to be righteous toward men, and unrighteous and
unjust toward God? Is this a righteousness any man dare stand upon, and plead
for his justification before Gods Tribunal? You see then there is more required
than an honest, outward, fair conversation to save the soul.

7. Take heed of deceiving and ill-grounded hopes of Heaven. Secure your state
in Grace, and then your title to Glory is unquestionable. Look to your
evidences for Heaven. Take heed of mistakes about the great work of repenting
and believing in Christ. Many think they have those Graces, when indeed they
have only a shadow of them. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith:
Prove your selves. Whoever is in Christ is a new Creature; old things are
passed away, old carnal principles, old sinful inclinations, old wicked
practices, old ungodly company are passed away and left by them that are true
converts. Ask your selves whether your repentance be a repentance unto life?
whether your Faith be a saving Faith? What the true characters of Repentance
and Faith are, you may find in the 2d and 3d Chapters of the second Part of
this Treatise.

It Is carnal hopes that deceive the world, and hinder people from looking after
a saving conversion. Content not your selves therefore to say, you hope you
shall be saved, but prove and try whether you are such persons as God has
promised salvation to. Prove by marks of Grace in your souls that you are true
converts, and then hope for salvation, and spare not, and the Lord confirm your
hopes. Great things and of everlasting consequence, should be made as sure as
is possible. Ask your selves what evidences you have you are converted. It Is
proof must carry it, and not confident presumption. Take God in Christ for your
only happiness and end: And Christ as Mediator, for your only Lord and
Savior. Accept him for your Sovereign, as well as for your Savior. Be
sensible of your continual need of his Blood, Spirit and intercession, and give
up your selves sincerely to him, to be justified, sanctified, guided, directed
and everlastingly saved by him. Let his Interest be uppermost in your souls,
and you are blessed for ever.

8. Pray earnestly unto the Lord to be established in the truth, and to be
preserved from Error, giddiness, and apostasy, which is the sin and shame of
these times. Let not the different Opinions that are now going, be an offense
unto you. Remember that though men are mutable, and change from one opinion to
another, and grow wanton and wild-headed, yet God and Christ, and the
Scripture, and Heaven, and the way thither, are still the same: These change
not: Mind you these things. Take heed of that threefold Apostasy that this age
is too guilty of. Namely,

1. Of Judgment, from the Truths of God.

2. Of Affection, from the Ordinances of God.

3. Of Conversation, from that sober, humble, and circumspect walking, which
all true Christians should make Conscience of. Let not the treachery of false
brethren dishearten you: He is the right Soldier that is not discouraged by
those that run away, but still presses on to victory. In a word, lay not out
your zeal on externals, or opinions and the smaller matters of Religion. Look
to it, that there be in you an unfeigned and fervent love to God, his Truth and
children: Let most of your daily care be about the right ordering and governing
of your hearts and affections: Labor to mortify lusts, and advance Grace. To
conclude this, separate speedily from the sins of Christians, but never from
the Ordinances of Christ.

9. Count those your best friends that lovingly and faithfully admonish you of
any sin or evil they see you going on in. If you were going ignorantly into a
house infected with the plague, you would think that man your friend that
plucked you back, and acquainted you with your danger. What a madness then is
it for any man to be offended and angry with him, that out of true good will
and charity to his soul, desires to preserve him from everlasting perdition.
Can it be thought by any sober man a malicious thing to endeavor to save a
soul from sin and Hell?

10. Take heed of prejudices against a strict and holy walking with God, The
Lord deliver you from that mad opinion of the world, that like not serving God
so much, nor making so much ado to be saved. Consider is there any thing in the
world does better deserve your care and diligence, and will better pay you for
it? I know carnal people think the way of Religion a melancholic and sad way;
But I must not spare to tell them the truth; They will never live a truly safe,
peaceable and comfortable life, till they are converted, and have engaged their
hearts in an humble, holy walking with God. They ignorantly flee from
Godliness as from sorrow and trouble, but the truth is, they flee from joy and
peace. What should trouble that man that is a member of Christ, and has escaped
out of the power of Satan, and is freed from the wrath of God, and the danger
of everlasting misery?

O Neighbors! let not the ignorant scorns and senseless reproaches of wicked
men discourage you. He that has good grounds to believe that he shall live for
ever in Glory With God and his holy Angels as soon as his soul parts from his
body, I think is a happy man, and so will be acknowledged by every one that has
not lost his reason and understanding. There is a time coming when the proudest
and most stubborn sinner will be glad to change condition with the meanest
Saint. Let me therefore entreat all those that have entertained any hard
thoughts of the ways of Godliness, but to make trial what a holy life is;
and if they do not find more comfort in a serious turning unto God, and in a
sincere endeavor to approve their hearts unto him, then in the ways of sin,
let them take their course, let Heaven go.

11. Nourish and maintain a tenderness of Conscience: Be very circumspect in
your daily walking. Look upon sin as the greatest evil. Make up every breach
between God and your souls betimes. Pray earnestly for the guidance of the
Spirit of God, and to be kept from Temptations.

12. Have a care of your Families, that true Piety and Godliness may be
countenanced, encouraged and promoted in them. Let your houses be Bethels,
houses of God, and not Bethavens, houses of iniquity. If you neglect
family duties, and the religious observation of the Lords day, and private
instruction, and so let those under your care be nuzled up in ignorance,
profaneness and ungodliness, provide to answer it to God when he shall call
for you. Remember, I faithfully warned you of the sin and danger of such
neglects. I cannot expect Religion should ever much thrive among us, till
Governors of Families be careful to train up those under their Government in
the Principles of true Piety, and in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

Lastly, Labor to maintain peace and love among your selves, Mark 9.50. --
Have salt in your selves, and peace one with another. Labor to get your hearts
seasoned with the graces of humility, self-denial, and true Charity, and this
will keep you in peace among your selves. Let there be no heart-burnings,
contentions, brawlings, backbitings or defamings heard of among you. Help one
another on toward heaven. Imitate that which is good wherever you find it, but
learn evil of no man. Encourage one another in the ways of Godliness. Abhor
to draw or entice one another to any sinful course or practice. Do all offices
of kindness and humanity one for another. As you have opportunity, let it be
your desire and endeavor to do good to every body, hurt to no body. Learn that
hard lesson of forgiving wrongs and injuries, and praying for, and wishing well
to those that are your enemies. It Is a hard lesson, but Gods Spirit can teach
it you. Remember our Saviors Words in Matthew. 6.14, 15. For if ye forgive men
their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive
not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. And
the words of the Apostle, Col. 3.12. Put on therefore (as the elect of God,
holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering. V. 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if
any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.
V. 14. And above all these things put on Charity, which is the bond of
perfectness. V. 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which
also ye are called in one body, and be ye thankful. I shall conclude with that
divine and affectionate exhortation of the same Apostle, Phil. 4.8. F^nally
brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be
any praise, think on these things.

And now O Lord, thou who have put into the heart of thy unworthy servant to
write these things for the good of this people, be thou pleased by the gracious
and effectual working of thy holy Spirit, to make them useful to them, (and to
all others into whose hands they shall come) for the promoting knowledge,
Faith, and obedience among them, and the furthering of their salvation. What is
here agreeable to thy holy Will, write upon their hearts. O let it not be in
vain that this help is afforded them. Grant success (I humbly beseech thee) to
this poor endeavor, and take thou all the Glory. Good Lord give this people a
right understanding in all things. Guide them in the way wherein they should
go, to attain eternal life. Open the eyes of the ignorant among them, turn the
hearts of the profane, reduce the erroneous, and increase thy Graces daily
more and more in the hearts of those whom thou have savingly wrought upon. O
let thy blessing be on this people: God Almighty bless them. Let Truth and
Holiness, real Piety and the power of Godliness, Let soundness of mind, and
uprightness of heart and life; let true Faith and fervent love; let charity
and good works (through the operation of thy holy Spirit) abound among them.
That so living here in thy fear, and serving their generation according to the
Will of God, they may at last (through thy infinite mercy, and the merits of
our blessed Lord and Savior) be received into thy Heavenly Kingdom. This is
the earnest and hearty Prayer of,

Your very affectionate, though unworthy Pastor, Samuel Cradock.

Dr. Reynolds his EPISTLE TO THE READERS.
AS in humane bodies, some parts are vital, others only integrall, some
necessary to the being, others to the well being, integrity, and beauty of
them: So it is in Theological Doctrines, some are more fundamental, and
immediately necessary to life and Godliness; others such as do greatly
accomplish and adorn Christians that have attained unto them, and are of
singular use for the edification of the Church, though not so primarily
belonging to the very vitals and essentials of Faith and Holiness.

Now because multitudes of ordinary Christians, either through the exigence of
their particular callings, or through the narrowness of their capacities, want
both time and strength to procure such plentiful measures of knowledge, as many
others, whose leisure is greater, and intellectuals stronger, have attained
unto: Therefore the Lord has from time to time stirred up zealous and faithful
men to commit unto writing those primary and most necessary Doctrines of Faith
and Duty which are common to great and small, and of principal use for ordering
their conversations aright in every relation wherein they stand toward God and
men.

Of this sort were Basil's Moralia and Regulae, Ambrose his Book De officiis,
Augustin's Enchiridion, Bernards Tractats De interiore domo, De Conscientia, De
ordine vitae, De Dilectione Dei, De modo been vivendi, and other the like
writings of the Ancients.

Amongst our selves in this age, several Books of this nature have been
written. Mr. Rogers his seven Treatises, Mr. Paul Baine his Directions for a
godly life, Mr. John Downham his Guide to Godliness and Christian warfare. The
Practice of Piety, Mr. Scuddars Christians daily walk, Mr. Boltons Directions
for comfortable walking with God, with diverse others of the same kind. Of which
some possibly may be of too great a price for every poor man to procure, and
too large for him to read quickly over. However, the same materials managed by
the different gifts of several ^nstruments, and pressed by new Arguments and
Motives, do bring to the Conscience a fuller evidence, and awaken the heart
unto a more serious consideration of the importance of them.

Amongst Books of this Nature, I commend unto the Christian Reader this Manual,
which I have read with great satisfaction and delight. It has many things to
render it acceptable to such judicious Palats as are best pleased with savoury
and serious things. 1. The variety and necessity of the matters therein
handled: Such as are self-knowledge and examination: Repentance and
self-judging, living by Faith; watchfulness over our hearts, words, and ways:
communion with God in spiritual duties; faithfulness in our particular
callings and relations, etc. 2. The pertinency of the Scriptures produced for
confirmation of the Truths which they refer unto. 3. The graciousnesse,
savourinesse, and wholsomnesse of the Language, becoming the weight and
holiness of the matter. 4. The strength of the Arguments whereby the duties
are pressed.

5. The Brevity of the whole, which renders it the fitter for memory,
meditation, and practice: In all which the Reverend Author has showed himself
a workman, which needs not to be ashamed.

Some Learned men have chosen some one or other Book, which they have resolved
to read over once every year. I could wish that serious Christians would single
out some one or other choice Book, fraught with variety of most wholesome and
necessary Doctrine to read frequently over, for daily quickening and preserving
their hearts in an healthy and spiritual frame. Of which sort I should
commend, 1. Summaries and Compendiums of sound Doctrine, such as Mr. Crooks
guide to true blessedness, and others of that sort. 2. Summaries of the most
weighty and necessary duties: A mixture of both which we have in this little
Book. By this means, with Gods blessing, the hearts of men might be established
in the love and obedience of the Truth, and be preserved from being tossed
about with every wind of Doctrine, the great sin and shame of these days.

Your Servant in the furtherance of the common salvation, ED. REYNOLDS.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART of this TREATISE.
CHap. 1. Concerning God. Of the Nature of God. Page 1. Of the Trinity. Page 4
Of the Attributes of God. Page 9 Of the Works of God. Page 16 Of Creation.
ibid. Of good Angels. Page 16 and 19 Of bad Angels. Page 16 and 22 Of
Providence. Page 26
Chap. 2. Concerning Man. Of the happy condition in which he was made. Page 30
Of his Fall. Page 33 Of the blessed way of his recovery by Christ. Page 41
Chap. 3. Concerning the Mediator between God and man: Wherein are handled
these seven things, 1. What manner of Person he was. Page 44 God. ibid. Man
Page 46
2. How he became man. Page 48 3. How he lived. Page 51 4. How he died. Page 54
5. What became of him after his death. Page 62 He was buried. Page 63 Rose
again, Page 64 Ascended into Heaven, Page 68 Sits at Gods right hand, Page 70
Is Head of the Church, Page 73 Shall judge the quick and dead. Page 74
6. What was the end and intent of his coming into the world. Page 80 To
procure pardon and reconciliation for lost sinners, Page 81 And to sanctify
their natures. Page 84 To this end he commanded the Gospel should be preached.
Page 87 Instituted Baptism and the Lords Supper. Page 92
7. What they are effectually called unto, and through the assistance of the
Spirit enabled to perform, who shall receive remission of sins by Christ, Page
95 Scriptures concerning,
Effectual Calling. Page 96 Believing the Gospel. Page 100 Repentance. Page 102
Faith in Christ. Page 106 Holiness and since^e obedience. Page 111
Perseverance. Page 117 The Members of Christ. Page 119 The new Covenant. Page
121 The state of the soul after death, the resurrection of the body, the day of
judgment, and life everlasting, either in joy or misery, Page 124


The Contents of the Second Part.
Chap. 1. Of Consideration. Page 131. Chap. 2. Of Repentance. Page 135 Chap. 3.
Of Faith in Christ. Page 145 Chap. 4. Of the new nature and reformed life. Page
151 Chap. 5. Of daily communion with God. 1. Of awaking with God in the
morning. Page 160 2. Of secret prayer and thanksgiving. Page 164 3. Of reading
the holy Scriptures. Page 182 4. Of living continually as in the view of God.
Page 190 5. Of living by Faith, in ten particulars. Page 196 Directions
concerning it.
6. Of diligent observing the Providence of God. Page 219 7. Of daily
watchfulness. Page 229 Of Watching,
1. Over our Thoughts. Page 231 Remedies against sinful thoughts. ibid.
2. Over our Affections. Page 237 Directions how to govern them aright. Page 238
3. Over our Words. Page 244 The manifold sins of the tongue. Page 246
Directions for the governing of the tongue. Page 247
4. Over our Actions. Page 260 Rules for the right ordering of them. Page 263

Of Watching,
1. Against the sins we are most inclined to by temper, and natural
constitution. Page 267 2. Against the sins our particular callings and
conditions of life most expose us to. Page 268 3. Against the sins of the times
and places wherein we live ibid. 4. Against temptations tending to sin. Page
269 5. Against dishonouring God in the use of lawful things. Page 270 6.
Against Error. Page 271 Preservatives against Error. Page 272 Of watching for
opportunities of doing and receiving good. Page 288 Motives to watchfulness.
ibid. Of Perseverance. Page 289 Of mental ejaculatory prayer. Page 293 Of
reviewing at night and reflecting upon all the actions of the day past. Page 296



Chap. 6. Of improving the opportunities and means of Grace. Page 301 Of the
observation of the Lords day. ibid. Of hearing the Word. How we are to prepare
our selves before we hear, how to behave our selves in time of hearing, what to
do after we have heard. Page 319 Of singing Psalms. Page 340 Of religious
Conference. Page 349 Of Meditation. Page 354
Chap. 7. Of frequenting good company. Page 358 Chap. 8. Of diligence, and
conscientiousnesse in our particular Callings. Page 365 Chap. 9. Concerning
just dealing in trafick, trading, and commerce. Page 372 Directions to buyers,
Page 373 To Sellers. Page 375 Motives to righteous dealing. Page 377 Of
restitution. Page 378
Chap. 10. Of the duties of Governors of Families. Page 382 Of Family Prayer.
Page 387
Chap. 11. Of the duties of Husband and Wife Page 397 Chap. 12. Of the duties
of Masters nnd Servants. Page 415 Chap. 13. Of the duties of Parents and
Children. Page 428 Of Infant Baptism. ibid.
Chap. 14. Of the duties of such as are in Office, and the duties of
Inferiors. Page 448 Chap. 15. Of the duties of people toward their Pastors
and Ministers. Page 452 Chap. 16. Of Christian and Brotherly reproof. Page 546
Chap. 17. Of the duties of the Rich and poor. Of those that concern the rich.
Page 483 Of Recreations. Page 490 Of Charity and relieving the poor. Page 492
Directions concerning the exercise of charity. Page 494
Of the duties that concern the poor. Page 498 Their Temptations and dangers.
Page 504

Chap. 18. Of the duties of Young and Old. Of those that concern the young.
Page 509 The danger of delays. Page 510 The advantages of turning to God
betimes. Page 513 Objections against it answered. Page 515 Directions to the
younger sort. Page 519
Of the duties of the Ancient. ibid. Serious considerations for the Ancient.
Page 524 The danger of ill-grounded hopes of Heaven. Page 528 What those
deceiving and sandy foundations are, whereon many ancient people build their
hopes of Heaven. Page 529 Directions to the Ancient. Page 534

Chap. 19. Directions to the healthy and to the sick. The duties of those that
are in health. Page 539 Directions and counsel to the sick. Page 541 How to
examine themselves. Page 543
Of the duties commanded and sins forbidden in the Law or ten Commandments.
Page 545 Of the sins against the Gospel. Page 556 Further directions to the
Sick. Page 564 The Lessons to be learned in the School of affliction. Page 567
What things are required of them whom God brings out of trouble and affliction.
Page 570

Chap. 20. Of the four last things, Death, Judgment, Hell, Heaven. Page 577 1.
Of Death. ib. Directions how to prepare for death. ib. Reasons why those that
are Godly should not overmuch fear death. Page 582
2. Of the last Judgment. Page 587 Arguments to prove there will be a day of
judgment. Page 588 Who will be the Judge. Page 591 The nature and manner of
this judgment. Page 594 A threefold Book that will then be opened. Page 598 The
consequents of this judgment. Page 599
3. Of Hell. Page 602 Of the duration of the persons of the damned. ib. Of the
duration of their pains. Page 606 Of the dreadfulnesse of their pains and
torments. Page 608
Of Heaven, Page 617 Of the resurrection of the body. Page 622 Of the Glory of
the body. Page 625 Of the blessedness of the soul. Page 628


ERRATA.
THe Reader is desired to Correct these Errata's with his pen, that the sense
be not disturbed.

Page 17. line 15. of him is wanting after invisible things. p. 20. the last
Scripture viz. Gen 48.16. should have been left out, as being spoken not of a
created Angel, but the Angel of the Covenant. p. 43. l. 10. dele of God. p. 71.
l. 3. after offered, read one. l. 4. after sins, r. for ever. p. 101 l. 27.
after Christ, r. v. 8. By grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not, etc.
p. 129 l. 1. the 47 v. of Mar. 9. is left out. p. 132 l. 21. for not, r. ever.
p. 137. l 21. for calender, r. calendar. p. 141. l. 18. dele three. p. 144. l
27. for the, r. thee. p. 146. l. 45. for This is the soul, r. Thus is the soul.
p. 165. l. 11. dele therefore. p. 173. l. 8. dele Isa. 48. 17. p. 180. l. 15.
for my being, r. any being. p. 181. l. 4. for and four beasts r. and the four
beasts. p. 240. l. 13. for spirit, r. spirits. p. 246. l. 3. after unlawful,
r. and customary. l. 16. for scurrulous, r. scurrilous. p 253. l. 4. for
persons whom, r. persons to whom. p. 263. l. 26. for watch, r. walk. p 301. l
13. for meditations, r. meditation. p. 209. l. 10. for the first of the, r. the
first day of the. p. 346. l. 20. for psams, r. psalms. p. 360. l. 6. for to
kind, r. to its kind. p. 413. l. 29. for stretched, r. stretches. p. 439. l.
10. for that that they do it, r. for that they do (as one says.) p. 482. l. 1.
for bears, r. hears. p. 512. l. 19. for do really, r. do not really. p.
514. l. 15. for twelfth bour, r. eleventh hour. p. 525. l. 16. for page 510, r.
page 511. p. 528. l. 18. for pe^suming, r. presuming. p. 541. l. 9. for party,
r. parties. l. 13. for cna, r. can. p. 551. l. 1. for visiting, r. of visiting.
p 567 l. 8. for corectest, r. correctest. p. 569. l. 23. for Oh, r. O. p. 570.
l. 6. for our, r. your. p. 581. l. ult. for his, r. this. p. 589. l. 4. after
conscience, r. only. p. 609. l. 17. dele or. p. 627. l. 7. for or, r. and.

KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE: OR, A Discourse of things necessary to be Known,
Believed and Practiced in order to Salvation.
TWo things are mainly necessary to Salvation, Right Knowledge. Right Practice.


The chief things to be Known and Believed are, Concerning God. Man. The
Mediator between God and Man.


Concerning God we are to Know three things: 1. His Nature. 2. His Properties
or Attributes. 3. His Works.


Concerning Man three things: 1. The happy Condition in which he was made. 2.
His Fall. 3. The way of his Recovery by Christ.


Concerning the Mediator between God and Man, seven things: 1. What manner of
Person he was. 2. How he came into the World. 3. How he lived here. 4. How he
died. 5. What became of him after his Death. 6. What was the end and intent of
his coming into the World. 7. What they are effectually Called unto, and
through the assistance of the Spirit of God enabled to perform, who shall
receive Remission of sins by Christ.


CHAP. I. Concerning God.
COncerning God we are to know three things: 1. His Nature. 2. His Properties
or Attributes. 3. His Works.


First, His Nature.

That there is one Only true God, who is a Spirit infinitely Glorious; and
being One in Nature, is yet Three in Persons or Subsistences; The Father, The
Son, and The Holy Ghost. These are Three and One after a wonderful and
mysterious manner. The Father God, The Son God, And the Holy Ghost God, and yet
not three Gods, but one God.

Secondly, His Properties or Attributes.

God is Eternal, or without any Beginning or End. Omnipotent, or Almighty.
Omnipresent, or every where present. Omniscient, or All-knowing.


Infinitely Wise. Holy. Just. Merciful.


Thirdly, His Works which are principally two.

1. Creation. 2. Providence.
I. Creation: Concerning which we must know,

1. That God made the world, and all the Creatures therein, (both visible, and
invisible,) by his Almighty power, and Created them all very good.

2. The chief of his Creatures are Angels, Men.


3. All the Angels were at first made holy and happy Spirits: Some continued in
their obedience to God, and are still Angels of Light; Others fell from God
through Pride, or some other sin, and are become Devils of Darkness.

Concerning the Creation of Man, see farther in the next Chapter.

II. Providence.

As God Created the World, and all the Creatures therein by his Almighty Power,
So he upholds, directs, disposes, and governs them all by his Providence.
Nothing so Casual, but he disposes of it; No Agent so free, as to be exempted
from his Control; No affliction or Evil of Punishment, but he has a hand in
it; But as for sin, he neither is, nor possibly can be the Author, or Approver
of it.

CHAP. II. Concerning Man.
COncerning Man we are to know and understand these three things.

1. The happy Condition in which he was made. 2. His Fall. 3. The way of his
Recovery by Christ.
1. The Holy and happy estate in which God created man at first, Namely, after
his own Image, in Knowledge, Holiness, and Righteousness, with Dominion over
the Creatures here below, writing his Law on man's heart, requiring perfect
obedience from him, and giving him power to perform it, promising the
continuance of him in that happy estate if he obeyed, and threatening him with
death if he disobeyed; which is called the Covenant of works.

2. The miserable Condition into which man threw himself by sin: Our first
Parents (by the temptation of Satan) disobeyed God, broke his righteous Law
and Commandment; and thereby cast themselves out of the Favor of God, became
the Slaves of Satan, and liable to the curse of the Law, and brought a great
depravation of soul and body upon themselves; And such as our first Parents
were, such must their posterity needs be: For who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean, says Job, Chap. 14.4.

They having lost the Image of God themselves, the holiness and happiness in
which they were made, could not conveigh it to their posterity. So that the
nature of man is now become corrupt, prone to evil, backward to good. And this
miserable condition is derived to us from Adam by our immediate Parents; and as
men come to be born in several Ages, and generations, so they actually
participate of the sap that comes from the first root; we being therefore all
of us in so bad a Condition by nature, and by custom and practice in sin
having made our selves much worse, and more abominable in the sight of God,
more guilty and liable to his wrath; we are to know and consider that this
woeful state of sin and misery is by no means to be rested in; But seeing we are
fallen into so lamentable a condition, we must speedily endeavor to get out of
it. And therefore let us remember that without Conversion there is no hope of
Salvation; Except a man be born again, and made a new Creature, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God.

3. The blessed way found out and appointed by God for man's Recovery out of
this miserable state, which is by the undertaking and mediation of his only
Son.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Mediator between God and Man.
COncerning the Mediator between God and man, Christ Jesus; We must know and
understand these seven things.

1. What manner of person he was; He was God and Man in the same person. The
Eternal Son of God, The second Person in the Trinity took to himself our humane
Nature (a humane soul and body) and united it after a wonderful manner to his
Godhead; And so God and Man became one person.

2. How he became man; He was born (about sixteen hundred and odd years ago) of
the Virgin Mary, who was of the seed of Abraham, and of the Family of David, as
was foretold in the Scriptures, being Conceived in her by the Almighty power of
the Holy Ghost, without the help of man, and without sin; and was Called Jesus
Christ.

3. How he Lived; He Lived about three and thirty years here upon Earth, a most
holy, innocent, sinless Life, performing perfect obedience to the Law of God.
And as the great Prophet of God (who was promised, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts 3, 22.) he
declared his Fathers will in his heavenly discourses, and Sermons, and wrought
many miracles to confirm his doctrine, and to prove himself the true Messiah,
and the Eternal Son of God.

4. How he Died; Being betrayed by Judas, forsaken by his Disciples, scorned
and rejected by the World, through the malicious prosecution of the Jews, and
unjust sentence of Pilat, he was Condemned to be Crucified; and being tormented
by his persecutors, and having conflicted with the Terrors of Death, and felt
and born Gods wrath; He endured the painful, shameful, and cursed death of the
Cross; there as a Priest offering up himself a Sacrifice to God, and a Ransom
and Propitiation for our sins.

5. What became of him after his Death; He being buried, rose again the third
day, and after Forty days continuance on the earth (in which time he
frequently appeared to his Disciples, and others, teaching the things
appertaining to the Kingdom of God,) he ascended into Heaven, and is now in
Glory with the Father, where he intercedes for, and presents the Merits of his
Death and Sufferings, in the behalf of all them that unfeignedly repent of
their sins, and do truly believe on him. And being made King and Head of his
Church, and Lord of Angels and Men, he shall come from Heaven again in great
Glory, to judge the quick and the dead at the Last day.

6. What was the End and Intent of Christ's Coming into the world. The chief End
and Intent of his Coming into the world was to save Lost and undone sinners, to
procure their pardon and reconciliation with God by his Merits; and to
Sanctify their Natures by his Holy Spirit; and to bring them to everlasting
Life. And to this end he appointed his Ministers to preach the Gospel unto the
world, and instituted the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, to
signify and keep in remembrance the great and inestimable benefits of his
Death and Sufferings.

7. What they are effectually Called unto, and through the assistance of the
Spirit of God enabled to perform, that shall receive Remission of sins by
Christ: They that shall be made partakers of that great and inestimable
benefit, the Remission of all their sins by Christ, are effectually called and
enabled by the assistance of his Grace, unfeignedly to believe the Gospel,
heartily to repent of all their sins, seriously to give up their souls unto
him, resting and relying on the Redemption and Ransom of his Blood for their
Pardon and Reconciliation with God. And taking him for their only Lord and
Savior, and yielding themselves up in sincere obedience to him, and to be
guided and governed by his Grace and Holy Spirit; they do depend on him alone
for Justification, Sanctification, strength to persevere in the ways of
Holiness, and at last to be brought to eternal Life. And to as many as are
thus drawn by the Holy Ghost savingly to repent of their sins, and believe in
Christ, being truly united to him, and made branches in him the true Vine, and
members of his mystical body the true Church, (whereof himself is the Head,)
God has promised pardon and Remission of all their sins, to write his Law in
their Hearts, to subdue their Corruptions by his Grace, that sin shall not have
Dominion over them, to bestow on them all such outward blessings as he in his
infinite wisdom shall see good for them; And when they die, their souls shall
be received into everlasting bliss, and their bodies shall be raised again by
the power of Christ at the last day, and made partakers of the same Glory. And
this is Called the Covenant of Grace. But such as go on in their sins, refusing
to accept of Christ, for their Lord and Savior, Redeemer and Sanctifier, and
to give up themselves in sincere obedience to him; when they die, their Souls
shall be adjudged to everlasting punishment; and their bodies shall be raised
again at the last day, and made partakers with their Souls of Everlasting
Torments.

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE. Or the chief things to be Known and Believed in order to
Salvation.
They are reducible to these three Heads, Concerning God. Man. The Mediator
between God and Man.


CHAP. I. Concerning GOD.
COncerning God we are to Know three things:

First, His NATURE.
That there is One only true God, who is a Spirit, infinitely glorious, and
being one in nature is yet three in Persons or Subsistences, The Father, The
Son, and the Holy Ghost: These are three and one after a wonderful and
mysterious manner. The Father God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God. And yet
not three Gods, but One God.

Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart there is no God. Psalm. 10.4. The
wicked through the pride of his Countenance will not seek after God, God is not
in all his thoughts. 1 Cor. 15.34. -- Some have not the Knowledge of God, I
speak this to your shame. Heb. 11.6. But without Faith it is impossible to
please him. For he that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Isaiah 44.6. Thus says the Lord the
King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am
the last, and besides me there is no God. Isai. 45.5. I am the Lord, and there
is none else; There is no God besides me. 1 Cor. 8.4. As conc^rning therefore
the eating of those things that are offered in Sacrifice to Idols, we know,
that an Idol is nothing in the World, and that there is none other God but One.
V. 5. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven, or in Earth,
as there be Gods many, and Lords many. V. 6. But to us there is but one God,
the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom are all things, and we by him. Deuteronomy. 4.35. Unto thee it was showed that
thou might know that the Lord he is God. And there is none else besides him.
Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is One Lord. Jer. 10.10. But the
Lord is the true God. He is the living God, and an everlasting King. At his
wrath the Earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide his
Indignation. 1 These. 1.9. For they themselves show of us, what manner of
entering in we had unto you. And how ye turned to God, from Idols, to serve the
living and true God. Job 11.7. Can thou by searching find out God? can thou
find out the Almighty unto perfection? Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. Luke 24.39. -- A
Spirit has not flesh and bones -- Romans 1.23. And they changed the Glory of the
Incorruptible God, into an Image made like unto corruptible man, and to birds,
and to four-footed beasts, and Creeping things. V. 25. -- And worshipped and
served the Creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen.
Concerning the Trinity.
Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 1 John 5.7. There are
three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and
these three are One. Mat. 3.16. And Jesus when he was baptized went straightway
up out of the water, and Lo the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the
Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him. V. 17. And Lo, a
voice from Heaven saying, this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. 2
Cor. 13.14. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all Amen. Concerning God the Father.
Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. Ephesians
3.14. For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Concerning God the Son.
John 1.14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
Glory, the Glory as of the Only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and
Truth. V. 18. No man has seen God at any time. The Only begotten Son which is
in the bosom of the Father he has declared him. Heb. 1.2. He has in these
last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things,
by whom also he made the world. V. 3. Who being the brightness of his Glory,
and the express Image of his person; and upholding all things by the word of
his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right
hand of the Majesty on high. V. 8. But unto the Son he says, thy Throne O
God is for ever and ever, a Scepter of righteousness is the Scepter of thy
Kingdom. John 10.30. I and my Father are One. 1 John 2.22. Who is a Liar, but
he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? He is Antichrist that denies the
Father and the Son. V. 23. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the
Father, but he that acknowledges the Son has the Father also. Romans 9.5. Whose
are the Fathers, And of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over
all, God blessed for ever, Amen. Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God. Acts 7.59. And they stoned Stephen
calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. V. 60. And he
kneeled down; and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin to their
Charge. -- 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our
Father, which has loved us, and has given us everlasting Consolation, and
good hope through Grace; V. 17. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every
good word and work. Concerning God the Holy Ghost.
Acts 5.3. But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to
the Holy Ghost? V. 4. Thou have not lied unto men but unto God. John 14.16. I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter that he may abide
with you for ever. V. 26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. John 15.26. But
when the Comforter is come whom I will send to you from the Father, even the
Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me. Gal.
4.6. And because ye are sons God has sent forth the Spirit of his son into
your hearts, crying Abba, Father. Phil. 1.19. For I know that this shall turn
to my salvation, through your prayer and the supply of the spirit of Jesus
Christ. Romans 8.9. But ye are not in the flesh but in the spirit, if so be that
the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his. Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye
are sealed to the day of Redemption. 1 Cor. 2.13. Which things also we speak,
not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual Acts 7.51. Ye stiff-necked,
and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost. As
your Fathers did so do ye. 2 Pet. 1.21. For the Prophecy came not in old time
by the will of Man; but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost. Rom 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. V. 27 And he that
searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes
intercession for the Saints according, to the will of God. Acts 13.2. As they
ministered to the Lord and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and
Saul for the work whereunto I have Called them. Titus 3.5. Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us by
the washing of Regeneration, and Renewing of the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 3.6. Know
ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in
you? 1 Cor. 6.19. What, know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? Romans
5.5. And hope makes not ashamed, because the Love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. Mat. 12.31. Wherefore I say
unto you all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. V. 32. And
whosoever speaks a word against the son of man it shall be forgiven him, but
whosoever speaks a word against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come. Secondly, His PROPERTIES
or ATTRIBUTES.
God is Eternal, or without any Beginning or End. Omnipotent, or Almighty.
Omnipresent, or every where present. Omniscient, or All-knowing.


Infinitely Wise. Holy. Just. Merciful.


Eternal.
Psalm. 90.2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed
the earth or the world, even from everlasting, to everlasting thou art God.
Deuteronomy. 33.27. The Eternal God is my refuge, and underneath are the everlasting
arms. Omnipotent.
Genesis 17.1. And when Abram was Ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared to
Abram and said unto him, I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou
perfect. Isa. 40.17. All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are
counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha, and Omega;
the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is and which was, and which
is to come, the Almighty. Rev. 19.6. And I heard, as it were the voice of a
great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty
thunderings, saying, Allelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns.
Omnipresent.
1 Kings 8.27. But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold the Heaven, and
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, how much less this house that I have
builded? Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see
him says the Lord? do not I fill Heaven, and Earth, says the Lord? Psalm.
139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
presence? V. 8. If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there, If I make my bed in
Hell, behold thou art there. V. 11. If I say surely the darkness shall cover
me, even the night shall be Light about me. V. 12. Yea, the darkness hides
not from thee, but the night shines as the day: the darkness and the light are
both alike to thee. Omniscient.
1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches
all hearts; and understands all the Imaginations of the thoughts, if thou
seek him he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee
off for ever. 1 King. 8.39. Then hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place, and
forgive; and do, and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart thou
know, for thou, even thou know the hearts of all the children of men.
Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but
all things are naked and open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do. Psalm.
139.2. Thou know my down-sitting and my up-rising, thou understandest my
thoughts afar off. V. 3. Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art
acquainted with all my ways. V. 4. For there is not a word in my tongue, but
Lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. Acts 15.18. Known unto God are all his
works from the beginning of the world. Infinitely Wise.
1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the Only wise
God, be Honor, and Glory, for ever and ever, Amen. Romans 11.33. O the depth of
the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God; How unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out? Romans 16 27. To God Only wise be
glory through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen. Infinitely Holy.
Isa. 6.3. And one cried unto another, and said, holy, holy, holy, is the Lord
of Hosts; the whole earth is full of his Glory. Rev. 4.8. And the four beasts
had each of them six wings about him, and they were full of eyes within, and
they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which
was, and is, and is to come. Isa. 57.15. For thus says the high, and lofty
One, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. 1 Pet.
1.16. Because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy. Just.
Job 34.10. Therefore hearken unto me ye men of understanding, far be it from
God that he should do wickedness, and from the Almighty that he should commit
iniquity. V. 11. For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause
every man to find according to his ways. V. 12. Yea, surely God will not do
wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert judgment. Jer. 9.23. Thus says the
Lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man
glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches. V. 24. But let
him that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I
am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness. Judgment, and Righteousness in
the earth; for in these things I delight says the Lord. Deuteronomy. 32.4. He is the
Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are Judgment, a God of truth and
without iniquity; just and right is he. Genesis 18.25. -- Shall not the judge of
all the earth do right? Merciful.
Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good and do good, teach me thy Statutes. Psalm.
147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in
his mercy. Nehem. 9.17. And refused to obey, neither were mindful of thy
wonders, that thou did among them, but hardened their necks, and in their
rebellion appointed a Captain to return to their bondage; but thou art a God
ready to pardon, gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness,
and forsookest them not. V. 31. Nevertheless; for thy great mercies sake thou
did not utterly consume them, nor forsake them, for thou art a gracious and a
merciful God. Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger and
plenteous in mercy. Jer. 3.12. Go and proclaim these words toward the North,
and say return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause
mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful says the Lord, and I will not
keep anger for ever. Exodus 34.6. And the Lord passed by before him; and
proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth. V. 7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and that will by no means clear the
guilty; visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children; and upon the
Childrens children unto the third and fourth generation. Psalm. 145.7. They
shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness and shall sing of thy
righteousness. 1 John 4.8. He that loves not knows not God, for God is
love, V. 16. And we have known and believed the love that God has to us; God
is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. Micah
7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgressions of the remnant of his heritage, he retains not his anger for
ever because he delights in mercy. Isa. 28.21. For the Lord shall rise up as
in Mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do
his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his act, his strange act. 2 Cor.
1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all Comforts. Isa. 30.18. And therefore will the Lord
wait that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that
he may have mercy upon you, for the Lord is a God of judgment, blessed are all
they that wait for him. Psa. 78.38. But he being full of compassion forgave
their iniquity, and destroyed them not, yea, many a time turned he his anger
away, and did not stir up all his wrath. Luke 6.36. Be ye therefore merciful,
for your heavenly Father is merciful. Thirdly, His WORKS, which are principally
two.

1. Creation. 2. Providence.
I. Creation: Concerning which we must know,

1. That God made the world, and all the Creatures therein, (both visible, and
invisible,) by his Almighty power, and Created them all very good.

2. The chief of his Creatures are Angels, Men.


3. All the Angels were at first made holy and happy Spirits: Some continued in
their obedience to God, and are still Angels of Light; Others fell from God
through Pride, or some other sin, and are become Devils of Darkness.

Concerning the Creation of Man, see farther in the next Chapter.

Creation.
Col. 1.^6. For by him were all things Created that are in Heaven, and that are
in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions or
Principalities, or Powers, all things are Created by him, and for him. V. 17.
And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. Nehem. 9.6. Thou
even thou art Lord alone, thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, with
all their Host; the earth and all things that are therein; the Seas, and all
that is therein, and thou preservest them all, and the Host of Heaven
worshippeth thee. Romans 1.20. For the invisible things from the Creation of the
world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
Eternal power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse. Rev. 15.3. And they
sing the song of Moses the servant of god, and the song of the Lamb, saying,
great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
ways, thou King of Saints. Heb. 3.4. For every house is built by some man, but
he that built all things is God. Psalm. 145.10. All thy works shall praise thee,
O God, and thy Saints shall bless thee. Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy (O Lord) to
receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for thou have Created all things, and for
thy pleasure they are and were Created. Heb. 11.3. Through Faith we understand,
that the worlds were framed by the Word of God, so that things which are seen
were not made of things which do appear. Genesis 1.31. And God saw every thing
that he had made, and behold it was very good, and the evening and the morning
were the sixth day. Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom
have thou made them all; the earth is full of thy riches. Psalm. 19.1. The
Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork. Job
26.13. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens; his hand has formed the
crooked Serpent. Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of
the Almighty has given me life. Jer. 10.12. He has made the earth by his
power, he has established the world by his wisdom, and has stretched out the
Heavens by his discretion. Acts 17.24. God that made the world, and all things
therein, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples
made with hands. Good Angels.
Job 38.7. When the morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God
shouted for joy. Heb. 1.7. And of the Angels he says, who makes his Angels
Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire. Luke 2.13. And suddenly there was
with the Angel a multitude of the Heavenly Host, praising God, and saying V.
14. Glory be to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward Men.
V. 15. And it came to pass as the Angels were gone away from them into heaven,
the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem; and see
this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. Acts
10.22. And they said, Cornelius the Centurion, a just man, and one that fears
God, and of good report among all the Nation of the Jews, was warned from God
by an holy Angel, to send for thee into his house, and to hear words of thee.
Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that do
his Commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word. 1 Timothy 5.21. I Charge
thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou
observe these things, without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality. Luke 15.7. I say unto you that likewise joy shall be in Heaven,
over one sinner that repents, more, than over ninety and nine just persons,
which need no repentance. Dan. 7.10. A fiery stream issued, and came forth from
before him: thousands of thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times
ten thousand stood before him, the judgment was set, and the books were opened.
Psalm. 34.7 The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them. Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation? Psalm. 91.11. For he shall
give his Angels Charge over thee, te keep thee in all thy ways. V. 12. They
shall bear thee up in their hands, least thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Mat. 18.10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say
unto you that in Heaven, their Angels do always behold the face of my Father
which is in Heaven. Genesis 48.16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil
bless the Lads, and let my name be named on them, and the name of my Fathers
Abraham, and Isaac, and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the
earth. Acts 12.15. And they said unto her thou art mad, but she constantly
affirmed that it was even so, then said they it is his Angel. Psalm. 148.2.
Praise ye him all his Angels, praise ye him all his Hosts. 1 Cor. 11.10. For
this cause ought the woman to have power on her head, because of the Angels.
Mat. 4.11. Then the Devil leaves him, and behold Angels came and ministered
unto him. Luke 22.43. And there appeared an Angel from Heaven strengthening him.
Luke 16 22. And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died and was buried. Mat. 28.2.
And behold there was a great earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended
from Heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon
it. V. 3. His countenance was like Lightning, and his raiment white as snow. V.
4. And for fear of him, the Keepers did shake, and became as dead men. Mat.
24.31. And he shall send his Angels, with a great sound of a trumpet, and they
shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to
the other. Luke 20.35. But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that
world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in
marriage: V. 36. Neither can they die any more, for they are equal unto the
Angels, and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.
Matthew. 22.30. For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, but are as the Angels of God in heaven. Devils.
2 Pet. 2.4. For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down
to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved unto
judgment. Jude v. 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but
left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. Matthew. 25.41. Then shall he say
also to them on his left hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels. 1 Timothy 3.6. Not a novice, lest being
lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil. 2 Timothy 2.26.
And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are
taken captive by him at his will. Ephesians 6.12. For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of
the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. V.
14. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the
breast plate of righteousness. John 8.44. Ye are of your father the devil, and
the lusts of your father ye will do; He was a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth; because there is no truth in him, when he speaks a
lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a Liar, and the Father of it. 2 Cor.
4.4. In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them, which
believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image
of God should shine unto them. Ephesians. 2.2. Wherein, in time past ye walked,
according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of
the Air, the Spirit that now works in the Children of disobedience. Mat.
12.24. But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, this fellow does not cast
out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of the devils. 1 John 3.8. He that
commits sin is of the devil, for the devil sins from the beginning, for
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the devil. V. 10. In this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of
the devil, whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that
loves not his brother. Rev. 12.9. And the great Dragon was cast out, that old
Serpent Called the Devil, and Satan, which deceives the whole world, he was
cast out into the Earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. 2 Cor. 11.3.
But I fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ. Job 1.7. And the Lord said unto Satan, whence come thou? then Satan
answered the Lord, and said, from going to and fro in the Earth, and from
walking up and down in it. Luke 22.31. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon; behold
Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat. 1 Pet. 5.8. Be
sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion walks
about, seeking whom he may devour. Mat. 8.29. And behold they cried out,
saying; what have we to do with thee Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come
hither to torment us before the time. V. 31. So the devils besought him,
saying, if thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine. Mat.
4 1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of
the devil. 2 Cor. 6.15. And what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part
has he that believes with an Infidel? Zach. 3.1. And he showed me Josuah the
High Priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his
right hand to resist him. V. 2. And the Lord said unto Satan, the Lord rebuke
thee O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee, is not
this a brand plucked out of the fire? James 2.19. Thou beleevest that there is
One God, thou do well, the devils also believe and tremble. Luke 4.33. And in
the Synagogue there was a man which had a Spirit of an unclean devil, and cried
out with a loud voice, V. 34. Saying, Let us alone, what have we to do with
thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee, who
thou art, the holy One of God. Acts 19.15. And the evil Spirit answered and
said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? Ephesians. 4.26. Be ye angry and
sin not, let not the Sun go down upon your wrath; V. 27. Neither give place to
the devil. Acts 5.3. And Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart
to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land? Psalm.
78.49. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation
and trouble, by sending evil Angels among them. Acts 26.18. To Open their eyes,
and to turn them from darkness unto Light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith that is in me. The next of Gods works to be
considered and understood by us is

II. His Providence.

As God Created the World, and all the Creatures therein by his Almighty Power,
So he upholds, directs, disposes, and governs them all by his Providence.
Nothing so Casual, but he disposes of it; No Agent so free, as to be exempted
from his Control; No affliction or Evil of Punishment, but he has a hand in
it; But as for sin, he neither is, nor possibly can be the Author, or Approver
of it.

Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of
his Person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high.
Col. 1.17. And he is before all things, and by him all things Consist. Psalm.
36.6. Thy Righteousness is like the great Mountains, thy judgments are a great
deep, O Lord thou preservest man and beast. Mat. 10.29. Are not two Sparrows
sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your
Father? V. 30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. V. 31. Fear ye
not therefore ye are of more value than many Sparrows. Dan. 4.34. And at the
end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes unto Heaven, and mine
understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most High, and I praised, and
honored him that lives for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion,
and his Kingdom is from generation to generation. V. 35. And all the
Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing, and he does according to his
will in the army of Heaven, and among the inhabitants of the Earth, and none
can stay his hand, or say unto him what do thou? Prove. 16.33. The Lot is cast
into the Lap, but the whole disposing thereof is from the Lord. Psalm. 103.19.
The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over
all. Acts 17.25. Neither is worshipped with men's hands as though he needed any
thing, seeing he gives to all life, and breath, and all things. V. 26. And
has made of one blood, all nations of men to dwell on all the face of the
earth; and has determined the times before appointed and the bounds of their
habitation. V. 28. For in him we live, and move, and have our being, as certain
also of your own Poets have said, for we are also his offspring. Jer. 10.23. O
Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps. Lam. 3.37. Who is he that says and it comes to
pass when the Lord commands it not? Isa. 45.6. That they may know from the
rising of the Sun, and from the West; that there is none besides me, I am the
Lord, and there is none else. V. 7. I form the Light and create darkness; I
make peace, and create evil, I the Lord do all these things. Amos 3.6. Shall a
trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? shall there be evil
in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord
pleased, that did he, in Heaven and in Earth, in the Seas, and in all deep
places. Prove. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil
and the good. Jer. 31.35. Thus says the Lord, which gives the Sun for a Light
by day, and the Ordinances of the Moon, and the Stars for a Light by night,
which divides the Sea, when the waves thereof roar, the Lord of Hosts is his
Name. Romans 11.33. O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of
God! how unsearcheable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? Ephesians.
1.11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined
according to the purpose of him, who works all things after the Counsel of
his own will. Prove. 21.1. The Kings heart is in the hands of the Lord, as the
Rivers of water, he turns it whithersoever he will. Ezra 7.27. Blessed be the
Lord God of our Fathers, which has put such a thing as this in the Kings
heart, to beautify the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem. Dan. 5.23. But
thou have lifted up thy self against the Lord of Heaven, and they have brought
the vessels of his house before thee, and thou, and thy Lords, thy wives, and
thy Concubines have drunk wine in them, and thou have praised the Gods of
silver, and Gold, of Brass, Iron, wood, and Stone, which see not, nor hear,
nor know, and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways,
have thou not glorified. 1 Samuel 3.18. And Samuel told him every whit, and hid
nothing from him, and he said it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.
Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. Job 1.21.
And said, naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return
thither, the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; Blessed be the name of
the Lord. Psalm. 97.1. The Lord reigns, Let the earth rejoice, Let the
multitude of Isles be glad ^hereof. (...) 1.13. Let no man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempts he any man. V. 14. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of
his own lust and enticed. CHAP. II. Concerning Man.
COncerning Man we are to know and understand these three things.

1. The happy Condition in which he was made. 2. His Fall. 3. The way of his
Recovery by Christ.
1. The Holy and happy estate in which God created man at first, Namely, after
his own Image, in Knowledge, Holiness, and Righteousness, with Dominion over
the Creatures here below, writing his Law on man's heart, requiring perfect
obedience from him, and giving him power to perform it, promising the
continuance of him in that happy estate if he obeyed, and threatening him with
death if he disobeyed; which is called the Covenant of works.

Psalm. 8.4. What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that
thou visitest him? V. 5. For thou have made him little lower than the Angels,
and have crowned him with Glory and Honor. V. 6. Thou made him to have
dominion over the works of thy hands, thou have put all things under his feet.
Genesis 1.26. And God said, let us make man in our Image, after our likeness; and
let them have dominion over the fish of the Sea; and over the foul of the
air, and over the Cattle, and over all the earth, and over every Creeping
thing that Creeps upon the Earth. V 27. So God Created man in his own Image,
in the Image of God Created he him, male and female Created he them. V. 28. And
God blessed them, and God said unto them, be fruitful and multiply, and
replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the Sea,
and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moves upon the
earth. Eccles. 7.29. Lo this only have I found, that God has made man upright,
but they have sought out many inventions. Col. 3.10. And have put on the new
man which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that Created him.
Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new man which after God is Created, in
righteousness and true holiness. Genesis 2.7. And the Lord God formed man of the
dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man
became a living soul. V. 16. And the Lord God Commanded the man, saying, of
every tree of the Garden thou may freely eat, V. 17. But of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it, for in the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Gal. 3.12. And the Law is not of faith,
but the man that does them shall live in them. Romans 10.5. For Moses describes
the righteousness which is of the Law; that the man which does those things
shall live by them. Romans 2.14. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law do
by nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law
unto themselves. V. 15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts,
their consciences also hearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another. 2. The miserable Condition into which
man threw himself by sin: Our first Parents (by the temptation of Satan)
disobeyed God, broke his righteous Law and Commandment; and thereby cast
themselves out of the Favor of God, became the Slaves of Satan, and liable to
the curse of the Law, and brought a great depravation of soul and body upon
themselves; And such as our first Parents were, such must their posterity needs
be: For who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, says Job, Chap. 14.4.

They having lost the Image of God themselves, the holiness and happiness in
which they were made, could not conveigh it to their posterity. So that the
nature of man is now become corrupt, prone to evil, backward to good. And this
miserable condition is derived to us from Adam by our immediate Parents; and as
men come to be born in several Ages, and generations, so they actually
participate of the sap that comes from the first root; we being therefore all
of us in so bad a Condition by nature, and by custom and practice in sin
having made our selves much worse, and more abominable in the sight of God,
more guilty and liable to his wrath; we are to know and consider that this
woeful state of sin and misery is by no means to be rested in; But seeing we are
fallen into so lamentable a condition, we must speedily endeavor to get out of
it. And therefore let us remember that without Conversion there is no hope of
Salvation; Except a man be born again, and made a new Creature, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3.

Genesis 3.6. And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it
was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took
of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her,
and he did eat. V. 7. And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew
that they were naked, and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves
aprons. V. 8. And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden in
the cool of the day. And Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of
the Lord God, amongst the trees of the Garden. V. 13. And the Lord God said
unto the woman, what is this that thou have done? And the woman said, the
Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. V. 16. Unto the woman he said, I will
greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy conception: in sorrow shall thou bring
forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over
thee. V. 17. And unto Adam he said, because thou have hearkened to the voice of
thy wife, and have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, thou
shall not eat of it; cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou
eat of it all the days of thy life. V. 18. Thorns also and thistles shall it
bring forth to thee, and thou shall eat the herb of the field. V. 19. In the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground, for
out of it wast thou taken, for dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return.
1 Timothy 2.13. For Adam was first formed then Eve. V. 14. And Adam was not
deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression. V. 15.
Notwithstanding she shall be saved in Childbearing, if she continue in faith,
and charity, and holiness, with sobriety. 2 Cor. 11.3. For I fear, least by
any means as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. Genesis 5.3. And Adam
lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a Son in his own likeness, after
his Image, and called his name Seth. Genesis 6.5. And God saw that the wickedness
of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of
his heart was only evil continually. Genesis 8.21. And the Lord smelled a sweet
savor, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any
more for man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth,
neither will I again smite any more every thing living as I have done. Romans
5.12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and
so death passed upon all men for that all have sinned. V. 18. Therefore, as by
the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of
life. V. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen
in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Job 15.14. What is man, that
he should be clean, and he which is borne of a woman, that he should be
righteous? V. 16. How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks
iniquity like water? Job 14.4. Who can bring a Clean thing out of an unclean?
Not one. Romans 3.9. What then are we better then they; no in no wise, for we
have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin. V. 10.
As it is written, there is none righteous, no not one. V. 23. For all have
sinned and come short of the Glory of God. 1 Cor. 15.22. For as in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. Acts 26.18. To open their eyes,
and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith that is in me. 2 Timothy 2.26. And that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken Captive by him at his
will. Romans 8.6. For to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually
minded is life and peace. V. 7. Because the carnal mind is enmity against God;
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. 1 Cor. 2.14.
But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Romans 7.14. For we know that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal,
sold under sin. V. 18. For I know that in me, that is in my flesh dwells no
good thing, for to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is
good I find not. V. 23. But I see another Law in my members, warring against
the Law of my mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of sin which is
in my members. V. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
body of this death. Jer. 17.9. The Heart is deceitful above all things, and
Desperately wicked, who can know it? Jam. 4.5. Do ye think that the Scripture
says in vain, The Spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy? Ephesians. 2.1. And
you has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins. V. 2. Wherein in
time past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the
Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience. V. 3. Among whom also we all had our Conversation in times past,
in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the
mind, and were by nature the Children of wrath, even as others. Gal. 3.10. For
as many as are of the works of the Law are under the curse; for it is written,
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them. Gal. 5.17. For the flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the
other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. Ephesians. 4.18. Having the
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them because of the blindness of their heart. 1 John 1.8.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. V. 10. If we say, that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word
is not in us. Jam. 3.2. For in many things, we offend all, if any man offend
not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body.
Eccles. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and
sins not. Hos 14.1. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have
fallen by thine iniquity. Ephesians. 4.22. That ye put off concerning the former
Conversation, the old man, which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts.
V. 23. And be renewed in the Spirit of your mind. V. 24. And that ye put on the
new man, which after God is Created in righteousness and true holiness. 1
Cor. 15.49. And as we have born the Image of the earthly, we shall also bear
the Image of the heavenly. John 3.3. Jesus answered, and said unto him; verily,
verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God. V. 4. Nicodemus says unto him, how can a man be born when he is old?
can he enter the second time into his mothers womb and be born? V. 5. Jesus
answered, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water, and
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. V. 6. That which is
born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. V.
7. Marvel not that I said unto thee, ye must be born again. Col. 1.21. And you
that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now
has he reconciled. 1 John 3.4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also
the Law, for sin is the transgression of the Law. Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Jam. 1.14. But every
man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own Lust, and enticed. V. 15. Then
when Lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished,
brings forth death. Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of
God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 7.5. For when we were
in the flesh, the motions of sins which were by the Law, did work in our
members to bring forth fruit unto death. Mat. 25.41. Then shall he say also to
them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his Angels. 2 These. 1.9. Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his power. 3. The blessed way found out and appointed by God for man's Recovery
out of this miserable state, which is by the undertaking and mediation of his
only Son.

Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help.
Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am; who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? V. 25. I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord; so then with the mind
I my self serve the Law of God, but with the flesh the Law of sin. Genesis 3.15.
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed, and her
seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. 1 Timothy 2.5. For
there is one God, and one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
John 3.14. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must
the son of man be lifted up. V. 15. That whosoever believes in him, should not
perish but have eternal life. V. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for
there is none other name under Heaven, given among men whereby we must be
saved. 1 John 4.14. And we have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the
Son to be the Savior of the world. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, for it is written, Cursed is every
one that hangs on a tree. John 6.35. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread
of life, he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me
shall never thirst. V. 51. I am the living bread, which came down from Heaven,
if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will
give is my flesh; which I will give for the life of the world. Col. 1.20. And
having made peace through the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all
things unto himself, by him I say, whether they be things in earth, or things
in Heaven. John 4.42. And said unto the woman, now we believe not because of
thy saying for we have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the
Christ the Savior of the world. Acts 13.38. Be it known unto you therefore men
and Brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins. John 1.29. The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, and says,
behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world. 1 John 5.11. And
this is the record that God has given to us, eternal life, and this life is in
his Son. V. 12. He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son of
God has not life. John 1.17. For the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and
Truth came by Jesus Christ. 1 John 2.2. And he is the propitiation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Heb
9.15. And for this cause he is the mediator of the new Testament, that by means
of death for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. CHAP. III. Concerning the Mediator between God and Man.
COncerning the Mediator between God and man, Christ Jesus; We must know and
understand these seven things.

1. What manner of person he was; He was God and Man in the same person. The
Eternal Son of God, The second Person in the Trinity took to himself our humane
Nature (a humane soul and body) and united it after a wonderful manner to his
Godhead; And so God and Man became one person.

1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of Godliness, God
was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into Glory. Romans 9 5.
Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came; who is
over all God blessed for ever, Amen. John 17.5. And now O Father, glorify thou
me with thine own self, with the Glory which I had with thee before the world
was. Christ God.
Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of
his Person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.
Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. 1 John
5.20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding: that we may know him that is true: and we are in him that is
true; even in his Son Jesus Christ: This is the true God, and eternal life.
John 10.30. I and my Father are one. John 8.58. Jesus said unto them, verily,
verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am. John 17.11. And now I am no
more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee, holy Father,
keep through thine own name those whom thou have given me, that they may be
one, as we are. John 17.12. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in
thy name: Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost but
the son of perdition that the Scripture might be fulfilled. John 1.1. In the
beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God. V. 2.
The same was in the beginning with God. V. 3. All things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made. 1 Cor. 15.47. The first man
is of the earth earthy, the second man is the Lord from Heaven. Col. 2.9. For
in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Christ Man.
Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise took part of the same: that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is the devil. V. 16. For verily
he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of
Abraham. V. 17. Wherefore in all things it behooved him to be made like unto
his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. Isa. 9.6.
For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the Government shall
be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called, Wonderful, Councellor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Phil. 2.6. Who being
in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God. V. 7. But
made himself of no reputation; and to k upon him the form of a servant; and was
made in the likeness of men. V. 8. And being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
1 John 4.3. And every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh is not of God, and this is that Spirit of Antichrist whereof ye have
heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the world. 2 John 7.
For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus is
come in the flesh this is a deceiver, and an Antichrist. John 5.27. And has
given him authority to execute judgment also; because he is the Son of man.
John 1.14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
Glory; the Glory as of the Only begotten of the Father full of Grace and
Truth. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man,
the man Christ Jesus. Mat. 16.13. When Jesus came into the Coasts of Cesarea
Philippi, he asked his Disciples, saying, whom do men say that I the Son of man
am? V. 14. And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias,
and others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets. V. 16. He says unto them, but
whom say ye that I am? V. 15. And Simon Peter answered, and said, thou art
Christ the Son of the living God, V. 17. And Jesus answered and said unto him,
Blessed art thou Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. 2. How he became man; He was born
(about sixteen hundred and odd years ago) of the Virgin Mary, who was of the
seed of Abraham, and of the Family of David, as was foretold in the Scriptures,
being Conceived in her by the Almighty power of the Holy Ghost, without the
help of man, and without sin; and was Called Jesus Christ.

Gal. 4.4. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made
of a woman, made under the Law. V. 5. To redeem them that were under the Law,
that we might receive the adoption of Sons. Mat. 1.18. Now the Birth of Jesus
Christ was on this wise, when as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before
they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. V. 20. But
while he thought on these things, behold, the Angel of the Lord appeared to him
in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, Fear not to take unto thee Mary
thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. V. 22. Now
all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by
the Prophet, saying. V. 23. Behold, a Virgin shall be with child, and shall
bring forth a Son, and they shall Call his Name Emmanuel, which being
interpreted is God with us. Luke 1.26. And in the sixth month the Angel
Gabriel was sent from God, unto a City of Galilee, named Nazareth. V. 27. To a
Virgin espoused to a man, whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, and the
Virgins name was Mary. V. 28. And the Angel came in unto her, and said, Hail,
thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou among
women. V. 30. And the Angel said unto her, fear not Mary, for thou have found
favor with God. V. 31. And behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring
forth a Son, and shall Call his name Jesus. V. 32. He shall be great, and be
Called the Son of the Highest; and the Lord shall give unto him the Throne of
his Father David. V. 33. And he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever,
and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. V. 34. Then said Mary unto the
Angel, how shall this be, seeing I know not a man? V. 35. And the Angel
answered and said unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing which
shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Luke 2.7. And she
brought forth her first born Son, and wrapped him in swaddling Clothes, and laid
him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the Inn. V. 8. And
there was in the same Country shepherds abiding in the field; keeping watch
over their flock by night. V. 9. And Lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon them;
and the Glory of the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid. V.
10. And the Angel said unto them, fear not; for behold, I bring you good
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. V. 11. For unto you is born
this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. V. 12. And
this shall be a sign unto you, ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling
Clothes, lying in a manger. V. 13. And suddenly there was with the Angel a
multitude of the heavenly Host, praising God, and saying V. 14. Glory to God in
the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men. V. 15. And it came to
pass, as the Angels, were gone away from them into Heaven, the shepherds said
one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing, which is
come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. V. 16. And they came
with have, and found Mary and Joseph; and the babe lying in a manger. Romans 1.3.
Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh. V. 4. And declared to be the Son of God with power
according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead. Col.
2.3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. John 3.34. For
he whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for God gives not the Spirit
by measure unto him. Heb. 1.9. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated
iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. Col. 1.19. For it pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell. Acts 10.38. How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with
the Holy Ghost, and with power, who went about doing good, and healing all that
were oppressed with the Devil, for God was with him. 3. How he Lived; He Lived
about three and thirty years here upon Earth, a most holy, innocent, sinless
Life, performing perfect obedience to the Law of God. And as the great Prophet
of God (who was promised, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts 3.22.) he declared his Fathers will
in his heavenly discourses, and Sermons, and wrought many miracles to confirm
his doctrine, and to prove himself the true Messiah, and the Eternal Son of God.

1 Pet. 2.22. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. Heb. 7.26.
For such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate
from sinners, and made higher than the Heavens. Heb. 4.15. For we have not an
High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but
was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Psalm. 40.7. Then
said I, Lo I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me. V. 8. I
delight to do thy will O my God, yea thy Law is within my heart. Gal. 4.4. But
when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman,
made under the Law. Mat. 5.17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or
the Prophets, I am not come to destroy but to fulfill. Romans 5.19. For as by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many
be made righteous. Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a
Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren like unto me, unto him ye
shall hearken. Acts 3.22. For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, a Prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me, him
shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. John 15.15.
Henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knows not what his Lord
does, but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my
Father I have made known unto you. John 2.11. This beginning of miracles did
Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his Glory, and his Disciples
believed on him. V. 23. Now when he was at Jerusalem at the Passover in the
Feast day; many believed in his name when they saw the miracles which he did.
John 6.14. Then those men when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said,
this is of a truth, that Prophet that should come into the world. John 10.41.
And many resorted unto him and said, John did no miracle, but all things that
John spoke of this man were true. John 15.24. If I had not done among them the
works which no other man did, they had not had sin, but now have they both seen
and hated both me and my Father. John 5.36. But I have greater witness than
that of John, for the works that the Father has given me to finish, the same
works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me. John 10.25.
Jesus answered them, I told you and ye believed not, the works that I do in my
Fathers name, they bear witness of me. V. 37. If I do not the works of my
Father, believe me not. V. 38. But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe
the works, that ye may know and believe that the Father is in me and I in him.
John 14.11. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, or else
believe me for the very works sake. Acts 2.22. Ye men of Israel, hear these
words, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God, among you by miracles and
wonders, and Signs which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye your selves
also know. 4. How he Died; Being betrayed by Judas, forsaken by his Disciples,
scorned and rejected by the World, through the malicious prosecution of the
Jews, and unjust sentence of Pilat, he was Condemned to be Crucified; and being
tormented by his persecutors, and having conflicted with the Terrors of Death,
and felt and born Gods wrath; He endured the painful, shameful, and cursed
death of the Cross; there as a Priest offering up himself a Sacrifice to God,
and a Ransom and Propitiation for our sins.

Matthew. 26.3. Then assemhled together the Chief Priests, and the Scribes, and
the Elders of the People, unto the Palace of the High Priest, who was Called
Caiaphas. V. 4. And Consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill
him. V. 47. And while he yet spoke, Lo Judas one of the twelve came, and with
him a great multitude, with swords, and staves, from the chief Priests, and
Elders of the people. V. 48. Now he that betrayed him, gave them a sign,
saying, whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he, hold him fast. V. 49. And
forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail Master, and kissed him. V. 50. And
Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? then came they and laid
hands on Jesus, and took him. V. 56. But all this was done that the Scriptures
of the Prophets might be fulfilled: then all the Disciples forsook him, and
fled. V. 57. And they that laid hold on Jesus, led him away to Caiphas the high
Priest, where the Scribes and the Elders were assembled. V 59. Now the Chief
Priests, and Elders, and all the Council sought false witness against Jesus,
to put him to death. V. 60. But found none, yea, though many false witnesses
came, yet found they none; at the last came two false witnesses, V. 61. And
said, this fellow said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it
in three days. Mark 14.61. But he held his peace and answered nothing; again
the High Priest asked him, and said unto him, art thou the Christ, the Son of
the blessed? V. 62. And Jesus said I am, and ye shall see the Son of Man
sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven. V. 63.
Then the High Priest rent his Clothes, and says, what need we any further
witnesses? V. 64. Ye have heard the blasphemy, what think ye? and they all
condemned him to be guilty of death. Mat. 26.67. Then did they spit in his
face, and buffeted him, and others smote him with the palms of their hands. V.
68. Saying, Prophecy unto us, thou Christ, who is he that smote thee. Luke
22.65. And many other things blasphemously spoke they against him. Mat. 27.1.
When the morning was come, all the chief Priests, and Elders of the people took
Council against Jesus, how to put him to death. V. 2. And when they had bound
him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilat the Governor. V.
17. Therefore when they were gathered, together, Pilate said unto them, whom
will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ? V.
20. But the chief Priests, and Elders persuaded the multitude, that they should
ask Barabbas and destroy Jesus, V. 22. Pilat says unto them, what shall I do
then with Jesus, which is called Christ? they all said unto him, let him be
crucified. V. 23. And the Governor said, why, what evil has he done? but they
cried out the more, saying, let him be crucified. Luke 23.23. And they were
instant with loud voices requiring, that he might be crucified, and the voices
of them, and of the chief Priests prevailed. Mat. 27.27. Then the Soldiers of
the Governor took Jesus into the common Hall, and gathered unto them the whole
band of Soldiers. V. 28. And they stripped him, and put on him a Scarlet robe.
V. 29. And when they had platted a Crown of Thorns, they put it upon his head,
and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him; and mocked
him, and said, Hail King of the Jews. V. 30. And they spit upon him, and took
the reed and smote him on the head. Mark. 15.15. And so Pilat willing to
content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he
had scourged him, to be crucified. Luke 23.24. And Pilat gave sentence that it
should be as they required. V. 25. And he released unto them him that for
sedition and murder was cast into Prison; whom they had desired, but he
delivered Jesus to their will. Mat. 27.31. And after they had mocked him, they
took the robe off from him, and led him away to crucify him. John 19.17. And
he, bearing his Cross, went forth into a place, called the place of a skull,
which is called in the Hebrew, Golgotha. Luke 23.33. And when they were come to
the place which is Called Calvary, there they crucified him, and the
malefactors, one on the right hand, and the other on the left. Mark 15.24 And
when they had crucified him, they parted his Garments, casting Lots upon them,
what every man should take. Mat. 27.46. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried
with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, Lamasabachthany, that is to say, My God,
My God, why have thou forsaken me? John 19.30. When Jesus therefore had
received the vinegar, he said, it is finished, and he bowed his head, and gave
up the Ghost. Luke 23.46. And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said,
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, and having said thus, he gave up
the Ghost. John 19.33. But when they came to Jesus; and saw that he was dead
already, they brake not his legs. V. 34. But one of the Soldiers with a spear
pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water. Isa. 53.3. He
is despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief:
and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him
not. V. 5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed. V. 10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to
grief: when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his
seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hand. V. 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities. 1 Pet. 2 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his
own body, on the tree, that we being dead to sins, should live unto
righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed. Phil. 2.8. And being found in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross. Acts 10.39. And we are witnesses of all things which he
did, both in the Land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem, whom they slew, and hanged
on a tree. Acts 2.36. Therefore let all the House of Israel know assuredly that
God has made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ. Heb.
9.28. So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that
look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. Heb.
12.2. Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the Throne of God. 1 Cor. 15.3. For I delivered unto
you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins
according to the Scriptures. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, being made a curse for us, for it is written, Cursed is every one
that hangs on a tree. Heb. 9.22. And almost all things are by the Law purged
with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission. V. 26. -- Now once
in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself. Heb. 10.12. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins,
for ever sat down on the right hand of God. V. 19. Having therefore brethren,
boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. V. 20. By a new and
living way, which he has consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say
his flesh. V. 26. If we sin wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins. 1 Cor. 6.20. For ye
are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, which are Gods. 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for
sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to
death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. Ephesians. 5.2. And walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. Col. 1.14. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. V. 20. And having
made peace through the blood of his Cross. -- Ephesians. 1.17. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches
of his Grace. Col. 2.14. Blotting out the hand writing of Ordinances that was
against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to
his Cross. Rev. 13.8. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him,
whose names are not written in the book of life, of the Lamb stain from the
foundation of the world. Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and
to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed
the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. 1 John 2.2. And
he is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world. 5. What became of him after his Death; He being
buried, rose again the third day, and after Forty days continuance on the
earth (in which time he frequently appeared to his Disciples, and others,
teaching the things appertaining to the Kingdom of God,) he ascended into
Heaven, and is now in Glory with the Father, where he intercedes for, and
presents the Merits of his Death and Sufferings, in the behalf of all them that
unfeignedly repent of their sins, and do truly believe on him. And being made
King and Head of his Church, and Lord of Angels and Men, he shall come from
Heaven again in great Glory, to judge the quick and the dead at the Last day.

Buried.
Mark. 15.42. And now when the even was come (because it was the preparation,
that is the day before the Sabbath.) V. 43. -- Joseph of Arimathea, -- Mat.
27.57. -- A rich man -- Mark. 15.43. -- An honorable Counselor -- Luke
23.50. -- A good man and a just, V. 51. The same had not consented to the
Counsel and deed of them, who also himself waited for the Kingdom of God. --
John 19.38. Being a Disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews. --
Mark 15.43. -- Came and went in boldly unto Pilat, and craved the body of
Jesus. V. 44. And Pilat marvailed, if he were already dead, and calling unto
him the Centurion, he asked him, whether he had been any while dead. V. 45. And
when he knew it of the Centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. V. 46. And he
brought fine linen, and took him down, -- John 19.39. And there came also
Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and brought a mixture of
myrrh, and aloes, about an hundred pound weight. V. 40. Then took they the
body of Jesus, and wound it in linen Clothes with the spices, as the manner of
the Jews is to bury. V. 41. And in the place where he was crucified there was a
Garden, and in the Garden a new Sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid,
Mark. 15.46. which was hewn out of a Rock. -- John 19.42. There laid they
Jesus therefore, because of the Jews preparation day; for the Sepulcher was
nigh at hand. Mat. 27.60. And rolled a great stone to the door of the
Sepulcher, and departed. Mat. 12.40. For as Jonas was three days, and three
nights in the whales belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and three
nights, in the heart of the earth. 1 Cor. 15.4. And that he was buried, and
that he rose again according to the Scriptures. Rose again.
Mat. 17.22. And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them, the Son of
man shall be betrayed into the hands of men. V. 23. And they shall kill him,
and the third day he shall be raised again, and they were exceeding sorry. John
2.19. Jesus answered and said unto them, destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up. Rev. 1.5. And unto Jesus Christ, who is the faithful
witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of
the earth, unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood. V. 18. I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am alive for
evermore, Amen. Romans 4.25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised
again for our justification. Acts. 2.24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed
the pains of death, because it was not possible that he should be holden of
it. Luke 24.39. Behold my hands, and my feet, that it is I my self, handle me,
and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. V. 40. And
when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands, and his feet. V. 46. And
said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and
to rise from the dead the third day. Romans 6.9. Knowing that Christ being raised
from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. Acts 13.32.
And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto
the Fathers, V. 33. God has fulfilled the same unto their Children, in that he
has raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm, thou
art my son, this day have I begotten thee. V. 35. Wherefore he says also in
another Psalm, thou shall not suffer thine holy One to see corruptition. V.
36. For David after he had served his own generation, by the will of God fell
on sleep, and was laid unto his Fathers, and saw Corruption. V. 37. But he whom
God raised again saw no Corruption. Acts 4.33. And with great power gave the
Apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great Grace was
upon them all. 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Acts 26.22.
Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing
both to small and great, saying none other things than those which the Prophets
and Moses did say should come. V. 33. That Christ should come, and that he
should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should show Light unto
the people, and to the Gentiles. John 20.24. But Thomas, one of the Twelve,
called Didimus, was not with them when Jesus came. V. 25. The other Disciples
therefore said unto him we have seen the Lord; but he said unto them, except I
shall see in his hands the print of the Nails, and thrust my hand into his
side, I will not believe. V. 26. And after eight days again, his Disciples
were within, and Thomas with them, then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and
stood in the midst, and said, peace be unto you. V. 27. Then says he unto
Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy
hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing. V. 28.
And Thomas answered, and said unto him, My Lord, and My God, Acts 1.3. To his
Apostles also he showed himself alive, after his passion by many infallible
proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining
to the Kingdom of God. Romans 1.4. And declared to be the Son of God with power,
according to the Spirit of Holiness; by the Resurrection of the dead. 1 Cor.
15.4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again, the third day, according
to the Scriptures. V. 5. And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve. V.
6. After that he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the
greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep. V. 7. After
that he was seen of James, then of all the Apostles. V. 12. Now if Christ be
preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you, that there is no
Resurrection of the dead? V. 14. And if Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. V. 20. But now is Christ risen
from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept. 1 These. 4.14.
For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with
Christ; seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right
Hand of God. Ascended into Heaven.
Mark 16.19. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up
into Heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. Luke 24.50. And he led them out
as far as to Bethany, and he lift up his hands and blessed them. V. 51. And it
came to pass while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up
into Heaven. Acts 1.9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld,
he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. V. 10. And while
they looked steadfastly toward Heaven, as he went up, behold two men stood by
them in white apparel. V. 11. Which also said, ye men of Galilee, why stand ye
gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven,
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven. 1 Pet. 3.^2.
Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God; Angels, and
Authorities, and powers being made subject unto him. Col. 2.15. And having
spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them in it. John 14.2. In my Fathers house are many mansions, if it were
not so I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you. Heb. 6.20.
Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus made an high Priest for
ever after the Order of Melchizedek. Ephesians. 4.8. Wherefore he says, when he
ascended up on high, he led Captivity Captive, and gave gifts unto men. V. 9.
Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he also descended first into the
lower parts of the earth? V. 10. He that descended is the same also that
ascended up, far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things. Psalm. 68.18.
Thou have ascended on high, thou have Captivity Captive, thou have received
gifts for men. John 16.7. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient
for you that I go away, for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto
you, but if I depart I will send him unto you. V. 28. I came forth from the
Father, and am come into the world, I leave the world, and go to the Father.
Sits at Gods right Hand.
Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his
Person, and upholding all things by the word of his power; when he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. V.
13. But to which of the Angels said he at any time, sit on my right hand until
I make thine enemies thy foot stool. Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord,
Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Heb.
12.2. Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the Throne of God. Heb. 8.1. Now of the things which
we have spoken this is the sum: We have such an high Priest who is set on the
right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens. Heb. 10 12 But this
man, after he had offered sacrifice for sins, sat down on the right hand of
God. Luke 22.69. Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the
power of God. Acts 7.55. But Stephen being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up
steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the
right hand of God. V. 56. And said, behold I see the Heavens opened, and the
Son of man standing on the right hand of God. Ephesians. 1.19. According to the
working of his mighty power. V. 20. Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised
him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the Heavenly places. V.
21. Far above all Principality, and power, and Might, an^ Dominion, and every
Name that is named not only in this world, but also in that which is to come.
V. 22. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be Head over all
things to the Church. Luke 24 26 Ought not Jesus to ^ave suffered these things,
and to enter into his Glory. Heb. 2.9. But we see Jesus who was made a little
lower than the Angels, for the suffering of death, Crowned with Glory, and
Honor, that he by the Grace of God should taste death for every man. Rev. 3 21.
To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. Rom 8.34. Who is he
that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again, who
is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Heb.
9.24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are
the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence
of God for us. Heb. 4.14. Seeing then that we have a great high Priest, that is
passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession.
V. 16. Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find Grace to help in time of need. Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he i^ able to save
them to the utmost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. John 17.24. Father I will, that they also whom thou have
given me, be with me, where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have
given me, for thou have loved me before the foundation of the world. Head of
the Church.
Ephesians. 1 22. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head
over all things to the Church V. 23. Which is his body, the fullness of him
that fills all in all. Ephesians. 5.23. For the husband is the head of the wife,
even as Christ is the head of the Church; and he is the Savior of the body. V.
27. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without blemish. V.
30. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. V. 32. This
is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. 1 Cor. 6.17.
He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. 1 Cor. 12.27. Now ye are the body
of Christ, and members in particular. Col. 1.18. And he is the head of the
body, the Church, who is the beginning, the first born from the dead, that in
all things he might have the preeminence. Col. 2.19. And not holding the head,
from which all the body by joints and bands, having nourishment ministered, and
knit together, increases with the increase of God. Ephesians. 4.15. But speaking the
truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head even
Christ. V. 16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted,
by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it
self in love. Judge of quick and dead.
John 5.22. For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to
the son. V. 27. And has given him authority to execute judgment also, because
he is the son of man. Romans 14.9. For to this end Christ both died, and rose,
and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. V. 10. But why
do thou judge thy brother, we shall all stand before the Judgment seat of
Christ. Acts 1.11. Which also said, ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up
into Heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so
come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven. Acts 10.42. And he
commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is he which
was ordained of God to be the judge of quick and dead. Mat. 13.40. As therefore
the tares are gathered, and burnt in the fire, so shall it be in the end of
this world. V. 41. The Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall
gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity.
V. 42. And shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth. Jude 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate,
but left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains, under
darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. V. 14. And Enoch, the seventh
from Adam; prophesied of these, saying, behold the Lord comes with ten
thousands of his Saints, V. 15. To execute judgment upon all, and to convince
all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him. 2 Pet. 2.4 For if God spared not the Angels that sinned,
but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into Chains of darkness, to be
reserved unto judgment. Mat. 26.64. Jesus says unto him, hereafter shall ye
see the son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds
of Heaven. 1 These. 4 16. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven, with a
shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpet of God, and the
dead in Christ shall rise first. V. 17. Then we which are alive, and remain,
shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. 2 These. 1.7. And unto you which
are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven,
with his mighty Angels. V. 8. In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. V. 9 Who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the Glory of his power. Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead, small and
great, stand before God, and the books were opened, and another book was
opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things
which were written in the books, according to their works. Dan. 7.10. A fiery
stream issued, and came forth from before him, thousand thousands ministered
unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him, the judgment
was set, and the books were opened. V. 13. I saw in the night visions, and
behold one like the son of man came with the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the
ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. V 14. And there was
given him Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, nations, and
languages should serve him: his Dominion is an everlasting dominion, which
shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. Acts
17.30. And the times of this ignoran^^ God winked at, but now he commands all
men every where to repent. V. 31. Because he has appointed a day in the which
he will judge the world in ^ight^ousnesse, by that man whom he ha^h ordai^^d,
whereof h^ has given assurance unto all me^, in that he has raised him from
the dead. 1 Cor. 15.51. Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed. V. 52. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the last trump, for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. Romans 2.5. But thou, after thy hardness,
and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath, against the day of
wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. V. 6. Who will render
to every man according to his deeds. V. 7. To them who by patient continuance
in well-doing seek for Glory, and Honor, and immortality, eternal life. V. 8.
But unto them which are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath, V. 9. Tribulation, and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. V.
10. But Glory, Honor, Peace to every man that works good, to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentile. V. 11. For there is no respect of persons with God. V.
16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel. Eccles. 12.14. For God shall bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
2 Timothy 4.1. I Charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick, and the dead, at his appearing, and in his Kingdom. V.
8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only but
unto them also that love his appearing. 2 Cor. 5.9 Wherefore we labor that
whether present, or absent, we may be accepted of him. V. 10. For we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may receive the
things done in the body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
bad. V. 11. Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men. 2 Pet. 3.10. But
the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the Heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. V. 11.
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought ye to be, in all holy Conversation and Godliness. V. 14. Wherefore
beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found
of him in peace without spot, and blameless. 1 Cor. 15.25 For he must reign
till he has put all enemies under his feet. Mat. 19.28. And Jesus said unto
them, verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the
regeneration, when the son of man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye also
shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Mat. 16.27.
For the Son of man shall come in the Glory of his Father, with his Angels, and
then he shall reward every man according to his works. Heb. 9.28. So Christ was
once offered, to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall
he appear the second time, without sin unto salvation. Mat. 25.31. When the son
of man shall come in his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he
sit upon the Throne of his Glory. V. 32. And before him shall be gathered all
Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides
his sheep from the goats. V. 33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand,
but the goats on the left. V. 34. Then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. V. 35. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me in.
V. 36. Naked, and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye visited me, I was in
Prison, and ye came unto me. V. 41. Then shall he say also to them on the left
hand, depart from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels. 6. What was the End and Intent of Christ's Coming into the
world. The chief End and Intent of his Coming into the world was to save Lost
and undone sinners, to procure their pardon and reconciliation with God by his
Merits; and to Sanctify their Natures by his Holy Spirit; and to bring them to
^verlasting Life. And to this end he appointed his Ministers to preach the
Gospel unto the world, and instituted the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, to signify and keep in remembrance the great and inestimable
benefits of his Death and Sufferings.

Luke 19.10. For the Son of man is come to seek, and to save that which was
lost. 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Mat. 1.21. And she shall
bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins. Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through
the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his
Grace. Jer. 33.6. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely, and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, the Lord our
Righteousness. 1 Cor. 15.3. For I delivered unto you first of all, that which I
also received, how that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures.
2 Cor. 5.19. -- God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of
Reconciliation. V. 21. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. John 1.12. But as many
as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of our Faith, even the
salvation of our souls. Romans 5.19. For as by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. Romans
4.25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification. 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. Heb. 7.23. And they truly were many Priests,
because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death. V. 24. But this
man because he continues for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood. V. 27.
Who needs not daily as those high Priests to offer up sacrifice first for his
own sins, and then for the peoples, for this he did once, when he offered up
himself. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a Curse for us, for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a
tree. Col. 1.14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins. V. 21. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies
in your mind, by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled. V. 22. In the body
of his flesh through death, to present you unblameable and unreproveable in his
sight. Col. 2.14. Blotting out the hand writing of Ordinances, that was against
us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his
Cross. V. 15. And having spoiled Principalities, and Powers, he made a show of
them openly, triumphing over them in it. Heb. 10.11. And every Priest stands
daily ministering and offering often times the same sacrifices which can never
take away sins. V. 12. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins
for ever, sat down on the right hand of God. V. 14. For by one offering he
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. V. 18. Now where remission of
these is, there is no more offering for sin. V. 19. Having therefore, Brethren,
boldness to enter into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus, V. 20. By a new and
living way, which he has consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say,
his flesh. V. 21. And having an high Priest over the house of God, V. 22. Let
us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. To
sanctify their Natures.
2 These. 2.13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God, for you
brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you
to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth.
Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. V. 9. But ye are not
in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you,
now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Col. 2.11. In
whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands, in
putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ. 1
Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God. Romans 6.5. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection. V. 6. Knowing
this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. V. 14. For sin shall not
have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. Ephesians.
5.26. That he might Sanctify and Cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word. Gal 5.24. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. Romans 8.13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die,
but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
Ephesians. 3.16. That he would grant you according to the riches of his Glory, to be
strengthened with might by the Spirit, in the inner man. V. 17. That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love, V.
18. May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height; V. 19. And to know the Love of Christ, which passes
Knowledge; that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Having therefore these promises dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of flesh, and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness without which no man shall
see the Lord 1 These. 5.23. And the very God of peace, Sanctify you wholly, and
I pray God, your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Gal. 5 16. This I say then, walk in the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. V. 17. For the flesh
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are
contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.
V. 25. If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. 1 Pet. 2.11.
Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts, which war against the soul. 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in Grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to him be Glory both now, and
for ever, Amen. 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face, beholding as in a
glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to
Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Phil. 2.13. For it is God that
works in you both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure. He commanded his
Disciples to preach the Gospel, and instituted the two Sacraments, viz.
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper.
Mark 16.15. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature. V. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so
account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of
God. John 4.1. When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that
Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John, V. 2. Though Jesus himself
baptized not, but his Disciples. Mat. 28.19 Go ye therefore, and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. V. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you, and Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world, Amen.
Mark 1.4. John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
repentance, for the remission of sins. Romans 6.3. Know ye not that so many of us
as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into his death. V. 4. Therefore we
are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up
from the dead, by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life. Mat. 3.11. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance,
but he that comes after me, is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to
bear, he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. John 1.33. And I
knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me,
upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same
is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. Tit. 3.5. Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saves us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost. 1 Pet. 3.21. The
like figure whereunto even baptism does now save us, (not the putting away the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God,) by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one body, whether we be Jews, or Gentiles, whether we be bond, or
free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. 1 Cor. 10.1. Moreover
brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our Fathers were
under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea. V. 2. And were all baptized
unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea. V. 3. And did all eat the same
spiritual meat, V. 4. And did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they
drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.
Romans 4.11. And he received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of the Faith, which he had, yet being uncircumcised, that he
might be the Father of all them that believe, though they be not Circumcised,
that righteousness might be imputed to them also. V. 12. And the Father of
Circumcision to them who are not of the Circumcision only, but also walk in
the steps of that faith of our Father Abraham, which he had being yet
uncircumcised. Col. 2.11. In whom also ye are Circumcised, with the
Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ. V. 12. Buried with him in baptism,
wherein also ye are risen with him, through the faith of the operation of God,
who has raised him from the dead. Gal. 3.27. For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Acts 2.41. Then they that gladly
received his word, were baptized, and the same day there were added unto them
about three thousand souls. Acts 16.33. And he took them the same hour of the
night, and wash d their stripes, and was baptized, he and all his straightway.
Acts 8.37. And Philip said, if thou beleevest with all thine heart thou may;
and he answered, and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. V 38.
And he Commanded the Chariot to stand still, and they went down both into the
water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him. Gal. 3 14. That the
blessing of Abrah^m might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we
might receive the promise of the spirit through Faith. Acts 2 38. Then Peter
said unto them, repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost. V. 39 For the promise is to you and to your Children, and to all that
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall Call. 1 Cor. 7.14. For the
unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is
sanct^fied by the hu^band, else were your Children unclean but now are they
holy. Mark 10.13. And they broug^t young Children to him that he should touch
them, and his Disciples rebuked those that brought them. V. 14. But when Jesus
saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them suffer the lit le Chi^dren
to come to me, and f rbid them not, for of such is the ^ingdome of God. V. 15.
Verily, I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a
little Child he shall not enter therein. V. 16. And he took them up in his
arms, and put his hands upon them, and blessed them. Luke 7.30. But the
Pha^isees and Lawyers rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, being not
baptized of him. Acts 8.13. Then Simon himself believed also, and when he was
baptized, he continued with Philip, and wondered beholding the miracles and
signs which were done. John 3 5. Jesus answered verily, verily, I say unto
thee, except a man be born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God. Ephesians. 5.25. His bands love your wives, even as Christ also
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, V 26. That he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word. Lords Supper.
Mat. 26.26. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, take, eat, this is my body.
V. 27. And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, drink
ye all of it. V. 28. For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed
for many, for the remission of sins. V. 29. But I say unto you, I will not
drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine, until that day, when I drink it new
with you, in my Fathers Kingdom. Mark 14.22. And as they did eat, Jesus took
bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave to them, and said, take, eat,
this is my body. V. 23. And he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he
gave it to them; and they drank all of it. V. 24. And he said unto them, this
is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many. Luke 22.19. And he
took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, this is
my body, which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me. V. 20. Likewise
also the Cup after Supper, saying, this Cup is the new Testament in my blood,
which is shed for you. 1 Cor. 11.20. When ye come together therefore into one
place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper. V. 23. For I have received of the
Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night
in which he was betrayed took bread, V. 24. And when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and said, take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you, this
do in remembrance of me. V. 25. After the same manner also he took the Cup,
when he had supped, saying, this cup is the new Testament in my blood, this do
ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. V. 26. For as often as ye
eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. V.
27. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords
body. 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ? V. 17. For we being many are one bread, and
one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread. V. 21. Ye cannot drink
the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lords
table, and of the table of devils. 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one body, whether we be Jews, or Gentiles, whether we be bond, or
free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. Acts 20.17. And upon the
first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul
preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his speech
until midnight. 1 Cor. 5.6. Your glorying is not good; know ye not that a
little leaven, leaveneth the whole lump? V. 7. Purge out therefore the old
leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened, for even Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us. Acts 2.41. Then they that gladly received his
word, were baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about three
thousand souls. V. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine,
and Fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. 2 These. 3.6. Now we
command you brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw
your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after the
tradition which he received of us. V. 14 And if any man obey not our word, by
this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed. V. 15. Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
7. What they are effectually Called unto, and through the assistance of the
Spirit of God enabled to perform, that shall receive Remission of sins by
Christ: They that shall be made partakers of that great and inestimable
benefit, the Remission of all their sins by Christ, are effectually called and
enabled by the assistance of his Grace, unfeignedly to believe the Gospel,
heartily to repent of all their sins, seriously to give up their souls unto
him, resting and relying on the Redemption and Ransom of his Blood for their
Pardon and Reconciliation with God. And taking him for their only Lord and
Savior, and yielding themselves up in sincere obedience to him, and to be
guided and governed by his Grace and Holy Spirit; they do depend on him alone
for Justification, Sanctification, strength to persevere in the ways of
Holiness, and at last, to be brought to eternal Life. And to as many as are
thus drawn by the Holy Ghost savingly to repent of their sins, and believe in
Christ, being truly united to him, and made branches in him the true Vine, and
members of his mystical body the true Church, (whereof himself is the Head,)
God has promised pardon and Remission of all their sins, to write his Law in
their Hearts, to subdue their Corruptions by his Grace, that sin shall not have
Dominion over them, to bestow on them all such outward blessings as he in his
infinite wisdom shall see good for them; And when they die, their souls shall
be received into everlasting bliss, and their bodies shall be raised again by
the power of Christ at the last day, and made partakers of the same Glory. And
this is Called the Covenant of Grace. But such as go on in their sins, refusing
to accept of Christ, for their Lord and Savior, Redeemer and Sanctifier, and
to give up themselves in sincere obedience to him; when they die, their Souls
shall be adjudged to everlasting punishment; and their bodies shall be raised
again at the last day, and made partakers with their Souls of Everlasting
Torments.

Concerning effectual Calling.
Romans 1.6. Among whom are ye also the Called of Jesus Christ. Romans 8.28. And we
know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who
are the Called according to his purpose. V. 30. Moreover whom he did
predestinate, them he also Called: and whom he Called, them he also justified,
and whom he justified, them he also glorified. 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us,
and Called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose, and Grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the
world began. Heb. 3.1. Wherefore holy brethren, partakers of the Heavenly
Calling, Consider the Apostle, and high Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus.
Ephesians. 1.18. The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may know
what is the hope of his Calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints. V. 19. And what is the greatness of his power to
usward, who believe according to the working of his mighty power. Acts 16.14.
And a certain woman, named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the City of Thyatira,
which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended
unto the things which were spoken of Paul. 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, that ye
should show forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous Light. Ephesians. 4.1. I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord beseech
you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called. 1 These. 2.12.
That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you to his Kingdom and
Glory. John 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me
draw him; and I will raise him up at the last day V. 45. It is written in the
Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God; every man therefore that has
heard, and has learned of the Father, comes to me. V. 65. And he said,
therefore said I unto you that no man can come unto me except it were given
unto him of my Father. John 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come to
me, and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. John 5.25. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the son of God, and they that hear shall live. 2 These. 2.13.
But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved of the
Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. V. 14. Whereunto he
called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Ezekiel 36 16. Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me saying, V. 17.
Son of man, when the House of Israel dwelt in their own Land, they defiled it
by their own way, and by their doings, their way was before me as the
uncleanness of a removed woman. V. 26. A new heart also will I give you, and a
new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh. V 27. And I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments, and do them. Ephesians. 2.13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes
were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. Romans 8.2. For the Law of
the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and
death. V. 9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the
Spirit of God dwell in you, now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his. John 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes; so is
every one that is born of the Spirit. Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, and to
turn them from darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan, unto God, that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by Faith that is in me. Concerning believing the Gospel.
1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit
which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of
God. V. 14. But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Ephesians. 1.16. -- Making mention of you in my prayers. V.
17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto
you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of him. V. 18. The
eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope
of his Calling, and what the riches of the Glory of his inheritance. V. 19. And
what is the exceeding greatness of his power, to usward, who believe
according to the working of his mighty power. John 8.24. I said therefore unto
you, that ye shall die in your sins; for if ye believe not that I am he, ye
shall die in your sins. Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for
there is none other name under Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.
John 14.6. Jesus says unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man
comes unto the Father but by me. John 17.3. And this is life eternal, that
they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.
Gal. 1.6. I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into
the Grace of Christ, unto another Gospel. V. 7. Which is not another, but there
be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. V. 8. But
though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye
also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your
salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy
Spirit of promise. V. 14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his Glory. Ephesians. 2.4.
But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us. V. 5.
Even when we were dead in sins has quickened us together with Christ, (by
Grace ye are saved.) 2 Cor. 4.13. We having the same Spirit of Faith, according
as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken: we also believe, and
therefore speak. Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved,
and he that believes not shall be damned. 1 Cor. 1.23. But we preach Christ
Crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness.
V. 24. But unto them which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of
God, and the wisdom of God. 1 Cor. 3.11. For other Foundation can no man lay
than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Concerning Repentance.
Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand, for to be a Prince and a
Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Mat. 4.17.
From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. Mark 1.14. Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came
into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God. V. 15. And saying,
the time is fullfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye and
believe the Gospel. Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your
sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord. Acts 20.20. And how I kept back nothing that was
profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you publicly, and
from house to house. V. 21. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the
Greeks, repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts
26.19. Wherefore O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the Heavenly vision.
V. 20. But showed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout
all the Coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and
turn to God, and do works meet for repentance. Prove. 28.13. He that covers
his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall have
mercy. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Josh. 7.19. And
Joshua said unto Achan, my son, give I pray thee Glory to the Lord God of
Israel, and make confession unto him, and tell me now what thou have done, hide
it not from me. Acts 11.18. When they heard these things, they held their
peace, and glorified God, saying, then has God also to the Gentiles granted
repentance unto life. Ezekiel 18.30. Therefore will I judge you, O house of
Israel, every one according to his ways, says the Lord God, repent, and turn
your selves from all your transgressions: so iniquity shall not be your ruin.
V. 31. Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed,
and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye die O House of
Israel. Ezekiel. 36.31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your
doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight, for
your iniquities, and for your abominations. V. 32. Not for your sakes do I this
says the Lord God, be it known unto you, he ashamed, and confounded for your
own ways, O house of Israel. Joel 2.12. Therefore also now says the Lord,
turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and
with mourning. V. 13. And rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto
the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil. 2 Cor. 7.11. For behold, this
self-same thing that ye sorrowed after a Godly sort, what carfulness it
wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea
what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge! in all
things ye have approved your selves to be clear in this matter. Rev. 2.5.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first
works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent. Luke 13.3. I tell you nay; but except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Acts 17 30. And the times of this
ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every where to repent. V.
31. Because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained: whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. Isa. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon Isa. 1.16. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil
of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, etc. V. 18. Come now
and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like Crimson, they shall be
as wool. Luke 15.7. I say unto you that likewise joy shall be in heaven over
one sinner that repents, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which
need no repentance. Heb. 6.1. Therefore, leaving the principles of the Doctrine
of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of
repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God. Luke 17.3. Take heed to
your selves, if thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he
repent, forgive him. V 4. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a
day, and seven times in a day turn again unto thee, saying, I repent, thou
shall forgive him. Concerning Faith in Christ.
Acts 16.31. And they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, and thine house. 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has life, and he
that has not the Son has not life. V. 13. These things have I written unto
you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have
eternal life, and that ye may believe on the Name of the Son of God. John 8.24.
-- For if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. John 6.40.
And this is the will of him that sent me that every one which sees the Son,
and believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. V. 47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me has
everlasting life. Ephesians. 2.12. At that time ye were without Christ, being aliens
from the Common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise:
having no hope, and without God in the world. V. 13. But now in Christ Jesus,
ye who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. Ephesians. 2.8.
For by Grace are ye saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God. V. 9. Not of works, lest any man should boast. John 12.44.
Jesus cried and said, he that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him
that sent me. V. 46. I am come a Light into the world, that whosoever believes
on me should not abide in darkness. Romans 10.14. How then shall they call on
him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? V. 17. So then
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. 1 Pet. 2.6. Wherefore
it is contained in the Scripture, behold, I lay in Sion a chief Corner stone,
elect, precious, and he that believes on him shall not be confounded. John 4
42. And they said unto the woman, now we believe, not because of thy saying,
for we have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the world. Heb. 11.13. These all died in Faith, not having received
the promises, but having seen them afar off; and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the
earth. John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become
the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. G^l. 2.20. I am
crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son
of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Acts 15.11. But we believe that
through the Grace of the Lord Jesus, we shall be saved, even as they. Ephesians.
6.16. Above all take the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked. Heb. 6.12. That ye be not slothful, but
followers of them who through Faith and patience inherit the promises. Romans
4.2. For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory; but not
before God. V. 4. Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of Grace,
but of debt. V. 6. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man to
whom God imputes righteousness without works. V. 20 He staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving Glory to God.
Romans 3.20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified
in his sight, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. V. 21. But the
righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets. V. 22. Even the righteousness of God which is by Faith of
Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe, for there is no
difference. V. 23. For all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. V.
24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ. V. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith
in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins, that are
past through the forbearance of God. V. 26. To declare I say at this time his
righteousness; that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believes
in Jesus. V. 27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded, by what Law? of works?
nay, but by the Law of Faith. V. 28. Therefore we conclude that a man is
justified by Faith without the deeds of the Law. Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man
is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ;
even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith
of Christ: and not by the works of the Law, for by the works of the Law shall
no flesh be justified. Phil. 3.9. And be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Acts 13.38. Be it known
unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is preached
forgiveness of sins. V. 39. And by him all that believe are justified from all
things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Heb. 12.24.
Unto Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling,
that speaks better things than that of Abel. Gal. 3.20. Now a Mediator is not
a Mediator of one, but God is one. Romans 8.1. There is therefore no Condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. James 2.22. See thou how Faith wrought with
his works, and by works was Faith made perfect. John 16.27. For the Father
himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out
from God. Jude 20. But ye beloved, building up your selves on your most holy
Faith, praying in the holy Ghost. V. 21. Keep your selves in the love of God,
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. Concerning
Holiness and sincere obedidience.
Phil. 1.11. Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the Glory and praise of God. Heb. 13.20. Now the God of peace,
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the
sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, V. 21. Make you perfect
in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing
in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen.
Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord
require of thee? but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God. Jam. 2.14. What does it profit, my brethren, though a man say he has
Faith, and have no works? can Faith save him? V. 15. If a brother or sister be
naked, and destitute of daily food, V. 16. And one of you say unto them, depart
in peace, be you warmed, and filled, notwithstanding ye give them not those
things which are needful to the body; what does it profit? V. 17. Even so
Faith, if it has not works, is dead, being alone. 1 John 2.3. And hereby do we
know, that we know him, if we keep his Commandments, V. 5. But whosoever keeps
his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we
are in him. 2 Pet. 1.5. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your
Faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge. V. 6. And to knowledge temperance, and
to temperance patience, and to patience Godliness, V. 7. And to Godliness
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness Charity. V. 8. For if these
things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren,
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. V. 9. But he that
lacks these things is blind, and cannot see far off; and has forgotten that
he was purged from his old sins. Mat. 5.16. Let your Light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
Tit. 2.11. For the Grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all
men. V 12. Teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. 1 Pet. 2.12. Having
your Conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against
you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold,
glorify God in the day of visitation. V. 15. For so is the will of God, that
with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. John 15.8.
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my
disciples. Ephesians. 2.10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. Romans
6.22. But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have
your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. Mat. 25.21. His Lord
said unto him, well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things, enter thou
into the joy of thy Lord. V. 22. He also that had received two talents, came
and said, Lord, thou deliveredst me two talents, behold, I have gained other
two talents besides them. V. 23. His Lord said unto him, well done good and
faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. Luke 17.10. So
likewise ye, when ye have done all these things which are commanded you, say we
are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. Job
22.2. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable
unto himself? V. 3. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous?
or is it gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect? Job 35.7. If thou be
righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand? V. 8. Thy
wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the
son of man. Mat. 23.23. Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye
pay tithe of Mint, and Annis, and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier
matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, these ought ye to have done,
and not to leave the other undone. Mat. 5.20. For I say unto you, except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of
the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
V. 23. Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law. 2 Cor. 8.12. For if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and
not according to that he has not. Heb. 6.10. For God is not unrighteous, to
forget your work, and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his Name, in
that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do minister. Heb. 5.9. And being made
perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.
Romans 6.6. Know this; that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Mat. 10.37. He
that loves Father, or Mother more than me is not worthy of me, and he that
loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. 1 Cor. 16.22. If any
man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. Mat. 22.37.
Jesus said unto him, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. Acts 10.35. But in every Nation, he
that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted with him. Phil. 2.15.
That ye may be blameless, and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as Lights in
the world. Romans 1.32. Who knowing the Judgment of God, that they which commit
such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in
them that do them. Romans 6.1. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin
that Grace may abound? V. 2. God forbid, how shall we that are dead to sin live
any longer therein? V. 15. What then? shall we sin because we are not under the
Law, but under Grace? God forbid. V. 16. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield
your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey? whether of
sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? 1 John 1.6. If we say then
we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the
Truth. V. 8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us. 1 John 3.3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth
himself, even as he is pure. Romans 8.13. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall
die, but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall
live. Concerning Perseverance.
Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good
work in you, will perform it until the day of Christ. 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore
the rather Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure, for
if ye do these things ye shall never fall. John 10.28. And I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out
of my hand. V. 29. My Father which gave them me is greater than all, and no man
is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of
God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God. Jer. 31.3. The Lord has appeared of old unto me,
saying, yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving
kindness have I drawn thee. Jer. 32.40. And I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good, but I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. 1 Cor.
10.12. Therefore let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall. 1
Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto salvation, ready
to be revealed in the last time. V. 9. Receiving the end of your Faith, even
the salvation of your Souls. 2 Timothy 2.19. Nevertheless the Foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his, and let
every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. Romans 8.33. Who
shall lay any thing to the Charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies. V.
34. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us. V. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Romans
8.37. Nay in all these things we are more than Conquerors, through him that
loved us. V. 38. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, V. 39.
Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. John 17.24. Father I will,
that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may
behold my Glory which thou have given me, for thou lovedst me before the
foundation of the world. Luke 22.32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith
fail not, and when thou art converted strengthen thy Brethren. 2 The^. 3.3. But
the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil. Ephesians.
4.30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day
of redemption. Concerning the members of Christ.
John 15.1. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. V. 2. Every
branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away, and every branch that
bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit 1 Cor. 12.12.
For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that one
body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ. V. 13. For by one Spirit are
we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews, or Gentiles, whether we be
bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto
the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ
Jesus, Called to be Saints, with all that in every place Call upon the Name of
Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours. Rev. 7.9. After this I beheld and
Lo a great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds,
and People, and Tongues stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed
with white robes, and with Palms in their hands. Romans 11.16. For if the first
fruit be holy, the lump is also holy, and if the root be holy, so are the
branches. Ephesians. 2.19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners,
but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God. Ephesians. 3.15. Of
whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named. Ephesians. 4.12. For the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ. V. 13. Till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. Mat. 16.18. And I say unto thee, that thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. Mat. 23.8. But be not ye Called Rabbi, for one is
your Master even Christ, and all ye are brethren. V. 9. And call no man your
Father upon the earth, for one is your Father, which is in Heaven. V. 10.
Neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ. Concerning
the new Covenant.
Heb. 8.8. For finding fault with them, he says, behold, the days come says
the Lord, when I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and the
House of Judah. V. 9. Not according to the Covenant I made with their Fathers,
in the day that I took them by the hand, to lead them out of the Land of Egypt:
because they continued not in my Covenant; and I regarded them not, says the
Lord. V. 10 For this is the Covenant, that I will make with the House of Israel
after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws in their mind, and write
them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a
people. V. 12. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their
iniquities will I remember no more. Mark 16.15. And he said unto them, go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every Creature. V. 16. He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned. Jer. 31.31. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a
new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah. V. 34. --
For I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. John
3.16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish; but have everlasting life. Heb.
9.15. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament, that by means
of death for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. V. 16. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be
the death of the Testator. V. 17. For a Testament is of force after men are
dead, otherwise it is of no strength, whilst the Testator lives Heb. 12.24.
And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling,
that speaks better things than that of Abel. Ezekiel. 36 26 A new heart also
will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away
the stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you an heart of flesh. V. 27.
And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them. Luke 22.20. Likewise also the Cup
after Supper, saying, this Cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed
for you. Micha 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. V. 19. He will turn again,
he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will
cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea. Romans 6.14. For sin shall not
have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. Jer.
32.40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me. Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun, and a
shield, the Lord will give Grace and Glory; no good thing will he withhold from
them that walk uprightly. Romans 8.28. And we know that all things work together
for good to them that love God, to them who are called according to his
purpose. Concerning the state of men after death, and the Resurrection of the
body.
Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the
spirit shall return to God who gave it. Luke 23.43. And Jesus said unto him,
verily, I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Heb. 12.23.
To the general Assembly, and Church of the first born, which are written in
Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just men made
perfect. 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a building of God, not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens. V. 6. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are
at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. V. 8. We are confident I say,
and willing rather, to be absent from the body, and to be present with the
Lord. Phil. 1.23. For I am in a strait betwixt two; having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ, which is far better. Luke 16.22. And it came to pass
that the beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: the
rich man also died, and was buried. V. 23. And in Hell he lift up his eyes,
being in Torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. V.
24. And he Cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am
tormented in this Flame. Acts 1.25. That he may take part of this Ministry, and
Apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his
own place. Jude 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left
their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains, under
darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day. V. 7. Even as Sodom and
Gomorrah, and the Cities about them in like manner giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. 1 Pet. 3.19. By which also he went and
preached to the Spirits in prison. 1 Cor. 15.42. So also is the Resurrection of
the dead; it is sown it corruption, it is raised in incorruption, V. 43. It is
sown in dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is sown in weakness, it is
raised in power; V. 44. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body. V. 52. In a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye at the last trump: for the trumpet shall
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. Job
19.26. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall
I see God. V. 27. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold,
and not another, though my reins be consumed within me. Acts 24.15. And have
hope toward God, which they themselves also allow that there shall be a
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. John 5.28. Marvel not at
this: for the hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves shall hear
his voice. V. 29. And shall come forth, they that have done good unto the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
damnation. Mat. 25.21. His Lord said unto him, well done thou good and faithful
servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler
over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. Heb 6.2. Of the doctrine
of baptismes, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and
of eternal Judgment. Mat. 16.27. For the Son of man shall come in the Glory of
his Father, with his Angels, and then he shall reward every man according to
his works. Mat. 13.40. As therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the
fire, so shall it be in the end of this world. V. 41. The Son of man shall send
forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, and them which do iniquity. V. 42. And shall cast them into a furnace
of fire, there shall be wailing, and gnashing of teeth. V. 43. Then shall the
righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father, who has
ears to hear, let him hear. 2 Pet. 3.11. Seeing then all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be, in all holy Conversation, and
Godliness? V. 14. Wherefore Beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be
diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.
Mat. 10.28. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul, but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell.
Rev. 2.7. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches: To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which
is in the midst of the Paradise of God. V. 11. He that has an ear, let him
hear, what the Spirit says unto the Churches: He that overcomes shall not be
hurt of the second death. V. 17. He that has an ear, let him hear, what the
Spirit says unto the Churches: To him that overcomes will I give to eat of
the hidden Manna, and I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new
Name written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it. 1 Cor. 2.9.
But as it is written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man the things which God has prepared for them that love
him. Mark 9.43. And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off, it is better for thee
to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into Hell: into the fire
that never shall be quenched. V. 44. Where their worm dies not, and their fire
is not quenched. V. 45. And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off; it is better
for thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into Hell:
into the fire that never shall be quenched. Mark 9.46. Where their worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched. V. 48. Where their worm dies not, and the
fire is not quenched. Jude 21. Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for
the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto eternal Life. 1 Timothy 1.19. Holding
Faith, and a good Conscience, which some having put away, concerning Faith have
made shipwreck. THE Second PART: Concerning PRACTICE. OR, A DISCOURSE,
containing several useful Directions to be Practiced by those who seriously
desire to save their SOULS.
CHAP. I. Of Consideration.
1.AT convenient times use to be alone; and laying aside all worldly cares and
businesses, spend now and then a secret hour in strict Self-examining, and
Considering, how the case stands between God and thy soul. Ask thy self these
two serious Questions:

First, What is it thy heart is most set upon? What is thy great care, thy main
design? What is it that does most deeply and most frequently possess thy
thoughts? What is it that thou do most love, and prize? and most desire to
enjoy? Is thy mind so spiritually enlightened as to see the loveliness of God,
and the greatness, and excellency of that Glory, that is to be had with him?
so as the main drift and bent of thy heart, is after the enjoyment of God, and
to be happy with him forever? Or do thou find, that the main bent of thy
heart is to the things of this World, to the Profits, the Pleasures, the
sensual satisfactions of this life; and these things thou most mindest,
regardest, and labourest for; these thy thoughts, and heart most run upon.

Secondly, Ask thy self, whether ever thou did feel, and apprehend thy self
in a lost, and undone condition by reason of thy sins? Have thou not seen thy
self in danger of everlasting misery? Have thou ever put this serious question
to thy self, what shall I do to be saved? Have thou in this or the like manner
ever discoursed with thy self?

O my soul, how stands the case with me? What am I? Am I a true Convert? a real
Penitent, a new Creature, one born again? Have I an interest in Christ? And is
my peace made with God through him? or am I as yet in the state of Nature,
under the guilt of all my sins, with the wrath of God abiding on me? If so, is
this a Condition to be rested in?

Let me advise thee, as thou love thy soul, to deal faithfully, and in good
sadness with thy self: Let me advise thee to review, and seriously to reflect
upon the whole course of thy life past; And (besides thy natural vileness)
Consider, how many actual sins, failings, miscarriages, and violations of Gods
righteous Law, omissions of good, commissions of evil, thou have been guilty
of, in the several parts of thy life, and in the several places where thou have
lived. Believe it, few people do reckon up one sin of ten that they are guilty
of. Allow thy Conscience therefore, a liberty to speak freely to thee, and to
set thy sins in order before thee. And if thou find thy self for the present
in a bad condition, and that the case is not with thee as it should be,
consider whether it will not be an extreme folly and madness, to go on in that
course, not minding, nor regarding speedily to turn to God, and to settle the
great affairs of thy soul, while thou have time? O Remember, remember, thou
have a precious and immortal soul, that must be shortly either in Heaven, or
Hell; either in unconceiveable Joys, or in endless, easelesse, and
remediless torments. Does it not therefore concern thee to consider, and cast
about, how to attain the one, and escape the other? Does it not behoove thee to
look to the securing of the main Chance, and to deliver thy self from the wrath
to come? Believe it, nothing undoes mankind more, than want of due and serious
Consideration; than want of frequent examining the state of their Consciences,
and often pondering and thinking of their everlasting Concernments.

2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own
selves; know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be Reprobates? Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways; and turned my feet unto
thy Testimonies. V. 60. I made have, and delaied not to keep thy Commandments.
Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters Crib, but Israel
does not know, my people does not Consider. Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise,
that they understood this, that they would Consider their latter end. Hag. 1.5.
Now therefore, thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways. Lam. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. Gal. 6.4. -- Let
every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself, and
not in another. V. 5. For every man shall bear his own burden. Psalm. 77.6. I
call to remembrance my song in the night, I commune with mine own heart, and my
Spirit made diligent search. Romans 14.12. So then every one of us shall give
account of himself to God. Ezra 8.22. -- The hand of our God is upon all them
for good that seek him: but his power, and his wrath is against all them that
forsake him. CHAP. II. Of Repentance.
HAving seriously examined thy Conscience, and impartially considered thy
ways, and course of life, and the state of thy soul toward God; The next duty
I would advise thee (beging the assistance of the Spirit of God) to set upon
the speedy practice of; is true, and serious, and unfeigned repentance.

I shall therefore for thy benefit, 1. Open the nature of true repentance. 2.
Give some directions about it. 3. Some motives to it.

Repentance unto life is an Evangelical Grace wrought in the soul by the Spirit
of God.

And the parts of it are these six, 1. Conviction. 2. Contrition. 3. Hating and
loathing sin. 4. Confession of sin. 5. Forsaking sin. 6. Conversion, and
turning the bent of the heart toward God.


First, Conviction. The Spirit of God first opens a sinners eyes, before he
breaks a sinners heart. The soul of a true penitent is convinced, and made
apprehensive of these three things, 1. The evil; odiousness, and filthiness of
sin. 2. The danger, desert, and mischievous effects and consequents of it. 3.
Its own deep guiltiness, both of Original and Actual sin.


I. The evil of sin appears in these seven particulars;

1. It Is contrary to Gods holy Nature.

2. To his righteous Laws.

3. It robs and deprives the soul of Gods Image, consisting in knowledge,
righteousness, and holiness.

4. It depraves, disorders, distempers the soul, weakens the powers of it,
disables it for holy operations, and brings a corrupt disposition into it.

5. It defiles the soul, and leaves such a blot, and stain upon it, that
nothing but the blood of Christ can wash out.

6. It enslaves the soul to the devil.

7. It makes the soul like unto the devil. Holiness is Gods Nature: Sin and
wickedness is the devils. 'Twas sin that at first, turned Angels of light into
devils of darkness: And if we could separate sin from them, they would cease
to be devils, and clear up again into Angels of light.

II. The great danger of sin appears in that it brings such a guilt upon the
soul, as makes it liable to Gods wrath and curse, and to punishments.

1. Temporal: Sickness, pain, vexation, misery, death: which to the wicked are
truly punishments, and fruits of Gods vindicative justice, and have their sting
still in them.

2. Spiritual. 1. Loss of the favor of God, and communion with him. 2. The
immediate strokes of his anger on the soul, wounds of Conscience, drops of his
wrath, horror of mind, despair. 3. Hardness of heart, a Spirit of slumber,
blindness of mind, a reprobate sense, to be given over to vile affections, and
to Satan. These are most fearful judgments.

3. Eternal. Such as concern the souls immortal condition after this life.
And they are either punishments of loss or pain. 1. Of loss, in being for ever
banished from the presence of the Lord, and the joys of Heaven, 2 These. 2.9.
being punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
the Glory of his power. 2. Of pain, consisting in those exquisite and
unconceivable torments, which shall be inflicted on the d^mned; set forth in
Scripture by everlasting fire, utter darkness, the worm that never dies, the
fire that is not quenched, chains of darkness, the blackness of darkness for
ever, the lake of fire and brimstone, etc. As therefore, the nature of sin is
out of measure sinful, so the punishments are out of measure fearful.

III. The souls deep guiltiness appears by considering,

1. Its Original sin. In which three things are to be noted: 1. The guilt of
Adams particular transgression in eating the forbidden fruit, imputed to us. He
was the head and common Father of mankind: and we were legally parties in that
covenant which was at first made with him; For God established his covenant
with Adam principally, in respect of his Nature, and not so much in respect of
his Person: so that by consequence it must follow, that all who are partakers
of that Nature, are bound by that Covenant. And therefore we cannot but expect
to be liable unto the guilt which followed upon the breach and violation of it,
Romans 5.12. etc. 2. A want of original righteousness, Romans 3.23. All have
sinned, and come short of the Glory of God; that is, of the glorious Image of
God, which was at first stamped upon man. 3. A corrupt disposition in man's
nature, in place of original righteousness; These two latter being the sad
effects of Adams sin. Now this depravednesse of nature, this great averseness
to good, and pronenesse to evil, is called the old man, and the body of sin,
Romans 6.6. The sin that dwells in us, Romans 7.17. The body of death, Romans 7.24.
The flesh, as opposite to the Spirit, and Grace, Romans 7.18, 25. The Law of the
members, Rom 7.23. Col. 3.5. A man's own lust, Jam. 1.14. where it is expressly
distinguished from actual sin, as being the procreant cause of it.

2. Its Actual transgressions, where are to be considered,

1. Omissions of good, and the duties required; that might and ought to have
been done.

2. Commissions of evil: Offending Against the Law, even both Tables of it.
Against the Gospel.


3. Doing that which was good in an evil manner, slight, and undue performance
of holy duties.

4. The aggravations of these sins, in regard First, Of the greatness of many
of them, Every one has some black days in his Calender, some more high and
great offenses, whereof he has been guilty, and for which he is to be more
deeply humbled. Secondly, The number of them, if we consider, 1. Wicked
thoughts. 2. Inordinate Affections. 3. Sinful words. 4. Evil actions. Thirdly,
That many of them have been committed, 1. Against mercies. 2. Against
judgments. 3. Against promises and vows of better obedience.

Secondly, Contrition, Godly sorrow, brokenness of heart for sin. To be sorry
for what we have done amiss, is something toward repentance; but it is not
the whole of it. Gracious humiliation, is a deep and hearty grieving for all
our sins, and that upon these Gospel Motives.

1. Because we have by our sins highly displeased and offended our gracious
God, whom we had all the reason in the world to have studied to please. The
displeasure and offense of God is that which sets the soul a bleeding and
mourning evangelically. Consider therefore, what is the Spring of thy sorrow.
If the punishment or shame of thy sins touch thee nearer than the offense of
God, it is a sign thy sorrow is not right.

2. Because our sins pierced our dear Lord and Savior, and put him to such
grievous, painful, and shameful sufferings.

3. Because by our sins we have brought a horrible defilement, and stain on our
souls.

4. Because we have made our selves liable to the wrath and curse of God, and
deserve to be separated from the Lord, and to be punished among devils, and
damned fiends for ever. This (in conjunction with the former) is an Evangelical
motive. I confess, to weep, and howl, and grieve, merely for the wrath and
punishment sin has brought upon the soul, is such a sorrow, as Judas had his
share in; and the damned in Hell exceed in it. But this sorrow does not use to
leave the soul in a better disposition for obedience in time to come, as godly
sorrow does, 2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow works repentance unto life, And take
notice by the way, this Godly sorrow, is not a flower that grows in the Garden
of nature. A hard heart is Adams Legacy: There may be a flexible nature, where
there is a hard heart, that knows not how to mourn and grieve for sin in a
right manner. Godly sorrow is voluntary. The soul is active in it, prays for
such a melting frame, is thankful for it, is best pleased when the heart is
soft and tender, and deeply affected for its sins and offenses against God.
It Is not so in worldly sorrow; for in that we are merely passive; It comes upon
us without sending for, or being bidden welcome by us.

Thirdly, Hating, and Loathing sin. The Spirit of sanctification works a secret
antipathy, an irreconcilable hatred in the soul against sin. The true penitent
hates sin, as sin: As David said, Psalm. 119.128. I hate every false way, True
hatred is to the whole kind. When we hate sin, as sin, we hate all sin. Now the
reason why there is such an universal hatred, in the true penitent against all
sin, is

1. Because his judgment is altered, his mind is changed; he sees with other
eyes than he did before; He sees the evil and danger of sin in those
particulars before mentioned. He sees plainly that sin is but like a cup of
sweet wine, that has rank poison in it.

2. His heart and affections are turned against it. He has a new heart put
into him. If God should offer him his choice of these two things, either a
liberty to go on in sin, or power, and Grace, and strength against it, he would
readily close with the latter. The remembrance of sin is bitter, and grievous
to him; not so, the remembrance of affl^ction; he blesses God for afflictions,
that have weaned his heart from sin. He is sick of sin, weary of it, it is a
burden to him, his heart rises against it; he had rather God should exercise
him with any affliction, than give him up to a hardened course in sin.

Fourthly, Confession of sin. Every true penitent is bound to make private
confession of his sins to God, praying earnestly for the pardon of the^. For

1. By this means the soul is brought into a dislike of sin. Confession it is
an act of mortification: It Is the spiritual vomit of the soul; it breeds a
dislike of the sweet morsels of sin, when they are thus cast up again with
loathing. Sin though sweet in commission, is bitter in remembrance, and
confession.

2. By a free ingenuous confession of sin, we accuse our selves unto God; take
shame to our s lves, judge and condemn our selves before him, humbly
acknowledging we are worthy of all his curses, all his judgments. Now self
accusing will prevent Satan's accusing of us. He can lay no more to our charge,
than we in our confessions are willing to charge our selves with: And
self-judging will prevent Gods judging of us, 1 Cor. 11.31. If we would judge
our selves, we should not be judged. We are not to judge others, but we may and
must judge our selves.

Concerning Confession of sin take these Rules.

1. Confess all thy particular known sins particularly: Take thy self in
private, and open the case of thy soul clearly, and without guile of spirit
before the Lord, make private confession of all thy sins unto him: not that
thou can acquaint God with any thing he did not before. know; but that it may
appear, thou thy self know, and art acquainted with the plague of thine own
heart, and art sensible of thy sins, iniquities, and defects in obedience. And
seeing every one is guilty of many more sins than he can remember, though he
examine his heart and life never so seriously: Therefore when thou have humbly
confessed, and bewailed all thy particular known sins to God, then with a
general confession acknowledge the rest; namely, all thy secret, unknown,
undiscovered sins; saying, as David, Psalm. 19.12. Lord cleanse me from my
secret sins. Cleanse me O Lord, not only from those particular sins I do
remember, and humbly confess before thee, but from all other sins also that I
am any manner of way guilty of, though I do not now remember them.

2. Remember, that it is not only words, and handsome expressions God regards in
confession of sin, but there must be shame, a deep sense and feeling of the
evil of sin, a heart hatred against sin, a true sorrow for all our offenses
against God, that must accompany our confessions, else they are no way pleasing
unto him.

3. Besides con^essing unto God, there are some cases, wherein confession also
unto man is requisite; as

1. Under deep wounds of Conscience, It Is requisite then to open the true state
and case of thy soul to some Godly Minister, or some faithful, experienced
Christian, that so they may give advice and counsel, and suit their prayers to
thy particular Case.

2. When some eminent judgment seizes on any, for some eminent provocation.
Here as Joshuah said to Achan, Josh. 7.19. My son, confess, and give glory to
God. That Gods justice may be cleared; for hereby God receives a great deal of
Glory, and men a wonderful confirmation, of the care and justice of Providence.

3. He that by any notorious offense really s^andalizeth his Brother, or the
Church of Christ, ought to be willing by a private, or public confession and
sorrow for his sin, to declare his repentance to those that are offended, who
are thereupon to be reconciled to him, and in love to receive him.

Fifthly, Forsaking sin, leaving off whatever appears to be displeasing unto
God. The true penitent 1. Forsakes the acting of known sins for the present. 2.
Resolves against sin for the future.


I. Forsakes all his former known sins, secret sins as well as open, profitable
sins, as well as those that are not. True and sincere obedience is universal,
especially in respect of the purpose of the heart: He that out of Conscience of
duty to God, forsakes one sin, will for the same reason fear to offend in
another; there being the same Divine authority, awing and binding the
Conscience in one sin, as in another. To pick and choose, here to obey, there to
dispense with our selves, is a shrewd sign of hypocrisy.

II. Resolves against sin. And his resolutions come,

1. From solid reasons, and not only from some sudden affections.

2. Are accompanied with earnest and fervent prayers to God. He that is strong
in resolution, and weak in supplication is quickly foiled.

3. Are made, not in his own strength, but the strength of Christ, which he
humbly implores, and rests upon.

Sixthly, Conversion, whereby the bent of the heart is turned toward God,
choosing him for its chief delight, and portion, desiring to walk with him, and
approve it self unto him in sincere obedience. A true and real penitent does
not content himself with a mere negative holiness, and leaving off his former
sinful ways. It Is not enough for such an one to be no drunkard, no swearer, no
unclean person, etc. But as he hates every evil way, so he makes Conscience of
every known duty required of him. The Commands that require duty, are as
binding to him, as those that forbid sin. There will be a visible change in
such a person; and that

1. In reference to God: He will love God more, and delight in his ways and
worship now, more than formerly.

2. In reference to men, He will be careful to discharge his relative duties:
He will labor to walk exactly and righteously, and to observe a strict
integrity in his dealings with men. And in these two things he will manifest
the reality of his conversion.

1. If he remember he has wronged any man formerly, in his goods, or estate,
either by defrauding, or unjust detaining what is due to him, he will endeavor
to make him restitution, or other satisfaction. He that confesses, and
forsakes his sin, shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13. He that restores not ill
gotten goods, lives still in his sin, Restitution being an inseparable fruit
of true Repentance.

2. If he be at variance with any, he will desire and seek reconciliation,
being willing to forgive injuries done to him, and desiring forgiveness of
those he has any way injured.

3. In the Government of himself, he will endeavor to he sober, and temperate,
and watchful over his heart and ways, his words and actions. See more
concerning watchfulness, in the fifth Chapter.

Thus much of the nature of true Repentance. I come now to some Directions
concerning, it.

I. Remember, Repentance (though never so serious) is not to be rested in, as
any satisfaction for sin, or any cause of the pardon thereof (that being the
act of Gods free Grace in Christ) yet it is of such necessity to sinners, that
none may expect pardon without it.

It Is necessary for these three Reasons.

1. Because God has commanded it, and the Gospel enjoynes it, as a condition
of the new Covenant.

2. That we may taste something of the bitterness of sin, that so we may the
more carefully avoid it for the time to come.

3. To prepare and fit us to receive pardon, to dispose us into such a frame,
as is suitable to such a blessing.

4. To make us set a higher value on Gods pardoning Mercy, and Christ's Merits,
and Blood. How dear and precious is Christ to a soul truly humbled for sin?

II. Consider, As there is no sin so small, but it deserves damnation, so there
is no sin so great, that it can bring damnation upon those who truly repent.
It Is not the falling into the water, drowns a man, but continuing in it, not
getting out again. No sin damnes a man, but as it is accompanied with final
impenitency and unbelief: Therefore the sin against the Holy Ghost is
unpardonable, because those that commit that sin do never repent, or fly to
Christ for pardon.

III. Look to it, that thy Repentance, and sorrow for thy sins, spring from
Evangelicall Motives, (such as are before mentioned,) and not merely from shame
or fear of Hell and wrath.

IV. Labor that thy sorrow for sin, may bear some proportion to the greatness
of thy sins; Every small touch of sorrow may not be sufficient: As sin is the
greatest of evils, so our sorrow for it should be the greatest sorrow. Betake
thy self therefore to a more solemn mourning, and renting of heart for the
great sins of thy life, refusing to be comforted, with any worldly comfort,
till thou have obtained thy pardon: But remember Godly sorrow is not always to
be measured by plenty of tears, and vehemence of expressions, but by the weight
of it on the heart, by the deep displeasure of the soul against sin: There may
be a deep, rational sorrow for sin, where there is no such outward passionate
expressions of it.

V. Content not thy self with a general repentance, but know that it is thy
duty to endeavor to repent of thy particular sins particularly: Do not slubber
over this great duty (which so much concerns thee) with a slight, formal,
general repentance, as too many are apt to do. Many sins long ago committed by
thee, may still lie at thy door, if not repented of. Review therefore thy life
past. Suffer thy Conscience to speak freely to thee, and to set thy sins in
order before thee, and labor to be heartily humbled both for the vileness and
depravednesse of thy Nature, and for all the particular actual sins, failings,
and miscarriages which thou find thy self any way guilty of. Repent of all
sin that lies upon thy Conscience.

VI. Let thy sorrow for sin be accompanied with a real forsaking of all known
sins, and amendment of life: Content not thy self with a partial reformation.

VII. Set upon the practice of this great duty speedily; now while thou art in
health, before sickness surprise thee. Without repentance, no hope of pardon,
or peace with God here; no hope of Glory hereafter: Now Consider, that by
repentance, the Scripture does not mean a sudden fit of confession, contrition,
and promising amendment at last cast; (when a man can live no longer in sin,
and is now afraid of Judgment) but a real change of the mind, a turning of the
heart from the love of sin to God, Take notice that hereby we do not go about
to limit the Almighty, or drive any to utter, and final desparation, but to
show what is man's duty, and what is Gods ordinary way o^ working upon the
hearts of those, whom he does conve^t. For God can work a ^eal gracious change
upon men's hea^^s at last. Though to defer repentance upon that ground i^
exceed^ng dangerous.
a durable state of new obedience, and a life of holy walking, which takes up
some space, length, and continuation of time, giving a sinner thereby competent
opportunity to mortify evil dispositions and habits, to break off sinful
courses, to set up the dominion of Grace within, and by an holy behavior in
his place and condition of life, to manifest the sincerity of his repentance;
and by a steady course of Godliness to give some proof of his real conversion.
To put off repentance therefore to the deathbed, is exceeding dangerous, to
say no more.

VIII. When thou have (through the assistance of the Spirit of God) humbled thy
soul, and repented seriously of all thy sins, do not rest in thy repentance,
(as was said before) but go out of thy self to Christ for thy pardon, Rest not
on this side Christ; Not thy tears, but his blood only can cleanse thy
Conscience from all guilt. But of this more in the next Chapter.

IX. After thou have labored (according to these directions) to revoke,
reverse, and undo again all the sins of thy life past by a serious repentance,
then be very watchful, lest thou fall knowingly, and deliberatly into any sin
again. The true penitent allows not himself in any sinful course, yet through
infirmity possibly he may fall: Sins of infirmity are such as a man is
overtaken with, contrary to the purpose of his heart, either through ignorance,
incogitancy, violence of temptation, or suddenness of surprizal: which when he
comes to consider, he confesses, and bemoans, strives, and prays against, and
(by Gods Grace) ordinarily gets more and more victory over. If therefore,
contrary to the fixed purpose of thy heart, thou do at any time sin;
endeavor speedily to recover thy self by a serious repentance; and be more
watchful over thy heart and ways for time to come.

Motives to Repentance.
1. It Is highly pleasing to God, Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto them, as I live says
the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for
why will ye die, O House of Israel? 2. It Is the Doctrine Christ himself first
preached, as we read, Mat. 4.17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to
say, repent ye, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand. And when he left the
world, he declared that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in
his Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24.47. 3. The Angels
in Heaven rejoice at the repentance of a sinner, Luke 15.10. Likewise I say
unto you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner
that repents. 4. Consider who are for thy repentance, and who are against it:
God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, good Angels, and glorified Saints, all
good Ministers, and sincere Christians are for it; None but the Devil and his
Instruments are against it. And which of these two parties will thou incline
unto? 5. Consider, it is not only a Gospel duty, but a Gospel privilege. The
Law allows no place for repentance: It Is an high favor God will pardon us
upon our repentance, and Faith in his Son. 6. Consider, All will sooner or
later commend true repentance: Be not thou one of them that will commend it,
when it is too late. 7. Consider, there is no other remedy. For, Without
Repentance it is not consistent, 1. With Gods justice we should be pardoned;
though repentance does not satisfy his justice, yet sins unrepented of, and
continued in, cannot be pardoned without injustice. 2. With his Mercy: God is
very merciful, but it is to penitent humbled sinners, not obdurate, impenitent
transgressors. 3. With the undertaking of Christ who came to call sinners to
repentance, and to seek, and save those that were lost in their own eyes. He
was exalted to be a Prince, and a Savior, to give repentance, and remission of
sins, Act. 5.31.


8. If thou do seriously, and in good earnest repent of all thy sins, it will
be a great foundation of comfort to thee in time of distress. If the Devil, in
time of temptation, or the hour of death, shall bring thy sins to thy
remembrance, and charge them upon thy Conscience, to drive thee to despair; O
what a comfort will it be, if thy Conscience can then truly answer, though I
have been guilty of such and such sins, yet through the riches of Gods Grace, I
have in time of my health, particularly humbled my soul for them, I have
retracted and undone them again by a serious repentance? Believe it, he that
has truly repented of all his sins, and has the bent of his heart turned
toward God, and is walking in a new course of life, a steady course of
Godliness; has a surer foundation of comfort in his own soul, than if an Angel
should come from Heaven, and tell him he should be saved. Upon all these
considerations, let me advise thee (begging the assistance of the Spirit of
God) to set upon the speedy practice of this, so great, so necessary, yea, so
comfortable a duty. Let not the deceitfulness of sin, the cunning of Satan,
the hope of long life, a vain presumption on the Mercy of God, or any mistakes,
or prejudices against the Doctrine of repentance keep the off: but laying aside
all pretenses, excuses, demurs whatever, set upon it seriously, and speedily,
and thou will find thereby (through the blessing of God) abundance of ease,
comfort, satisfaction, and settlement to thy Mind and Conscience.
Psalm. 32.5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid,
I said, I will confess my transgression unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins shall not pr^sper:
but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy. 1 John 1.8. If we
say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. V.
9. If we confess our sin, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his
errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults. Psalm. 90.8. Thou have set our
iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance. Jam.
3.2. For in many things we offend all. Job 13.26. For thou writest bitter
things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth. Psalm.
38.4. For mine iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burden they are
too heavy for me. Job. 34.32. That which I see not, teach thou me, if I have
done iniquity, I will do no more. Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy upon me, O God,
according to thy loving kindness, according unto the multitude of thy tender
mercies, blot out my transgressions. V. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. V. 3. For I acknowledge my
transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. V. 5. Behold I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. V. 7. Purge me with hysop, and
I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. V. 9. Hide thy face
from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. V. 10. Create in me a clean
heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me. V. 11. Cast me not away from
thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. V. 16. Thou desire not
sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering. V. 17.
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise. See more Scriptures concerning repentance, page 102.

CHAP. III. Of Faith in Christ.
UPon serious consideration of the evil and danger of thy sins (renouncing all
Confidence in thy self, or any thing thou can do, to procure thy pardon and
peace with God) deliberatly, and advisedly betake thy self unto Christ Jesus,
the only Mediator and Peacemaker between God and man; who once offered up
himself, a sacrifice on the Cross for sin, and is now in Heaven, making
intercession, and presenting the Merits of his Obedience, Sufferings, and Death
in the behalf of all such, who being lost and undone in themselves, do fly to
him for help and relief, and take him for their only Lord and Savior. With
judgment and understanding give up thy self to this Savior: Cast thy penitent
soul at his feet: Rest and rely on him wholly and alone, to be justified,
acquitted, and discharged of all thy sins by his Merits, to be sanctified by
his Spirit, to be commanded and disposed of by him, and to be enabled by his
Grace to persevere in the ways of Truth and Holiness all thy days, and at
last, to be brought to Eternal life. Entrust all thy hopes of pardon only on
him: Enter into a real Covenant with him, to be for ever his, resolving to live
and die his faithful Disciple, and servant. And because really to close with
Christ, and savingly to believe on him, is a matter of such exceeding high
Concernment I shall,

1. Explain the Nature of it.

2. Lay down some Conclusions about it.

3. Give some Motives, and Encouragements to it*

Know therefore, there is a twofold Act of Faith.

1. Of Adherence. 2. Of Assurance.
I. When a poor sinner does cast himself wholly on Christ crucified for pardon
and life, (upon the warrant of the promise) although he has no assurance in
himself, how the Lord will dispose of him. This is commonly called Faith of
Adherence, or Recumbency.

II. When a soul that has thus cast himself on Christ, reflects upon what he
has done, and comparing it with the Gospel promises, becomes (by the
assistance of the Spirit, bearing witness with his Spirit) confidently
persuaded of his interest in Christ, and that he shall be saved by him. This is
called Faith of Assurance.

Now the former is that Faith which is the Condition of the new Covenant, by
which a sinner is freely acquitted of all his sins, and accounted as a
righteous and just person in Gods sight.

To this Faith, there are these six things required.

1. A real, firm belief of the truth of the Gospel, a true historical Faith,
concerning Christ's person, undertaking, and performance, and that he came to be
a Mediator and Peacemaker between God and man.

2. A deep sense and feeling of the heavy burden of sin, with true sorrow and
humiliation ^hereupon. The soul is brought to see its undone condition by sin,
before it closes with Christ.

3. A firm persuasion that there is no other way of salvation, but by Christ
alone.

4. A clear knowledge that Christ is able to save to the uttermost, all that
come to God by him; and willing to save, and ready to receive such as do own
him for the true Messiah, and unfeignedly give up themselves unto him.

5. An earnest desire, a real thirsting after an Interest in this Savior.

6. An actual giving up the soul to Christ, depending on him wholly and alone
for pardon and life; firmly trusting in him to be justified, sanctified, and
everlastingly saved by him.

This is the soul truly and really united unto Christ. And being by Faith and
Love thus joined to the Lord, (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 6.17.) is one
Spirit, i. e. is governed by one and the self-same Spirit. The Scripture sets
forth this admirable spiritual union by these four earthly resemblances.

By the union 1. Of the Husband and Wife, Ephesians. 5.23. The husband is the head of
the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church: and he is the Savior of
the body. 2. Of the Head and Members, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Has put all things under
his feet, and given him to be head over all things to the Church, which is his
body. 3. Of the stones in the bullding, with the foundation, whereon they rest
and are built, Ephesians. 2.22. In whom you also are builded together, for an
habitation of God through the Spirit, 1 Cor. 3.11. 4. Of the Vine and the
Branches, John 15.5. I am the Vine, ye are the Branches.


So that when we do willingly betroth our selves to Christ, and consent to take
him for our Lord and Husband, and to be his loyal spouse: when we are willing
to be in subjection to him, and to be ruled by him, as the members of the body
are by the head: when we depend, and rest and rely on him alone for our
salvation, as the stones rest on the foundation: Lastly, when we derive Grace
and Holiness from him, as the branches derive juice, virtue, and sap from the
root and stock, and do bring forth fruits in him, and to him; then is there a
real, and spiritual union wrought between Christ and our souls.

Thus much concerning the Nature of saving Faith: The Conclusions I shall lay
down concerning it, are these;

1. Though Christ has paid down a sufficient price on the Cross, for the
ransoming and buying in of lost and undone sinners, yet we are not justified
and absolved from the guilt of our sins, till we do actually close with him by
Faith.

2. True saving Faith, is not a strong persuasion, that all a man's sins are
pardoned by Christ's Merits, and that he is in Gods Favor, and in a good state
and condition: For it is evident many of Gods dear servants are exercised with
doubts, and fears concerning themselves; and many Graceless wretches, that
never felt the burden of sin, nor ever made much Conscience of walking holily,
are most confident of their own good condition: Therefore this confident,
ungrounded persuasion cannot be true Faith; for then, hardness of heart, would
make the best Faith; and he that could presume most, and be most secure, and
free from doubts, would be the truest believer. For a man to be confident of
his good condition, while he lies under the power and reign of sin, is the
grossest unbelief in the world: It Is to believe the flat contrary to what God
has revealed in the Word, 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not (says the Apostle) that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
fornicatours, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Therefore a
confident resting on Christ for salvation, (if it be not a resting according to
the Word) will not serve the turn.

3. Fiducially, and savingly to believe on Christ, is not an act of man's power,
but wrought in the soul by the Spirit of God; who does effectually enlighten,
persuade, and draw the heart, and assist, and enable the soul, to give up it
self unto Christ. Beg therefore the assistance of this blessed Spirit, whom God
has promised to give to them that ask him, Luke 11.9. And in the aid of his
Grace, give up thy self unfeignedly unto Christ, to be justified, sanctified,
and everlastingly saved by him.

4. A true believer may fear, and be in doubt, that he has not given up
himself to Christ unfeignedly; and this fear may proceed from the abundance of
his love to Christ, and earnest desire to be assured of an interest in him,
which makes him think he can never be certain enough of him; Love is
sollicitous, and full of fears, lest it should miss the person beloved.

5. They that truly close with Christ, do take him for their Lord, as well as
for their Savior. None come to Christ by Faith, and savingly believe on him,
but they cleave to him by love also, and live to him by obedience. True Faith
on Christ, will beget love to Christ, and love will bring forth obedience.

6. The surest mark of true believing in Christ, is a new and holy life. It Is
the property of Faith to purify the heart, and so to work a change in the life
and conversation. Do thou make Conscience therefore of all Christ's commands?
And art thou careful to refrain thy feet from every evil way? Who ever is in
Christ, is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. Has the love of Christ shed abroad in
his heart, and that love constraines him to yield sincere obedience: Has the
Spirit of Christ, Rom 8.9. not only to comfort him, but to counsel and direct
him, to lead him in the paths of truth and holiness, and to uphold him from
taking any desperate and irrecoverable falls, either in matter of judgment or
practice. These are the Conclusions.

I come now in the third place, to the Motives and Encouragements to believe in
Christ.

1. Consider for thy encouragement, how able Christ is to save thee. There is
more merit in the Son of God, to obtain our pardon, than there is guilt of sin
in us, to merit condemnation. For the person suffering, being (as to his
Godhead) infinite, and the merit and value of his sufferings depending on the
dignity and worth of his person, the satisfaction made, must needs be infinite,
and so abundantly sufficient.

2. Consider his willingness and readiness to accept to mercy all poor humbled
sinners, that come unto him: He never rejected any man that came unto him, and
acknowledged him for the true Messiah, and unfeignedly gave up himself to be
saved by him.

His willingness to save sinners, cannot but appear to thee, if thou
considerest these three things. 1. His gracious words before he came into the
world. The Prophet in the person of Christ, proclaims thus, Isa. 55.1. Ho every
one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, etc. 2. His free and general
invitation when he was in the world, John 7.37. In the last day, that great day
of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, if any one thirst, let him come to
me and drink, And Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. 3. His great kindness to poor sinners
expressed after his ascension, and leaving the world, Rev. 22.17. Let him that
is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the waters of life freely:
That these were the words of Christ, appears, v. 20. where it is said, He that
testifies these things, says, surely I come quickly.

3. Consider, that to believe, and rest on Christ crucified, and to take him
for our Lord and Savior, is to perform that act, to which justification and
remission of sins is promised, John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. Christ and all his benefits are promised to a believing
soul. Will thou not therefore give up thy self to him.

4. Consider, it is the duty of all truly humbled sinners, to go to Christ, and
believe in him. It Is the duty of a sick man, to apply himself to a skilful
Physician; and as such an one must not destroy his own life, by a wilful
refusing the Physic that would cure him; so neither must the humbled sinner
destroy his own soul, by refusing to close with Christ; He must not add to all
the rest of his sins unbelief, and a wilful neglect of Christ, and the
salvation by him purchased, and so freely offered.

5. Consider that the humbled sinner by believing in Christ, does not only
bring comfort, and salvation to his own soul, but also in an eminent manner
brings Glory to God: When thou (though discouraged in thy self, by reason of
thy sins) dare venture thy soul in the hands of Christ: When thou make thy
way through all doubts, scruples, and misgivings of heart, and take Gods bare
Word, because he has said it, (thereby setting thy seal to his truth and
faithfulness) and do resolve to throw thy self on his free Mercy, and
Christ's Merits, for pardon and life, to lay thy soul at Christ's feet, and to
clasp about him, though he kill thee: This is an excellent, and an heroical act
of Faith, which brings Glory to God; as Abraham's Faith did: Of whom it is said,
Romans 4.20. That he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but
was strong in Faith, giving Glory to God.

6. Consider, it is the greatest folly and madness in the world, for an humbled
sinner not to close with Christ, and commit his soul unto him. What an
irrational, and unprofitable sin is unbelief? If we go not to Christ, Where can
salvation possibly be had? As those lepers reasoned, 2 King. 7.3. If we sit
still we perish. That person is sure to be damned, that keeps off from Christ.
There is no way therefore for a poor sinner, but to venture himself into the
hands of Christ, to give up his soul sincerely to him, and to resolve with
himself, if I perish, I will perish at his feet.

7. Lastly, If you think you have cause to fear that Christ is not yet yours,
and as yet you have no interest in him, my advice is, that you now go unto him,
now strike up the Covenant between him and you: Defer no longer; Let this be
the marriage-day. Now give up thy self unfeignedly to be pardoned, sanctified
commanded, disposed of, and everlastingly saved by him; and rest assured he
will on no terms cast thee out.

John 3.14. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness; even so must
the Son of man be lifted up, V. 15. That whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have eternal life. V. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. V. 36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting
life: and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him. John 5.40. And ye will not come to me that ye might have
life. John 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Phil. 3.8. Yea doubtless, and I
count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them
but dung, that I may win Christ. V. 9. And be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith. See more Scriptures
concerning Faith, p. 106.

Covenanting with God.
Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and his
Judgments, and to hearken unto his voice. Josh. 24.21. And the people said unto
Joshua, nay, but we will serve the Lord. V. 22. And Joshuah said unto the
people, ye are witnesses against your selves, that ye have chosen you the Lord
to serve him, and they said, we are witnesses. CHAP. IV. Of the new Nature, and
reformed Life.
4. HAving thus solemnly given up thy self to Christ, labor to walk worthy of
the Lord, to all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work. Let it be thy
daily care (begging the assistance of the Spirit to enable thee) to mortify
the old man, to crucify the flesh, with its affections, and lusts; to weaken,
impair, and destroy the dominion of the whole body of sin, and to put on the
new man; that thou may be strengthened and furnished with all saving Graces,
to the practice of true holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord: As
Christ (by his divine power) raised and quickened his own body, when it lay in
the grave, so he conveighs a spiritual life into all his members, raising them
from the death of sin, and enabling them to walk in newness of life. I live
(says Paul, Gal. 2.20.) yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And the life of
Jesus is made manifest in our mortal bodies, 2 Cor. 4.11. He that abides in
me, and I in him, (says our Savior, John 15.5*) brings forth much fruit.
Beg therefore earnestly of the Lord, that thou may be sanctified throughout,
in Spirit, Soul, and Body. That thy Understanding, Conscience and Will, thy
sensual affections and desires; and thy whole outward man may be put into, and
kept in a good order and frame; that the fear of God may dwell in thine heart
continually, and his Law be written in thy inward man. Look to the bent and
frame of thy heart, that it be right toward God. If thy heart be once ordered
aright, thou will look that thy outward conversation be ordered aright also.
Let it appear therefore thou art a living member of Christ, by being a new
Creature; by unliving, and undoing thy former sinful course. Live not
henceforth in any known sin, but speedily forsake, whatever thou know to be
evil, and displeasing unto God any kind of way. Labor to testify the
sincerity of thy repentance and Faith, by an holy life, and an unblameable
Conversation. Set thy self in good earnest to walk religiously and holily
before God, righteously and uprightly before men, and soberly and temperatly in
the Government of thy self.

Let it be thy daily exercise (with Paul) to keep a good Canscience, void of
offense, toward God, and toward man. Be careful of the duties both of the
first, and second Table. And read often and carefully observe our Saviors
Sermon in the Mount, contained in the fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of
Matthew. In sum, beg a continual supply of strength, from the sanctifying
Spirit of Christ, that though thou art to wrestle, not only against flesh and
blood, but against Principalities, and powers, and spiritual wickednesses, and
against manifold temptations from the world, yet notwithstanding (through the
aides of Grace) the regenerate part in thee may overcome, and that thou may
grow in Grace, and be daily perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature; Old
things are past away, behold, all things are become new. 1 Cor 6.11. And such
were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Ephesians.
4.22. That ye put off, concerning the former Conversation, the old man, which
is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts. V. 23. And be renewed in the
Spirit of your mind. V. 24. And that ye put on that new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. Romans 6.5. For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death: we shall be also in the
likeness of his resurrection. V. 6. Knowing this that our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin. V. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not
under the Law, but under Grace. 1 John. 3.8. He that commits sin is of the
devil, for the devil sins from the beginning; for this purpose the Son of
God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. 1 John 2.6.
He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk, even as he
walked. 1 John 3.3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself
even as he is pure. Romans 8.13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die:
but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
Ephesians. 3.16. That he would grant you, according to the riches of his Glory to be
strengthened with might, by his Spirit in the inner man. V. 17. That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by Faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love, V.
18. May be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height: V. 19. And to know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. 1 Cor. 7.1.
Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. I
eb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord. 1 These. 5.23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and
I pray God your whole Spirit, and Soul, and body, be preserved blamless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Gal. 5.17. For the flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to
the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly
beloved, I beseech you as strangers, and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts,
which war against the soul. 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in Grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to him be Glory both now and
for ever, Amen. Gal. 5.19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, V. 20. Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
V. 21. Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, of the which
I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do
such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. V. 22. But the fruit of the
Spirit is, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, V.
23. Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law. V. 24. And they that
are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections, and lusts. Phil.
2.15. That ye may be blameless, and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke,
in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as Lights in
the world. 2 Pet. 1.5. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your
Faith virtue, and to virtue Knowledge. V. 6. And to Knowledge temperance, and
to temperance patience, and to patience Godliness, V. 7. And to Godliness,
Brotherly kindness, and to Brotherly kindness Charity. 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore,
my beloved Brethren be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work
of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know, that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.
1 Pet. 1.14. As obedient Children, not fashioning your selves according to the
former lusts in your ignorance. V. 15. But as he which has called you is holy,
so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. 1 Cor. 6 19 What, know ye not that
your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of
God, and ye are not your own? V. 20. For ye are bought with a price: therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your Spirit, which are Gods. Romans 2.6. Who
will render to every man according to his deeds. V. 7. To them who by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and immortality; eternal
Life. V. 8. But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but
obey unrighteousness; indignation, and wrath, V. 9. Tribulation, and anguish,
upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the
Gentile. Mat. 16.24. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, if any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. 1 Samuel
2.30. Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed. 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and Godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you-wards. Isa. 38.3. And said, remember now, O Lord, I beseech
thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and
have done that which is good in thy sight: And Hezekiah wept sore. Acts 24.16.
And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward men. Tit. 2.11. For the Grace of God, that brings
salvation, has appeared to all men. V. 12. Teaching us, that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world. V. 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. V 14. Who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Tit. 3.8. This is a faithful
saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which
have believed in God, might be careful to maintain good works: these things are
good and profitable unto men. Mat. 5.17. Think not, that I am come to destroy
the Law and the Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. Mat. 22.36.
Master, which is the great Commandment of the Law? V. 37. Jesus said unto him,
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all soul, and
with all thy mind. V. 38. This is the first and great Commandment. V. 39. And
the second is like unto it, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. V. 40.
On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. Mark 12.32. And
the Scribe said unto him, well Master, thou have said the truth: for there is
one God, and there is none other but he. V. 33. And to love him with all the
heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the
strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole burnt
offering and sacrifice. Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith?
God forbid, yea, we establish the Law. CHAP. V. Of Communion with God.
5. Labor to maintain a daily close Communion with God, in these particulars
following,

1. Awake with God in the morning.

2. Forget not to pour forth thy soul in secret prayer, and praise before him.

3. Read the Scriptures.

4. Live continually as in the sight and view of God.

5. Live by Faith.

6. Observe all the passages of his Providence toward thee.

7. Be continually watchful.

First, Awake with God in the morning: When I awake, I am still with thee, sais
holy David, Psalm. 139.8. The morning is an emblem of the Resurrection, when
our bodies shall awake from the sleep of death, and that long day shall arise
upon us, that shall never have any night. O how should thou then, when sleep
falls from thine eyes, lift up thy soul in praises and thanksgivings to the
Lord, for his gracious Providence over thee in the night season. Had not he
been exceeding gracious, thou might have slept the sleep of death, and from
the darkness of the night been sent away into outer darkness. Let not the
commonnesse of this mercy diminish, but the continualness of it rather increase
thy thankfulness. O when thy body awakens, how should thou awaken and stir
up thy soul also, to some holy and pious Ejaculations; such as the sweet Singer
of Israel, used to send up to God; O Lord, thou art my God, early will I seek
thee. I laid me down and slept, and thou have sustained me. I have been safe
under the shadow of thy wings, thy faithfulness, and truth have been my shield
and buckler, And now Lord, lift up the Light of thy Countenance upon me,
instruct me in the way wherein I should go, and guide me with thine eye. Teach
me thy way, O Lord, and I will walk in thy Truth, O knit my heart to thee, that
I may fear thy Name. And hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip
not. Let me walk circumspectly this day, redeeming the time, Let my soul put on
the Lord Jesus, and be clothed with the white robe of his righteousness, and
adorn me with the saving Graces of thy holy Spirit, etc.

After some such pious ejaculations sent up to the Throne of Grace, labor to
get thy heart possessed, with deep, strong, and powerful apprehensions and
impressions, of Gods holiness. Majesty, Omni-presence, Omniscience: Consider
with reverence, and humbly admire, and adore his glorious wisdom, his almighty
power, his gracious Providence, his truth and faithfulness, and especially his
tender love and mercy in Christ Jesus. And if such thoughts as these make
strong and deep impressions in thy mind, in the morning, thou art the more like
to be in the fear of God all the day after, and to have thy mind possessed both
with reverential and delightful thoughts of his Majesty.

Psalm. 139.18. -- When I awake, I am still with thee. Job 7.17. What is man
that thou should magnify him? and that thou should set thine heart upon
him? V. 18. And that thou should visit him every morning, and try him every
moment? Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because
his compassions fail not. V. 23. They are new every morning, great is thy
faithfulness. V. 24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore I will
hope in him. V. 25. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul
that seeks him. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is
none upon the Earth that I desire besides thee. Ephesians. 5.14. Wherefore he says,
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
Light. Romans 13.11. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake
out of sleep: for now is our salvation nearer, than when we believed. V. 12.
The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works
of darkness, and let us put on the armor of Light. Ephesians. 5.15. See then that
ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise. Romans 13.13. Let us walk
honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying. V. 14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.
Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts
for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry, and thirsty Land, where no water
is. Psalm. 59.16. But I will sing of thy power: yea I will sing aloud of thy
mercy in the morning, for thou have been my defense, and refuge in the day of
my trouble. Psalm. 35.28. And my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness, and
of thy praise all the day long. Psalm. 3.5. I laid me down and slept; I awaked,
for the Lord sustained me. Psalm. 91.1. He that dwells in the secret place of
the most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. V. 4. He shall
cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust; his truth
shall be thy shield and buckler. Psalm. 4.6. There be many that say, who will
show us any good? Lord lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon us. Psalm.
32.8. I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall go, I
will guide thee with mine eye. Psalm. 86.11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will
walk in thy Truth: unite my heart to fear thy Name. Psalm. 17.5. Hold up my
goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. Psalm. 90.17. And let the
beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish thou the work of our hands
upon us, yea, the work of our hands, establish thou it. Secondly, Omit not
daily to pour forth thy Soul in secret and fervent prayer before the Lord,
humbly confessing, and bewailing thy sins, with a deep sense and feeling of the
evil, danger, and desert of them; begging earnestly (as for thy life) a full and
free pardon and discharge of them all in the blood of Christ, and humbly
imploring the aid and assistance of the holy Spirit, to enable thee to mortify
thy corruptions, to resist temptations, and to perform in a right manner all
the duties required of thee.

Be much in this duty of secret prayer, if ever thou intendest to save thy
soul, to honor God here, or to be happy with him hereafter. And remember that
to pray unto God in an acceptable manner, is not to say over a few prayers, or
to utter a few petitions (Patrat-like) in a formal, cold, customary manner;
where there is not a true sense and feeling of sin and misery; and where the
desires of the soul are not carried out earnestly to seek for mercy, and relief
from God through Christ, there can be no true hearty praying, such as God will
accept, though the outside and external part of the duty be performed never so
speciously. God more regards the sighs, and tears, and broken expressions of a
truly contrite and humble heart, that are powered forth in secret before him,
than the most set, and exactly formed devotions, that proceed either from
formality or hypocrisy. If thou would therefore pray aright, beg the
assistance of the holy Spirit of God, to help and enable thee; for we know not
how to pray as we ought, except the Spirit help our infirmities. Beg therefore
the assistance of the Spirit, to work, and quicken in thy heart those
apprehensions, affections, and Graces, which are requisite for the right
performance of this duty, And with that gracious assistance labor to pray,

1. With humility, and reverence, having an high and awful apprehension of the
Majesty of God.

2. With a deep sense, and feeling of thy wants and necessities: and with
brokennesse of heart, and true contrition for thy sins.

3. Offer up thy prayers and supplications to God in the Name of Christ, the
only Mediator between God and man, not barely mentioning his Name, but drawing
thy encouragement to pray, and thy hope of acceptance in prayer, from his
Merits, Mediation, and Intercession.

4. Pray in Faith, humbly trusting in Gods Power, Goodness, Faithfulness, and
gracious promises made in Christ; not so much a Christians prayer, as his Faith
in prayer prevails with God. And it is a great encouragement to Faith, to
consider, there is not only bounty in God, but bounty engaged by promise. O how
great are the privileges of Saints? God is their Father willing to hear their
prayers; Christ is their Advocate willing to present their requests; the holy
Ghost is their helper and assister to draw up their requests for them.

5. Lift up pure hands without wrath, as the Apostle advises, 1 Timothy 2.8.
Before thou set thy self to this duty, labor to get thy heart purged of
all malice, wrath, ill will, and desire of revenge, if there be any such vile
affection in thee toward any body. When thou go to pray, thou go to beg
forgiveness of thy manifold sins from God; which thou can not reasonably
expect, if thou art not willing to forgive others: Our Savior has taught us
to pray, forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. And this is very remarkable, he resumes this petition of all the rest to
explain and by a strong reason to enforce; Mat. 6.14, 15. For if you forgive
men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if ye
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses. Remember therefore, that it is thy duty, heartily to forgive those
that have done thee any wrong; and to pray for them, that God would pardon them
in his Son, and give them such a frame of heart, that they may please him, and
be blessed by him, both here and hereafter. This is a good sign of Grace, to
pray for a blessing on our very enemies.

6. Pray in sincerity; Look that thy end be right, and that thy aim be at the
Glory of God. There is a great deal of difference betwixt a carnal desire, and
a gracious supplication, Jam. 4.3. Ye ask and have not, because ye ask amiss,
to spend it on your lusts. Prayers that want a good aim, do usually want a good
issue. When thou find thy heart running out by a perverse aim, check it, and
disclaim it the more solemnly. If our prayers be not directed to the Glory of
God, there is little hope that when we receive the talent we pray for, we shall
employ it to our Masters use. They that cannot ask a mercy well, seldom use it
well.

7. Labor to pray with zeal, fervency, warmth, and holy importunity, with
sensiblenesse, and strong workings of affection. It Is easy to say a prayer in
a formal, cold manner, when the heart is nothing affected with it, but possibly
wandering, while the lips are praying: But that is true prayer, when the soul
reaches out after those things it prays for, in holy, ardent, and spiritual
desires. Sighs and groans are the Language God understands. When God means to
bestow any blessing, he usually stirs up the hearts of his people earnestly to
pray for it. And the effusion of the Spirit of supplication, that holy, yet
humble importunity, that spiritual violence, and wrestling and striving, and
pleading with the Almighty, is a happy presage of an approaching blessing.

8. Beg spiritual blessings, and the things appertaining to the soul primarily,
and with greatest earnestness: Beg temporal mercies, and such as concern this
life, and thy welfare here, with an humble submission unto God; resigning thy
will to his most holy will; earnestly begging, that, what he sees not good for
thee, nor fit to be granted thee, he would make thee willing and contented to
be without.

9. To supplication, forget not to add praises and thanksgivings to the Lord
for all his benefits; for his innumerable favors conferred on thee in the
course of thy life past, and also for thy present enjoyments. Especially
quicken and provoke and awaken thy soul to lift up the high praises of God, for
his inestimable love in sending his Son, to be a ransom for sin, and sending
his Holy Spirit to convince of sin, and of righteousness, and to persuade, and
enable thy heart to close with Christ. And lastly, upon the receipt of any new
mercy and favor from God, offer up a cheerful and hearty sacrifice of praise
and thanksgiving, in and through the mediation of Christ, by whom alone our
Persons, and Sacrifices are accepted with God.

And to direct and quicken thee to this duty, of rendering praises to the Lord;
Consider,

1. That praise is Gods Tribute, his Custom, it is all the Impost he sets upon
his Blessings. There are three things to be considered in a mercy. 1. The mercy
it self. 2. The Comfort, and sweetness that may be enjoyed in the use of it.
3. The Glory, Honor, and Praise that is due for it. The two former God freely
gives us; he only reserves the latter as a tribute and homage to himself.

2. Praising God for former mercies, invites him to bestow new mercies. God
will be bountiful to those that he sees thankful; and from whom he receives
Glory and acknowledgment.

3. Praising God is the beginning of Heaven, it is the employment of the holy
Angels, and glorified Saints there.

4. To have a heart delighting in praising God, is a great evidence (in
conjunction with others) of sincerity; self-love forces prayer oftentimes from
us; but to praise God aright, comes from a more heavenly affect^on, and a
sanctified frame of heart.

5. To set upon this duty of praising God is one of the best ways to mitigate
any sorrows that at any time are upon us. If we can work our hearts to praise
him for the mercies that are continued to us, it will exceedingly abate the
sense and feeling of any present Cross, or affliction that lies upon us.

6. Consider who they are that are the most unthankful to God; even Devils,
and damned Spirits, who are full of envy, malice, and pride; they will not
praise God, but do wretchedly blaspheme him; and wicked men, who imitate their
Father the devil. And would thou be like these?

Upon these Considerations stir up thy heart to be much in this heavenly duty
of praising God, and remember 1. To praise him with thy heart. 2. To praise him
with thy tongue. 3. To praise him with thy life.

Let there be an abiding sense of his favors on thy heart, and let thy life
and conversation praise him also. Let thy works praise him, that others seeing
thy good works, may glorify thy heavenly Father. Labor to secure thy state in
Grace, and thy interest in Gods favor, through Christ, and then thou may be
assured, that whatever God gives thee, he gives it thee in pure love; all comes
swimming to thee in the blood of Christ; and this Consideration will
exceedingly raise thy heart to thankfulness, and make thy tongue sound forth
the praises of the most High.

These Directions may help thee in the performance of that great Christian duty
of prayer, and thanksgiving,

After thou have prayed, Consider

1. What thou have prayed for. As before prayer we should consider and labor
to find out our wants; So after prayer we should consider of our petitions, and
what we have begged of God.

2. Humbly expect a gracious answer, and return to thy prayers, not for any
worthiness or desert in thy self, or prayers, but for Christ's sake alone.

3. Serve Providence in the use of fair and lawful means, for the attaining
those good things thou have prayed for.

4. To Prayer add watchfulness. If through Grace thy heart has been wrought
to a good temper, and holy frame in prayer; labor to keep it afterward; labor
to preserve those apprehensions and those affections in thy soul, which thou
foundest in time of prayer; And therefore one well advises, that for some
little time after we have prayed, we should keep our selves silent, and quiet;
nor presently (and in the next moment as some do,) but fair and softly removing
our hearts from our prayers to our worldly businesses and occasions.

Zach. 12.10. And I will pour upon the House of David, and upon the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and of Supplications: and they
shall look upon me whom they have peirced, and they shall mourn for him, as one
mourns for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is
in bitterness for his first born. Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps
our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered. V. 27. And he that searches the hearts knows what is the mind of
the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the
will of God. Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness and access with confidence
by the Faith of him. Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. John 14.13. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that
will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. V. 14. If ye shall ask
any thing in my Name, I will do it. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. John 16.23. And in that day
ye shall ask me nothing: verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my name, he will give it you. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as lively
stones are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual Sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Isai. 48.17. Thus says
the Lord thy Redeemer, the holy One of Israel, I am the Lord thy God, which
teaches thee to profit, which leads thee by the way that thou should go.
Psalm. 32.5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid:
I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin, Selah. V. 6. For this shall every one that is Godly pray
unto thee in a time that thou may be found, surely in the floods of great
waters they shall not come nigh unto him. Psalm. 17.1. Hear the Right O Lord,
attend unto my Cry: give ear unto my Prayer, that goes not out of feigned
lips. Phil. 4.6* Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God. Psalm.
65.2. O thou that hear Prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come. Mich. 7.18.
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his Heritage? He retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in Mercy. Psalm. 145.18. The Lord is nigh unto all
them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. V. 19. He will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also will hear their cry and will
save them. Psalm. 50.15. And call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. Dan 9.14. Therefore has the Lord watched
upon the evil, and brought it upon us: for the Lord our God is righteous in all
his works which he does: for we obeyed not his voice. Mat. 7.7. Ask, and it
shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto
you. V. 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven.
1 John 5.13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of
the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may
believe on the Name of the Son of God. V. 14. And this is the Confidence that
we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.
V. 15. And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have
the petitions we desired of him. Psalm. 10.17. Lord, thou have heard the desire
of the humble, thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to
hear. Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all prayer, and supplication in the
Spirit, and watching thereto with all perseverance, and supplication for all
Saints. 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort therefore, that first of all supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, V. 2. For
Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty. Jam* 5.16. Confess your faults
one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed; the effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. Man. 5.44. But I say unto you,
love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. 2 Samuel 7.29.
Therefore now let it please thee to bless the House of thy Servant, that it
may continue for ever before thee, for thou O Lord have spoken it, and with thy
blessing let the House of thy servant be blessed for ever. 1 John 5.16. If any
man see his Brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he
shall give him life for them that sin not unto unto death; there is a sin unto
death, I do not say he shall pray for it. Genesis 18.27. And Abraham answered, and
said, behold, now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but
dust and ashes. Luke 18.13. And the Publican standing afar off, would not lift
up so much as his eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner. V. 14. I tell you this man went down to his house
justified rather than the other: for every one that exalts himself shall be
abased, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. Psalm. 51.17. The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken, and a contrite heart, O God,
thou will not despise. Job 22.27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he
shall hear thee; aad thou shall pay thy vows. 1 Samuel 1.15. And Hannah answered
and said, no, my Lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit, I have drunk neither
wine nor strong drink, but have poured out my soul before the Lord. 1 Cor.
14.15. What is it then? I will pray with the Spirit, and will pray with
understanding also: I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also. Mark 11.24. Therefore I say unto you, what things soever ye
desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.
Jam. 1.6. But let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering; for he that wavereth, is
like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind, and tossed. Psalm. 145.18. The
Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in
truth. 1 Timothy 2.8. I will therefore, that men pray every where, lifting up holy
hands without wrath and doubting. Mat. 26.39. And he went a little farther, and
fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this
Cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. Luke 11.13.
If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children: how much
more shall your Heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Romans
8.15. For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have
received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father. Acts 12.5. Peter
therefore, was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of the
Church, unto God for him. Mat. 6.9. After this manner therefore pray ye; Our
Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Luke 11.2. And he said unto
them, when ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name,
Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done, as in Heaven, so in earth. Thanksgiving.
Col. 3.17. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the Father by him. Heb. 13.15. By him
therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the
fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name. Psalm. 67.2. That thy way may be
known upon earth, thy saving health among all Nations. V. 3. Let the People
praise thee O God, let all the People praise thee. Psalm. 86.12. I will praise
thee O Lord my God, with all my heart, and I will glorify thy Name for
evermore. V. 13. For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my
soul from the lowest Hell. Psalm. 103.1. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that
is within me bless his holy Name. V. 2. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget
not all his benefits. Psalm. 47.7. For God is the King of all the Earth, Sing ye
praises with understanding. Col. 4.2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same
with Thanksgiving. Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? V. 13. I will take the Cup of salvation, and call upon the
Name of the Lord. Psalm. 115.1. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
Name give Glory: for thy mercy, and for thy Truths sake. Psalm. 106.21. They
forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt. Psalm. 66.16.
Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for
my Soul. Psalm. 105.2. Sing unto him, Sing Psalms unto him, talk ye of all his
wondrous works. Psalm. 22.10. I was cast upon thee from the womb, thou art my
God from my mothers belly. Luke 17.17. And Jesus answered and said, were there
not ten cleansed, but where are the nine? V. 18. There are not found that
returned to give Glory to God, save this stranger. Psalm. 69.30. I will praise
the Name of God with a Song, and will magnify him with Thanksgiving. V. 31.
This also shall please the Lord better than an Ox, or Bullock, that has
horns and hoofes. Psalm. 50.13. Will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the
blood of Goats? V. 14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the
most High. Ephesians. 5.20. Giving thanks always for all things unto God, and the
Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 These. 5.17. Pray without
ceasing. V. 18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus concerning you. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ. Psalm. 57.7. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I
will sing and give praise. Psalm. 146.2. While I live I will praise the Lord, I
will sing praises to my God while I have my being. Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows
his owner, and the Ass his masters Crib; but Israel does not know, my people
does not Consider. Psalm. 147.19. He shows his word unto Jacob; his statutes
and his Judgments unto Israel. V. 20 He has not dealt so with any Nation: and
as for his Judgments they have not known them: Praise ye the Lord. Genesis 32.10.
I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth which
thou have showed unto thy Servant: for with my staff I passed over this
Jordan, and now am become two bands. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. But who am I? and what is
my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for
all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. Rev. 7.9. After
this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man could number, of all
Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands. V. 10.
And Cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which sits upon
the Throne, and unto the Lamb. V. 11. And all the Angels stood round about the
Throne, and about the Elders, and four beasts; and fell before the Throne on
their faces, and worshipped God. V. 12. Saying, Amen, Blessing, and Glory, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might be unto our God for
ever, and ever, Amen. Rev. 19.1. And after these things, I heard a great voice
of much people in Heaven, saying, Alleluja, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor,
and Power unto the Lord our God. V. 3. And again they said Alleluja -- V. 4.
And the four and twenty Elders and the four beasts fell down, and worshipped
God that sat on the Throne, saying, Amen, Alleluja. V. 5. And a voice came out
of the Throne, saying, Praise our God all ye his Servants, and ye that fear him
both small and great. Thirdly, Be frequent, and diligent in reading the holy
Scriptures.

When thou read the Commands, the Promises, the Threatenings therein
contained, think God speaks to thee in them; And God must needs be true, he
cannot lie, nor deceive.

Now there is sufficient evidence that the Scripture is his Word, and written
by the especial inspiration of his holy Spirit; and that will appear if we
consider these three things.

1. The internal Light of its own perfection. The holiness and heavenlinesse
of the matter; the Majesty of the Style; the Consent of all the Parts; the
Scope of the whole (which is to give all Glory to God) and the full discovery
therein made of the only way of man's salvation and reconciliation with God.
Which is a suitable way both to Gods Glory, and man's Necessity.

2. The many providential attestations and confirmations of the Truth of the
things therein contained, by real and undeniable miracles, such as could not be
wrought but by the power of God. And surely, if the Scripture had been only the
device of men, God would some way or other have disowned it ere this, as a
notorious abuse put upon him, and not so constantly have preserved it in spite
of the Devil, and all his instruments, who have labored to banish it out of
the world, and to weaken the authority of it.

3. The great and wonderful efficacy of the doctrine therein delivered, to
enlighten, convince, and humble sinners; to drive them out of themselves, and
to draw them to Christ, to conform them to the Image of God, to subdue them to
his will, to strengthen them against temptations and corruptions, to build them
up in Grace, to establish their hearts in holiness; and lastly, to comfort
them through Faith unto salvation.

As therefore the holy Ghost by special inspiration, was the author of the
Scripture, and by extraordinary endowments was the author of the miracles
wrought for its confirmation; so also he is the author of the Faith of him that
truly and unfeignedly believes it. Yet he does not cause us to believe by
Enthusiasm without any reason or evidence, but he enlightens the understanding
(removing the blindness and depravednesse thereof,) and shows us the
credibility of the thing, and the evidence of the truth that is to be believed,
and so persuades the heart to a belief thereof. Indeed, an historical belief of
the Scripture (which is true in its kind) we may come to, by rational
persuasions, without the special Grace, or illumination of the Spirit of God;
but not that deep and firm belief, which shall carry over the will effectually
to God in Christ; and captivate the whole man to the obedience of the Truth.
And when such a Faith, and belief of the Scripture as this, (attended with
sanctification) is wrought in the soul; the effect is, a good argument, to
confirm the truth, and excellency of such a Faith, and belief.

1. Labor therefore to work thy heart to a high and reverent esteem of the
Word, when thou go to read it. We should read it as a Letter written by the
hand of God from Heaven unto us. If an Angel should bring us a letter from
Heaven, we should highly value it and regard it. The Bible is a message sent
from Heaven, to acquaint us with the mind of God. If we own the divine
authority thereof, let us read it with reverence, and due regard.

2. Beg the Spirit of God (that endited the Scripture, that inspired, and
infallibly guided and assisted the penmen thereof) to open thy eyes, to
illuminate thy mind, and to incline thy heart to a full belief and persuasion
that it is the very Word of God, and to bring over thy will to a sincere
obedience, and compliance with the will of God therein revealed.

3. Remember that all things necessary to man's salvation, are either expressly
set down in the Scripture, or by good and necessary consequence may be deduced
therefrom: Unto which nothing is at any time to be added, either by new
revelations, or traditions of men; it being a perfect Canon, a perfect rule of
Faith and life. St. John, who outlived the rest of the Apostles, sealed up the
Canon, Rev. 22.18, 19. which was a great mercy to the world; For God saw what a
liberty man inclined to in divine things, and therefore needed to be tied up to
a rule, which here is given us. There is enough delivered in the Scripture to
make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. What should a Christian desire more?
and the Apostle tells us, we ought to give heed thereto till the day star arise
in our hearts, that is, till we have full communion with Christ. Mr. Manton on
Jude.
For our reward in Heaven is expressed by the morning star, Rev. 2.28. To him
that over-cometh, I will give the morning star.

4. Take notice, that those things that are necessary to be known, believed,
and observed for salvation, are so clearly propounded, and opened in some place
of Scripture or other, that not only the learned, but the unlearned also, in a
due use of the ordinary means God has appointed, may attain unto a sufficient
understanding of them. If there arise any question about the true and full
sense and meaning of any Scripture, it must be searched and known by other
places that speak more clearly. The certain rule of interpreting the Scripture,
is the Scripture it self. The Scripture, says Camero, is so penned, that they
that have a mind to know, may know. They that have a mind to wrangle, may take
occasion enough of offense, and justly perish by the rebellion of their own
reason, for God never intended (says he,) to satisfy men of a stubborn and
perverse wit. And Tertullian long before him, has told us, that God has so
disposed the Scripture that they that will not be satisfied might be hardened.

5. And lastly, Remember, that the supreme Judge, by which all con^rove^sies of
Religion are to be ^ried, all decrees of Councils, opinions of ancient writers,
doctrines of men, and private spirits are to be examined, in whose sentence we
are to rest, can be no other than the Holy Spirit of God speaking in and by the
Scriptures; for what the Scripture says, God speaks by it.

Isa. 8 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them. John 5.39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which
testify of me. V. 4^. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me:
for he wrote of me. Acts 17.11. These were more noble than those in
Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. V. 12. Therefore
many of them believed: also of the honorable women, which were Greeks, and of
men not a few. Luke 16.29. Abraham says unto him, they have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. V. 31. And he said unto him, if they hear not
Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the
dead. 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do
well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until
the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. V. 20. Knowing this first,
that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation. V. 21. For
the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Timothy 3.15. And that from a child
thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. V. 16. All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness. V. 17. That the man of God may
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Luke 10.26. What is
written in the Law? how read thou? Romans 15.4. For whatsoever things were
written afore-time, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Deuteronomy. 17.18. And it shall be, when
he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a Copy of
this Law in a book, out of that which is before the Priests the Levites. V. 19.
And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life,
that he may learn to fear the Lord, his God, to keep all the words of this Law,
and these statutes to do them. Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect
converting the soul; the Testimony of the Lord is sure making wise the simple.
Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed
thereto according to thy word. V. 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a
light unto my paths. V. 130. The entrance of thy words gives light, it gives
understanding unto the simple. Psalm. 147.19. He shows his word unto Jacob,
his statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. V. 20. He has not dealt so with
any Nation, and as for his Judgments they have not known them. Praise ye the
Lord. Mat. 4.4. But he answered and said, it is written, man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. V. 7.
Jesus said unto him, it is written again, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God. V. 10. Then he says unto him, get thee hence Satan: for it is written,
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Ephesians. 2.20.
And are built upon the foundation of Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief cornerstone. Luke 24.27. And beginning at Moses, and
all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things
concerning himself. V. 44. And he said unto them, these are the words which I
spoke unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled
which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms
concerning me. Romans 3.2. Much every way, chiefly because unto them were
committed the Oracles of God. Gal. 1.8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let
him be accursed. V. 9. As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach
any other Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be accursed. 2
Pet. 3.15. And account that the long suffering of the Lord is salvation, even
as our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, has
written unto you. V. 16. As also in all his Epistles, speaking in them of these
things: in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned, and unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto
their own destruction. Mat. 22.29. Jesus answered, and said unto them, ye do
err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. V. 31. But as touching
the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken to you by
God, saying. Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all
wisdom, teaching, and admonishing one another in psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with Grace in your hearts to the Lord. Fourthly, Live
continually as in the view of God, as in his sight, and presence, being careful
to approve thy heart, and all thy ways unto him. Remember there is a broad,
and a pure eye of Glory always fixed upon thee God sees hearts, as we see
faces. There are three things in the heart of man to be especially heeded, and
observed. Principles, Projects, and Ends. God sees what Principles thou actest
from. He sees all the projects and contrivances that are forging in thy
breast; and he sees what are the ends thou aimest at in all thy undertakings.
That is pure Religion, that eyes God rather than man. In all thy actions
therefore, whether natural, moral, or spiritual, be careful still to design
the Glory of God.

1. In natural Acts, labor to have supernatural aims, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether
ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all the Glory of God.

2. In civil Acts, such as the discharge of the duties of thy relations, be
careful so to walk as designing that God may have Glory by thy Faithfulness.
For so the Apostle advises, Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord,
for this is right. V. 5. Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters,
according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of heart as unto
Christ. V. 6. Not with eie-service as men pleasers, but as the servants of
Christ, doing the will of God from the heart. And Titus 2.9, 10. Exhort
Servants to be obedient to their own Masters, and to please them well in all
things, not answering again. V. 10. Not purloyning, but showing all good
fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

3. In spiritual Acts, such as praying, praising God, and worshipping of him,
be especially careful that thy aims be spiritual. Do ye fast to me, even to
me? says God, by the Prophet, Zach. 7.5. He makes no account of any of our
Acts of Piety, except we aim at his Glory in them.

What an excellent frame of Spirit was there in holy David, who professes,
Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me. Did we but keep this one
common Principle warm upon our hearts, that God sees; how would it keep us
sincere and upright? How would it deter us from heart sins, and the closest
hypocrisy, and from warping into any sinful practice? This was that which kept
Joseph so upright, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? Ask thy self therefore often this question, Will this be pleasing
to God that I am now going about? If credit or shame will restrain thee from
sin, how much more should Gods eye? Nothing more feeds, maintains, and
preserves Piety, than a constant awe of God. David gives the reason the wicked
are so bad, They have not set God before them, Psalm. 86.14. Abraham was afraid
of himself in Gerar, Genesis 20.11. And what was the reason? why says he, the
fear of God is not in this place. Men durst as well run their heads into a hot
flaming Oven, as sin against God, so impudently as they do, if they thought he
saw them, and would call them to an account.

The fear of God is a Grace of continual use; If that be not before our eyes,
we are exceeding apt to grow careless and secure. We cannot be always praying
unto God, nor praising of him, nor worshipping of him, nor employed in Acts of
special communion with him. Yet we ought to be always in his fear, and to
remember, that we are always under his eye. Be thou in the fear of the Lord
all the day long; it is Solomon's advice, Prove. 23.17. Right thoughts of God are
the fuel that maintains the life of Religion, which otherwise would be soon
extinguished. Remember therefore Gods Omnipresence, and that will make thee
upright, and careful to approve thy heart unto him. Sincerity, it is the life of
all our Graces, and puts life into all our duties. Faith unfeigned, Love
without dissimulation, a plain Spirit in which there is no guile, these are
Gods delight.

The clearer therefore thou stand in thy own thoughts, concerning the
uprightness of thy heart, in the tenure of thy Christian course, incomparably
the more joy and comfort thou will have. Let integrity and uprightness preserve
me, was David's prayer, Psalm. 25.21. Keep thy integrity; and thy integrity will
keep thee: A good man, next to his care that he give not God any occasion
against him, will take care that he give not his Conscience any occasion
against him. Be afraid therefore of giving thy Conscience any just occasion to
reproach, and rebuke thee; Conscience, it is Gods Magistrate within, that is
appointed to be a terror not to good works, but to the evil. Would thou then
not be afraid of this power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise
of the same; to allude to that in Romans 13. O! it is exceeding sweet, (no man
knows how sweet but he that has it) to have the testimony of a good
Conscience, upon good grounds. A good Conscience, it is the best pillow to sleep
upon, the best dish to feed upon; a dish said I? nay, it is a feast, a continual
feast, Prove. 15.15. Would thou fare deliciously every day, keep a good
Conscience.

Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his sight,
but all things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to
do. Psalm. 119.168. I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies, for all my
ways are before thee. Psalm. 139.3. Thou compassest my path, and my lying down,
and art acquainted with all my ways. Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always
before me, because he is at my right hand I shall not be moved. Genesis 5.24. And
Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him. Heb. 11.5. By Faith
Enoch was translated that he should not see death, and was not found, because
God had translated him, for before his translation he had this testimony that
he pleased God. Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just man, and upright in his generation,
and Noah walked with God. Prove. 5.20. And why will thou my Son be ravished with
a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? V 21. For the ways of a
man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings. Genesis
39.9. There is none greater in this house than I, neither has he kept back any
thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife, how then can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 42 18. And Joseph said unto them the
third day, this do and live, for I fear God. Job 34.21. For his eyes are upon
the ways of man, and he sees all his goings. V. 22. There is no darkness, nor
shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. Job 27.6.
My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go, my heart shall not
reproach me so long as I live. Isa. 38.3. And Hezekiah said, remember now O
Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight, and Hezekiah wept sore. 1
John 3.20. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and
knows all things. V. 21. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we
confidence toward God. 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony
of our Conscience, that in simplicity, and Godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world,
but more abundantly to you-wards. Psalm. 32.2. Blessed is the man unto whom the
Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. Psalm. 78.34.
When he slew them, then they sought him, and they returned, and enquired early
after God. V. 35. And they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God
their Redeemer. V. 36. Nevertheless they flattered him with their mouth, and
they lied to him with their tongues. V. 37. For their heart was not right with
him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. Genesis 17.1. And when Abraham
was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared to Abraham, and said unto
him, I am the Almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect. Ephesians. 6.24.
Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.
Fifthly, Labor daily to live by Faith.

Having given up and committed thy penitent Soul into the hands of Christ, to
have thy pardon and peace procured by his merits and intercession; learn also
daily to trust, and depend on the goodness of God, and his gracious promises,
for a supply of all such blessings both spiritual and temporal as thou stand
in need of.

I shall show thee what it is to live the life of Faith in these ten
particulars.

1. Seek unto the Lord, and daily trust and depend on him for the assistance of
his holy Spirit, for Grace and strength effectually to enable thee, to subdue
thy corruptions, and to mortify all sinful vile affections in thee.

Luke 11.9. And I say unto you, ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye
shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. V. 10. For every one that
asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it
shall be opened. V. 11. If a Son shall ask bread of any of you that is a
Father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give
him a Serpent? V. 12. Or if he ask an egg, will he offer him a Scorpion? V.
13. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how
much more shall your Heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?
Jam. 4.5. Do ye think the Scripture says in vain, the Spirit that dwells in
us lusts to envy. V. 6. But he gives more Grace: wherefore he says, God
resists the proud, but gives Grace to the humble. 2 Cor. 12 9. And he said
unto me, my Grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in
weakness, most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me. Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion
over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. 2. Trust in him to
enable thee to resist and overcome the temptations wherewith thou shall be
assaulted from the Devil or the world.

Mat. 6.13. Lead us not into temptation. 2 Chronicles. 32.31. Howbeit in the
business of the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to
enquire of the wonder that was done in the Land, God left him, to try him, that
he might know all that was in his heart. 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant,
because your adversary the Devil as a roaring lion walks about seeking whom
he may devour. V. 9. Whom resist, steadfast in the Faith. Jam. 4.7. -- Resist
the Devil, and he will flee from you. 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, nor the
things that are in the world; if any man love the world, the love of the Father
is not in him. V. 16. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father. 1 John 5.4.
Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world; and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our Faith. John 17.15. I pray not that thou should
take them out of the world, but that thou should keep them from the evil. V.
20 Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word. 3. Humbly depend on him to assist and enable thee to
perform all the duties both of thy general and particular calling, with
sincerity, diligence, and delight.

2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of
our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. Phil. 4 13. I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me. Psalm. 87.7. All my Springs are in thee. 4.
Trust in him to enable thee to bear all the afflictions he shall please to lay
upon thee, with patience, affiance in his mercy, and submission to his will.

Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all might according to his glorious power, unto
all patience and long-suffering, with joyfulnesse. 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no
temptation taken you but such as is common to man; but God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able; but with the
temptation will also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Romans
5.3. But we glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation works
patience, Rev. 13 10. Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints. 5. As
thou must continually depend on God for a supply of all those Graces, and
comforts thy soul stands in need of; so likewise thou must depend daily on his
Fatherly care to be furnished and supplied with all such outward mercies as
thou stand in need of for this life.

Mat. 6 11. Give us this day our daily bread. Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord is a
Sun and a shield, the Lord will give Grace and Glory; no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly 1 Timothy 4.8. For bodily exercise
profits little; but Godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. 2 Pet. 1.3. According as
his divine power has given us all things that pertain unto Life and
Godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to knowledge and
virtue. 6. Humbly depend on him for direction and guidance in all thy lawful
ways, and to be counseled in difficult cases, and matters of great
concernment to thee.

Prove. 3.5. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not unto thine own
understanding. V. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy
paths. Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee,
he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved. Jer. 10.23. O Lord I know that
the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his
steps. Prove. 16.9. A man's heart devises his way, but the Lord directs his
steps. Psalm 32.8. I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou
shall go: I will guide thee with mine eye. Psalm. 17.5. Hold up my goings in thy
paths, that my footsteps slip not. Psalm 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy
counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory. Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask of God that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not, and it shall be given him. V. 6. But let him ask in Faith, nothing
wavering, etc. 7. Daily trust in him to be protected, and preserved from
dangers, evils, and mischiefs (as far forth as he shall see it good for thee)
and that his holy Angels may have charge over thee, and may perform all those
good offices for thee, which he has appointed them to do for those who shall
be heirs of Salvation.

Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for
them who shall be heirs of Salvation? Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them. Mat. 18.10. Take
heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you, that in
Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven.
Psalm. 91.1. He that dwells in the secret place of the most high, shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty. V. 4. He shall cover thee with his Feathers,
and under his Wings shall thou trust. V. 10. There shall no evil befall thee,
neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. V. 11. For he shall give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. V. 12. They shall bear
thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. 8. Trust in
him to be blessed and made successeful in all thy lawful endeavors. For though
man do his endeavor, yet success is only his to give.

Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall
bring it to pass. Psalm. 62.5. My Soul wait thou only upon God, for my
expectation is from him. Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord build the house, they
labor in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the City, the watchman
waketh but in vain. V. 2. It is in vain for you to rise up early, and to sit up
late, to eat the bread of sorrows; for so he gives his beloved sleep. 9. Look
up to him, and humbly depend on him, to have all lawful enjoyments and
possessions sanctified to thee; that they may be sweetened to thee, with a sense
of his love and favor in Christ, and then they will be blessings indeed.

Prove. 10.22. The blessing of the Lord it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow
with it. Psalm 37.16. A little that a righteous man has, is better than the
riches of many wicked. Prove. 15.16. Better is a little with the fear of the
Lord, than great treasure and trouble therewith. Heb. 13.5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as ye
have; for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. 10. Humbly
trust in him for the assistance of his holy Spirit, to enable thee daily to
grow in Grace, and to persevere and hold out in the ways of truth, and
holiness, till thou attainest the end of thy Faith, even the salvation of thy
soul.

2 Pet. 1.5. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your Faith,
virtue; and to virtue, knowledge. V. 6. And to knowledge, temperance; and to
temperance, patience, and to patience, Godliness. V. 7. And to Godliness,
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity. 2 Pet. 3. ult. But
grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to
him be Glory both now and for ever, Amen. 1 Cor. 10.12. Wherefore let him that
thinks he stands take heed lest he fall. Romans 14.4. Who art thou that
judge another man's servant, to his own Master he stands or falls: yea, he
shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand. Jude 24. Now unto him
that is able to keep you from falling, and present you faultlesse before the
presence of his Glory, with exceeding joy. V. 25. To the only wise God, our
Savior, be glory, and majesty, dominion, and power, now and ever, Amen. 1 Cor.
1.8. Who shall also confirm you, unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ. V. 9. God is faithful, by whom ye were called
unto the fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept
by the power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. Luke 22.32. But I have
prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not, and when thou art converted,
strengthen thy Brethren. Jer. 32.40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant
with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put
my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Heb. 12.2. Looking
unto Jesus the author, and finisher of our Faith, etc. John 17.24. Father, I
will, that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my Glory which thou have given me: for thou lovedst me before the
foundation of the world. And that thou may the better practice this excellent
lesson of living by Faith, take these further Directions.

Direction 1. Labor to strengthen thy assent to the truth of the word of God.
Unbelief it is a mother sin. There was a faultring of assent in our first
parents to the truth of Gods commination concerning eating of the forbidden
tree, else they had not fallen so sadly: and still it is the ground of all
miscarriages, of hardness of heart, and apostasy, Heb. 3.12, 13, Take heed,
Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing
from the living God. But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day,
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

He that believes not the judgments, and threatenings of the Word will not
stick to do any evil: and he that does not believe the promises, will not be
forward to any good: All neglect, and coldness in holy duties, comes from the
weakness of our Faith: there is a decay at the root. Did we firmly believe the
Glory of Heaven, and the happiness of the life to come, we would be earnest
and zealous for the obtaining of it.

Direction 2. Labor to be well acquainted with the promises of God, and learn
to stay thy soul upon them: If an able potent friend promise help in troubles,
how are we cheared with it? Ought not the promises of God then to be a strong
consolation to us? The proper life of a Christian is to take his comforts, and
supports from the promises of God, and not only from his outward providence.
God many times alters the dispensations of his Providence, but does not alter
his promises. The promises are the Saints inheritance, Isa. 54.17. No weapon
that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise
against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn; this is the heritage of the
Servants of the Lord, Whilst Christ is at Gods right hand, and the Bible in the
hand of gracious persons, they need not be dejected in any condition, Why art
thou cast down O my soul! and why art thou disquieted within me! So David
chides his soul, and rebukes his fears, Psalm. 42.5. and Psalm 77.10. This is my
infirmity, He bewailes his unbelief, and chides his heart for dejection and
distrust of Gods Providence.

Direction 3. Live upon God, and account him all in all, even in thy highest
and fullest enjoyment of the creature. Let not the creature be the object of
thy trust at any time. Trust and dependence is the greatest homage and respect
we can yield to the Creator. Therefore Job Chap. 31.24. says, If I have made
Gold my hope, or have said to the fine Gold, thou art my confidence. V. 25. If
I have rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because my hand had gotten
much, etc. V. 28. I should have denied the God that is above. Men are very apt
to make riches the staff of their lives, and the stay of their posterity; and
so their hearts leaning on them, are taken off from God. The great danger of
riches is the trusting in them, Mark 10.23. Jesus says unto his Disciples, how
hardly shall those that have riches enter into the Kingdom of God. V. 24. And
the Disciples were astonished at his word, But Jesus answers again, and says
unto them, children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into
the Kingdom of God?

How many rich men are there, that look upon themselves as it were entrenched
within their estates, and so promise themselves security against all dangers.
Thus God is not regarded, but their wealth, and worldly greatness is made
their rock and fortress: therefore covetousness is called Idolatry, Col 3.5.
And the covetous man an Idolater, not so much for his love to riches, as his
trust in riches. Take heed therefore of making an Idol of the creature, do not
build thy happiness, or felicity, on any thing thou do here enjoy. When God
affords thee creature comforts, trust not in them. Live upon God in the use,
and live upon God in the absence of the creature.

Direction 4. Use lawful and fair means, for accomplishing and bringing about
thy lawful designs, but let thy main trust be on God. Do thy duty, and commit
thy self and thy affairs to him in quietness of heart. For a man to say, he
trusts in God, and yet neglects to do his duty, this is but to mock God; a
moderate care in the management of our aff^irs is very commendable, which puts
a man upon prayer, and an humble diligence in the use of lawful means; that
once done, a Christian should labor after a holy moderation and composedness
of Spirit: and should take heed his heart be not fixed too much on any thing
here below to his disturbance. He should put all his ways and affairs into
Gods hands. He should wait patiently, how God will cast his affairs; and then
submit, and acquiesse in the issues of Providence. O how sweet a life leads
that Christian, who lives in continual dependence on God! This kind of life
discharges the creature of all that is burdensome; of all carking cares, and
tormenting fears; It leaves nothing upon him, but a conscionable use of the
means, no life makes us so humble, so lowly, so nothing in our own eyes, as
this life of Faith, which fetches all from God. Faith uses means, but
trusts in God alone.

In all thy affairs therefore still seek to the Lord, and apply thy self unto
him, and trust in him. We are dark creatures, and easily overshoot our selves;
we have not wisdom enough to manage our own affairs. God can counsel us, when
we know not how to give counsel to our selves: And God takes it well to be
advised with by us. Hereby we acknowledge our subjection to him, when we will
nor stir a foot without advising with him, when we desire not to be ordered by
our own wisdom, but trust in the Lord with all our hearts, and do not lean to
our own understanding; as Solomon advises, Prove. 3.5. Take heed therefore of
inordinate carfulness, and distrusting God. Consider the evil of rhis sin in
these four particulars.

1. No sin more dishonours God, and robs him of his Glory, than this sin does.
It cannot indeed rob God of his essential, but it does of his declarative
Glory. We glorify God declaratively when we trust in him, and thereby declare
to the world, that we own and acknowledge those his excellencies of wisdom,
power, mercy, faithfulness, which his Word ascribes unto him: And therefore
it is said of Abraham, Romans 4.20. That he staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief; but was strong in Faith, giving Glory to God. V. 21. As being
fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able also to perform, ver.
22. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness. Unbelief does
blemish all those four attributes of God, before mentioned, his Wisdom, his
Power, his Goodness, his Faithfulness; it is an interpretative blasphemy, and
calling all these into question, and so an high injury and dishonor unto God:
Whereas faith is said to justify God, Luke 7.29. that is, to profess and
acknowledge him to be such a God as his Word reveals him to be.

2. Nothing does more debar, and shut out Gods operation, in order to our
relief and help than this sin. If by taking only moderate and due care, we
would resign up our selves, and our concernments into the hands of God, he
would charge himself with us. But if we will immoderatly cark and care, and be
so peremptory in our designs, and will not submit them unto him; then God is
discharged, we must look to our selves. Therefore it is not only our duty, but
our interest, to resign up our selves to God, and to submit our concernments
to his will.

3. Unbelief it is a sin, against which God has exceedingly declared his
displeasure: The Apostle tells us, the children of Israel were destroyed in the
wilderness for unbelief; Many were their sins there, Murmurings, lustings,
Idolatry, but the main reason of their punishment was, they believed not. Look
to their final excision, and cutting off, why what was it for? for unbelief
were they broken off, Romans 11.20. That noble man in 2 Kings 8.2. was trodden to
death for distrusting Gods power, and could only see the plenty, did not taste
of it. Moses and Aaron could not enter into the land of promise because of
their unbelief, Number. 20.12. And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, because ye
believe me not, to Sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel,
therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given
them. Zachary was struck dumb for not believing what God had revealed. Christ
did never chide his Disciples for any thing so much as their unbelief, Luke
24.25. O ye fools, and slow of heart to believe. And, why doubt ye O ye of
little Faith, Mat. 8.26.

4. It Is a Paganish sin, as our Savior intimates, Mat. 6. For Heathens to be
full of carking and caring, is not so much to be wondered at, but for us that
profess to believe in God, that do acknowledge a particular Providence, and
believe the happiness of another world, to be under the tyranny of distracting
cares, anxiety of mind, and thoughtfulness, (as if God had no care of us) this
is an exceeding unworthy carriage toward God. Take heed therefore of
distrusting God, and overcharging thy self with the cares of this life. Let not
thy heart be too much fixed on any thing here below. Lay not these outward
things too much to heart. And remember that then cares are inordinate, when
they cause such a tumultuousness, and unquietness in our thoughts, and
affections, that reason is disturbed, and cannot allay or compose them: or when
they exceedingly hinder, or quite put us by the duties we ought to perform to
God; or lastly, when they cause a sinking, or dying in the heart, (as Nabals
heart is said to die within him) when we are disappointed in that we were so
eagerly solicitous about. And therefore our Savior in Mat. 6. bids us take no
thought, and repeats it three several times, as v. 25. Therefore I say unto
you, take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink,
nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. V. 31. Therefore take no thought,
saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink; or wherewithal shall we be
clothed? V. 34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall
take thought for the things of it self, sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof.

Direction 5. Take heed of limiting God. 1. Either to the time of fulfilling
his promises. Or 2. To the way; Faith does not limit the holy One of Israel, to
any set time, or any set means. Do thy duty therefore, and resign thy self to
God; Commit thy self, and all concernments to his Fatherly care: and be not
over-solicitous or perplexed about events. What strange distrustful language do
the children of Israel use in Psalm. 78.20. Can the Lord prepare a table in the
wilderness, can he give bread also? Can he provide flesh for his people? And
therefore at v. 41. What a black character is given of them, They turned back,
and tempted God, and limited the holy One of Israel. We must not prescribe to
God, we must not go about to subject his Providence to our direction, and
prescribe what he shall do for our satisfaction.

Direction 6. Reflect upon the Lords past kindness, and gracious dealings with
thee. Consider how much God has done for thee, and for others, that have
trusted in him: and that will tend very much to encourage thee still to trust
in him. The more experience and manifestation of Gods power and presence thou
have had, the greater reason thou have, to cast away all unbelief from thee. It
exceedingly provoked God against Israel, that notwithstanding so many
experiences of his power, yet still they distrusted him, Number. 14.11. And the
Lord said, unto Moses, how long will this people provoke me? And how long will
it be ere they believe me? for all the signs I have showed among them. By
every experience we should grow up into a greater courage, and strength of
Faith, as David drew inferences of hope against the present danger, from the
lion and the bear, 1 Samuel 17.36. Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear,
and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he has
defied the Armies of the living God. Or as Paul said, 2 Cor. 1.10. He has, and
does, and therefore will deliver. Who delivered us from so great a death; and
does deliver; in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. Christ was angry
with his Disciples for not remembering the miracle of the loaves, when they were
in a like strait again, Mat 16.9. Do ye not yet understand, neither remember
the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? God is
more angry with the unbelief of his children than of others, because they have
more experience of his love and care, and therefore that they should distrust
him that never failed them, is very ungrateful.

2 Cor. 5.7. For we walk by Faith, not by sight. Hab. 2.4. Behold his soul
which is lifted up is not upright in him, but the just shall live by his Faith.
Gal 2.20 I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Job. 13.15.
Though he slay me yet will I trust in him. Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon
the Lord, and he shall sustain thee, he shall never suffer the righteous to be
moved. 1 Cor. 7.32. But I would have you without carefulness, etc. Phil. 4.6.
Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God. 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all
your care upon him, for he cares for you. 1 Cor. 7.35. This I speak for your
own profit -- that you may attend upon the Lord without distraction. Psalm.
119.49. Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to
hope. Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the lord are mercy and truth to such as
keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. Psalm. 112.7. He shall not be afraid of
evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord. Psalm. 89.33.
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him nor suffer my
faithfulness to fail. Psalm. 62.9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men
of high degree are a lie, to be laid in the balance they are altogether
lighter than vanity 2 Chronicles. 14.8. And Asa had an army of men, that bare
targets, and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand, and out of Benjamin
that bare shields, and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand, all
these were mighty men of valor. V. 11. And Asa cried unto the Lord his God,
and said, Lord it is nothing with thee to help whether with many, or with them
that have no power; help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy
Name we go against this multitude: O Lord, thou art our God, let not man
prevail against thee. 2 Chronicles. 20.12. O our God! will thou not judge them? for
we have no might against this great company that comes against us, neither
know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. Romans 4.19. And being not weak
in Faith he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about one hundred
years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb. Psalm. 73.28. But it is good
for me to draw near to God, I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may
declare all thy works. Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose
mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. Isa. 50.10. Who is among
you that fears the Lord, that obeieth the voice of his servant, that walks
in darkness, and has no light? let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God. Psalm. 1^.14. The poor commits himself unto thee, thou art the
helper of the Fatherless. Psalm. 62.5. My soul, wait thou only upon God, for my
expectation is from him. V. 6. He only is my rock, and my salvation, he is my
defense, I shall not be moved. 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him
are yea, and in him Amen, unto the Glory of God by us. Josh. 21.45. There
failed not ought of any good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the house of
Israel, all came to pass. Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have, for he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Romans 8.28. And we know that all things
work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called
according to his purpose. Mat. 6 30. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of
the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not
much more cloth you, O ye of little Faith! Psalm. 34.9. O fear the Lord ye his
Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him. V. 10. The young lions do
lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good
thing. Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord is a Sun and a shield, the Lord will give
Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly. Isa. 54.17. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and
every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shall condemn, this
is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me,
says the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 16.9. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro,
throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose
heart is perfect toward him. John 11.40. Jesus says unto her, said I not unto
thee, that if thou would believe, thou should see the Glory of God.
Sixthly, Observe all the passages of his Providence toward thee, whether of
justice, or mercy, Take notice of every frown, and every smile from God, and
that will much direct thee, how to order thy services of prayer, and praise,
and teach thee submission to his holy will. Many duties depend on the
consideration and taking notice of Gods Providential dispensations. How blame
worthy then are they, that do not care to observe or regard the works of God?
Certainly, it is our duty, to observe and acknowledge Gods sovereignty and
dominion in the world, and over all events here below, (not a sparrow, not a
hair falls to the ground without our Heavenly Father) And where we cannot
understand the ways of God, let us with an humble reverence believe, and
admire the wisdom of them. The deep and unsearcheable ways of God are not to
be judged before the Tribunal of man's reason. Labor therefore to get a firm
belief of this great truth, settled in thy soul, that God governs all humane
affairs, and thou will find it of great efficacy against those damps and
dejections of mind, that in afflictions we are too prone unto; and it will be a
singular antidote against all murmurings, and repinings. How did this
consideration quiet and compose the heart of old Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the
Lord. And David on the same account says, I was dumb, and opened not my mouth,
because thou did it, Psalm. 39.9. So when a sore and terrible affliction fell
upon Aaron, (his two sons Nadab and Abihu being consumed by fire from Heaven)
all that the Scripture reports of his carriage and demeanor is this, And Aaron
held his peace, Lev. 10.3. As therefore thou art dilgently to observe and mind
Gods Providential dispensations toward thee, so remember it is thy duty, and
ought to be the posture of thy Spirit, that whatever he takes from thee, or
whatever he does unto thee, perfectly and absolutely to submit to his will.
Remember there is no resisting the Almighty, Shall a Grasshopper contend with an
Eagle? Shall we that are worms contend with our maker? If we consider our
sinfulness and guilt, we have reason to admire he afflicts us no more; If as
the unjust steward in the Gospel for one hundred, set down but fifty; so if God
for an hundred stripes due to us, inflicts but fifty, nay but ten, have we not
reason to be patient, and to say, He punishes less than our iniquities
deserve? Labor therefore to be patient under his hand. Murmuring and repining
does but increase our guilt, and provoke God to double our punishment. The
Parent takes up the child for whimpering and crying, as well as for any other
fault; not patiently to let God have his will, is the way to beg another
whipping from him. In patience therefore possess thy soul. Solomon says, If
the Iron be blunt, put the more strength to it, Eccles. 10.10. So say I, if the
affliction be strong, put the more patience to it. Let patience have its
perfect work (not only its half work) in thee. Patience meets God in such an
humble way, as discreet Abigail met David, let not my Lord be angry,
Impatience, and fretting against the Almighty, is just as if a man should beat
his shinnes against an iron bar; or as if he should throw a stone against
Heaven, that will be sure to fall on his own head. And further consider the
way to have what thou desire, is to submit to God, and lay thy self at his
feet: When thy soul is wrought to that perfect submission, that thou can
truly say, here I am, let the Lord do with me, what seems him good; Let the
Lord please himself, and he shall please me, thou have conquered the difficulty
of living in this world: Thou have got that precious art of chimistry, that
will extract gold out of any thing. Thou will be able in some measure with
blessed Paul to say, I have learned in all estates to be content. O labor and
pray for this happy posture of Spirit; and that thou may attain unto it, be
especially careful to secure thy interest in his favor, who is the great
Governor of the world, and disposer of all events; What a strong consolation
will it be to thee, if this God be thy God, thy reconciled Father in Christ?
thou may then be assured all things shall work together for thy good. Let the
wind blow from what point of the compass it will, it shall blow thee on
toward thy haven. Thou needst not fear the bitterest potion, if it come from
the hand of a loving Father. The Cup that my Father has given me, shall I not
drink it? says our Savior, John 18.11. What my Father prescribes, I have no
reason to fear any hurt from. If God be thy Father, and thou his adopted child,
th u may comfort thy self with this, that whatever he takes from thee, or
deprives thee of, he will supply to thee again (as one says) either in kind,
or in kindness; some way or other, he will make it up to thee. Kindness is
Gods sure pay to his children: if he takes all and gives himself to thee, he
makes thee an abundant amends. It Is want of Faith that we cannot find all in
God.

And as this consideration will exceedingly becalm thy mind in afflictions, so
when God dispenses himself in a way of mercy to thee, it will exceedingly raise
and quicken thy heart to thankfulness. Thou will give God the Glory of all his
mercies. Thou will not sacrifice to thine own net, to thine own wit, wisdom,
industry, friends, or any second cause, (much less to chance, fortune, or good
luck, as ignorant people speak) but thou will cast the Crown of all thy mercies
at his feet, humbly ascribing all Honor and Glory unto him. He will be owned
and acknowledged by thee as thy chief Lord. Thou will look upon thy self, as
holding all from him, and to be but his tenant at will, and therefore obliged
to pay him his rent duly and faithfully. And what is the rent he requires of
thee? but only to give him the Glory of all his mercies, and to honor him, and
magnify him, in the use of them. In a word, to love him, and thank him, to
serve him, and obey him, and to walk humbly before him all thy days.

Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven, and in Earth,
in the Seas, and in all deep places. Isa. 5.12. And the harp, and the viol, the
tabret and the pipe, and wine are in their feasts, but they regard not the work
of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. Psalm. 10.4. The
wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, God is not
in all his thoughts. Mat. 10.29. Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing? and
one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. V. 30. But the
very hairs of your head are all numbered. V. 31. Fear ye not therefore, ye are
of more value than many Sparrowes. Prove. 16.33. The lot is cast into the lap,
but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. Prove. 21.1. The Kings heart is
in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water, he turns it whithersoever he
will. Jer. 10.23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is
not in man that walks to direct his steps. Hab 1.16. Therefore they sacrifice
unto their net, and burn incense unto their drag; because by them their portion
is fat, and their meat plenteous. Lam. 3.37. Who is he that says, and it
comes to pass, when the Lord commands it not? Isa. 45.7. I form light, and
create darkness, I make peace, and create evil, I the Lord do all these
things. Amos 3.6. Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be
afraid? Shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Psalm.
46.11. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth because thou did it. Micah 7.9.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him:
until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me, he will bring me forth
to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness. 1 Samuel 3.18. And Samuel
told him every whit, and hid nothing from him, and he said it is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good. Job 1.21. And Job said, naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. 2 Samuel 16.10. And the King
said, what have I to do with you, ye sons of Zerviah? so let him curse, because
the Lord has said unto him, curse David, who shall then say, wherefore have
thou done so? 2 Samuel 15.25. And the King said unto Zadok, carry back the Ark of
God into the City: if I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will
bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation. V. 26. But if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as seems
good unto him. Deuteronomy. 8.10. When thou have eaten, and art full, then thou shall
bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he has given thee. V. 11.
Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandments,
and his Judgments, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day. V. 12. Lest
when thou have eaten, and art full, and have built goodly houses, and have
dwelt therein, V. 13. And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy
silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is multiplied, V. 14.
Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, (which brought
thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. V. 15. Who led
thee through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery Serpents,
and Scorpions, and drought, where there was no water, who brought thee forth
water out of the rock of flint. V. 16. Who fed thee in the wilderness with
Manna, which thy Fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and that he might
prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end,) V. 17. And thou say in thine
heart, my power, and the might of mine hand has gotten me this wealth. V. 18.
But thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power
to get wealth, that he may establish his Covenant which he swear unto thy
Fathers, as it is this day. Prove. 10.22. The blessing of the Lord it makes
rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. Psalm. 75.5. Lift not up your horn on
high, speak not with a stiff neck. V. 6. For promotion comes neither from the
East, nor from the West, nor from the South. V. 7. But God is the Judge, he
puts down one, and sets up another. Deuteronomy. 8.3. And he humbled thee, and
suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with Manna, which thou knew not,
neither did thy Fathers know: that he might make thee know that man does not
live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the
Lord does man live. Prove. 16.9. A man's heart devises his way, but the Lord
directs his steps. Jam. 4.13. Go to now, ye that say, to day, or to morrow we
will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get
gain. V. 14. Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow. 1 Cor. 4.19. But
I will come to you shortly if the Lord will, etc. Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord
build the house, they labor in vain that build it, except the Lord keep the
City the watchman waketh but in vain. V. 2. It is in vain for you to rise up
early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows, for so he gives his
beloved sleep. Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and
he shall bring it to pass. V. 6. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness
as the light, and thy judgment as the noon day. V. 7. Rest in the Lord, and
wait patiently for him, fret not thy self because of him who prospers in his
way, because of the man who brings wicked devices to pass. V. 16. A little
that a righteous man has, is better than the riches of many wicked. V. 23. The
steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way. V.
24. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth
him with his hand. V. 25. I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not
seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. V. 35. I have seen the
wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree. V. 36. Yet
he passed away, and Lo, he was not, yea I sought him but he could not be found.
V. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace. 1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord kills, and makes alive, he brings down to the
grave, and brings up. V. 7. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, he
brings low, and lifts up. V. 8. He raises up the poor out of the dust, and
lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make
them inherit the Throne of Glory, for the pillars of the earth are the Lords,
and he has set the world upon them. V. 9. He will keep the feet of his Saints,
and the wicked shall be silent in darkness, for by strength shall no man
prevail. Phil 4.11. Not that I speak in respect of want, for I have learned in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. V. 12. I know both how to be
abased, and I know how to abound: every where, and in all things I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer
need. Seventhly, Charge upon thy self with all seriousness, that great and
necessary duty of daily watchfulness.

Be not like those whose manner is to spend a little time in prayer in the
morning, and then to take their leave (as it were) of God, for all the day
after; but unto earnest and fervent prayer, add serious watchfulness.

And for thy better direction herein, I shall here first give thee a short
draught; or scheme of the several particulars I treat of under this head.

First, There are four things thou must watch over; Namely, 1. Thy Thoughts.
2. Thy Affections. 3. Thy Words. 4. Thy Actions.


Secondly, Six things thou must watch against; Namely, 1. Against those sins
thou art most inclined to by temper, and natural constitution. 2. Against the
sins thou art most obnoxious to, by reason of thy particular calling,
condition, state, and course of life. 3. Against the sins of the times and
places wherein thou live. 4. Against all occasions and temptations that thou
foreseest are likely to endanger thy soul. 5. Against dishonouring God in the
use of lawful things. 6. Against Error and seduction of mind.


Thirdly, One thing thou must watch for; Namely, For opportunities to glorify
God; to do good to others; and to receive good to thy own soul.


The Motives to quicken thee to this duty are these three. 1. Most of the sins
we commit, we fall into through carelessness, and want of watchfulness. 2. The
Devil the tempter is always watchful to betray us. 3. The necessity of
perseverance, whereunto a concurrence of our care and diligence is required.


First, The first thing I would advise thee carefully to watch over is thy
thoughts. Be very careful, not to lodge, or entertain any sinful thoughts in
thy mind: Sinful thoughts are the Reubens, the firstborn of original sin, and
the beginning of its strength. They exceedingly defile the soul, and are the
first movers to evil, and very abominable in the sight of God. Oh what reason
have we to be humbled for the vain, wanton, foolish, proud, wrathful, covetous,
blasphemous, idle, useless, unconcerning thoughts that do many times annoy us.

Let us therefore consider of some remedies against sinful thoughts.

1. Settle in thy mind a strong and deep apprehension of Gods Omni-presence,
and Omniscience; and overawe thy thoughts with this, that they are all seen,
and observed, and taken notice of by him.

2. Remember, that though in the worlds wicked proverb, thoughts are free;
because man cannot discern them, nor punish them, yet they are not free from
Gods observation, nor from his Law, which being spiritual, blndes the thoughts
of the heart, as well as the outward man; nor from his Justice, which will call
us to account for our sinful thoughts, nor from the rebukes and scourgings of
an awakened Conscience; which are no small punishments.

3. Let it be thy care to suppress, and crush bad thoughts at the very first
rising: Do not at all consent, or comply with them; but abhor, and abandon them
presently, and cry out unto the Lord for help against them: Take heed of
representing, or acting sin in thy thoughts. If thou would keep thy soul
pure, beware of speculative sinfulness.

4. Be careful to have a stock of good materials always in readiness for thy
thoughts to work upon. Have some good subjects ready to present and offer to
thy mind, to entertain thy thoughts with. A good man has a good treasure in
his heart, out of which he brings forth good things, Mat. 12.35. Let thy mind
therefore have always some good heads to meditate on: As the evil and danger
of sin, the necessity of conversion; thy absolute need of Christ; the vanity of
the creature; the shortness and uncertainty of this life; the everlastingness
of thy future state, etc.

5. Avoid Idleness, and allow not thy self in melancholy. If thou do not
employ thy mind about that which is good, it will busy it self about evil: The
mind of man if it be not well employed, will be ranging, and roving all over
the world, and will be intent on things it should not. The spirit of man is
active, and restless; It Is like a mill; it will be either grinding of that
which is put into it, or else working upon it self, wearing, and wearying it
self in foolish, fruitless, and unconcerning thoughts. Idleness is a grand
occasion of impure and impertinent thoughts: It Is the devils hour, in which he
takes advantage to fill and defile man's mind with wicked suggestions; and
melancholy disposes the mind to strange, absurd, incoherent, unreasonable
imaginations; to many sad, perplexing, afflicting thoughts. Man disquieteth
himself in vain, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 39.6. framing many imaginary evils
and grievances to himself, which God has not really laid upon him.

Let it be thy care therefore to keep thy mind well employed, either in the
duties of Piety, or the works of thy particular calling. When thou do relax
thy mind at any time, from being intent on serious things, for thy necessary
refreshment, be careful to allow thy self only in innocent cheerfulness; When
the loins of thy mind are ungirt, and thy thoughts let loose to run at random,
and have not Conscience set over them as a Governor, thou art in great danger
of sinning against God.

6. Do not cumber thy self with too much worldly business, that will
overcharge thy mind with solicitude, and force too many earthly thoughts upon
it: it will fill thee with distracting, disturbing thoughts, and torturing
cares. When Martha was careful, and troubled about many things, she neglected
the one thing necessary, Luke 10.41, 42.

7. Le^rn to spiritualize earthly obj^cts, and to raise holy meditations from
them. This will be an excellent and advantageous employment for thy mind. This
was our blessed Saviors practice, and can thou follow a better example?

8. Learn to divert and put by bad thoughts, by introducing and bringing in
some good thoughts that are contrary to them into their rooms: Thus overcome
evil thoughts by good thoughts. If self magnifying thoughts come in; bring in
self abasing: If distrustful; put thy soul upon thinking of Gods Faithfulness:
If revengefull; think how much thou need forgiveness from God: Thus let one
wedge drive out another.

9. Beg of God to new mould thy mind, and to put it into such an holy and
heavenly frame, that it may be fit to produce good thoughts, as a good tree
does bring forth good fruit. Beg that Grace may be the Law of thy mind* Romans
7.23. Pray earnestly, act Faith, and put thy trust in the power, and promise of
God, for the casting down of all sinful imaginations in thy soul, and subduing
thy thoughts to the obedience of Christ.

10. If thou would keep bad thoughts out of thy mind, be ready to entertain
the gracious motions of the blessed Spirit of God, Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at
the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come
in to him and will sup with him, and he with me. O do not grieve this holy
Spirit; do not repel so blessed a guest, who knocks at thy heart in many a
sermon, and by many a providence, and sues for entrance that he may make thee
happy. What! shall the devil, with his wicked suggestions be let in, and shall
the King of glory with his train of Graces, be shut out? O let it not be.

11. Remember that if thou willingly entertainest, and lodgest in thy mind
wicked thoughts now, (and die in an impenitent and unconverted state) thy
thoughts will be thy executioners and tormenters in Hell. As light as thou
make of evil thoughts now, they will then prey upon thy soul as so many
vultures, and be a never-dying worm in thy Conscience.

And the more to quicken thee to practice these directions; Consider,

This will be a great argument of thy sincerity, and of the truth of Grace in
thee, if thou art conscientiously watchful over thy thoughts. Many restraints
lie upon the outward man to overawe it and keep it from evil; but the power of
Grace does then much appear, when it commands the inward man, and lays
restraints upon our thinking faculty, that we dare not allow our selves in any
sinful thoughts.

Psalm. 119.97. Oh how love I thy Law! it is my meditation all the day. V. 113.
I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love. Mat. 12.35. A good man out of the
good treasure of his heart brings forth good things, and an evil man out of
the evil treasure, brings forth evil things. Mat. 15.19. For out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false
witness, blasphemies. V. 20. These are the things that defile a man. Isa. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon. Psalm. 63.5. My soul shall be satisfied as with
marrow and fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips. V. 6.
When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches.
Psalm. 94.11. The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity. Jer.
4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved;
how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Psalm. 49.11. Their inward
thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling
places to all generations; they call their lands after their own names. Psalm.
119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. Prove.
16.3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established.
Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
life. Secondly, Watch over thy Affections, the motions and stirrings of thy
will, the outgoings of thy heart.

Rightly to order our Affections, is one of our principal businesses, in this
life. When they are rightly ordered, and governed, they do much further and
help on our course in Godliness. Whereas disordered passions blind the
judgment, hurry away the will, fill the heart and mind with disquiet, and
interrupt prayer, and other holy duties. Keep an especial watch therefore over
thy Affections: Be careful they be not set on wrong objects, nor suffered to
grow unruly, and exorbitant. Grace does not extinguish, but rectify
affections. Christ (who was free from all sin) was not without affections: He
was angry, did grieve, rejoice. Let it be thy care therefore to look to the
right regulating of these powers, and these affections that God has placed in
thee.

And to help thee in this work, observe these Directions.

1. Beg of God, a sound mind, a right understanding, a clear judgment, that
thou may be able rightly to discern between good and evil; and may not take
shows and appearances for realities. There is great danger in misapprehensions;
for as the apprehensions of the mind are weaker or stronger, so the affections
are hotter or cooler.

2. Labor to bring thy will, sense, and appetite under subjection to right
reason. If sin do seem pleasant to thee, (as the forbidden fruit to Eve) let
reason tell thee it is forbidden fruit; and therefore thou must not touch it. A
man is Lord of himself, when reason rules him: but his own slave, when
wilfulness, appetite, or passion bear sway in him. When the Coachman cannot
rule the horses, but is hurried violently away with them, there is nothing but
confusion to be expected; so it is with a man whose reason is overborn, or
hurried away by his headstrong passions. Affections are like fire and water;
good servants, but very bad Masters: Fire does well while it is kept in the
chimney; and water is useful, while it is kept within its banks; if they break
out, they are very mischievous Elements: Affections (while they are moderated,
and kept within their due bounds) they are very serviceable; but if they
overflow those banks and bounds, what a world of mischief follows?

3. Labor to foresee such things before they come, which may prove great
provocations to thee, and are like to kindle and excite thy passions. Use
precaution, and wisely avoid such occasions as much as thou can. Passions are
far mo^e easily prevented, than moderated: And here premeditation is of
singular use, whereby the mind may fortify and strengthen it self against the
exorbitancy of p^ssion, before it arise; by considering the unreasonablenesse
of it, and the bitter fruits and effects of it.

4. Resist evil affections at the beginning, before they grow high and
headstrong; Dash Babylons brats against the wall: If they once get strength,
they may be too hard for thee. Lusts, and vile affections let alone, do often
end in gross sins. There are works of the flesh, that follow lusts of the
flesh, Gal. 5.19. Love of pleasure, if uncontro^l'd, may end in drunkenness,
or uncleanness. Envy, and malice, if uncheck'd, may end in mu^der, or
violence. Judas allowing himself in Covetousness, that brought him to deny
his Master.

5. Temperance, and keeping under the body is an excellent means to mortify
lusts, passions, and vile affections. He that pampers his flesh, feeds his
enemy. And how much better is it to endure the pains of mortification here,
than the horrors of everlasting darkness hereafter?

6. Remember, that when thy blood and Spirits are moved, and thy passions are
up, whatever is presented to thy imagination, tends to the delusion of thy
soul. Passions like some kind of glasses, represent things falsely: sometimes of
a mountain, they make a molehill; and sometimes a molehill, they magnify into
a mountain. Therefore if it be possible in passion make no resolutions. Let it
be one of thy main cares, then to suffer thy spirit and blood to cool, and thy
passions to sink, and melt away, and then thou will come to right
apprehensions. Many have grievously overshot themselves in passion, and
repented of it at leisure.

7. Consider the root of all inordinate passion is self-love. The larger the
branches of passion, the deeper the root of self-love. Therefore labor to dig
up the root, and do not only lop off the branches. Inordinate self-love ought
to be subdued, and mortified.

8. Meditate often on the abasings, sufferings, death, and passion of our Lord,
and Savior. Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, says the Apostle,
1 Pet. 2.21. that we should follow his steps. Was he crucified for us? and
shall not we crucify our vile affections for him? Did he renounce his own
will, to accomplish our salvation? and shall not we deny our wills for him? our
corrupt wills? The wills of the flesh and of the mind, as the Apostle calls
them, Ephesians. 2.3. The lustings of the lower and the upper soul. Was he made of no
reputation for us? and shall we be proud? Did he lay down his very life for us
his enemies? and shall not we forgive an enemy for his sake? O labor from the
consideration of Christ's sufferings to mortify thy lusts and vile affections.

9. By earnest Prayer, even the prayer of Faith, seek for succor from Heaven,
against all thine inordinate affections. Humbly plead that promise before the
Lord, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the
Law, but under Grace.

10. Take the sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. and
therewith labor to slay thy inordinate affections. Apply the Commands and
Threatenings of Gods Word to thy self, when thou find any strong passion or
lust stirring in thee: As suppose Anger be up in thee; take that sword of the
Spirit thou will find Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath;
^^ther give place to the devil. If hatred against thy Brother be working in
thee, take that sword, 1 John 3.15. Whoever hates his Brother is a murderer,
and ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. If thy heart be
pestered with revengeful thoughts: take that sword in Mat. 6.14, 15. If ye
forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will forgive you; But if ye
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses. If lust be stirring in thee, take that sword in Mat. 5.28. But I
say unto you, whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed
adultery with her already in his heart. If pride, take that sword, 1 Pet. 5.5.
God resists the proud, and gives Grace to the humble. If Covetousness, take
that sword, Luke 12.15. Take heed and beware of covetousness, for a man's life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses. And 1 Timothy
6.10. The love of money is the root of all evil. Thus if thou art well
acquainted with the word of God, thou may find a sword to slay any inordinate
affection, any rebellious lust that rises up in thee.

Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
life. Gal. 5.24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. Tit. 2.12. Teaching us that denying ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present
world. Romans 8.6. For to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually
minded is life and peace. V. 13. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall die,
but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live. 1
Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims abstain from
fleshly lusts which war against the soul. Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom also, we all had
our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath
even as others. Prove. 25.28. He that has no rule over his own spirit, is like
a City that is broken down, and without walls. Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to
anger is better than the mighty, and he that rules his spirit than he that
takes a City. Ephesians. 4.26. Be ye angry, and sin not; let not the Sun go down
upon your wrath. V. 27. Neither give place to the devil. V. 30. And grieve not
the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the day of redemption. V. 31.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be
put away from you, with all malice. V. 32. And be ye kind one to another,
tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you. 1 Cor. 14.20. Brethren be not children in understanding; howbeit,
in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men. Eccles. 7 9. Be not
hasly in thy spirit to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom of fools. 1
John 3.15. Whosoever hates his Brother is a murderer, and ye know that no
murderer has eternal life abiding in him. 2 Cor. 12.20. For I fear, lest when
I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto
you such as ye would not; lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes,
backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults. Jam. 4.5. Do ye think that the
Scripture says in vain, the Spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy? Jam.
1.20. For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. Luke 9.55.
But he turned and rebuked them, and said, ye know not what manner of spirit ye
are of. John 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye
have love one to another. 1 Pet. 3.4. But let it be the hidden man of the
heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet
Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. Thirdly, Watch over thy
words.

Gods servants in all ages, have seen a great deal of reason, to resolve within
themselves, to take heed of offending with their tongues, and to pray earnestly
to the Lord, that he would please to set a watch before their mouths, and to
keep the door of their lips. It Is a great part of Religion, rightly to govern
and bridle the tongue. If any man seems to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, this man's religion is vain, Jam. 1.26. And the transgression of the
tongue is the rather to be watched against, because of the natural pronenesse
that is in us to offend in that kind. We are exceedingly apt to fall into this
sin; partly, because of that quick intercourse that is between the tongue, and
the heart, so that we sin in an instant; partly, because speech is an Act we
perform without labor, and so we the more easily offend this way: And lastly,
because the sins of the tongue are very pleasing, and compliant with corrupt
nature. Therefore St James says, Jam. 3. v. 2. If any man offend not in word,
the same is a perfect man. i. e. Not only a beginner, but one that is come to
some ripeness, and growth in Christianity; his care and watchfulness over his
words, argues him to be a sound, sincere, and upright Christian. Oh how much
reason have we to be seriously humbled for the errors and miscarriages of our
tongues! Divide the sins of man into two parts, says Nazianzen, and one half
of them are the sins of the tongue. One reckons up twenty four sins of the
tongue, and yet possibly he has not reckoned all.

1. Taking Gods Name in vain, in ordinary communication. 2. Unlawful swearing.
3. Lying. 4. Cursing. 5. Perju^y. 6. Blasphemy. 7. Rash and unlawful vows. 8.
Heartlesse and hypocritical praying. 9. False accusing. 10. Open railing,
reviling and reproaching. 11. Secret defaming, backbiting, and whispering. 12.
Scoffing, jeering, scorning, giving biting quips and girds. 13. Ribaldry,
filthy speaking, scurrulous jesting, rotten communication. 14. Menacing and
threatening revenge. 15. Deceiving and cheating. 16. Proud boasting, and self
magnifying. 17. Rash judging and censuring. 18. Vain and idle tatling. 19.
Flattering and soothing in evil. 20. Enticing and alluring to sin and
wickedness. 21. Seducing into error. 22. Murmuring and repining. 23.
Disclosing secrets contrary to promise.
To all which may be added, 24. Sinful silence. Of which more afterward.


Oh how vile are we, if one member be guilty of so much sin! Not without reason
therefore has St. James in his third Chap. v. 6. described an evil Tongue, to
be a fire, a world of iniquity, and set on fire of Hell, i. e. from the Devil
the Father of lies, malice, and virulency. They that nourish an evil tongue,
nourish that which comes from Hell, and which will carry them thither, without
serious, and timely repentance. The tongue can no man tame, as he goes on, v.
8. that is, of himself without the concurrence of Divine Grace. Pray therefore
for this Grace, that thou may take heed to thy words, that thou offend not
with thy tongue. And for the better regulating and governing of it, observe
these Directions.

1. Begin at thy heart, if thou would rightly govern thy tongue. Pray as
David did, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right
Spirit within me. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, says
our Savior, Mat. 12.34. The disorders of the tongue, usually proceed from the
distempers of the heart. Idleness of words, from vanity of thoughts; Rashness
of speech, from hastiness of Spirit: Boasting, and proud brags, from pride of
heart; Reviling, and open reproaching, from inward malice. The foul stomach
betraies it self, in a stinking breath. The naughtiness of the heart vents it
self by the tongue. A heart stored with wisdom and grace will discover it self
in savoury discourse.

2. Let thy end and aim in speaking be, to glorify God, and to do good to
others. That word is an idle word, and utterly lost, which tends to no good
purpose. Either speak something better than silence, or keep silence, says the
Heathen Poet. Choose either to speak that which is (some way or other)
profitable; or to be silent. Now there may be a sinful silence, as in these
cases.

1. When God is dishonored, and we express no dislike of it. 2. When it is our
duty to reprove an offending Brother, and we neglect it. 3. When our silence
proceeds from want of delight in Spiritual things; when we are free enough to
any worldly discourse, but cannot abide to speak of matters that concern our
souls. 4. When we are ashamed to own the ways of God, for fear of reproach.
5. When we neglect to give good counsel where we ought.
3. Consider before thou speak, and be not rash with thy mouth; Be slow to
speak, says St. Jam. Chap. 1. v. 19. i. e. deliberate, and advised: Let thy
mind be thy tongues guide. When thy words are once out of thy mouth, they are
past recall. And therefore one set a pretty moral picture over his table (a
place usually of too much licentious discourse) of a man out of whose mouth
many little birds flew (which were his words) which he with both his hands
strove to catch again, but could not: Consider therefore before thou speak,
and ere thy words be gone out of thy reach and power; especially consider
before thou promisest any thing: Consider whether the thing be good, fit,
convenient, and in thy power, and whether thy mind will suffer thee to do it or
no: He that does not this, will be apt to err, and to ensnare himself by his
own words.

4. Whatever thou have covenanted, agreed, or promised, be careful to perform,
though to thy loss and damage. If thou find thy self unable to perform,
give notice betimes, and crave either forbearance, or a release. It Is a good
caution that one gives, that we should be exceeding careful what vows we make
to God, or what promises to man.

5. Be sure, that whatever thou speak, be morally true; ( i. e. that there
be an ag^eement between thy heart and tongue) though thou art not obliged to
speak all that thou know to be true, at all times. There may be sometimes
malice in reporting the truth: An eager desire to spread a fault wants not sin.

6. Speak with a great deal of caution and wariness, where thou art aggrieved,
and do think thou suffer: Trust not thy self, if there be any the least
touch of ill will, or envy in thee, toward the person spoken of. Ill will
never speaks well. Under sense of wrong, our minds are apt to run into very
uncharitable imaginations.

7. Forbear altogether to speak when thou art in passion. He that is in a high
fit of passion, is as truly drunk, as he whose head is full of wine. Passion is
a bad counselor, and as ill a speaker: Moses when in passion spoke
unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106.33. Job cursed the day of his Nativity,
Job. 3.2.3. Jonah spoke pettishly against God himself, Jonah 4.9.

8. Deal with another good name as thou would be willing thine own should be
dealt with; be very wary of speaking of the credit of others on bare reports. A
good name is better than riches, Prove. 22.1. Possibly thou abhorrest to steal
from thy neighbor, or be thought a thief; do not then rob him of his good
name, which is more percious than worldly substance. By a good name many have
done good after their death: by the loss of it many have been rendered useless
while they lived.

9. Be not severe-spirited, and apt to interpret every thing in the worst
sense. Let charity have its perfect work. It Is better to err ten times in a
way of charity, than once in a way of cruelty. Goodness is least suspicious:
Gracious hearts reflect most upon themselves; they do not seek so much what to
reprove in others, as what to amend in themselves; they love to look inwards,
and being sensible of their own failings, are tender in reflecting on the
weaknesses of others: whereas those that are most inquisitive into the lives of
others, are usually most careless in reforming their own. Sharp censurers,
and reprovers, had need be very exact in their own lives; else in judging
others they pronounce their own doom. Be not apt therefore to judge or censure
the actions of others. Consider how often thou thy self have offended; use
another with the same mercy thou would have showed to thy self, Gal. 6.1.
Brethren, if any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such a one in the Spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be
tempted. They that are most spiritual, are most tender to set a fallen
Christian in joint again. Consider well therefore, before thou pronounce too
hard a censure upon thy brother: If thou can not excuse the action, yet
consider possibly the intent was good; or it might proceed from ignorance, or
some violent temptation, and that thou thy self may so fall, if so tempted,
and God do not sustain thee. Bernard tells of a man, that hearing of a fallen
brother, fell into a bitter weeping, and said, he is fallen to day, and I may
fall to morrow: Therefore cherish an humble sense of thine own frailty, and
that will make thee charitable toward others. And be especially careful thou
do not make the failings, and miscarriages of others, (which should be matter
of grief to thee, and set thee upon praying for them, 1 John 5.16.) to serve
thee for mirth and sport: And yet this is the usual entertainment of this
corrupt world. But the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 13.6. Charity rejoices not in
iniquity; and therefore it cannot make the sins and failings of others, its
recreation.

10. Do not recite jests made upon Scripture, or contrived out of Scripture
phrase, which can hardly be told, or heard, without leaving in the mind some
diminution of the Majesty, and Authority of Gods Word; the Dignity whereof all
ought to maintain. Therefore it is ill trusting our corruptions with the bare
reporting of such jests made by wicked wits, on Scripture abused, for fear of
the bad effects that may ensue thereupon. Our tongue is our glory, Psalm. 57.8.
With that we should bless the Lord at all times, his praise should be
continually in our mouths, Psalm. 34 1. With that we should labor to do good
to others with whom we converse. Let us not then pervert it from the right use.
Moral infection spreads abroad by words, as the pestilential does by a corrupt
breath.

11. Speak with great modesty, when the matter any way relates to thine own
commendation. A man's praise smells sweet out of another mouth, but stinks out
of his own

12. Speak not ill of any, except it be upon just occasion, and in order to
some good, that God may have Glory thereby, and the persons whom thou speak,
may be warned and admonished.

13. In stead of speaking ill, or censuring thy brother, privately admonish him;
but do it not in a masterly way, but in the Spirit of meekness, Let love
sweeten thy words. When love rules in the heart, the law of kindness is in the
tongue.

14. Lastly, Consider what Solomon says, Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of
words, there wants not sin, and he that refraineth his lips is wise. Due and
befitting silence is many times a great prese^ver of innocence; but when the
tongue runs very fast, and speaks more than comes to its share, it is ordinarily
a servant either to pride or passion.

Psalm. 39.1. I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my
tongue, I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.
Psalm. 17.3. I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. Psalm. 141.3. Set
a watch (O Lord) before my mouth, keep the door of my lips. Mat. 12.34. O
generation of vipers, how can ye being evil speak good things? for out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. V. 35. A good man out of the good
treasure of the heart, brings forth good things: and an evil man out of the
evil treasure, brings forth evil things. V. 36. But I say unto you, that
every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the
day of judgment. Prove. 13.3. He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life, but
he that opens wide his lips shall have destruction. Jam. 1.26. If any man
among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his
own heart, this man's religion is vain. Jam. 3.2. For in many things we offend
all; if any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to
bridle the whole body. V. 3. Behold, we put bits in the horses mouths, that
they may obey us, and we turn about their whole body. V. 4. Behold also the
ships, which though they be so great, and are driven of fierce winds, yet are
they turned about with a very small helm, whithersoever the Governor lists.
V. 5. Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasts great things, behold,
how great a matter a little fire kindles! V. 6. And the tongue is a fire, a
world of iniquity, so is the tongue amongst our members, that it defiles the
whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire of
Hell. Col. 4.6. Let your speech be always with Grace, seasoned with salt, that
ye may know how ye ought to answer every man. Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the hearers. Ephesians. 5.3. But
fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints. V. 4. Neither filthiness, nor foolish
talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient, but rather giving of thanks. 1
Cor. 15.33. Be not deceived; evil communications corrupt good manners. Psalm.
106.33. They provoked his spirit, so that he (i. e. Moses) spoke unadvisedly
with his lips. Prove. 15.28. The heart of the righteous studieth to answer, but
the mouth of the wicked pours out evil things. 1 Samuel 2.3. Talk no more so
exceeding proudly, let not arrogance come out of your mouth: for the Lord is a
God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. Prove. 10.11. The mouth of a
righteous man is a well of life, but violence covers the mouth of the wicked.
V. 19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin, but he that refraineth
his lips is wise. V. 20. The tongue of the just is as choice silver: the heart
of the wicked is little worth. V 21. The lips of the righteous feed many; but
fools die for want of wisdom. Prove. 17.27. He that has knowledge, spares
his words, and a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit. Psalm. 37.30.
The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of
judgment. Psalm. 34.12. What man is he that desires life, and loves many
days, that he may see good? V. 13. Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips
from speaking guile. Psalm. 12 4 Who have said, with our tongue will we prevail,
our lips are our own; who is Lord over us? Psalm. 140.3. They have sharpened
their tongues like a Serpent, adders poison is under their lips. Selah. Romans
3.13. Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used
deceit; the poison of aspes is under their lips. V. 14. Whose mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness. Prove. 16.27. An ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in
his lips there is a burning fire. Prove. 15.4. A wholesome tongue is a tree of
life: but perverseness therein, is a breach in the spirit. V. 7. The lips of
the wise disperse knowledge: but the heart of the foolish does not so. Prove.
14.3. In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride, but the lips of the wise
shall preserve them. Prove. 12.18. There is that speaks like the piercings of
a sword: but the tongue of the wise is health. Prove. 17.5. Whosoever mocketh the
poor, reproacheth his maker: and he that is glad at calamities, shall not be
unpunished. Prove. 31.26. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue
is the Law of kindness. Tit. 3.1, 2. Put them in mind, etc. To speak evil of
no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men. Mat.
5.22. But I say unto you that whos^ever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say unto his
brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the council, but whosoever shall say,
thou fool, shall be in danger of hellfire. Levit. 19.16. Thou shall not go up
and down as a talebearer among thy people. Prove. 11.13. A tale bearer
reveals secrets, but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter.
Prove. 25.18. A man that bears false witness against his neighbor, is a
maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow. Prove. 20.19. He that goes about as a
talebearer, reveals secrets, therefore meddle not with him that flattereth
with his lips. Psalm. 15.1. Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? V. 2. He
that speaks the truth in his heart. V. 3. He that backbiteth not with his
tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his
neighbor. Jer. 18.18. And they said, come, let us devise devices against
Jeremiah, -- come let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to
any of his words. Job. 5.21. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue,
neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it comes. Psalm. 31.20. Thou
shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man; thou shall
keep them secretly in a pavilion, from the strife of tongues. Prove. 6.1. My
son, if thou be surety for thy friend if thou have stricken thy hand with a
stranger, V. 2. Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken
with the words of thy mouth. Prove. 12.13. The wicked is snared by the
transgression of his lips: but the just shall come out of trouble. Isa. 63.8.
For he said, surely they are my people, children that will not lie, so he was
their Savior. Prove. 6.16. These six things does the Lord hate, yea, seven are
an abomination unto him. V. 17. A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that
shed innocent blood, etc. Zeph. 3.13. The remnant of Israel shall not do
iniquity, nor speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their
mouth: for they shall feed, and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.
Levit. 19.12. And ye shall not swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou
profane the Name of thy God: I am the Lord. Prove. 21.6. The getting of
treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek
death. Prove. 17.14. The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water;
therefore leave off contention, before it is meddled with. Prove. 18.6. A fools
lips enter into contention, and his mouth calls for strokes. Eccles. 5.6.
Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the
Angel that it was an error, wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and
destroy the work of thine hands. Numb. 12.8. With him will I speak mouth to
mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude of the
Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my
servant Moses? 1 Timothy 5.19. Against an Elder receive not an accusation, but
before two or three witnesses. Prove. 27.2. A stone is heavy, and the sand
weighty, but a fools wrath is heavier than them both. Levit. 19.17. Thou shall
not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Ephesians. 5.11. And have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Psalm. 141.5. Let the
righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall
be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head. Prove. 15.5. A fool
despises his Fathers instruction; but he that regards reproof is prudent. 1
Pet. 3.8. Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another,
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous. V. 9. Not rendering evil for evil,
or railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are
thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing. Fourthly, Watch over thy
Actions.

The Apostle gives us an excellent exhortation in the 5th to the Ephesians. v. 15.
See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fo^ls, but as wise. And in 1 Pet. 1.15.
We are commanded to be holy in all manner of conversation. True and real
Christianity is a careful business. There is a great deal of watchfulness and
circumspection required to keep our Consciences void of offense toward God,
and toward men. O how sad a sight is it to see men in words professing Christ,
and yet in works denying him! Show me thy Faith by thy works, says St. James.
And our Savior in Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. The men of
the world have their eyes on the lives and conversations of Professors, they
know not what they do in their closets, they care not much what they do in the
congregation; they look what the tenor and course of their lives is. O
therefore let those that name the Name of Christ depart from all iniquity! Let
such as profess themselves real Ch^istians, and true converts, take heed of
being taken tardy in such things, which mere moral men (that are strangers to
the life of Grace) cannot be justly charged with.

Be very careful therefore of, and watchful over all thy actions. Take heed
the Name of God be not blasphemed, nor his honor wounded by any ungodly action
of thine: Take heed of bringing a scandal on Religion, and a reproach on the
Gospel. If ever thou would win others to Religion, thou must be exemplary in
holiness and righteousness thy self; it is a woeful thing to be an offense,
and stumbling block to others, and to be an occasion of keeping them off from
embracing the ways of God. O therefore take heed of doing any such things as
may make Religion stink in the nostrils of profane men: Take heed of doing any
thing that is not justifiable or warrantable, and which may be an active
scandal unto others. Indeed there are passive scandals and offenses, such as
wicked men take through their own corrupt and malicious hearts, as the
Pharisees did at Christ; But such people destroy themselves, and like Serpents,
turn every thing they eat into poison: But the true Christian is tender of Gods
Glory, and the repute of Religion; and therefore dares not do such things as
are unwarrantable. If Augustus could say, an Emperor should not only be free
from crimes, but the very suspicion of them: How much more should true
Christians labor to be such, who are commanded to abstain from all appearance
of evil? 1 These. 5, 22. Do nothing therefore that is misbecomming a real
Christian. As Nehemiah once said, shall such a man as I flee? Nehem. 6.11. So
do thou reflect upon thy self, when tempted to any evil action: Shall such an
one as I, lie, swear, deal deceitfully; be proud, be covetous, be earthly
minded, etc? O! if ever thou should be overcome with such things, thou may
say to thy self truly, what Michal said falsely to David, Thou have made thy
self like one of the vile and base ones of the earth.

That therefore thou may be the more seriously watchful over all thy actions
take these three directions.

1. Look carefully to the principle, the spring, the rise of them. Observe from
whence all thy external obedience flows: Does it come from an inward principle
of Grace, from a sanctified heart, from a new Nature, from a principle of
Faith, and Love? or from external motives, and outward respects and
considerations? It Is not the matter that makes the work good, but the
principle: Some things may be done (for the matter good) and some external
obedience performed by mere natural men, and that either for credit, or upon
the impulses of natural Conscience, out of bondage, and a servile frame of
spirit; like fruits that are ripened by art and force, not naturally and
kindly; but it is not enough to do actions good and just as to the matter, but
we must do them out of love to God, and obedience to his will, and in Faith
expecting our reward from him.

2. Look to thy rule. Is the Word of God the rule and square of thy actions?
Thy Word is a light to my feet, and a lanthorn to my paths, says David, Psalm.
119.105. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God, says Paul, Gal. 6.16. Many people watch in
a disorderly way; They have no Law or Rule, but their own lusts and corrupt
wills; no guide, but their own blind passions and humors. But if thou would
order thy actions aright, take the Word of God for thy Rule.

3. Look to thy aim and end. Thy main and ultimate end must be Gods Glory. A
Christians whole life should be a living unto God, Gal. 2.19. All that is done,
be it an act of Piety, Justice, Temperance, or Charity, it should be done with
this aim, that God might be glorified thereby. In all thy actions therefore,
whether natural, civil, or spiritual, thou must still design the Glory of God:
But of this we have spoken more under the fourth particular of this Chapter.

Jam. 2.12. So speak ye, and so do as they that shall be judged by the Law of
Liberty. 1 Pet. 1.15. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in
all manner of conversation. 2 Pet. 3.11. Seeing then that all these things
shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be, in all holy
conversation and Godliness? Mat. 7.22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name have cast out Devils?
and in thy Name done many wonderful works? V. 23. And then will I profess unto
them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. 1
John 3.3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as
he is pure. Ephesians. 5.15. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise. V. 16. Redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Col. 4.5. Walk
in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time. 2 Cor. 1.12. For
our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity, and
Godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we had our
conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you wards. Isa. 38.3. And
Hezekiah said, remember now. O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in
thy sight, and Hezekiah wept sore. Acts 24.16. And herein do I exercise my
self, to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men.
Jam. 1. ult. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God, and the Father, is this,
to visit the fatherless, and widows, in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world. Jam. 2. ult. For as the body without the spirit is
dead, so Faith without works is dead also. Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven. Prove. 16.17. The high way of the upright is to depart from evil,
he that keeps his way preserves his soul. Ezekiel. 36.27. And I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
Judgments, and do them. 1 Cor 6.20. For ye are bought with a price; therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. 1 Timothy 1.5. Now
the end of the Commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good
Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. 2 Timothy 2.19. Nevertheless, the foundation
of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his, and
let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity. Ephesians 4.1. I
therefore, the Prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called. Luke 3.8. Bring forth therefore fruits worthy
of repentance -- 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Romans 12.2. And be not conformed
to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God. Phil. 2.15.
That ye may be blameless, and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as Lights in
the world. Phil. 4 8. Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Having now
dispatched those four things thou must watch over, namely, thy Thoughts, thy
Affections, thy Words, and thy Actions. I come now in the second place to speak
of those six things thou must especially watch against.

1. Against those sins thou art most inclined to, by temper and natural
constitution. The weakest part of the City must have the strongest guard. Some
Affections are predominant in one Age, some in another: There are youthful
lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22. as well as infirmities proper to old Age. 'Twas a great
Argument of David's sincerity that he could truly say, Psalm. 18 23. I was
upright before thee, and kept my self from mine iniquity.

Study therefore thy heart, and consider what sins thou art most prone unto.
All sins fight against the soul, but thy Master sin is the Goliath; endeavor
(through the aids of Grace) to slay that, and the whole Army of the Philistines
will be easily vanquished.

2. Against the sins thou art most obnoxious to, by reason of thy particular
Calling, Condition, State, and Course of life. A man by reason of his calling,
or condition of life may have more frequent, and stronger inducements to some
sins, than to others; which he is therefore the more especially to keep watch
against, 2 King. 5.18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when my
Master goes into the house of Rimmon, to worship there, and he leans on my
hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon; when I bow down my self in the
house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing.

3. Against the sins of the times, and places wherein thou live We must be
careful of being carried away with the evil of the times. It Is a description of
wicked men, Ephesians. 2.2. that they walked according to the course of this world,
i. e. according to the Age, as the manner of the times went. But of righteous
Noah, we have another kind of Character, Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just man and
upright in his generation, and Noah walked wtih God. And so in 2 Chronicles. 17.3.4.
We read, that the Lord was with Jehosaphat, because he walked in the first
ways of his Father David, and sought not unto Baalim, but sought to the Lord
God of his Father, and walked in his Commandments, and not after the doings of
Israel. And the Apostle exhorts the Philippians, Chap. 2. v. 15. that they
should be blameless, and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke in the
midst of a crooked and a perverse nation, among whom (says he) ye shine as
Lights in the world. It Is a high point of Grace, not to be snared with the
evils of our own times.

4. Against all occasions, and temptations, thou foreseest are likely to
endanger thy soul. We that pray to God, not to lead us into temptation, must
not run our selves into it: A prudent man should therefore forethink, and
consider in the morning, what temptations he is like to be encountered with that
day, that so he may (if possible) decline them, or else set his guards the
stronger against them. A weak temptation that takes us unawares, will prevail
more than a stronger forseen. A prudent man says Solomon, Prove. 22.3.
foreseeth the evil, and hides himself, but the foolish go on still and are
punished. It Is a point of true spiritual wisdom to foresee sin afar off, in the
occasions, and temptations that lead to it; and by avoiding the one to prevent
the other. It Is easier and safer for the Fowl to pass by the snare, while she
is yet out, than it is to wind her self out again, when she is once in.

Watch and pray, says our Savior to his Disciples, Mat. 26.41. that ye enter
not into temptation. If ye do rashly enter the lists of temptation, a thousand
to one (such is man's natural weakness) you will not come out without some
foil.

5. Against dishonouring God in the use of lawful things, such as meat, drink,
apparel, lawful refreshments, etc.

Remember that it is in the use even of things indifferent, that Satan most
usually sets his snares for Gods servants; for here the snare is not so
visible, as in grosser sins; and he prevails more often against those that be
not grossly profane and ungodly, by the immoderate or undue use of things in
themselves lawful, than by drawing them to such things as are simply evil, and
unlawful. The Devil knows well, that he that will do all he may do, will soon
be drawn to do somewhat he ought not to do. It Is dangerous to come near the
borders and confines of sin: Those that will go to the utmost extent of their
Christian Liberty and venture themselves so near the brink, do many times fall
into the pit of sin. All things (says the Apostle) are lawful unto me, but all
things are not expedient. 1 Cor. 6.12. and 10.23. All things. i. e. not all
things absolutely, but all things in their own nature indifferent, are lawful
to me; yet all such things are not always expedient. It Is better for us many
times to forbear many things we may do, (it will never be grief or offense of
heart to us, as was said to David, in another case, 1 Samuel 25.31.) than be once
overtaken in what we should not do.

6. Watch against Error.

As thou must be careful to keep thy heart from sinful lusts, and thy life from
being spotted and stained with sinful practices; so thou must be vigilant also
to keep thy judgment sound, and thy mind from being tainted and fly-blown with
Error. Thou must take heed of a corrupt judgment, as well as a rotten heart
and a wicked life. It Is a great judgment to be given up either to an erroneous
mind or to vile affections. Some there are that seem very strict in their
lives, and pretend as much tenderness in matter of morality, as Lot did of his
guests, Genesis 19. yet are very loose as to their judgments, exposing them as he
his Daughters to be defiled with any corrupt Doctrine that comes to their
doors. Julian the Apostate was a just, temperate, strict man, but a bitter
enemy to Christ: Some that are sober in their lives, are yet drunk with Error.
But let such consider, that as they say of fish, they begin to stink at the
head, so a corrupt judgment is very frequently a beginner and introducer of a
depraved conversation. Men in this age are wanton, and play with opinions; but
(believe it) it is not of small moment, what opinions we hold, and whether we be
sound in the Faith, or no. Grace and Truth use to thrive together: The way of
truth is the way of life, and error tends to death. The Apostle tells us of
pernicious Doctrines, and damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. that bring swift
destruction. Truth in the mind preserves an awe of God in the heart; But false
Doctrines blind the mind, harden the heart, deprave the conversation, destroy
the Churches peace, and provoke the Lord to have a controversy with a people
where they are tolerated, Rev. 2.14, 15, 20.

And we should be the more watchful over our selves in this particular, because
Errors are so agreeable to corrupt Nature; (and Conscience does usually less
regret a man for Error, than for unholinesse) and many times also they suit a
corrupt interest (namely, profit and worldly advantage) and then people are in
great danger to be caught by them.

To keep thee therefore from Error take these few Directions.

1. Labor to be well-grounded in the truth Let the foundation be laid sure,
else the building with every ruffling wind, will be apt to totter. Ungrounded
Christians who never understood the true grounds of the Religion they have
taken up, and how it is built on the Scriptures, when they meet with Arguments
against it, which they never heard of before, and which they (through their
unskilfulness) cannot answer; they presently yield to error; and think,
because they cannot answer them, therefore no body else can. But if thou
would not be carried away with every wind of Doctrine, Labor rightly to
understand the true grounds of Christian Religion: And to this end study the
Scriptures, with humility, and be much in prayer, that God would guide thee by
his holy Spirit into all saving truth, and keep thee from falling into error.
And remember, that what has been commonly received by the people of God and
embraced and practiced by the Saints in all ages, is not lightly to be rejected
and deserted. Can any rational man think, God would leave the generality of his
people to error and seduction of mind? Consider with thy self therefore
whether it be not safer to follow the footsteps of the flock of Christ, than to
be led away by pretenders to new light; the Scripture having given so many
cautions to beware of seduce^s, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.

2. Rest not in a bare knowledge of the truth, but reduce thy knowledge into
practice. Be sincere in the Religion thou professest, and let the truths of
God, like leaven, season thy mind, will, and affections, and have a powerful
influence on thy life. When men are in love with Gospel Truths, for the
goodness, sweetness and benefit they taste in them, they will labor to hold
them fast. Those that have any experience in their own hearts of the comfort
and efficacy of the Doctrines of Repentance, Faith in Christ, and daily
watchfulness, will not easily throw them off, and exchange them for new
opinions: But they that care not to practice the great and necessary truths of
the Gospel, no wonder if they prove Apostates, and fall off from them. Labor
therefore to practice the truths thou professest, holding the mystery of Faith
in a pure Conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9. The more thou growest in Grace, the more thou
shall be kept from falling into the error of the wicked, Heb. 13.9. He that
does what he knows of the will of God, shall know more of it, John 7.17. If ye
know these things, says our Savior, happy are ye if ye do them, John 13.17.
Happiness does not lie in the mere knowing or assenting to the principles of
Christian Religion, but in living according to them, and expressing the power
and efficacy of them in our lives. For a man to be of an orthodox judgment, and
an haeretical life; an orthodox swearer, an orthodox drunkard, a profane
person, and yet zealous against Heretics; an antinomian in practice, and yet a
declamer against the opinions of the Antinomians, O how sadly do these things
sound! A right belief should have a powerful influence on the heart and life:
But they whose hearts are rotten and deceitful under truth, it is no wonder if
they be deceived by error. Believe it, if the heart be corrupt and love sin,
it will easily incline a man to entertain such corrupt principles as will give
liberty to sin. Men would fain have that true which is most accomodate to their
corrupt interests. Take heed therefore of harboring any secret lust or sin in
thy heart. It Is sin provokes God to give men up to error; God does many times
out of a secret judgment suffer those to fall into error, who held the truth
in unrighteousness. They who are not sound in the fear of God, soon prove
unsound in the Faith of God. Hymeneus and Alexander first put away a good
Conscience, and then made shipwreck of Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. The women that
were led away by seducers, 2 Timothy 3.6. were such as were laden with diverse
lusts. What Solomon therefore says of a strange woman, may be applied to a
strange Doctrine; whosoever pleases God, shall escape from her, but the sinner
shall be taken by her, Eccles. 7.26.

3. Take heed of pride, conceitednesse, confidence in thine own judgment and
understanding. The humble God will teach, but he resists the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5.
Pride usually it is the mother of Heresies: 'Twas of old the condemnation of the
Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. the ruin of our first Parents; and therefore no wonder if
it ruin so many souls in these days. Proud persons may carry it high for a
time, but commonly God suffers them at last to fall into the ditch of error,
or profaneness. And it is just it should be so; that when the understanding of
these high-flown ones returns unto them (if God have such a mercy in store for
them) they may with Nebuchadnezzar, see their folly, and bless the most High.

4. Beware of the itch of noveltie and affecting new Doctrines. He is half gone
into error, that vainly covets after novelties, and listens after every
newfangled opinion. New Doctrines like new fashions, do usually take with
unstable minds. We read of itching ears, 2 Timothy 4.3. and following after
another Gospel, Gal. 1.6. But Christ tells us but of one way to Heaven, and that
is by himself; I am the way, the truth, and the life, John 14.6. There is no
new way thither. True Repentance, Faith in Christ, and sincere obedience, this
is the good old way that we must walk in, if we intend to come thither.

5. Expose not thy self to the temptations of seducers. It Is in vain for any to
pray to God to keep them from the infection of error, if they wilfully
(against the express Word of God) and without any just warrant and call, run
into the company of seducers, and read their Books.

The Scripture bids us, To beware of them, Matthew. 7.15. Not to go after them,
Luke 21.8. To avoid them, Romans 16.17. To turn away from the^, 2 Timothy 3.5. If
they come to us, not to receive them, or bid them God-speed, or encourage them
in their way, 2 ep. Joh. 10.


But possibly some will say, Are we not commanded to prove all things? 1 These.
5.21.

Ans. Will you try poison whether it will kill you or no? Therefore the meaning
of this place must needs be, that we are to examine the Doctrines that are
delivered unto us, by the Scripture, whether they are built thereon, or no.
Like those noble Bereans, Acts 17.11. who searched the Scriptures whether those
things were so, that were delivered to them for the Truths of God. And let that
place, Romans 14.1. be considered by all such as are not thoroughly grounded in
the principles of Christianity, Him that is weak in Faith, receive, but not to
doubtful disputations. Every private Christian is not fit to cope with
heretics, and such as are skillful to destroy the Faith of others. You would
not allow a man to come and undermine the foundation of your house; This do
they, and worse, that go about to undermine your Faith, and labor to shake and
unsettle you in the grand truths of the Gospel. Surely they that rob and rifle
souls of Truth, are worse felons, than they that rob and rifle houses.

6. Forsake not the public Ordinances, nor faithful Ministers of Christ, whose
endeavors God has born witness to, by the real conversion of many thousand
souls. It Is not safe to balk the known and ordinary ways, wherein God uses to
dispense his spiritual blessings. Wisdom's dole is to be expected at wisdom's
gate. Ephesians. 4.11. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, v. 12. For the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ. v.
14. That we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of men and cunning craftiness,
whereby they ly in wait to deceive.

7. Remember thou art not only to be steadfast in the truth, and to hold fast
the truth, as to thine own particular, but also to be valiant for the Truth,
Jer. 9.3. To contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude v. 3.
Thou must show thy self a Champion for Truth, when it is opposed. Truth it is
one of the choicest treasures and greatest privileges that ever God bestowed
on any people, And shall we so easily and tamely part with it? Shall we suffer
crafty persons that are now abroad, to rob us and steal from us our best
treasure? Shall we suffer them to cheat us, and our posterity of our richest
Jewel? Not long ago, the great bickerings were about discipline: Now the
Doctrine of the Gospel is in danger; And shall we suffer the interest of our
Lord and Master to be trodden under foot? Indeed we are not to be bitter against
the persons of the erroneous, yet we are to be sensible how God is dishonored,
and thousands of souls endangered by their pernicious errors. And therefore
it deeply concerns us to have a care of our selves to preserve our own souls
from this infection; and not of our selves only, but to have a regard to our
posterity also; that we transmit truth down to them. We would be willing to
leave our estates to our children; And shall we not be more careful to leave
them truth? Believe it, we are to perform the part of faithful Trustees, and to
keep the Doctrine of salvation pure and unmixed (as much as in us lies) and so
to leave it to those that are to come after us.

8. and Lastly, Consider how the Scripture has forewarned us there must be
Heresies, 1 Cor. 11.19. Now there is a twofold necessity; Absolute, Conditional.

1. Absolute, when a thing cannot possibly be otherwise; as God must needs be
just.

2. Conditional, when a thing must be, supposing such another thing to be
before: As suppose the Sun be risen, it must be day; so here, upon supposition
of these two things, 1. Satan's malice. 2. Man's Corruption, there must be
Heresies. Far be it from us ever to think that God imposes a necessity on any
to be Heretics: but he permits them and suffers them to spring up in the
Church; and that for these three reasons.

1. That his glorious truths may be the more cleared up, and evidenced, and
strongly confirmed and maintained: Many parts of true Doctrine have been but
slenderly guarded, till ass^ulted by Heretics; then old evidences have been
searched and found out. Many truths have been occasionally most cleared and
settled by the opposition of the Adversary.

2. That they that are approved may hereby be made manifest. This is an effect
the Devil never intended by raising Heresies; But it is the Chimistry of Heaven
to bring good out of evil: That is pure gold that endures the trial of the
fire. A quick smart wind severs the solid grain from the chaff. They are but
chaff who are blown away with every wind of Doctrine: The good wheat remains
still in the floor of the Church. When you see an Army march, you know not who
is valiant, and who not; when the enemy approaches, then is the trial.

3. That the obstinate may be rendered inexcusable, who wilfully shut their eyes
against these more open manifestations, and greater clearings up of the Truth,
which (occasionally) by the opposition of the adversary, God is pleased to
afford his Church.

Jude v. 3. Beloved when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation; it was needful for me to write unto you and exhort you, that ye
should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints. V. 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of
old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the Grace of our God
into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction. V. 2. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by
reason of whom, the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. V. 3. And through
Covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you; whose
judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth not. 1 Timothy 4.1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly that in the latter times some shall
depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils.
V. 2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with a hot
Iron. 2 Timothy 2.17. And their word will eat as does a Canker, of whom is Hymeneus
and Philetus. V. 18. Who concerning the truth have erred, saying the
Resurrection is past already; and overthrow the Faith of some. 2 Timothy 4.3. For
the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their
own lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears. V. 4.
And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto
fables. Acts 20.29. For I know this, that after my departure shall grievous
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock. V. 30. Also of your own
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after
them. 2 Timothy 3.6. Of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead
captive silly women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts. V. 7. Ever
learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. V. 8. Now as
Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth, men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith. V. 13. Evil men and seducers
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. Mat. 7.15. Beware of
false Prophets which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly they are
ravening wolves. V. 16. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Mat. 24.11. Many
false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. V. 24. There shall arise
false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, in
so much that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect. 1 John
4.1. Beloved believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of
God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. 1 John 2.18.
Little Children, it is the last time and as ye have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even now are there many Anti Christ's whereby we know it is the last
time. V. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out, that
they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. Romans 16.17. Now I
beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to
the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. V. 18. For they that are
such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. Gal. 4.17. They zealously
affect you, but not well; yea they would exclude us, that you might affect
them. Tit. 1.10. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers,
especially they of the circumcision. V. 11. Whose mouths must be stopped, who
subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres
sake. Tit. 3.10. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
admonition reject. V. 11. Knowing that he that is such, is subverted and
sins, being condemned of himself. 2 Cor. 11.3. But I fear lest by any means
as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity which is in Christ. V. 4. For if he that comes,
preaches another Jesus whom we have not preached, or if ye receive another
spirit, which ye have not received, or another Gospel, which ye have not
accepted, ye might well bear with him. V. 13. For such are false Prophets,
deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. V. 14.
And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light. V. 15.
Therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the
Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. Gal.
3.1. O foolish Galatians who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth, crucified
among you? Gal 5.19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, etc. V. 20.
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies. 1 Cor. 11.19. For there must be also Heresies among you, that they
which are approved, may be made manifest among you. Heb. 13.9. Be not carried
about with diverse and strange doctrines; for it is a good thing the heart be
established with Grace, etc. Ephesians. 4.14. That we henceforth be no more children
tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men and cuning craftiness, whereby they ly in wait to deceive. Gal. 1.6. I
marvel ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the Grace of
Christ, unto another Gospel. V. 7. Which is not another; but there be some that
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. V. 8. But though we or an
Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed. 1 Cor. 3.11. For other foundation can no man
lay, than that is laid which is Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand
fast in the Faith, quit your selves like men; be strong. 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast
the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, in faith and love which
is in Christ Jesus. Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith
without wavering. 1 Timothy 1.19. Holding Faith, and a good Conscience, which some
having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck. 1 These. 5.21. Prove all
things; hold fast that which is good. Acts 17.11. These were more noble than
those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of
mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. 2 Pet.
3.15. As our beloved Brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him,
has written unto you. V. 16. As also in all his Epistles, speaking in them of
these things, in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that
are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures unto
their own destruction. M^t. 4.5. Then the Devil takes him up into the holy
City, and sets him on a pinnacle of the Temple. V. 6. And says unto him, if
thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down; for it is written, He shall give
his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up,
lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Jude. v. 17. But beloved
remember ye the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord
Jesus Christ. V. 18. How that they told you, there should be mockers in the
last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts. V. 19. These be they
who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. 2 These. 2.10. --
Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. V.
11. For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie. V. 12. That they all might be damned who believed not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Rev. 2.14. I have a few things against
thee, because thou have them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak
to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication. V. 15. So have thou also them
that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. V. 20. I have a
few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezebel, which
calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit
fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols. 2 Pet. 3.17. Ye therefore
beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away
with the error of the wicked, fall from your omn steadfastness. V. 18. But
grow in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Jude
v. 24. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling and to present you
faultless before the presence of his Glory with exceeding joy. V. 25. To the
only wise God our Savior be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and
ever. Amen. I have now dispatched the second Particular, The things thou art to
watch against. I come now to the third, the thing thou must watch for.

Thirdly, Watch for, and take all fit opportunities to glorify God, and to do
good. This is to be like our blessed Lord and Savior, who went about doing
good, and made every place (where he came) the better for him. How much good
may a seasonable word dropped for God, do? A sin wisely reproved, and
discountenanced; a good hint well improved, some good counsel seasonably given,
of how much advantage to the souls of others may these things prove? This is
to be on Gods side, and true to his party. We say, A wise man makes more
opportunities than he finds, but a fool neglects those he has: It should be
our real design in all companies, either to do good, or to receive good; And
this will turn to a comfortable account in the day of recompenses.

I come now to the Motives, to quicken thee to this great and necessary duty of
continual watchfulness.

First, Consider how naturally we are all prone to be secure and careless; and
want of watchfulness betraies us to most of the sins, we fall into.

Secondly, Consider the vigilance of the tempter. Shall he be so watchful to
destroy us, and shall not we be watchful to keep our selves from his malice?

1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary, the devil, as a
roaring lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. Ephesians. 6.11. Put on the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the
devil. Thirdly, Consider the necessity of perseverance, whereunto, a
concurrence of our care, and diligence is required.

Whosoever endures to the end, says our Savior, Matthew. 10.22. he and he only
shall be saved. Let us all run with patience, says the Apostle, the race that
is set before us, Heb. 12.1. Now in worldly races none gains the prize, but
he that gets first to the goal; but in the spiritual race, not only he that
comes first, but whosoever holds out to the last, he is sure to win and obtain
the prize. Be faithful to the death, and I will give thee the Crown of life,
says our Savior, Rev. 2.10. It Is to no purpose therefore for a man to do well
for a spurt, and then to give over, and break off that good course he was
entered into; for it is perseverance in well doing, that carries away the Crown.
It Is true, Gods called and sanctified people are preserved and kept in their
state of Grace and Holiness by the power of God; by their close union with
Jesus Christ; by virtue of his merits and constant intercession for them; and
also by a continued influence from the Spirit, maintaining the essence, life
and seed of Grace in them; so that they shall neither totally nor finally fall
away. Yet observe these four things. 1. Seeming Grace may be lost; Take from
him that which he has, Mat. 25.28. In Luke it is, Take from him, that which he
seems to have, Chap. 8. v. 18. Blazing Comets, and Meteors are soon spent,
and fall from Heaven, while true Stars keep their Orb and Station. 2. The
common work of the Spirit may fail: Such as is spoken of Heb. 6.4, 5. viz.
Illumination, external reformation, temporary Faith, a slight taste of the
comforts of the Gospel, a weak glance upon the Glory of Heaven, which may
possibly stir up such a wish as was in Balaam, O that I might die the death of
the righteous; Nay further, there may be a partaking of the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, i.e. of abilities for holy duties, (though not of his renewing Graces)
And yet such plenty of blossoms as here are, may sometimes be without fruit. 3.
True Grace may suffer a shrewd decay; the leaves may fail, though there may
remain some life in the root: We read in Scripture of a decay both of Faith,
Love, and Obedience. Some left their first Faith, 1 Timothy 5.12. Others left
their first Love, Rev. 2.4. And as for obedience, we read of the first ways of
David, as distinguished from his latter, 2 Chronicles. 17.3. because David in his
latter time fell into scandalous sins. In temptations, Gods children may be
sorely shaken: Their heel may be bruised as Christ's was, though their head be
not crushed. The operations of Grace may be obstructed for a time; and yet a
seed remain, as in the case of David. 4. True Grace, if left to us, would soon
be lost. Adam showed a sad example of this in innocence: But the best is, our
security lies in Gods power and promises, and our union with Christ (as was
said before) not in our own strength. Christ has a charge to keep the Saints
safe, and to conduct them safe to everlasting Glory, John 10.28. I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish, etc. v. 29. My Father which
gave them me is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my
Fathers hand; I and my Father are one. God and Christ are engaged in the
keeping of them. But observe it; Those whom God causes to persevere, he makes
to persevere in the use of means, as 'twas in their case. Acts 27.31. All
shall come to land; but except ye abide in the ship, ye cannot be safe. No
believer is so sure of his continuance in a state of Grace, as that he needs
not be very wary, and watchful, and jealous over himself, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him
that stands, take heed lest he fall. There is a fear of caution, as well as a
fear of diffidence and distrust, it is good to weaken and abate the security of
our flesh, though not our confidence in Christ. Our Savior had prayed that
Peter's Faith should not fail, yet together with the other Apostles, he bids him
watch. Luke 22.40, 46. The fear of God is a preserving Grace, Jer. 32.40. I
will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. This
fear will make us watchful, not diffident of Gods power and goodness. And in
this sense, Blessed is the man that fears always, as Solomon says, Prove.
28.14. And as our Savior advises, Luke 22.46. that watches and prays, that
he enter not into temptation.

We see then that to perseverance there is a concurrence of our care and
diligence required, Jude v. 21. Keep your selves in the love of God. and Phil.
2.12, 13. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling for it is God that
works in you, etc.

Indeed the main work is Gods; he is the beginner, and he is the perfecter,
Phil. 1 6. He is the author, and he is the finisher, Heb. 12.2. But may we then
be idle and sit still, be careless and negligent? No, in no wise: For God
works in us, and by us. If therefore there be no Grace working in us, nor
working by us, and exciting, and quickening, and enabling us to sincere
obedience, and a careful and watchful carriage toward God, we may justly
suspect our state for the present to be very bad. A Christians life is never
exempted from care. We must be watchful and diligent to the very last: Satan is
always busy; we have corruptions within, and the world is full of snares: And
many times, where there seems to be least danger, there is most cause of fear.
Lot that was chaste in Sodom, miscarried in the mountains, where there were
none but his own Family. David's example may warn the holiest persons to the
worlds end, to be jealous over themselves. Who would have thought that he
(whose heart smote him for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment) should after
fall into uncleanness and murder? Peter also is a sad instance of confidence
in a man's own strength.

Upon all these considerations, let me advise thee to watch and pray, to pray
and watch continually. Have thou begun to make profession of Religion? O do not
fall off, and bring an ill report upon the ways of Holiness. A house begun,
and not finished is a habitation of shreek owls. Hold out to the last, that so
thou may obtain that honorable title, that Mnason had, to be an old
disciple, Acts 21.16.

I shall conclude this Head of watchfulness, and this whole Chapter of
maintaining a daily close communion with God, with two further Directions,
which (with Gods blessing) will much conduce to the carrying on of the whole
work.

Direction 1. Inure thy soul, (besides thy daily solemn prayers) to send up
frequent, mental, ejaculatory prayers unto God. These holy liftings up of the
heart unto the Lord, as they are very pleasing to him, so they are exceedingly
advantageous for the fetching speedy aid from Heaven, for the quenching of a
lust, resisting of a temptation, the better performing any service, delivering
us out of any present straits, enabling us to bear any affliction, or in case
of any failing, to beg mercy and pardon speedily, while the heart is smitten,
and tenderly affected with a sense of its miscarriage: As when David's heart
smote him for numbering the people, 2 Samuel 24.10. we find him lifting up his
heart unto the Lord, in this manner, I have sinned, I beseech thee take away
the iniquity of thy servant.

These ejaculatory prayers are (as it were) messengers sent post to Heaven,
(when time is not afforded for continued prayer) for some speedy help. And as
they hinder no business, but (being duly performed) further it much every way,
so no business can hinder them. When a Minister is preaching, and finds his
heart cold and livelesse in the service, or when in solemn prayer he finds his
spirit indisposed, dry, and barren; How may he speed one of these swift and
silent messengers, one of these fervent ejaculations to Heaven, for help and
assistance? When a Christian is hearing the Word, of how much advantage is it,
to send up such silent and fervent prayers, that God would set home such or
such a Doctrine upon his heart; or help him to forsake such a sin, then
reproved; or enable him to believe, and embrace such a Truth? When Christ was
preaching to his Apostles, that hard lesson of brotherly forgiveness, we find
in the 17th of Luke, v. 5. They sent up that holy ejaculation, Lord increase
our Faith. A man that is riding, or walking, or employed in his lawful calling,
may thus converse with Heaven, and yet no ways hinder his present business.

And further to persuade thee to the practice of this direction, consider,

I. These ejaculatory prayers do very much honor God; in that they acknowledge
him, to be a God, that can understand the language of our hearts, and the least
movings of our desires, toward him; and that he is a God hearing prayers, and
a very present help in time of trouble.

II. They are a good means to keep our hearts spiritual, and heavenly, and in a
good frame. Strangeness often grows between God and our souls, for want of
these. And many affecting providence loose their kindly work upon us for want
of a present lifting up of our hearts in some suitable ejaculations.

III. They are a special means to fit us for more solemn prayer. We must begin
duties with duties: God prepares the hearts of his people, to pray acceptably
unto him, by these preparatory ejaculations.

But here observe these few cautions and directions.

1. Take heed of formality, slightness; and customariness in them. Let them be
serious, and fervent, and from thy heart. Nothing more usual with many people,
than God forgive me, Lord bless me, God help me, when the heart is nothing
affected; nor does it send up these as earnest requests unto the Lord, looking
for an answer.

2. Use these holy ejaculations, not only in a way of petition, but also of
thanksgiving. Thus our Savior, Father I thank thee, Mat. 11 25.26. Thus David
often, as may be seen in his Psalms, that are full of such holy breathings and
affectionate thanksgivings.

3. Take heed under this pretense of laying aside, or neglecting solemn prayer
in a continued way: For that many ignorant people are apt to do; thinking a few
formal, short ej^culations to be devotion enough; and begrutch God any more of
their time.

4. Get a deep sense of thy own Weakness, inability, insufficiency, and of thy
continual need of help from God, and that will dispose thy heart to be ready in
every thing by prayer, and supplication, with thanksgiving, to make thy
requests known unto God.

Direct. 2. Retire thy self every night, and review and reflect upon all thy
actions and whole behavior in the day past. We read that God himself when he
created the world, every day looked over his own works. Surely God had no need
to examine his works that were so exact and perfect; but it is written for our
instruction, that we should do so likewise. Therefore for the keeping thy
Conscience clear from guilt, it will be very requisite, thou should take thy
self in private, before thou lie down to sleep, and consider thy whole
carriage and behavior that day; that so thou may by a serious humiliation,
retract and undo whatever has been amiss, and may make all straight between
God and thy soul. If thou find out thy sins, when they are but a day old,
before they become customary, and have taken root, they will be more easily
removed, by serious and speedy repentance, and applying thy self to Christ for
pardon. But for want of this frequent self-examining, and soul-purging, the
heart becomes hardened, sin gets root, the devil gets possession, and the soul
is more and more alienated from God.

To conclude this head of Watchfulness.

Let it be thy serious and fixed purpose every morning (through the assistance
of Grace) not willingly or knowingly to commit any sin, or to do any thing thy
Conscience shall tell thee is displeasing to God. But if (contrary to thy
serious intention) through infirmity, sudden surprizal, violence of temptation,
incogitancy, thou do at any time fall; humble thy soul before the Lord,
bewail and confess thy fault with sorrow and grief, and speedily recover thy
self by a serious repentance, and flying to the blood of Christ for pardon.
When thy peace is broken with God at any time, by sin; rest not, till it be
made up again: And rise from thy fall with a greater detestation of sin, a
stronger resolution against it, with a greater love to Christ, and
thankfulness for his pardoning Grace. And begging help from God, be more
watchful for the future.

Matthew. 25.13. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour
wherein the Son of man comes. Matthew. 26.41. Watch and pray that ye enter not
into temptation, the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. Matthew.
13.35. Watch ye therefore (for ye know not when the master of the house comes,
at even, or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in the morning) V 36. Lest
coming suddenly, he find you sleeping. V. 37. And what I say unto you, I say
unto all, Watch. Luke 12.37. Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord when he
comes, shall find watching. Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any
time your hearts be overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness and the cares
of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares. V. 36. Watch ye therefore
and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man. 1 Cor. 15.34.
Awake to righteousness, and sin not. Romans 13.11. And knowing the time, that
now it is high time to awake out of sleep, for now is our salvation nearer than
when we believed. 2 Timothy 4.5. Watch then in all things, endure afflictions, do
the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry. 1 Pet. 4.7. The end
of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. 1 Pet.
5.8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the devil as a roaring lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour. V. 9. Whom resist, steadfast in the
Faith -- 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit your selves like
men, be strong. Col. 4.2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same, with
thanksgiving. 1 These. 5 6. Let us not sleep, as do others, but let us watch and
be sober. Rev. 3.2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that
are ready to die, for I have not found thy works perfect before God. V. 3.
Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, and
repent; if thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shall
not know what hour I will come upon thee. Rev. 16.15. Behold I come as a thief;
Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments. -- Ephesians. 6 10. Finally my
Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. V. 11. Put on
the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the
devil. V. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. V. 13. Wherefore take unto
you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day,
and having done all to stand. V. 14. Stand therefore, having your loins girt
about with truth, and having on the breast plate of righteousness. V. 15. And
your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. V. 16. Above all
things taking the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the
fiery darts of the wicked. V. 17. And take the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God. V. 18. Praying always with all
prayer and supplication, in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance, etc. CHAP. VI.
CArefully make use of all good means God has appointed for the begetting, and
increasing saving Knowledge and Grace in thee. Under this head I shall treat of
these five Particulars.

1. The Observation of the Lords day. 2. Hearing the Word. 3. Singing Psalms.
4. Religious Conference. 5. Retired holy Meditations.
1. Concerning the Observation of the Lords day.
Be careful religiously to observe the Lords day, the Christian Sabbath.

The Law of Nature dictates to us that there ought to be a due proportion of
time set apart for Gods solemn Worship and Service. God has in his Word
appointed one day in seven to be kept holy to him; which was the last day of
the week, from the beginning of the world to the resurrection of Christ; and
the first day of the week ever since, and so to continue to the end of the
world; which is the Christian Sabbath, and in the new Test^ment called the
Lords day.

I shall here do two things.

1. Show the Reasons why we should observe this day.

2. The Manner how we should observe it.

The first I shall show in these Particulars following.

I. We find a Sabbath instituted by God himself from the beginning, Genesis 2.2,
3. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and he rested
on the seventh day from all his work which he had made, and God blessed the
seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his
work, which God created and made. Before we read of the fall of Adam, we read
of a seventh day, blessed and sanctified by God himself: God blessed the
seventh day, that is, dispensed a peculiar favor toward it, exalted that day
above the rest; which is intimated in the next words, he sanctified it, that
is, he separated and consecrated it to his own holy Worship, and annexed a
blessing to the observation of it. Adam did not need a day of rest in
innocence, by reason of any bodily weariness that would have betided him upon
his six days labor in his calling of husbandry; yet God saw it convenient to
enjoin him to set apart one day in seven, to enjoy more especial communion with
his Creator. Now if Adam in innocence (when he had no sin in him) had need of a
Sabbath, to take him off from the works of his calling, that he might converse
with God (more immediately) in holy duties, and exercises: How much more need
have we in this corrupt estate, who are so prone to sin, and had need of all
helps against it? Well then, we find in the very beginning, that the Law
concerning the Sabbath was given while the whole Nature of mankind was in our
first Parents, even before they fell. They might have lived here on the earth
without sin, but they were not to live without a Sabbath.

After the fall, when Enos was born of Seth, the son of Adam, it is said that
then men began to call on the Name of the Lord, Genesis 4. ult. That is, (as I
take it) to call upon his Name in public Assemblies: And most like it is, the
day they observed was the same that Abel and Seth and Adam observed before
them, and the rest of the Patriarchs after them; Namely, that day of the week,
in which God himself rested, having finished the great work of the worlds
creation: Even before the Law (says learned Mercer upon Gen.) I doubt not but
this day by Gods teaching, was solemn and sacred to those primitive Fathers.
Neither did the observation thereof (says Peter Martyr, loc. com. cap. 7.)
begin with the giving of the law in Sinai, but it was celebrated before. Of the
same opinion is the judicious Rivet, who answers all Arguments brought to the
contrary, in 2 Genesis Exerc. 13. And indeed there is no reason to think
otherwise: For besides that in Adams heart the Law of Nature was perfectly
imprinted (and to consecrate some time to the Worship of God, was, and is a
member of that Law) It Is more than probable, God did dictate and prescribe to
Adam all circumstances of his Worship, which by tradition past to his
posterity, and were in their several Families until Moses observed.

II. We find a Sabbath observed by the Patriarchs, in Exodus 16. Before the
giving of the Law, we find there an express charge touching the observation of
it; and two such Miracles to ratify and set a value upon it, v. 22, and 27. as
seldom we read of greater. The Manna fell in great plenty on the six days, and
on the seventh none. 2. Being gathered on the sixth day, it remained sweet to
the seventh, and not so on any other day. Observed therefore it was at this
time, and surely in obedience to Gods command: For we must not impute
will worship to these holy men. I shall end this with the words of the learned
Paraeus in Com. on Genesis God sanctified the Sabbath in the very prime creation,
and doubtless that sanctification was observed in the Patriarchal Families.

III. After all this, we find the day again (for the better observation of it)
proclaimed on Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. and that in a very dreadful, and glorious
manner, having a more solemn entrance into it, and more solemn reasons to hedge
it in, and confirm it, than any of the other Commandments. God (being to give
his moral and immutable Laws to his people) does first apply himself to them
as Jews, rouzing their attention by inculcating the late signal mercies he had
conferred on them, hereby to excite them to a more strict observation of what he
was now to give them in charge; so that though the introduction be proper to
the Jews, yet the commandments have a larger extent, and are spoken alike to
all.

Now it is very observable the Jewish or Saturday Sabbath, or seventh from the
creation is not in express terms commanded in the fourth Commandment: That we
shall perceive, if we look over the Commandment.

1. Remember thou sanctify the Sabbath day. The Sabbath day it is you see, and
not the seventh from the Creation. Observe says Zanchy, God said not, Remember
thou sanctify the seventh day, but the day of rest; (that is) the day that is
consecrated to rest, either immediately by himself, or mediately by the Church,
directed by the Holy Ghost, whatsoever day it be: So that the day must be of
Divine Institution.

2. God tells us distinctly what Sabbath he here means, viz. the weekly. He
says, Sanctify the Sabbath, in the singular number, not Sabbaths, in the
plural. The observation (not of many festivals but) of one only is there
enjoined, says the learned Junius.

3. The Sabbath must be sanctified, but what day is appointed for it? Six days
shall thou labor: Six days are ours: The seventh is the S^bbath. A seventh
God will have: But what seventh? He says not, the seventh from the Creation.
He names no day (as intending the day should change) He says only the seventh,
i. e. The seventh after six working days.

4. But is the determination of this one in seven in our power? No, for it must
be the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, i. e. which he has already, or should
hereafter declare to his Church, to be his Sabbath. It must be Gods own choice.

Now that the fourth Commandment is moral, will appear, if we consider,

1. Except it be moral, there cannot be ten Commandments, and yet so we find,
Deuteronomy. 10 4. And he wrote on the Tables, according to the first writing, the ten
Commandments, which the Lord spoke unto you in the Mount out of the midst of
the fire, in the day of the Assembly: And the Lord gave them unto me. To keep
some time holy to the Lord, and to keep that time which he should appoint is
absolutely moral. Now it is plain, a Sabbath God must have by the perpetual
Ordinance of the fourth Commandment. Remember thou sanctify the Sabbath day,
i. e. That day which for the time being, God has marked out and appointed for
his own. And he has declared his Will concerning the limitation of it; Six
days shall thou labor, etc. But the seventh is the Sabbath, so that one in a
week he must have. If this Commandment enjoin no particular and set time under
the Gospel, then are there but nine Commandments. Why should the Sabbath be
put among the moral Laws of the Decalogue, if it were only ceremonial? And
wherein does the designation or limitation of one day in a week, for Gods
service seem ceremonial? It being a memorial of Gods creating the world in six
days, and resting the seventh, this being a benefit whe^ein all mankind
intercommon, the Jews can claim no property therein several to themselves.

2 If we look upon the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, we shall find it
stripped of all legal observances: For those things which are urged as
ceremonial, and several of the Jews touching the Sabbath, are all post-scripts
and bylaws, not one emergent from the fourth precept. As no fire to be
kindled, Exodus 16 23. No meat to be dressed, Exodus 17 5. These were peculiar to
the Jews: We must distinguish therefore between those precepts of the Sabbath
that occur elsewhere and the fourth Commandment: What is ceremonial touching
the Sabbath, we must apply to them, what is moral, we must restrain to this.
See Mr. Lestrang's learned Treatise of the Sabbath.

Thus we have seen how God had from the Creation, to the Law, from the Law, to
Christ, a day appointed, and that by himself, to his own Worship. And has he
less reason to require it under the Gospel? Surely no.

IIII. From Christ's resurrection, on the first day of the week very early in
the morning ( Luke 24.1. John 20.1.) The Sabbath was changed to that day in
honor of our Savior, who that day rising from the dead, finished the work of
our Redemption.

The Jewish Sabbath slept its last in the grave with our Savior, though its
shadow indeed walked a while after; but it self, the old Sabbath expired then;
and immediately entered the Lords day. From the resurrection of Christ
immediately, when Christ himself was but newly up, from that very day whereon he
arose, does Augustine derive the beginning of the Evangelical Sabbath: The
Lords day says he, by the resurrection of Christ was declared to be the
Christians day; and from that very time (of Christ's resurrection) it began to
be celebrated as the Christian man's Festival, Epist. ad Jan. 19. c. 13. This
was the first day of our Saviors appearing to his Disciples, and the first
Christian Sabbath he honored with his beatifical presence, Joh. 20.19, 20, 26.
The next was the eighth day after.

V. Well, our Savior is ascended. Let us now see what honor the holy Ghost
(whom he promised to send his Apostles) has conferred on this day. The holy
Ghost descends; But on what day? Why the first day of the week. It was when
Pentecost arrived, and that fell that year on that day. On this day the
Apostles were solemnly, though closely assembled in prayer and holy duties, and
the holy Ghost descended upon them Acts 2.

VI. The next mention of Apostolical observation of this day occurreth, Acts
20. v. 7. The first of the week the Disciples being come together to break
bread, (i. e. The Sacramental or Eucharistical bread) Paul preached to them.
That for his practice: Now his precept for the day is plainly implied, 1 Cor.
16.1. As I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, so do ye. v. 2. Upon the
first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store as God has
prospered him, that there be no gathering when I come. He ordains their
collections for the poor Saints, and oblations should be on that day: And why
should that day be the Almes-day or Collection day, rather than any other, had
it not been observed holy in those times, and that the Congregation did use on
that day to assemble? The Collection therefore being enjoined on that day, the
Lords day was consequently enjoined.

VII. About sixty years after, (as Calvisius out of Irenaeus computes) we meet
with this day apparrelled in a Christian Name, not styled the first day, but
the Lords day; which probably was then current among the Christians, else the
holy Ghost would not have used it, Rev. 1.10. St. John says he was in the
Spirit on the Lords day, i. e. in spiritual exercises and Meditations, and by
means thereof in spiritual raptures, and elevations of soul.

VIII. The Church succeeding the Apostles held her se^f obliged to the same
observation. For even in times of persecution, before any, either Imperial
Edict, or Canon of Council enjoined it, the observation of this day was so
taken notice of by the Heathen, that it became a constant interrogatory to the
Christians in their examining, Have you kept the Lords day? To which their
answer was ever ready, I cannot intermit it, for I am a Christian, and the law
of God prompts me to it, Baron. 30.3. Memb. 5.

Now if any man shall enquire how the Sabbath came to be translated into the
Lords day. I answer, Christ in the forty days he stayed upon the earth after
his resurrection, did sundry times appear to his Disciples, teaching them the
things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. Therefore it is probable
the Apostles were instructed by Christ concerning the change of the day (from
the seventh, to the eighth) and had special order immediately from himself,
concerning it. It Is evident Christ is Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2.27. And
therefore had power not only to abrogate the old Sabbath, but to surrogate and
substitute the new in its room. But whether this day were instituted immediately
by Christ himself, or by his Apostles, guided and infallibly inspired by his
holy Spirit, after his ascension, still the day will be of Divine Institution.
And this Act of theirs will appear but the execution of a particular Command
from the Spirit of Christ to that purpose.

For consider how Christ sent these Apostles; As my Father sent me, so send I
you, John 20.21, He that hears you, hears me, Luke 10.16. Go, Mat. 28.19.
There is their mission. Teach all Nations, There is their Commission. What?
Why, What things I command you: and to assist and help you, Lo, I am with you
always, to the end of the world; not in corporal presence, but by my Spirit,
the Comforter whom I will send you, John 15.26. And he shall bring all things
to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you, John 14.26. This Spirit
of Truth shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall
he speak: He shall receive of mine, and show it you.

Thus we see the Apostles were undoubtedly inspired by the Spirit of Christ,
who revealed his will unto them. And that they were thus acted by the holy
Ghost, they themselves testify in their first Council; It seemed good to the
holy Ghost and to us, Acts 15.28.

Thus we see there are two things whereon the Divine right of the Lords day is
founded; Upon the morality of the fourth Commandment, and upon Evangelical
Institution, either by Christ himself, or his Apostles. And what the Apostles
delivered by the dictate of the holy Ghost, is as firm and indefeizable (says
Cyprian de ablut. pedum.) as what Christ himself. Our Church reduces the
institution of this day as a weekly day to the fourth Commandment; and as the
first day of the week, she foundeth it upon Apostolical practice and tradition.

I shall conclude this, with the words of the judicious Hooker in his Eccles.
Pol. Book 5. parag. 17. We are bound, says he, to account the sanctification
of one day in seven, a duty, which Gods immutable Law does exact for ever;
although with us, the day be changed, in regard of a new revolution, begun by
our Savior Christ; yet the same proportion of time continues, which was
before, by way of a perpetual homage never to be dispensed withal, nor remitted.

I come now to the second Particular. The manner how we ought to observe this
day.

1. We ought to prepare for the Sabbath, before it comes, by a prudent care, so
disposing and dispatching our worldly businesses and affairs, that they may be
off our hands, and out of our minds (as much as is possible) on that day, that
so our hearts may be more free and fit for those spiritual duties then required
of us. The Jews before the Sabbath had a time of preparation, Luke 23.54. Why
should not we?

2. We ought to sanctify the Lords day, not only by resting from worldly
employments and recreations (on other days lawful) but consecrating that rest
unto God; making it our delight to spend the whole time (excepting so much of
it as is to be taken up in works of necessity and mercy, and such as are
needful for the comfortable passing of the Sabbath) in the public and private
exercises of Gods Worship and Service; Such as Prayer, Reading the Scripture,
Preparing for the public duties, Attending on the Word, Singing the praises of
God, Private meditation on that which has been preached, Repetition thereof in
the Family, and religious conference, to make the public Ordinances the more
profitable.

Take heed therefore of being found a slighter of those duties, the neglect
whereof cannot consist with any true vigor and power of Religion, or any due
care of our own or others souls, that we ought to have a care of. Consider,
God has blessed and sanctified this day, not only as a day of service to
himself, but as a time wherein he will confer blessings on the conscionable
observers of it. It is his special day of proclaiming and sealing pardons to
penitent sinners. It Is a blessed day to the careful observers of it, and
sanct^fied to many gracious purposes. The Sabbath was made for man, said our
Savior, Mark 2.27. i. e. For man's great benefit and advantage. It would not be
for the good and benefit of mankind to be dispensed with, from the religious
observation of it. How much then are they to blame that make it a day of carnal
rest, a day of Idleness and jollity, of feasting and pastimes, which more
alienate the mind from God, than ordinary labors, and take away the taste of
spiritual things. Some people if they have any visit to make, or any odd
business to do, they refer them to this day. Some keep the Sabbath as the Ox;
they rest from their labors, but serve not the Lord that day. They are weary
of the duties of the Sabbath, they do not call the Sabbath a delight, as it is,
Isa. 58.13. Delight sweetens any labor. How will people toil at their sports
and pleasures? O had we spiritual hearts, we should account the celebration of
the Sabbath not only our duty, but our privilege!

By observing the Sabbath, we continue a thankful remembrance of the two great
benefits of Creation and Redemption, which contain a short abridgment of true
Religion. The Sabbath duly observed is a type of the everlasting rest that
remains for the people of God, Heb. 4.9. How then can those ever think to come
to Heaven, and to keep an everlasting Sabbath in praising and adoring God, to
whom the celebration of a weekly Sabbath is so tedious and irksom here?

3. Every true Christian is to take care not on^y to sanctify the Lords day
himself, but that those under his charge do the like. Every Governor of a
Family should resolve with pious Joshuah, Josh 24.15. But as for me and my
house we will serve the Lord. Observe it, True Religion and the power of
Godliness has there usually most flourished, where the Lords day has been
most conscientiously observed. And many direful judgments have befallen the
violators and prophaners of it.

Genesis 2.2. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and he
rested on the seventh day from all the work which he had made. V. 3. And God
blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested
from all his work which God created and made. Lev. 23.3. Six days shall thy
work be done, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, an holy convocation,
ye shall do no work therein: it is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your
dwellings. Nehem. 13.19. And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem
began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut,
and charged that they should not be opened till after the Sabbath, and some of
my servants set I at the gates, that there should no burden be brought in on
the Sabbath day. Isa. 58.13. If thou turn away thy feet from the Sabbath, from
doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of
the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor
finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words. Luke 23.54. And that
day was the preparation, and the Sabbath drew on, V. 56. And they returned, and
prepared spices, and ointments, and rested the Sabbath day, according to the
Commandment. Exodus 23.12. Six days shall thou do thy work, and on the seventh
day thou shall rest, that thine Ox and thine Ass may rest, and the son of
thine handmaid and the stranger shall be refreshed. Ezekiel. 22.26. Her Priests
have violated my Law, and have profaned mine holy things, they have put no
difference between the holy and profane, neither have they showed difference
between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my Sabbaths,
and I am profaned among them. Ezekiel. 23.38. Moreover this they have done unme,
they have defiled my Sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my Sabbaths.
Amos 8.4. Saying, when will the New Moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and
the Sabbath that we may set forth wheat, etc. Lam. 1.7. Jerusalem remembered in
the days of her affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant things that
she had in the days of old, when her people fell into the hand of the enemy,
and none did help her, the adversaries saw her, and did mock at her Sabbaths.
Ezekiel. 20.20. Hallow my Sabbaths, and they shall be a sign between me and you,
that ye may know that I am the Lord your God. Isa. 56.2. Blessed is the man
that does this, and the son of man that lays hold on it, that keeps the
Sabbath from polluting it, and keeps his hand from doing evil. V. 4. For thus
says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the things
that please me, and take hold of my Covenant. V. 6. Also the sons of the
stranger that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the Name
of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keeps the Sabbath from
polluting it, and takes hold of my Covenant. V. 7. Even them will I bring to
my holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt
Offerings and their Sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar: for mine
house shall be called an house of prayer for all people. Mark 2.27. And he said
unto them, the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. V. 28.
Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath. Psalm. 92. Title. A Psalm
or Song for the Sabbath day. Mat. 5.17. Think not that I am come to destroy the
Law or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. Luke 4.16. And
he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and as his custom was, he
went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read. Acts
20.7. And upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to
break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow, and
continued his speech until midnight. 1 Cor. 16.1. Now concerning the
Collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia,
even so do ye. V. 2. Upon the first day of the week, let every one of you lay
up in store as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come.
Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day. Psalm. 118.24. This is the day
which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. 2. Hearing the
Word.
We live in an age wherein (through the rich mercy of God) there is much good
preaching; but it is a general complaint there is so little profiting. We see
not those gracious effects of the Word, that were to be desired and wished. And
certainly one main reason of it, is, few take care to hear in a right manner,
as they ought to do. That therefore thou may so hear, as to profit I shall
show thee, 1. What thou art to do before thou hear, by way of preparation.
2. What thou art to do in time of Hearing. 3. What after thou have Heard.


For the First: Thou must prepare thy heart before thou come to hear. Rash
entering on duties, is seldom successeful: If the ground be not prepared, the
seed is lost that is sown therein. Plow up the fallow ground of your hearts,
says the Prophet, Jer. 4.3. and sow not among thorns. In a fallow piece of
ground (you know) thorns and briers, weeds and thistles use to grow. And such a
thing is man's heart naturally, which if let alone, and no pains taken with it,
will quickly be overgrown with hurtful cares, stinking lusts, and distempered
affections. And therefore St. James advises, Jam. 1.21. That before we go to
hear the Word, we should lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of
naughtiness, i. e. all evil frames of heart. And how hard a matter that is, I
appeal to the experience of every true and sincere Christian. That holy man
Gerson professes he many times spent some hours before he could get his heart
in tune for solemn duties. Gods children have entered comfortably on duties,
^hen they have been serious and careful in their preparations for them.

To help thee therefore to prepare thy heart for the Word, take these
Directions.

1. Lay aside (as much as possibly thou can) all worldly thoughts, cares and
businesses, that thy mind may be free for God, and the impressions of his Word
and holy Spirit,

On Saturday night, shut up the gates of thy heart against the world, as
Nehemiah, Chap. 13. v. 19.20. did the gates of Jerusalem, on the evening of
their Sabbath. If any Merchants come, any worldly thoughts or businesses, let
them stay without till the Sabbath be over: The work of men's Callings, is not
only in their hands, but in their minds and heads. A Minister may have a great
Congregation, and yet but a few hearers, if their minds be stuffed with the world
before they come: if they bring their trades, their bargains, their plow,
their worldly business along with them. As therefore we read of Abraham, in
Genesis 22.5. That when he went up to the Mount to offer Sacrifice, he left his
servants and the Ass in the valley behind him; so should we our worldly cares
and businesses, when we go to worship God, and to hear his Word.

2. Consider and meditate on the great concernment and importance of the Word.
It Is the ordinary means God has appointed for the working that great work of
conversion (without which no salvation) and for the edifying and building up
those that are already savingly wrought upon, Jam. 1.18. Of his own Will begat
he us by the Word of Truth. 1 Cor. 4.15. I have begotten you in Christ Jesus
(says Paul) through the Gospel. Romans 10 17. Faith comes by hearing. Indeed
sin and consequently death came by hearing at the first, by our first Parents
listening to, and believing a tempting Spirit. But now Faith, and consequently
life comes by Hearing, through the operation of the blessed Spirit of God in
the Word, Romans 1.16. The Gospel it is the power of God unto salvation.

Labor therefore to have an high value and esteem of the preaching of the
Gospel. God has appointed his Ordinances, not in Sovereignty only, but in
Mercy to us. As our Savior said of the Sabhath, Mark 2.27. The Sabbath was
made for man, and not man for the Sabbath: So may I say of all the Ordinances
of God, they were ordained for man, for man's benefit, and not man made for
them. And therefore the great benefit, that (with Gods blessing) may be
expected from them (if we duly attend upon them) should make us highly value
them.

Indeed it is one of the devils stratagems in this age, to urge the efficacy of
the Spirit, as a plea for the neglect of means. Whereas Gods Spirit does
usually work in and by the means, and rarely (if ever) when the ordinary means
are slighted. It Is true, God himself is not tied to means, nor to any of his
own Ordinances, yet he ties us to make use of them, when we may have them. That
soul cannot expect to be instructed by Gods Spirit, who is a slighter and
neglecter of Gods ordinary means.

Further consider, the intent of the Word is not only to regenerate, but to
nourish, increase and perfect the Graces of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Our
knowledge is imperfect. Those that know most, may learn more: We need new
inforcements of duty: Our affections are dull, and need a new excitement. None
so wise, so knowing a Christian, but he may receive some benefit from a
different handling of what he himself knew before.

Therefore seeing the preaching of the Word was ordained for so great and
signal benefits to mankind, it is just with God, that they that have slight
thoughts of it, should be barren under it.

3. When thou art going to hear, consider whither thou art going. Thou art
going to meet the great God of Heaven and Earth: A God that is not to be
dallied with, Levit. 10.3. I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me. When
the people went to hear the Law, Exodus 19.10. The Lord said to Moses, Sanctify
the people, and let them wash their clothes. What does this speak to us? that
Christians should only wash their hands and faces, and put on their best
apparel, when they come to hear the Word? No, the Apostle James, Jam. 1.21.
tells us; Lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive
with meekness the ingrafted Word, that is able to save your souls. If thou
find thy Spirit slight and wandering, to fix it and make it serious, think
with thy self, and imagine how it was with the Israelites going to receive the
Law of God: When the Mount was all on a flame of fire, the trumpet sounding
louder and louder, the people trembling and sore afraid. This is to beat the
Devil with his own weapon; for he often prevails upon us, by casting in sinful
Imaginations. Consider therefore how the Lord is present in an especial manner
where his Word is preached. Surely the Lord is in this place, as Jacob said of
Bethel, Genesis 28.16. The apprehension of Gods presence in the assemblies of his
people, will preserve in thee an awful and reverent disposition of soul.

4. Before thou go, fail not to pour forth earnest and fervent prayers unto
the Lord, and that in behalf, 1. Of the Minister. 2. Of thy self.


I. In behalf of the Minister, that the Lord would teach him what he should
teach the people, and direct and enable him to declare the mind of God, and to
preach such truths as may tend to the benefit, and salvation of thine and
others souls. Certainly if people did more seriously and more frequently pray
for their Minister, that the Lord would bless and prosper his labors, and
direct him to divide the Word aright, to give to every one their portion, to
feed the people with knowledge and understanding; he might expect a greater
blessing and assistance in his studies, and they more benefit by his
endeavors. How earnestly does Paul beg prayers, Romans 15 30? Now I beseech you
(brethren) for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit,
that ye strive together with me, in your prayers to God for me. v. 31. -- That
my service which I have for Jerusalem, may be accepted of the Saints. And Ephesians
6.18. Praying always with all prayer, and supplication in the Spirit for all
Saints. v. 19. And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open
my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel. v. 20. -- That
therein I may speak boldly as I ought to speak. Col. 4.3. Withal praying for
us, that God would open to us a door of utterance to speak the mystery of
Christ, for which I am also in bonds. v. 4. That I may make it manifest as I
ought to speak.

II. In behalf of thy self.

1. That the Lord would fix thy mind, and make it serious. When the mind is
serious, truths are apt to make impression.

2. That he would enlighten thy mind, and open thy heart, as he did the heart
of Lydia, Acts 16.14. that thou may have a clear and right understanding of
those truths that concern thy salvation.

3. That he would give thee a heart to believe, and embrace the truth, in the
love of it; that truth may not only float in thy fantasy, but sink down into
thy heart, Romans 10.10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness. There
is a Faith of the head, and a Faith of the heart: Devils, and wicked men have
the Faith of the head; but they have no such belief, as affects the heart, and
makes it close with truth, and love it and embrace it.

4. That the Spirit of God would set in with the preaching of the Word, and
make it effectual for the beating down of thy corruptions. It Is a remarkable
expression, that in Isa. 8.11. The Lord spoke to me with a strong hand; not
with a mere voice, but a strong hand. Pray therefore thus, Lord speak to my
lusts and corruptions this day with a strong hand; let them feel thy power, and
the strength of thine arm, that so they may be effectually destroyed in me.

5. Labor to come with a teacheable and tractable frame of Spirit. Receive
with meekness the ingrafted Word, James 1. Christ was anointed to preach glad
tidings to the meek, Isaiah 61.1.

There are three sorts of Spirits far from this temper.

1. The cavilling Spirit, that is forward to cavil at the Word, and to frame
Objections against it.

2. The wrathful Spirit, that is fierce and ready to rise up in arms against
the just reproofs of the Word. When such are admonished or warned, they revile:
Conviction, that should humble, provokes them. There is a great deal of
difference between those two places, and expressions, Acts 2.37. Now when they
heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and the rest
of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? And Acts 7.54. When they
heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with
their teeth. Here is a great deal of difference between being pricked at the
heart, and feeling compunction for sin in their Consciences, as it was with the
true converts in the former place, and being cut to the heart, and vexed, when
they heard their sins reproved, as it was with the malicious and obstinate
Jews in the latter.

A guilty Conscience thinks the Minister aims at him in particular, and intends
to disgrace him; he thinks he commits a trespass by treading upon his ground,
and coming so close to his Conscience. It stuck in Herod's stomach when John
touched him about his Herodias: But (observe it) those that most storm at a
reproof, are usually those that most deserve it.

3. The earthy obdurate spirit. Let the Minister say what he will, he is
Sermon-proof: He is resolved to hold his own: Indeed his sins may well be
called his own. It Is a sad word that is spoken of the Pharisees and Lawyers,
Luke 7.30. They rejected the counsel of God against themselves. And that of the
Jews, Acts 13.46. Ye put it from you (namely the Word of God) and judge your
selves unworthy of eternal life; Lo we turn to the Gentiles.

But now a meek spirit is a teacheable and tractable spirit: A tender heart is
apt to receive impressions, as you may observe in persons whose hearts are
softened by afflictions; How do Sermons work on such? Labor therefore to come
with such a frame of spirit to hear the Word, as those did in Acts 10.33. We
are all here present before the Lord to hear the things that are commanded thee
of God.

6. Come with an appetite, with a longing desire to the Word. Nothing makes
wholesome food more savoury and sweet, than appetite. Some people come to
Church, as sickly people do to a Feast; they sit down for company, though they
have no stomach: It Is in vain to come to a Sermon, without a spiritual
appetite. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be satisfied: It Is our Saviors own promise, Mat. 5.6. O that people were
such to their Ministers, as those Job speaks of, C. 29.23. Who waited for him,
as for rain; gasping after the Word, as the chapt earth for showers! O that
there were some such Divine affections in us, as were in holy David! that we
could truly say, My soul is athirst for God, even for the living God: My soul
pants after Christ, after his pardoning Mercy, and sanctifying Grace, as the
Heart pants after the water brooks! We should then see Sermons work other
effects, than now we do: But when people come either with no appetite, no
desire and love to the Word, (but sit down in the Congregation merely for
fashion or company sake) or when they come with distempered pallats, with
prejudices and prepossessions against the simplicity of the Gospel; the most
Evangelicall Truths are to them but as a banquet of sweet meats unto swine;
they had rather have husks. They can relish (may be) some witty jingling
discourse; but the preaching of Christ and him crucified, (which Paul thought
so richly of) is too stale a Doctrine, and too flat a note for their ears.

7. Having sought to the Lord, and taken pains to bring thy heart into right
frame; come with expectation to profit. It Is often said in the Gospel, Be it
unto thee according to thy Faith. And truly, usually people profit by Sermons
according to their expectations. But take here this Caution. Do not ground thy
expectation on the parts or gifts of the Minister, but on Gods promise; looking
for his blessing to accompany his own Ordinance. Usually people speed according
to their aim and expectation. They that come to hear man's voice do hear it.
It Is said of Paul's companions, Acts 9.7. That they heard a voice. Acts 22.9.
It Is said, they that were with him, heard not the voice. They heard a sound,
but heard it not distinctly, as Christ's voice. Some only hear an outward sound,
the voice of man, but not the voice of God in the Word.

Thus much of preparation before Hearing.

Secondly, I come now to give some Directions how thou should carry thy self
in time of Hearing.

I. Hear with the most fixed attention thou possibly can. Attend with
reverence and seriousness. Many weighty Truths are lost by negligent hearing.
Though it cannot be expected, that we should be totally free from wandering
thoughts; yet we ought to be watchful, and not to allow our selves in them. And
when we perceive our hearts gone, we should speedily recall them, David says
of Idols, they have ears, and hear not, Psalm. 115 6. We have too many such
Idols in our Congregations.

There are three sorts of ears, that are not the hearing ears: I mean, that
hear aright.

1. The dull ear. When people allow themselves in drowsinesse, and
carelesseness. What impressions, is it possible the Word should make on a man
that is asleep? What know thou, O sleeper, but whilst thou have slept, those
truths have been delivered, which (had thou duly minded) might have tended to
thy everlasting salvation? If such a Judgment befell him that slept in the
night, and that at an exceeding long Sermon, Acts 20.9, 10. What shall we say
of those that sleep in the day at a Sermon of an hour long.

2. The stopped ear, Some are resolved sinners. They stop their ears like the
Adder, against the voice of the Charmer, Charm he never so wisely, Psalm. 58.4.
We read of some Zach. 7.12. That made their heart as Adamant stone, that they
might not hear. It Is a sad complaint the Prophet makes (And yet many Ministers
may in these days make the same) I have stretched out my hands all the day
long to a disobedient and gainsaying people, Isa. 65.2. Romans 10.21.

3. The itching ear, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. The Apostle speaks of some, who having
itching ears, did turn away their ears from the Truth unto Fables. When men
affect only new things, and another Gospel, as Paul speaks, Gal. 1. They are
half gone into Heresy: Plain Doctrines that tend to the conviction of sin,
that discover the necessity of conversion, that show man's lost and undone
condition by nature, and his only remedy by Christ, the necessity of Holiness
and new obedience: these serious truths are too stale for many curious ears.
But remember, they were carnal people who complained, they had nothing but the
old burden, Jer. 23.33, 34.

II. Apply what thou hear to thy self, Job 5. ult. Hear thou this, and know
it for thy self. Do not ward off the blows of the Word from thy self: Do not
say within thy self, this reproof concerns such an one, etc. The Jews being
pricked in their hearts, Acts 2.23. said, What shall we do? not what shall
others do to be saved. No plaster can do us good, except it be applied.

III. Lift up thy heart in frequent, mental, ejaculatory prayers unto the Lord,
to set the truths thou hear, home upon thy soul: Lord help me to remember
and practice this lesson. Lord help me to forsake this sin; Lord strengthen my
Faith in the belief of this Truth. As the Disciples, when Christ told them how
often they should forgive an offending brother, Luke 17.5. they instantly pray,
Lord increase our Faith.

IV. Mix Faith with the Word. Heb. 4.2. The Apostle tells of some that the Word
profited not, bccause they did not mix it with Faith. O cursed infidelity! How
many thousand souls have thou destroyed? How many thousand Sermons have thou
made unsuccesseful? St. James tells us The Devils believe and tremble. That is
more than many a wicked man does.

Thus much of thy behavior in time of hearing.

Thirdly, After hearing practice these Directions.

1. Labor to keep alive those good motions, those good inclinations, those
Heavenly affections, and stirrings of Spirit which thou foundest in time of
hearing. Thou will quickly cool, when out of the Congregation, if thou take not
heed.

2. When thou go from the Congregation, be willing to speak and confer of
what thou have heard, laboring thereby to work those truths on thy own heart,
and on the hearts of others: O how sad is it that people as soon as ever they
are out of the Congregation, fall a talking of any thing rather than the Sermon
they have heard! They are free to talk of bargains, or news, or any thing else:
But they are ashamed of such precise discourse, as to speak of the truths they
have heard, though they concern them never so much.

3. Let such as are governors of Families revive the truths they have heard in
public, by repetition in their Families: Our memories are weak, and Commands
had need be repeated to forgetful servants. At first hearing many truths may be
lost through distraction and wandering. Paul in his Epistles does often repeat
the same passages; and renew the same exhortations. And he tells the
Philippians, C. 3. v. 1. To write the same things to them, was not to him
grievous, but for them safe.

4. Retire thy self, and meditate on the truths thou have heard, and labor to
fasten them by prayer in thy heart. Let thy Conscience in secret preach them
over to thee again, Luke 2.19. It Is said, Mary pondered those sayings in her
heart. O how few will spend a secret hour on the Lords day to consider and
meditate on what they have heard. One main reason Sermons do no more good is
because people so soon forget them. And why do they forget them so soon? But
because they do not consider and meditate on them, when they have heard them,
Heb. 2.1. Therefore says the Apostle, we ought to give the more earnest heed
to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip.
And 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that
thy profiting may appear unto all.

5. Be not a bare hearer, but a doer of the Word. Speedily set upon the
practice of what thou have learned to be thy duty. Be ye doers of the Word, and
not hearers only, deceiving your own souls. Jam. 1.22. Some do not care to
hear, because they have no mind to practice. Some hear, and rest in it. It Is
practice that proclaims the sincerity of our profession. In hearing we may look
like Saints, but in doing we live like Saints. Practice is the best
commendation of a Sermon.

Having thus showed thee what thou must do.

1. Before hearing the Word. 2. In hearing the Word. 3. After hearing the Word.
I come now to give thee some Motives to quicken thee to the practice of these
Directions.

1. Consider, such as wilfully neglect to prepare their hearts, before they
come to hear, do tempt God to withdraw the assistance and blessing of his holy
Spirit from them when they are come. Presume not on Gods assistance in an
Ordinance, if you neglect to prepare for it. If the ground be not well
prepared, we do not expect a crop.

2. Consider and remember, the Devils care is, not only to disturb thee at the
Ordinance, but to indispose thee for it, before thou come. The Devil is
stirring early on the Lords day morning. He is at work betimes: Be sure, he
has a mornings draught for thee; he will be presenting and suggesting
something to thee, to unfit and indispose thee for the duties of the day.

3. Consider, as thou art more or less careful to prepare, so will thou
ordinarily more or less taste the sweetness of the Ordinance. Preparation is
like exercise before a meal: It will make thee come with the better appetite to
the Word, and relish it the better.

4. Consider, preparation is not only advantageous in order to the Ordinance,
but it brings advantage to us, considered in it self. By preparation we have
communion with God: We come to u^derstand our selves, and the case of our own
souls. Whilst thou art preparing, thy Graces are increasing; the work of Heaven
goes on.

5. Consider, If thou make Conscience thus to behave thy self before, in, and
after hearing of the Word (as thou have been directed) thou will find it a
great evidence of the sincerity and uprightness of thy heart. Outward respects
may make people come to Church, but to take pains thus with their hearts
beforehand, argues a true desire after communion with God, and a real
willingness to profit by the Word, and to grow in Grace.

6. Consider what a choice mercy it is to enjoy the Gospel. It Is not a dish
that is set on every table. God has not done so for every Nation, as for this.
No Island so far from Jerusalem, had the light of the Gospel so soon as this.
And I know not any particular promise whereby the Gospel is entailed on this,
or any other Nation. If we slight the Gospel, for ought I know, we may quickly
forfeit it; and provoke God to take it from us. When the Israelites despised
Manna, God quickly sent serpents among them. If we despise the Manna of his
Word, and count it light food; God may justly send Serpents among us; I mean,
such deceivers as with their pernicious Doctrines may poison many souls to
their everlasting destruction.

7. Lastly, Consider, though the Gospel may continue to the Nation, yet thou or
I may quickly be deprived of our personal opportunities of enjoying of it. I
have heard of one lying on his deathbed, that cried out, Call time back, Call
time back. Thou may shortly cry out call Sermons back; call Sabbaths back,
and all in vain, if thou neglectest the present opportunity and season of
Grace. Consider the Spirit of God will not always strive with the children of
men. Consider, this may be the last Sermon that ever thou may hear; (Some one
Sermon will be the last) And think thus with thy self, such a gale of the
Spirit, as now I feel, may never be afforded me again. Shall I be so foolish
then, as not to yield to these blessed motions? To day, while it is called to
day, hear his voice, and harden not thy heart.

Luke 8.18. Take heed therefore how ye hear. Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot when
thou go to the House of God, and be more ready to hear, than to give the
sacrifice of fools; for they consider not that they do evil. Romans 10.14. How
then shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
preacher? V. 15. And how shall they preach, except they be sent? as it is
written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace,
and bring glad tidings of good things? Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us,
with the Word of Truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his
Creatures. 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever. Jam.
1.21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted Word which is able to save your souls. V.
22. But be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
selves. V. 23. For if any man be a hearer of the Word, and not a doer, he is
like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass, V. 24. For he beholds
himself, and goes his way, and straightway forgets what manner of man he
was. V. 25. But whosoever looks into the perfect Law of liberty, and continues
therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man
shall be blessed in his deed. 1 Pet. 2.1. Wherefore laying aside all malice,
and all guile, and hypocrisy, and envies, and evil speakings. V. 2. As new
born babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. John
8.47. He that is of God, hears Gods Words, ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God. 1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at
the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in
to him, and sup with him, and he with me. Prove. 2.3. Yea, if thou criest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding. V. 5. Then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. Mat. 13.3. The
parable of the sower, and the four sorts of ground. Luke 8.5. The parable of
the sower, and the four sorts of ground. Mat. 13.14. And in them is fulfilled
the Prophecy of Esaias, which says, by hearing, ye shall hear, and shall not
understand; and seeing, ye shall see, and shall not perceive. V. 15. For this
peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their
eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them. V. 16. But blessed are your eyes, for they
see, and your ears, for they hear. 1. These. 2.13. For this cause also thank we
God without ceasing, because when ye received the Word of God, which ye heard
of us, ye recieved it not as the Word of men, but (as it is in truth) the Word
of God, which effectually works also in you that believe. Luke 10.16. He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me, and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me. 1 Samuel 8.7. And the Lord said unto
Samuel, they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should
not reign over them. 1 These. 4.8. He therefore that despises, despises not
man, but God; who has also given unto us his holy Spirit. Luke 24.32. And they
said one to another, did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us
by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures. Psalm. 119.162. I rejoice
at thy Word, as one that finds great spoil. Jer. 6.10. To whom shall I speak
and give warnning, that they may hear? behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and
they cannot hearken; behold, the Word of the Lord is to them a reproach, they
have no delight in it. Heb. 2.1. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest
heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them
slip. Prove. 4.4. He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my
words, keep my Commandments and live. V. 21. Let them not depart from thine
eyes: keep them in the midst of thine heart. Deuteronomy. 11.18. Therefore shall ye
lay up these my Words in your heart, and in your soul, etc. Isa. 48.17. Thus
says the Lord thy Redeemer, the holy One of Israel, I am the Lord thy God,
which teaches thee to profit, which leads thee by the way that thou should
go. 3. Of Singing of Psalms.
Neglect not that excellent and Heavenly Ordinance of singing Psalms, and
lifting up the praises of the most high; singing with understanding, and making
melody to God in thy heart. Many people in this age not understanding the
reasons and grounds of the duties of Religion they perform; when they are
questioned, are apt to lay them aside. I shall therefore here do these four
things.

1. Show that Singing of Psalms is a Gospel-duty. 2. That it is lawful and
warrantable to sing David's Psalms. 3. Answer the Objections made against it. 4.
Give some Rules and Directions how Christians may practice this Ordinance to
the Glory of God, and to their own great benefit and spiritual advantage.
For the First; Singing of Psalms was once an Ordinance of God in the Church,
and a part of Divine Worship; and never repealed under the Gospel. Psalm. 95.1,
2. O come, let us sing unto the Lord, let us make a joyful noise to the Rock of
our salvation. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a
joyful noise to him with Psalms. And it is sorted with other duties that are of
a perpetual obligation, as Prayer, Hearing the Word, etc. v. 6. 7. 'Twas
practiced by those eminent Saints of God, Moses, Deborah, Barak, David the
sweet Singer of Israel, Solomon, and others, whose Songs and Hymns we have
recorded in the old Testament.

2. The Prophesies in Scripture, that foretell the state of the Church under the
Gospel, do speak of Psalms to be used as a part of Gods Worship and Service
then. Compare Romans 15.9. with Psalm. 18.49.

Romans 15.9. And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, as it is
written, for this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing
unto thy Name. Psalm. 18.49. Therefore will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord)
among the Heathen; and sing praises unto thy Name. 3. We have several
exhortations to it, in the New Testament.

Ephesians. 5.18. And be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but be filled with
the Spirit. V. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord. Col. 3.16. Let the
Word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing
one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing with Grace in
your hearts to the Lord. Jam. 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray,
is any merry? let him sing Psalms. It Is spoken generally: Is any merry? let him
sing, etc. not that it is unlawful to sing at other times (for then it might be
argued as well, that it is not lawful to pray, but when sad) but as prayer is
the best remedy for sorrows, so thanksgiving or singing to Gods praise, is
the proper duty in the time of Mercies and Comforts. In Misery, the proper duty
is prayer; In Prosperity, giving thanks.

4. We have Directions and Rules given us how to sing in a right manner.
Namely, with Grace in our hearts unto the Lord: Which directions were
needless, if singing of Psalms were not a duty under the Gospel.

5. We find it practiced by our blessed Savior and his Disciples, Mat. 26.30.
And when they had sung an Hymn, they went out into the Mount of Olives. And by
Paul and Silas, Acts 16.25. And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang
praises unto God: and the prisoners heard them.

6. In the primitive times it was frequently practiced; insomuch that the
Heathens took notice of this use and custom among the Christians. Pliny
writing to Trajan the Emperor, tells him of the Christians morning Hymns or
Psalms to Christ and God, as an usual practice in their solemn Worship.

I come now to the Second thing; That it is lawful and warrantable to sing
David's Psalms.

1. Because no composures can be equal to those of Gods Spirit. If any Psalms
therefore are to be sung, then surely such as are given by Divine inspiration,
as David's were. Those excellent composures being part of the Word of God, and
full of Heavenly matter tending to instruction and consolation; and being
consigned to the use of the Church, ought to be preferred before the composures
of private persons, ordinarily gifted, and not infallibly assisted: Observe
that, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Moreover Hezekiah the King, and the Princes commanded the
Levites to sing praise unto the Lord, with the words of David, and Asaph the
Seer, and they sang praises with gladness. As for that extraordinary gift of
composing Psalms by the sudden suggestion of the holy Ghost (which was given to
some of the members of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14.) it is now ceased,
with other extraordinary gifts, as that of Tongues, and Healing, etc.

2. The Apostle in those two places before mentioned, Ephesians. 5.19. and Col. 3.16.
by using those three words, Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, does seem
plainly to point at David's Psalms, for they answer exactly to those three
Hebrew words, Shirim, Tehillim, Mizmorim, whereby David's Psalms were called,
divided, and distinguished.

3. 'Twas the custom of the Jews to sing some of David's Psalms in the night
of the Passover (as Scalliger, Buxtorfius, and others, skilled in their
customs, inform us) Those Psalms were those six from the 113th to the 119th.
which were called the great Hallelujah. And it is more than probable, Christ
with his Disciples followed their custom herein, because in other things he
observed their usual Passover Rites.

I come now to the Third thing; to answer the Objections usually made against
this duty.

Obj. 1. Some scruple to sing in a mixed Congregation, where wicked men join,
that praise not God in a right manner.

Ans. To render praises is a duty all men owe to God. David calls on all
creatures to sing praises to God. Psalm. 145. And all the Kingdoms of the Earth
are bidden to praise the Lord, Psalm. 68.32. Though therefore wicked men do not
praise God as they should, yet they sin more in not doing it at all, then in
not doing it in a right manner.

2. In Exodus 15. We find Moses and the Children of Israel sang praises to God
together. And yet surely there were some wicked persons among them. Paul in the
ship, Acts 27.35 gave thanks to God before Infidels, and professed Heathens. If
the presence of wicked men should hinder the acceptance of those that are
sincere, the people of God were in a most sad condition, being never certain
but some secret Hypocrite may be in the most picked Assembly. But the best is,
God will accept us according to our integrity, not our company. God will hear
the bleating of one sheep, though in the midst of a thousand wolves. If the
wicked take the Name of God in vain, sin lies at their own doors. We warn them
against it: If they do not their duties as they should, must we therefore
neglect ours?

Obj. 2. Why should we sing Psalms? Cannot we read them for our instruction?

Ans. Singing will affect, and raise, and quicken the heart to praise God, more
than reading. The voice is a great matter to quicken our hearts both in prayer
and singing. The people of God formerly did not think it enough to say what God
had done for them, but they did sing it, that their hearts might be more
affected, warmed, raised, enlivened, and lifted up in the praises of God.

Obj. 3. Some are offended we sing on days of fasting and humiliation.

Ans. All Psalms are not fit for all occasions. There ought to be a wise choice
made: Many of the Psalms David penned, and sung, when his mind was full of
anguish and grief, and so he eased his heart, by lamenting his sad condition
before the Lord. Observe the Title of Psalm 102: A prayer of the aflicted, when
he is overwhelmed and pours out his complaint before the Lord. Therefore our
singing on fasting days, is not to make us merry; but to affect and melt our
hearts with a deep sense of our sins. Penitential Psalms provoke to sadness,
as Eucharistical, to joy and rejoicing.

Obj. 4. David's Psalms do not suit our conditions. Is it not absurd to give
people David's Conditions to sing, and for them to tell God it is so with them,
as it was with David, when possibly it is nothing so?

Ans. 1. All Scripture is profitable for doctrine, reproof, correction,
instruction, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16. And written for our learning and comfort, Romans
15.4. And therefore the Psalms also.

2. The Psams seem principally written for a threefold use.

1. For Instruction and admonition. 2. For Consolation. 3. For Praise and
Thanksgiving.
Now what passage is there in David's Psalms, but thou may accomodate to thy
self one of these ways? Suppose David said, I am not puffed in mind, Psalm. 131.
And thou find thy heart prone to pride; here is a word of admonition to
thee. So that whilst thou art reciting and declaring David's humble frame and
condition, thou ought to lift up thy heart to God, that he would work the
like frame in thee. Lord, thy Servant David could truly say, I am not puffed in
mind: Good Lord grant me this Grace also. Suppose thou can not find in thy
self such a love to Gods Law, as was in David, Psalm. 119. Then there is a word
of Instruction to thee, teaching thee what thou should do. Thou ought to
pray, to have such a Divine Affection to the Law of God kindled in thee. So
that we sing Psalms as we read them, for the benefit and good use we may make
of them. It Is therefore no more a lie to sing them, than to read them. By
singing, as by reading them, we recite and repeat what God has revealed in his
Word for our admonition and instruction. And though we cannot make some
passages our own, by using them for our selves, and in our own name (as David
did) yet we may make them our own by a sweet meditation on them, for our
benefit and edification.

I come to the Fourth thing, to give some Rules and Directions how Christians
should practice this duty aright.

I. Sing with understanding and attention of mind to the matter sung. Labor to
understand the mind and meaning of the holy Ghost, in the Psalm you sing, Psalm.
47.7. Sing ye praises with understanding.

II. Labor to sing with Grace in ^he heart, i. e. with a gracious frame of
spirit. Our singing must not be a lip labor, an outward bodily exercise only,
pleasing our selves or others with the tune of a Psalm: But we should look to
it that our hearts be well tuned, as Mary's was, Luke 1.46. My soul does
magnify the Lord, etc.

III. Labor to exercise and act those peculiar Graces, which the matter sung
requires and gives occasion to. God looks at the heart, and how a man is
affected within.

1. Some Psalms are laudatory, and set forth the high praises of God, from the
consideration of his glorious Nature, Attributes, and Works. In singing these,
we should stir up our hearts to love God, to fear him, to trust in him, and our
hearts should prompt our tongues to sound forth his praises.

2. Some are petitionary, containing supplications for spiritual blessings,
such as pardon, Grace, the favor of God; or temporal, such as direction,
protection, provision, etc. Here we should look up to God, as the only author
of these mercies, and humbly pray to him for them.

3. Some are Eucharistical, containing thanksgivings to God for mercies
received, private or public, spiritual or temporal.

4. Some contain precepts and instructions, to fear God, to love him, to walk
in his ways, being backed with promises to encourage us thereunto. Some
declare the evil ways of sinners, and the judgments of God that attend them,
to deter us therefrom.

5. Some contain imprecations and prayers for judgments on enemies. Here we are
not to pray for, or wish the same judgments on our private enemies. But,

1. We may meditate on the fearful judgments of God that hang over the heads of
all wicked and impenitent transgressors; that so we may fear to be like them.

2. We may pray for the like judgments on all the implacable and incurable
enemies of Christ, and his Kingdom.

6. Some contain the sad complaints of the Church, under afflictions. Here thou
may meditate on the sufferings of the Saints, and lift up thy heart to God to
give thee also suffering Graces.

IV. Let there be a wise choice made of Psalms to be sung according as our
present necessities and occasions do require.

V. Let thy end in singing be, that God may be honored, thy self and others
edified; that the Graces of Gods Spirit may be excited and exercised in thy
self and others.

4. Religious Conference.
It Is the duty of all true and sincere Christians to labor to further one
another Heavenward. And surely religious conference rightly managed is a
great means of increasing knowledge and Grace among Christians. Communion of
Saints is an Article of our Faith. The Apostle tells us, Romans 12.5. We being
many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another. Such a body
true believers are by their union with Christ, and ought to be by communion and
fellowship one with another, for their mutual edification. There ought to be a
mutual serviceablenesse among Christians, and helping one another on in
gracious courses.

I shall therefore, 1. Give some Arguments, to persuade to it. 2. Some
Directions about it.


1. We have many exhortations to it in the Scriptures, 1 These. 5.11. Wherefore
comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even as also ye do, Heb.
10.24. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good
works. v. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see
the day approaching. Heb, 3.13. But exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

2. We find this practiced by the primitive Saints, Acts 2.42. And they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking
bread, and in prayers.

3. To this end God has given several Gifts and Graces to his people, 1 Pet.
4.10. As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to
another, as good stewards of the manifold Grace of God. 1 Cor. 12.7. But the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal.

4. Where Christians are most frequent, and most faithful in this duty, there
usually they are in a most thriving condition, both as to knowledge and
holiness: As Countries that maintain a trade and commerce together, do enrich
each other.

5. It Is a good way to prevent seduction into error. Christians are better
able to resist errors by their united forces, and mutual counsels, than singly
and alone. The Church is said, Cant. 6.10. to be terrible as an Army with
banners. But straglers, and such as go alone are often snatched up. How easy is
it to pervert and draw one single person into any dangerous error, who
neglects the benefit of other Christians advice and counsel?

6. It will be a good means to increase love in the hearts of Christians one
toward another; And Love is Christ's Livery, John 13.35. By this shall all men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another.

Thus much of the Arguments to perswde to this duty: The Directions follow.

I. Let Christians in their Religious Conferences have this principally in
their aim, to edify one another, to further one another Heavenward, to do
good to one another souls.

II. Let them labor for those Graces that are requisite for this duty. Such as
these, 1. Sobriety of judgment. 2. Humility and lowliness of mind. 3.
Ingenuity, acknowledging and prizing the Gifts and Graces they see in each
other. 4. Self-denial, condescending to them of low parts, going a slow pace,
rather than outgoing the young and tender lambs. 5. Love, affability,
encouraging weak beginners. 6. Inoffensivenesse. 7. Sincerity and plain
heartedness.


III. Let them avoid censuring or judging the Spiritual state of others. Such
persons meet together for the worse, and not for the better.

IV. Let them decline controverted points, (such things usually gendring strife
and variance) and apply themselves to speak of things that are practical; As of
God, and his Goodness. Of Christ, his Person, Offices and Merits: Of the
Covenant of Grace: Of the Doctrine of justification: Of the patience and
self-denial of those that are gone before us: Of Heaven, and the Glory of that
Kingdom. How did the Martyrs in prison (by such ravishing discourses) set one
another at liberty from the fears of death? How did holy Bradford's sweet and
cheerful company make the very dungeons lightsom, and palace-like to his
fellow prisoners, as themselves confessed? These, and such like practical
matters will be the fittest subjects for Christians to discourse of, when they
meet together.

V. Let them impart their experiences and the methods of Gods dealings with
themselves or others: How they got rid of such a corruption, vanquished such a
temptation, attained to a facility in such a duty. Let them impart what may
tend to the advancement of Holiness.

VI. Let them provoke, and stir up one another to Holiness, to Love, and to
good works, admonishing and exhorting one another to watch, and take heed to
their ways, seeing so many watch for their haltings, like those the Prophet
speaks of, Jer. 20.10. All my familiars watched for my halting, etc.

VII. If any fallings out or jars shall happen among them at any time, let them
be prudently and seasonably healed and made up. And in this case, praying
together, and for one another, is of singular use. Let them (as the Apostle
speaks in another case, Jam. 5.16.) Confess their faults one to another, and
pray one for another, that they may be healed; if their minds have been
distempered, and ill-affected one toward another.

5. Retired holy Meditation.
Holy Meditation is the acting of the mind upon some Divine Object, in order to
the working upon the affections, and raising foam fit resolutions in the soul
therefrom; tending to Gods Glory, and the furtherance of Holiness. How many
Christians are there, that live in a constant neglect of this so exceeding
useful duty, by which all other duties are improved, and by which the soul
digesteth truths, and draws forth their strength for its nourishment and
refreshing? Certainly, Meditation rightly managed, does exceedingly tend to
the advancement of Piety. I shall therefore, 1. Give some Reasons why we should
practice it. 2. Give some Directions as to the manner how we should perform it.


I. Consider, this was the practice of many of the eminent Saints of God
recorded in the Scriptures. Isaac and David were much in this Duty.

II. Consider the great benefit of it duly performed.

It Is an excellent means,

1. To increase knowledge, and to make the mind serious and solid: None are
more knowing, settled, established Christians, than such as are much in
Meditation.

2. To stir up and awaken the Graces of Gods Spirit in us. Hereby we awaken our
Faith, inflame our love, strengthen our hope, enliven our desires, increase our
joys in God, we loosen our affections from the world, and fore-acquaint our
selves with the Glory that is to come.

3. To make the Word profitable. Meditation is the digestion of the soul. It Is
not the taking in of food, but the stomachs concocting of it, that makes it
turn to blood and Spirits. For want of this, How many Sermons are lost and do
no good? The Word will not profit us, except we take time to think upon it.

4. To prepare the heart for prayer and other holy duties. Meditation tunes and
prepares and fits the heart for solemn Worship.

5. To antidote and fortify the soul against sin and temptation. If men would
but often consider of the evil and danger of sin, it would be a great means to
deter them from the practice of it.

6. It Is an excellent help and means of Communion with God. It Is the souls
perspective, whereby it sees something of the Glory and happiness of that
Kingdom that is above.

Thus much of the Arguments for it.

I come now to give some Directions how it should be managed.

I. Pitch upon some convenient time of the day for this duty. A Christians
timing his duty aright, is a great help to him in the right performance of it.
Some have chosen the morning for this duty, and some the evening: We have
examples of both in Scripture. Of our Savior, we read, Mark 1.35. And in the
morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a
solitary place, and there prayed. Genesis 24.63. And Isaac went out to meditate in
the field at the even-tide.

II. Pitch upon some convenient retired place. The wise man tells us, Prove.
18.1. Through desire a man having separated himself, seeks and intermedleth
with all wisdom. First he separates himself, and then intermedleth with
wisdom. There is nothing the Devil more spights than this, that a man should
often retire and separate himself from the world, to meditate on his
everlasting concernments. The Devil cannot endure a man should consider whether
he be journeying toward Heaven or Hell.

III. Get a good stock of profitable materials to meditate on: as the
Attributes of God: His promises of remission, sanctification, reward. The love
of Christ; The evil and danger of sin; The vanity of the Creature; The
necessity of regeneration, The state of thy own soul to God ward; The
excellency of a gracious state; The preciousness of time; of Eternity: And the
four last things, Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell. These and such like subjects
will be fit matters to employ thy thoughts about.

IV. Labor to get thy heart into a right frame and temper. The work is
serious, and thou had need rally together all the powers of thy soul, that
thy thoughts may be intent and fixed when thou set on this duty.

V. Begin with prayer, begging the assistance and help of God, to order thy
meditations aright. Prayer sanctifies every thing.

VI. Confine thy thoughts to one Subject only at a time. One truth driven home
by meditation will kindly affect the heart.

VII. For the Method.

1. Let thy mind consider and dwell on the thing thou propoundest to meditate
on, so long, till thou have settled some persuasions in thy self concerning it.

2. Labor to stir up and awaken such affections in thy heart, as the Subject
meditated on requires.

3. Draw some fit and proper resolutions tending to Gods Glory, and the
furthering thee in a gracious course, from thy meditations.

VIII. For the manner.

1. Do it sincerely. Take heed of formality and superficialnesse, the bane of
most religious performances.

2. Shut up all with prayer.

3. Reduce thy meditations into practice.

CHAP. VII.
FRequent good company, that may further thee, and help thee forward in the way
to Heaven. And though thy Calling, Necessity of business, Charity to their
souls, and a desire to do them good, may draw thee sometimes to converse with,
yet be not willingly, ordinarily, and unnecessarily a companion of wicked and
ungodly men; who by their vain, unsavory discourse, and sinful conversation,
will be apt to draw thy heart unto a neglect and slighting of spiritual things.
It Is exceeding dangerous to be ordinarily in such company, as will be ever
hindering, never helping us forward in the way to Heaven; and where we shall
hear no talk of Religion, but in distaste and contempt. Believe it, Thousands
have been everlastingly undone by evil company.

That therefore thou may be more wary in this ^^^ticular, I shall desire thee
to consider of these things.

I. Ill company must needs be exceeding dangerous, because sin is of an
infecting, contagious nature. It quickly spreads among such, as ordinarily and
familiarly converse together. Why should we not be as much afraid of being
infected with sin, as with a contagious disease? but that we are carnal, and
fear the evil of the body which is death, more than the evil of the soul, which
is sin and damnation. The ground of that dreadful Church-Censure,
Excommunication, is the contagion of other men's sins. Purge out the old leaven,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.7. Which was the incestuous person. And why?
because a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. There is a strange power in
ill company, to infect and deprave the best dispositions. Can a man touch
pitch, and not be defiled? says the son of Sirach, Chap. 13.1.

1. By frequent and familiar converse with such, there steals upon a man
secretly and insensibly, a dislike of Religion, and the ways of Godliness, as
too strict and restraining to humane nature.

2. He usually comes by degrees, to approve and delight in sensual courses, and
sinful practices.

3. At last he comes to be an utter enemy, and opposer of the ways of
Holiness. And no wonder, for such as men usually converse with, such (for the
most part) they prove to be Ungodly company is the deep ditch, out of which few
escape.

II. To delight in ungodly company, is a sure sign a man's heart is naught.
Similitude is the cause of love: Like will to like, whether good or evil.
Though many will not be drunk or swear, etc. Yet if they delight in the company
of those that do so. it is plain their dispositions are against Godliness.
David having a Godly frame of heart, declared it in this, that in the Saints of
the Earth, and the excellent was all his delight, Psalm. 16.3. and Ps. 119.63.
He says, I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep
thy Precepts. Ecclesiasticus tells us, Chapter 13.16. All flesh consorteth according
to kind, and a man will cleave to his like. What fellowship has the wolf with
the lamb? So the sinner with the Godly? When you choose wicked, loose company,
when you may have better, and find delight and content in such, you plainly
declare what you are. There is no reason he should be accounted Gods friend,
who familiarly converses with his professed enemies.

III. By frequenting ill company, thou do harden, encourage, and embolden
them in their sinful courses. How can they think, but thou approvest their
ways, seeing thou delightest in their society: Whereas the Apostle commands us
Ephesians. 5.11. To have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them. David's eyes ran down with rivers of tears, because he saw
men kept not Gods Law, Psalm. 119.136. And Lots righteous soul was vexed with
the unclean conversation of the wicked among whom he lived. So far is it from
the temper of a gracious heart to hold a delightful familiarity with wicked
companions.

IV. Consider ill company is a great hinderance to conversion. Wicked
companions ( like Herod) kill the young beginnings, and first tendencies of the
heart toward God. One wicked person, by his scoffs and flouts has done more
hurt, than many Sermons have done good. Scoffers at Religion, and deriders of
true Piety, and Holiness, make things of the saddest and most serious
concernment, to seem ridiculous. And when once the awe of these great Truths is
weakened, men are easily induced to cast off all care and profession of
Religion. Many have been jeered from the practice of Godliness, and a holy
life, that could never by serious Arguments be disputed or dissuaded from it.
Mockers and Scoffers at Religion, are usually the worst of sinners. In Psalm. 1.
there are three degrees of sinners mentioned; and the highest rank are they
that sit in the seat of the scornful: Which the Septuagint render the chair of
pestilence: They being indeed the pests of mankind. It Is better to go with the
frowns and scoffs of carnal friends to heaven, than with their love to hell.

V. Remember, it is not only the openly profane and dissolute, the swearer, the
drunkard, and the professed open enemies of Godliness, that thou art to avoid,
as hurtful companions; but thou must also take heed of too frequent society
with dead hearted formalists, and persons merely civil, whose conference is
usually barren and unsavory, nothing conducing to the raising the heart
Heavenward. And by conversing much with such, though thou do not endanger
thy soul as to infection with sin, yet thou do, as to defection from gracious
courses. Such lukewarm professors are usually remiss, and slight and
indifferent in Religion; and though they run not into such exorbitant courses,
as the openly profane do; yet usually they love not strictness, nor the power
of Godliness, thinking it more ado than needs. And by frequent, familiar
converse with such, thou will be in danger to content thy self with a little
goodness, and seem some body in thy own eyes, having no better patterns before
thee (as he that has but half an eye, is a King among them that are blind.)
Whereas among wise, holy, spiritual, improved Christians, thou will still have
matter of imitation and provocation to aspire to a greater perfection in
goodness. He that walks with the wise, shall be wiser (says Solomon) but a
companion of fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.20.

VI. Consider, our company will be part of our happiness in Heaven. Communion
of Saints here, is the lower Heaven of Saints. O what comfort, what benefit,
may we reap from good society? How many thousands have cause for ever to bless
God, that ever they lived near, or came acquainted with some persons seriously
Godly? From such company a Christian comes away revived, quickened, encouraged
to walk in the ways of Holiness. He finds a good relish on his Spirit; and
his heart drawn Heavenward: He finds himself provoked to press forward
toward the mark of his high calling: But from wicked company, it is ten to one,
but either a man brings away a guilty Conscience, or a sad heart, or both. Upon
all these considerations, labor to make thy acquaintance and familiar converse
with those here, who must be thy companions in Heaven, if ever thou come
thither.

Romans 12.2. And be not conformed to this world, etc. 1 Pet. 4.4. -- They think
it strange, that you run not with them, to the same excess of riot, speaking
evil of you. 1 Cor. 15.33. Be not deceived, evil communications corrupt good
manners. Prove. 12.26. The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor; but
the way of the wicked seduceth them. Isa. 3.10. Say ye to the righteous, that
it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. V. 11.
Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him; for the reward of his hands shall
be given him. Mal. 3.18. Then shall ye return, and discern between the
righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves
him not. Prove. 19.29. Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the
back of fools. Isa. 28.22. Now therefore be not mockers, lest your bands be
made strong -- Mat. 18.6. But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that
believe in me, it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. Prove. 23.20. Be not
amongst wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh. V. 21. For the drunkard
and the glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsinesse shall cloth a man with
rags, 1 Cor. 5.9. I wrote unto you in an Epistle not to company with
fornicators. V. 10. Yet not altogether with the fornicatours of this world, or
with the covetous, or extortioners, or with Idolaters; for then must ye needs
go out of the world. V. 11. But now have I written unto you, not to keep
company, if any man that is called a brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous, or
an Idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one, no
not to eat. 2 These. 3.14. And if any man obey not our Word by this Epistle,
note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. Zeph.
1.12. And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem
with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees, that say in
their heart, the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil. 2 Timothy 3.5.
Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn
away. Isa. 3.9. The show of their countenance does witness against them, and
they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not: Woe unto their soul, for they
have rewarded evil unto themselves. Heb. 6.12. -- Be not slothful, but
followers of them who through Faith and patience inherit the promises. CHAP.
VIII.
Walk conscientiously in thy particular calling, according to these Directions
following.

I. Avoid idleness and sloth. Remember Adam in innocence had a calling
appointed him by God: And after the fall, Genesis 3.19. it is Gods decree upon man,
in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, till thou return unto the
ground. No man has a privilege to live idly and lazily; but either by labor
of body, or toil of mind, either by the sweat of his brows, or of his brains,
ought to be serviceable and profitable to humane society. Idleness exposes a
man to many sins and many punishments. When the Devil finds men idle, and not
employed in Gods service, he entertains them into his. If thou have nothing to
do, the Devil will be ready to employ thee. David when idle, fell into the
heinous sin of adultery. A lawful calling is an excellent preservative against
a multitude of sins and temptations, 1 Cor. 7.20, 24. Let every man abide,
says the Apostle, in the same calling, wherein he was called. When God calls us
to be Christians, he calls us out of the world as to our affections, but not out
of the world as to our employment. An idle professor is a scandalous professor,
and walks inordinately.

II. Be diligent in thy calling, for Conscience sake. Many take pains enough,
but not out of Conscience to Gods Command, nor with an eye to his Glory.
Whatever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, says the Apostle, Col. 3.23.
Thou must be diligent in thy calling on a religious account, performing the
duties thereof in obedience to God, studying both for matter and manner to
approve thy self to him. Think with thy self, this is the calling wherein the
Providence of God has set me. I am but his servant in my own shop, or at my
plow. To him I must give an account of my diligence and faithfulness.

III. Seek and pray earnestly to the Lord for his blessing on thy lawful
labors, and endeavors. It Is an irreligious course to engage in any thing,
without prayer. Thou must be fervent in prayer, as well as not slothful in
business. All lawful business is sanctified by the Word and prayer, 1 Timothy
4.5. When we do that which the Word of God allows, and by prayer humbly beg
his blessing upon our endeavors, we take a right course to prosper. It Is Gods
blessing makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, Pro. 10.22. It Is his
blessing that gives thee power to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. If his blessing be
wanting, (which thou art not like to have, except thou cravest it) all thy
labors are to little purpose, Psalm. 127.1, 2. Except he bless thee, it is in
vain to rise early, to sit up late, and eat the bread of carfulness, etc.

IV. In the management of thy Calling, labor to exercise these Graces,

1. Faith and affiance in the goodness of God; casting thy self on his
gracious promises and providence in the use of lawful means; expecting success
from him alone, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way
unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass.

2. Moderation of affections: Be not over-eager, nor inordinately bent on thy
worldly affairs. Remember our Saviors precept; Let not your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness and the cares of this life, Luke
21.34. Pursue not thy worldly business with too much anxiety and fervor of
mind.

3. Contentation: Be content with that portion (little or much) which God upon
thy honest labors shall please to allot thee, quietly acquiesce in his wise
disposal.

4. Patience: Be not dismayed, neither fret nor repine at those crosses and
troubles which befall thee, in the way and course of thy calling; considering
God does often exercise his own dearest children with many afflictions.

V. Let not thy particular calling too much incroach upon thy general: The
world is of an incroaching nature. It Is hard to converse with it, and not come
into bondage to it. Worldly employments will be apt to justle out Spiritual
duties; if thou have not a great care.

Now the true Christian should especially look to these two things.

1. That his worldly business do not eat up and devour that time which should
be set apart (every day) for communion with God, and for the exercise of
religions duties.

2. That his worldly employments do not blunt the edge of his affections to
Spiritual things. Thou may use the world, but take heed of loving the world,
1 John 2.15, 16. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world;
if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that
is in the world, the lust of the flesh the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life, is not of the Father, but is of this world.

VI. Labor carefully to avoid the temptations that thy particular calling is
most liable unto. Every calling and condition of life has its peculiar
temptations. And a great deal of care and Christian prudence is required to
foresee them, and avoid them, that so we be not ensnared with them.

VII. In the mannaging of thy worldly affairs, endeavor to carry a Heavenly
mind. Be often lifting up thy ^^^rt in Spiritual and Heavenly meditations.
Think how little it will profit thee, if thou should gain the whole world,
and loose thy soul. Think how Godliness is profitable for all things, having
the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.
Remember thou art but a pilgrim, and a stranger here upon earth: Heaven is the
proper Country of holy souls.

VIII. When success crowns thy faithful endeavors in thy calling, let God have
all the Glory. If thou speed well, thrive, and prosper, sacrifice not to thy
own net, to thy wit, parts, industry, or any second cause; but ascribe the
Glory wholly to him, in whose hands alone it is to give success.

1 These. 4.11. Study to be quiet, and do your own business, and to work with
your own hands, as we commanded you. V. 12. That ye may walk honestly toward
them that are without, and that ye may have lack of nothing. 2 These. 3.11. For
we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at
all, but are busy bodies. V. 12. Now them that are such, we command and exhort
by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work and eat their own
bread. Prove. 18.9. He also that is slothful in his work, is brother to him that
is a great ^aster. Prove. 21.17. He that loves pleasure shall be a poor man, he
that loves wine and Oil shall not be rich. Prove. 28.19. He that tilleth his
land shall have plenty of bread, but he that follows after vain persons shall
have poverty enough. 1 Timothy 5.8. But if any provide not for his own, and
especially for those of his own house, he has denied the Faith and is worse
than an Infidel. Prove. 26.13. The slothful man says, there is a lion in the
way, a lion is in the streets. V. 14. As the door turns upon his hinges, so
does the slothful upon his bed. V. 15. The slothful hides his hands in his
bosom, it grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth. V. 16. The sluggard is
wiser in his own conceit, than seven men that can render a reason. Prove. 6.6.
Go to the Ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise. V. 7. Which
having no guide, overseer, or ruler, V. 8. Provideth her meat in the Summer,
and gathers her food in the harvest. V. 9. How long will thou sleep, O
sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep. V. 10. Yet a little sleep, a
little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. V. 11. So shall thy
poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man. Mat. 25.26.
His Lord answered and said unto him, thou wicked, and slothful servant, etc.
Psalm. 128.1. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, that walks in his
ways. V. 2. For thou shall eat the labor of thine hands, happy shall thou be,
and it shall be well with thee. Prove. 10.4. He becomes poor that deals with
a slack hand; but the hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove. 22.7. The rich
rules over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the lender. Prove. 31.27.
She looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not the bread of
Idleness. Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more; but rather let him
labor, working with his hands, the thing which is good, that he may have to
give to him that needs. CHAP. IX. Concerning just dealing in Traffic,
Trading, and Commerce.
OBserve a strict integrity, and uprightness in all occasions of intercourse,
matters of traffic, commerce, and bargaining; making Conscience to be true in
thy words, faithful in thy promises, punctual in thy performances, and in all
things, dealing justly and uprightly; doing to others (according to our
Saviors Golden rule, Luke 6.31.) As thou would that others should do to
thee, Mat. 7.12. Whatsoever ye would (with a rectified judgment, and an honest
heart) that men should do to you, even so do ye to them, for this is the Law
and the Prophets. In all contracts, and acts of commerce with others, it is good
to put our selves in their stead; and to make frequent appeals to our own
Consciences, and to ask our selves, Would I be thus dealt with? Would I be
content to have this measure measured to my self? Should I (if it were my own
case) think this fair dealing, if used toward my self? Paul says Gal. 5.14.
All the Law is fulfilled in one word (that is, all that part of the Law which
concerns our duty toward man) Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. This
expression prescribes the manner of our love, not the measure of it; a parity
or likeness for kind, not for degree or proportion.

That therefore the black art of defrauding may be abhorred, and all deceit in
traffic and commerce avoided; I shall give some Directions both to buyers and
sellers, which (if carefully observed) will exceedingly tend to their comfort
and advantage: For light and honest gains make a heavy purse, whilst great and
dishonest make a heavy heart.

Directions to buyers.
1. Let not the buyer debase or dispraise a good commodity that he is about to
buy, to bring down the price, and to get it for less than he knows it to be
worth, Prove. 20.14. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, but when he is
gone his way, then he boasts.

2. Let not the buyer peremptorily say he will give no more for a commodity,
than he offers, and yet intend to give more, rather than go without it. It Is
too frequent with buyers to say they will not give a farthing more, and with
sellers, to say, they will not take a farthing less, and yet usual with both to
go from their words.

3. Give good and current money for what you buy, Genesis 23.16. And Abraham
weighed to Ephron the silver which he had named in the audience of the Sons of
Heth, four hundred Shekels of silver, current money with the Merchant. To put
away brass or false money, (when you know it to be false, though perhaps you
took it for good, except you return it to the person of whom you received it)
is a branch of deceit. It Is better to suffer wrong, than to do wrong.

4. Do not work upon the weakness or necessity of the seller, and so give him
less than in your Conscience you apprehend the thing to be justly worth
between man and man. Some will not buy, except they may have that they are
dealing for, at their own price; though the seller cannot so afford it. We
should be willing to give to the worth of the thing we buy, according to common
estimation. If the buyer give a price (knowingly) far inferior to the true
value, he is an Over-reacher: If he work upon the necessities of the poor, who
must sell to buy bread, he is an Oppressor.

5. In your buying a commodity, do not take any advantage of any oversight, or
mistake in the seller, Genesis 43.12. And the money that was brought again in the
mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand, peradventure it was an
oversight.

6. Buy not any thing on the Lords day, except upon absolute necessity. Let God
have the time consecrated to his Worship. Let there be no bargaining nor
dealing on that day.

7. Buy not any stolen goods (if you know them to be stolen) though the price
be never so low.

Directions to Sellers.
I. Do not multiply words in selling, Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of words
there wants not sin. Zach. 11.12. If ye think good, give me my price, if not
forbear.

II. Do not highly commend and over-praise a commodity you know to be faulty;
nor sell that for good, which you know is not so. Do not lie, nor equivocate.
How many are there, that in this case, to deceit, add lying; and (too often)
bind all these sins together with an oath, swearing their commodities are good,
when they know they are not? And then what an heap of sin is here gathered
together? abundantly enough to sink any poor soul into Hell: And all this, to
skrew a little more money out of their neighbors pockets; and that sometimes so
very little, that it is an amazing wonder, how any man that thinks he has a
soul, can set it at so miserable and contemptible a price.

III. Do not disguise and hide the faults of the commodities you sell, by using
some art to them, to make them look fairer and better than indeed they are.
This is acting a lie though it be not speaking one) which has surely as much of
the intention of cheating and defrauding as the most impudent lying can have.
Hereby thou make thy neighbor pay for somewhat which is not in the thing
thou sellest him; he presuming there is that good quality in it, which thou
know is not.

IV. Do not sell commodities by false weights or measures, Amos 8.5. When will
the new Moon be gene, that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set
forth wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and falsifying the
balances by deceit? Prove. 20.10. Diverse weights, and diverse measures, both of
them are alike abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 25.14, 15. Thou shall not have in
thine house diverse measures, a great, and a small. But thou shall have a
perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shall thou have; that thy
days may be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, Micah
6.10. Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked,
and the scant measure, that is abominable?

V. In selling, do not work upon the ignorance or unskilfulness of the buyer:
If you discern him to be unskilful, use him rather the better, than the worse.
Zeph 1.9. In the same day also will I punish those that leap on the threshold,
and fill their Masters houses with violence and deceit. 1 These. 4.6. That no
man go beyond, and defraud his brother in any matter, because that the Lord is
the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you, and testified Neither
take advantage of his present urgent necessity: Do not make him pay
unreasonably, because thou see he extremely wants it, and must have it. An
unreasonable price is that which exceeds the true worth of the thing,
considered with those moderate gains which all tradesmen are presumed to be
allowed in the sale of their commodities. Consider soberly what the thing is
worth, and for what thou would afford it to another (of whom thou had no
such advantage) and accordingly rate it to him. Do nothing to any man, but what
thy self, or any honest-minded man (according to right reason, and common
justice) would be content to have done to him. The truth is, in the whole
business of traffic, there are so many opportunities of deceit, that a man
had need fortify himself with firm resolutions, and have in his heart a great
love of justice, or he will be in danger to fall under temptation.

VI. Do not ingrosse corn in a time of scarcity, Prove. 11.26. He that
withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him. And that both buyers and sellers
may be persuaded to make Conscience of these things, let them consider,

1. The commonnesse of injustice is a reproach to Christianity. The Name of
Christ is blasphemed among Turks and Infidels, by the injustice, fraud, and
deceit that is practiced among too many that call themselves Christians: And
methinks, this very reason should make us abhor it.

2. A secret curse usually goes along with ill gotten goods, and a strange
unprosperousnesse (for the most part) attends ill gotten estates: Whereas the
blessing of God does wonderfully accompany just and righteous dealing; and
makes that which is so got to prosper.

3. What will it profit a man to gain never so much, and lose his soul? Thou
think (may be) thou have been very cunning, when thou have over reached thy
Neighbor, but considerest not, there is another all the while overreaching
thee, and cheating thee of that which is infinitely more precious, even thy
immortal soul. And alas! What will it ease thee in Hell, to think thou have
left a great deal of wealth behind thee upon Earth?

4. Remember, what is unrighteously got by defrauding and injuring another,
must not only be repented of before God, but restitution thereof, or other
satisfaction made to the party wronged. For God pardons no sin we will
pertinaciously retain and live in, Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins,
shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy
And he that restores not ill gotten goods, lives still in his sin, and
repents not of it; seeing restitution is an inseparable fruit of true
repentance. Take heed therefore of all unjust getting, and all unjust
detaining: For in such cases, restitution is to be made in kind or value to the
person wronged, if alive: If he be dead, to his heirs: If they cannot be known,
to the poor. And equity requires that the time be considered, wherein his
right has been detained from him.

For restitution we have,

1. Gods Command. God requires if any thing be gotten either by violence,
fraud, or deceit, restitution should be made to the true owner, Lev. 6.2. If a
soul sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord, and lie unto his neighbor
in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken
away by violence, or has deceived his neighbor; V. 3. Or have found that
which was lost, and lies concerning it, and swears falsely, in any of all
these that a man does, sinning therein: V. 4. Then it shall be, because he has
sinned and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took violently away,
or the thing which he has deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered him
to keep, or the lost thing which he found.

2. We have examples for it. Joseph's brethren restored the money found in their
sacks, Genesis 41.12. Zacheus practiced it, Luke 19.8. And Zacheus stood, and said
unto the Lord, behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I
have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold.
Yea, Judas himself, being convinced of his sin, made restitution, Matthew. 27.3.
Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented
himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief Priests and
Elders.

3. There is this great reason for it: For our repentance is not sincere, if we
do not labor to undo our sins again: Now he that restores not ill gotten
goods, lives still in his sin, and does not labor to retract and revoke it,
as he ought to do. And because many are loath to come to this hard duty of
restitution, for fear of shame or reproach that may acrue to them thereby; they
may desire some Godly Minister, or some faithful Christian friend to transact
that business for them; who (if they see cause) may conceal their names, and
yet present the satisfaction or restitution by them sent to the injured person.
And whoever in singleness of heart, and as in the sight and presence of God,
do thus labor to retract their sin, and clear their souls of guilt by choosing
rather to part with some of their substance, than to retain what they ought
not; I am most confident will find abundance of comfort in so doing.

Upon all these considerations labor to mortify that which is the root of all
injustice, namely, Covetousness. And remember, that upon all rational
accounts, true Piety and exact Honesty is the best policy. A little righteously
got is better then the great treasures of the wicked.

1 Timothy 6.6. Godliness with contentment is great gain. V. 9. But they that
will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. V. 10. For the
love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they
have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. 1
These. 4.6. Let no man go beyond, or defraud his brother in any matter, because
that the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you, and
testified. Ephesians. 5.5. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person,
nor covetous man who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ, and of God. Lev. 25.14. And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbor or
buyest ought of thy neighbors hand, ye shall not oppress one another. Ezekiel.
33.15. If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he has robbed, walk
in the Statutes of life without committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he
shall not die. Numb. 5.6. Speak unto the Children of Israel, when a man or
woman shall commit any sin, that men commit, to do a trespass against the Lord,
and that person be guilty, V. 7. Then they shall confess their sin which they
have done, and he shall recompense his trespass with the principal thereof,
and add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he
has trespassed Exodus 22.2. If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten
that he die, there shall no blood be shed for him. V. 3. If the Sun be risen
upon him, there shall be blood shed for him; for he should make full
restitution: If he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft. CHAP. X.
Concerning the duties of Governors of Families.
Governors of Families ought to be very careful that not only themselves, but
the rest of their Family also do faithfully serve the Lord.

In treating of this, 1. I shall give some Arguments for it. 2. Some Directions
for the right performing of it. 3. Show, whence the neglect of it proceeds.


I. There is great reason for it, in respect of God, whose Honor (above all
things) we should endeavor to advance: And what better course can be taken for
it, than to set up his Worship in our houses and families.

II. In respect of our Families. The greatest good we can possibly do them, is,
to instruct them in the principles of true Piety. To provide an estate or
inheritance for children, meat and drink and wages for servants, is no more
than sober Heathens do: What singular thing is this? To leave them rightly
principl'd, and instructed, interested in the Covenant of Grace, under the
favor, blessing, and protection of God: This is a high and a singular good
indeed. For this they may have cause to bless God for ever. Is it enough for
Christian Parents to breed up their Children so as they may live in this World,
and take no care what shall become of them hereafter? Can they be content to
train them up for the Devil, to be for ever tormented with him in Hell? (And
yet so they must be, if they live and die in ignorance, impenitencie and
unbelief) Where are their bowels?

III. In respect of Church and Commonwealth. A Family is the first society,
and a seminary of the rest. It Is made up of single persons in several
relations: And Towns, Congregations, Cities, Countries, all are made up of
several Families. Particular Families are (as it were) the hives out of which
swarms go forth into the world. To make Families good and religious, is the way
to make good Magistrates, good Husbands, good Wives, good Masters, good
Servants, good Neighbors. Families are the Nurseries of Church and State. Now
if the Canker take the young trees in the Nursery, they are never like to be
good when they are transplanted. The want of Family reformation, is the cause
of most of the miscarriages in Church and Commonwealth. If there be Ignorance,
profaneness, error, ungodliness in particular Families, we shall soon hear
of it in Church and State. As therefore Elisha healed the naughty waters, by
casting in salt at the spring head, 2 King. 2.21. So let us labor to season
our Families with true Piety, if we would keep disorders out of Church and
State.

It Is true, when all care is used, there may be some bad in the best Families.
In the first Family, there was a Cain, in the best Family, a Judas, in Noah's
Family (the only Family then on earth) a Cham; yet ordinarily God is pleased so
to bless the care and endeavors of religious Governors, that their Families
are Schools of Piety and Virtue, and both Church and Commonwealth reap the
fruit of it.

IV. In respect of our selves.

1. The benefit is great that will come to us thereby. There is no such way to
bring children and servants to be obedient and faithful, as to infuse
principles of true Piety into them, and to plant the fear of God in their
hearts. Then they will do their duties for Conscience sake: And besides, such
persons in a Family are a great blessing to it. Potiphar's Family was blessed
for Joseph's, and Labans for Jacobs sake.

2. It Is a great honor to a Family, to be truly religious Let profane
scoffers talk what they will; Is it not a greater honor for any Christian to
have his house to be a Bethel, a house of God, than a Beth-aven, an house of
iniquity? Religious Families are dignified by the Apostle with the title of
Churches, Romans 16.3. Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus, v.
5. Likewise greet the Church that is in their house. Col. 4.15. Salute the
brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church which is in his
house.

3. It will bring much comfort to us, both here and hereafter. What a joy must
it needs be to any serious Christian, to see his Family (through the blessing
of God on his care and labor) to thrive in Piety, and to walk in the way
leading to Heaven? And with how much comfort may be leave them, when he comes
to die, having this testimony in his own bosom, that he has been faithful
this way? We know Eli was charged with, and severely punished for the sins of
his Children, 1 Samuel 2.29. Because he had been too remiss in reproving of
them. I shall conclude this, with the words of Mr. Rogers, a learned Divine of
our own. Believe it, (says he) Every Governor of a Family is as deeply
charged with the souls of those under his Government, as any Pastor is, with
the souls of that Flock which is committed to his charge: Nor will the public
Ministry become fruitful, if that which is sown in public, be not watered in
private, by conference, examination and good instruction. What can we more
impute the unprofitablenesse of our Ministry to, than to Masters and Parents
neglect of their duties? You call our Congregations our charge; and so they
are; so are your Families also your charge: Thus he.

So much of the first Particular; the Reasons why Governors of Families should
be careful that those under their Government do faithfully serve the Lord.

I come to the second, to give some Directions for the right performance of
this Duty.

I. Let Governors of Families begin at themselves, laboring to reform what is
amiss in themselves; that so they may be exemplary in wisdom and Holiness to
those under their care. Let them humbly beg of God those Graces and abilities
that may fit them for the discharging of their places. Inferiors mind more
what superiors do, than what they say. He that walks disorderly himself,
cannot expect to reform his children, or servants, or keep his Family in order.

II. Let them be careful about the constitution of their Families. Let them
look well to it, that those they admit into their house, (as near as they can
guess) be hopeful and tractable, as to Religion, Psalm. 101. v 6. Mine eyes
shall be upon the faithful, that they may dwell with me; he that walks in a
perfect way, he shall serve me.

III. Let them set up the practice of true Religion in good earnest in their
Families. Let them worship God together morning and evening, offering up the
spiritual Sacrifice of prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving. For let them
consider,

1. Is it not the duty of all sincere Christians to make Religion the main
business of their lives? Should not Governors of Families endeavor to make
their Families Godly, to win the souls of those under their Government to
Christ? And can this be done by them who neglect to pray in their Families?

2. Does not the very light of Nature seem to suggest we should begin and end
the day with God?

3. Was not Family Worship the first Worship performed to God in the world, for
a long time?

4. Did not God declare his pleasure under the Law, by the evening and morning
Sacrifice? And does not the Apostle in Analogy to this continual and daily
sacrifice, bid us pray continually? 1 These. 5.17. Col. 4.2.

5. Is not the neglect of prayer made a branch of Atheism? Psalm. 14.4. Have all
the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread,
and call not upon the Lord. And are not Heathens described to be Families that
call not on Gods Name? Jer. 10. ult. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that
know thee not, and upon the Families that call not on thy Name, etc.

6. If Job offered Sacrifice, and prayed for his Children, when they were
absent, Is it not more then probable he did the like with them when present?
seeing it is said, thus did Job continually, Job 1.5.

7. Did not Queen Esther, and her maids pray and fast together, Esth. 4.16. Go
gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me,
and neither eat nor drink three days, night nor day; I also and my maidens
will fast likewise.

8. Did not Christ pray with his Family, Luke 9.18? And it came to pass, as he
was alone praying, his Disciples were with him -- As he was alone, not singly,
but privately alone; as appears by comparing this place with Mark 4.10. And
when he was alone, they that were about him, with the twelve, asked of him the
Parable.

9. Does not our Savior in the Lords Prayer, plainly teach that Christians
should pray jointly, as well as severally? Our Father, etc. Give us this day
our daily bread, etc.

10. Does not the Apostle bid us pray with all prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. i. e. With
all manner of lawful prayer, therefore with Family prayer.

11. Is there not a blessing promised to joynt-prayer, Matthew. 18.19? Again I
say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing
that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven;
v. 20. For where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in
the midst of them.

12. Should not every Christian Family be a little Church of Christ? And is not
a Church to pray together, Acts 12.5? Peter therefore was kept in prison, but
prayer was made without ceasing of the Church for him. v. 12. And when he had
considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose
Surname was Mark, where many were gathered together, praying. Acts 2.42. And
they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread and in prayers.

13. Do not the necessities of a Family require it? They are joined in mercies,
in judgments, and often in sins; Should they not therefore join in
humiliations, prayers, and thanksgivings?

14. Can a Family expect to be blessed by God, that lives in a constant neglect
of this duty? The favor of Providence is a man's best inheritance. Family Piety
is usually attended with Family prosperity, Prove. 3.33. The curse of the Lord
is in the house of the wicked; but he blesses the habitation of the just.

15. Were not houses as well as Temples to be dedicated to God, by the
inhabitants, at their first entrance into them, Deuteronomy. 20.5. And the Officers
shall speak unto the people, saying, What man is there that has built a new
house, and has not dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he
die in the battle, and another man dedicate it. Psalm. 30. Title. A Psalm and
song at the dedication of the house of David. And why should they not afterward
be used for places to pray in, to read the Word, to sing Psalms in, as well as
to eat, and drink and sleep in? Is there not as good fellowship in holy duties,
as in merry company, and idle communication? Why should a Family do nothing
jointly that tends to the good of their souls? Are we Christians, and shall we
not be willing God should be the Master of our houses?

16. Does not the neglect of prayer expose a Family to many judgments, and many
sins? Where prayers are shut out of any house, there usually the door is opened
wide to profaneness, and all licentiousness: And what follows thereupon, but
the wrath and curse of God?

Let not Family prayer therefore morning and evening be neglected, upon any
pretense whatsoever; and let all persons be careful they be not slight and
formal in the performance of it. And besides prayer, let there be reading the
holy Scriptures, and other good books; singing Psalms, Catechizing and private
instruction; a due care to sanctify the Lords day, a diligent frequenting the
public Ordinances, a reviving by repetition in private, what they have heard
in the public; religious conference, and whatever else may conduce to the
increasing true Piety and Godliness among them.

IV. Let Governors of Families call upon and charge those under their
Government, to pray privately and in secret, and not to content themselves only
with the Family Prayer, as too many are apt to do.

V. Let them keep out (as much as they can) lewd company out of their Families.
When swearers, drunkards, Atheists, scorners of Godliness, may have free
access, entertainment, and countenance in a Family, Religion is not like to
thrive there, nor any thing that is of good report or praiseworthy.

VI. Let them also be careful to preserve their Families from seducers, and
soul deceivers, 2 Epist. John v. 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not
this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed.

VII. Let them watch over their Families. The want of vigilance in the
Governor, is usually the fountain of most disorders in the Family. Let there
be Family-Discipline. Let them admonish the unruly, and seek to reclaim them,
and if they prove incorrigible, cast them out; if they be separable members:
Let them encourage those that do well; letting them see, they take notice as
readily of their well-doing, as of their faults: When there is cause to rebuke
any offender, let it be done without bitterness or reviling. Let there be more
strength of reason in their words to convince them of their sins, and to make
them see their danger, and to know how to amend; than heat of anger to utter
their own displeasure. Let the fault be made manifest to the person offending,
that his own Conscience may condemn him. Bitterness does oftener harden the
heart, than reform the life.

And if Governors of Families would according to these Directions, labor to
do their duties faithfully, they might be exceeding instrumental of the
salvation of those under their Government. Oh how much good may the prayers,
precepts, example, prudent admonitions, and constant vigilance of such pious
Governors do? They may more promote the business of Religion in their
Families, than any Minister can. It Is morally impossible a Minister should
bring a Town or Congregation to good order, except assisted by Governors of
Families. The long desired reformation both of Church and State sticks here. To
reform all, let us begin at home: It Is a vain thing to expect the reformation
of a Congregation, while private Families remain unreformed, and are pestered
with ignorance, error, or profaneness.

A Governor of a Family should look upon himself as Christ's deputy in his own
house, and (as it were) invested with his three Offices, of Prophet, Priest,
and King. He should be,

1. A Prophet, to teach, instruct, catechize his household, Deu. 6.7. And thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. An uncatechized head, and an unsanctified heart
do too frequently go together. Lewis the ninth of France, was found instructing
a poor Kitchen boy, and being asked why he would do so, answered, the meanest
has a soul as precious as my own, and bought with the same blood of Christ.
Our Savior instructed his Disciples, prayed with them, taught them to pray,
sung an Hymn with them; And can you follow a better example? Timothy was
trained up by his parents, and that from a child in the holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy
3.15. Want of instruction at home, is one main reason of the unprofitablenesse
of preaching.

2. A Priest, to offer up the spiritual sacrifices of prayer and praise for
them and with them.

3. A King, to rule, command, and govern for Christ in his own house, Genesis
18.19. I know Abraham, that he will command his children, and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, etc. A Master of a Family
has a greater command and authority over those in his own house, than any
Minister has. He is more with them, and has his eye more upon them: He should
therefore improve his power for God; and be like the good Bishop described, 1 Timothy 3.4. ruling well, i. e. Religiously his own house, having his children in
subjection with all gravitie.

So much of the second particular, the directions how Governors of Families
should discharge their duties toward those under their Government.

I come now to the third and last; to show whence the neglect of this so great
and necessary a duty proceeds: There are several causes of it.

1. Ignorance: Some are so ignorant themselves, they know not how to instruct
others. They know not how to pray with their Families. Oh let all such
presently apply themselves (with all care and seriousness) to learn the things
that concern their salvation, that they may discharge their duties toward
their relations. And let them know, it is their duty to labor for ability to
pray, and for that gift whereby (upon all occasions) they may in an humble and
fitting manner) express the desires of their hearts unto the Lord. In the mean
time (till by seeking to God for his Spirit to enable them, and by a faithful
endeavor they have attained to some measure of this gift) they may use some
good prescribed form. Only let them be exceeding watchful over their hearts,
for fear of that formality and mere lip-service, which in such cases we are
more especially in danger of.

2. Carelessness. Some are of Gallio's temper, Acts 18.17. They care for none of
these things. They think this more ado than needs. They will provide portions
for their children, look that their servants do their work; but for Religion,
(the one thing absolutely necessary) they do not much trouble themselves.

3. Worldly-mindednesse. Some are so worldly, they cannot afford time for Gods
Worship and Service. Not a swine about the house, but shall be served morning
and evening; but God is not regarded.

4. Profaneness. Some are so far from having any religious care of their
Families, to pray with them, to instruct them, etc. that they deride these
duties, and scoff at those that make conscience to perform them. They (through
the pride of their hearts) think it a disparagement to them, to set up the
practice of these things in their houses. Wretched worms! Is God become a shame
to his creatures? Who are they, or what is their Fathers house, that they are
too good to be the servants of the most High? Let them make their peace with
that Scripture, Mark 8. ult. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of
my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son
of man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels.

5. Loose Opinions, under pretense of new Light, setting people at liberty from
the observation and practice of those duties, whereby the life and power of
Religion is most maintained and preserved.

Let Governors of Families therefore beware of all these things, and whatever
else may hinder them from a Conscionable discharge of their Duties.

Genesis 18.19. For I know him, that he will command his Children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment,
that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that which he has spoken of him. Josh.
24.15. -- But as for me and my house we will serve the Lord. 1 Samuel 1.21. And
the man Elkanah, and all his house went up to offer unto the Lord the yearly
Sacrifice, and his vow. Acts 10.2. Cornelius a devout man, and one that feared
God with all his house, which gave much Alms to the people, and prayed to God
always. CHAP. XI. Of the duties of Husband and Wife.
I Shall first speak of the Duties common to both, and then more particularly
of those that belong to each of them severally.

They owe to each other Love. Faithfulness. Helpfulnesse.


I. Love. There ought to be a firm and inviolable love between them; grounded
on Gods Ordinance and their own Covenant (and not merely on natural or civil
respects) and being so nearly united, and made one flesh, they should have but
one heart. They should have the greatest tenderness, and kindness for each
other imaginable. If any unkindnesse should at any time happen to arise between
them, they should never sleep in displeasure; but both readily agree to a
speedy reconcilement: The Sun should not go down on their wrath. Love must
sweeten all their speeches, carriage, and actions toward each other. It Is love
will make all the duties of a married life easy, and all the cumbers and
crosses, tolerable. This love must for measure, exceed and surpass their love
to any other creature. There must be between them both the love of goodwill,
desiring heartily the welfare of each other, and the love of complacency,
delighting in each other. Want of love between man and wife is no mean sin.

II. Faithfulness, and that of several sorts.

1. That of the bed. They must keep themselves pure and chaste from all strange
embraces; and with the greatest abhorrence detest any motion or temptation that
way. They must not embrace the bosom of a stranger, Prove. 5.20. They must be
constant to each other, and confident of each other. Jealousy is the pasport
of love.

2. They must keep each others secrets.

3. Conceal each others infirmities.

4. Be faithful to each other in the mannaging their worldly affairs.

5. If any difference arise, not let it take vexed: for jars concealed are half
reconciled; whereas if they be once divulged, it is a double labor to make up
the breach, and stop the mouths of people abroad.

III. Helpfulnesse. They are to be mutual helpers each to other, both in
spiritual and temporal things.

1. They should endeavor to help one another on toward Heaven; to promote and
increase knowledge and Holiness in each others souls; designing to meet
together, and live together for ever in Heaven. They should pray together and
for each other, 1 Pet. 3.7. They should faithfully, wisely, and lovingly
admonish one another of any failings they discern in each other. This is (of
all other) the truest and most valuable love. Nay indeed, How can it be said,
they do love at all, if they can contentedly let each other run on in a course
that will bring them to eternal misery. True love is soul love: And if the love
of Husband and Wife be thus grounded in Religion, and Piety, and a care of each
others souls, it will make their lives a kind of Heaven upon earth. 'Twill
prevent those contentions, heart burnings and brawls so fatal to many Families.
They will like Zachary and Elizabeth, labor to walk before the Lord
blameless: They will endeavor to plant Religion in their Family; and be
examples of Piety, prudence and goodness to those among whom they live.

2. They are to be mutual helpers to each other in natural and civil respects.
They are to comfort and cherish one another both in health and sickness, in
prosperity and adversity: They are to advise and assist each other in a right
governing their Family, and in a prudent mannaging their estate and worldly
affairs: And in a word, they are to endeavor to make their passage through
this world as comfortable to each other as they can.

So much in general, for the duties common to both.

I now come to speak more particularly of the duties belonging to each of them
severally. And first, of the duties of the Husband.

I. The first duty the Husband owes to his Wife, is love. How great this love
should be, the Apostle intimates by the similitudes he uses in this matter. The
one of that Christ bears to his Church, Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your Wives,
even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it. The other, of
that a man bears to himself, v. 31. Let every one of you in particular, so love
his wife even as himself. Now every one knows and feels how he loves himself. A
man's love to himself, has these properties.

1. It Is cordial, without dissimulation. Many a man feigns love and friendship
to others, but no body is insincere and false in his love to himself: Such a
love should a man bear to his Wife. As Jonathans heart was knit to David, 1 Samuel 18.1. And he loved him as his own soul; so ought the Husband to love his
Wife. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 13.5. Charity is not easily provoked. True,
fervent, cordial love is long suffering, and bears with many infirmities and
weaknesses, and covers a multitude of offenses, 1 Pet. 4.8.

2. It Is constant. It Is so natural, nothing can make it cease: Though a man
has been handsome, and is by sickness become deformed; though he has been
healthy, and is become sickly; though he has been patient, and is now grown
choleric; yet he still loves himself: So, no accidental change or defect
should lessen a man's love to his Wife.

3. It Is very tender. How tenderly does a man treat himself when sick? If he
have a sore eye, How careful is he of it? Such ought a man's affection be to his
Wife; expressing it self in a tender regard of her, in sickness, as well as
health. The man ought to look upon his Wife as the tenderer part of himself, or
(as the Apostle phrases it) as the weaker vessel, 1 Pet. 3.7. Which must not be
a cause of contempt, but rather of respect and regard: And the more weak she is
in respect of any sickness, or the like, so much the more tender care ought he
to have of her. No man ever hated his own flesh, (says the Apostle) but
nourishes and cherishes it, Ephesians. 5.29. The Husband therefore must not do any
thing that may be hurtful or grievous to his Wife, no more than he would cut
and gash his own flesh. For my part, I know no Law of God or man, that allows
the Husband a power to beat his Wife: He is indeed to govern her; but he is to
do it by wise, loving, amiable counsel, not by stripes. The civil Law is strict
against it, Cod. 5. And among Heathens, we read not of any, except such as were
mad or drunk, practicing this unnatural cruelty. The Husband therefore should
manage that authority and superiority which God has given him over his Wife,
wisely, mildly, amiably. He should remember, all Government is ordained by God
for the good of the whole, and not the pleasure only of the Governor:
Therefore all harshnesse and roughness, and such tyrannical carriage is
utterly unallowable on the Husbands part toward his Wife.

4. It Is pure. Not for base and sinister ends: He does not love himself because
he is a healthy man, a handsome man, a rich man; but it is purely himself
(because it is himself) that he loves. Such ought a man's love to his Wife to be;
not only because she is fair, or rich, or young; but because she is his Wife. A
man may look abroad in the world, and see others healthier, handsomer, richer,
wittier than himself; yet (I hope) he does not thereupon fall in love with
them, and slight and neglect himself: So a man is to love his wife purely for
this reason, because she is his Wife. Though he is not bound to think her the
best accomplished woman in the world, yet he is to love her, like her, delight
in her more than any woman in the world.

So much for the first Duty the man owes to his Wife, Love, and the degree of
it.

II. The next is Instruction. The Husband is to instruct the wife in the things
that concern her everlasting welfare, if she be ignorant of them. Thus Paul
bids the wives learn of their husbands at home, 1 Cor. 14.35. Which supposes
the Husband is to teach her. This should make men careful to get knowledge
themselves, that so they may perform this duty they owe to others.

III. Maintenance. He is to maintain her, provide for her, and allow her things
convenient and fit according to his estate, and to let her partake with him in
those outward good things wherewith God has blessed him: And as he is not by
niggardize, to deny her what is fit for her, so neither must he by his
unthriftinesse wast his goods, and so make himself unable to support her; if
God take him away before her, he is to provide for her comfortable subsistence
(according to his ability) and not to beat her when he is dead (as one phrases
it) by leaving her an insufficient and too short an allowance.

I come now to speak of the Duties of the Wife.

The Wife owes to her Husband,

I. Subjection, Ephesians. 5.22. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands as
unto the Lord. Col 3.18. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands as it
is fit in the Lord. 1 Pet. 3.1. Likewise ye wives be in subjection to your own
husbands, etc. V. 5. -- Being in subjection to their own husbands.

Besides these Scripture-Commands there are several reasons for it.

1. From the Creation.

1. The man was first created, 1 Timothy 2.13. Adam was first formed, then Eve.

2. The woman was made of the man, and not the man of the woman, 1 Cor. 11.8.
For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man.

3. The woman was made for the man, not the man for the woman, Genesis 2.18. And
the Lord God said, it is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him
an help meet for him.

4. Nature it self proclaims it in respect of the sex; the female being
inferior to the male. Man is the Image and Glory of God, and the woman is the
Glory of the man, 1 Cor. 11.7.

2. From the Transgression. For the woman though the latter in Creation, yet
was the former in transgression, Genesis 3.6. And when the woman saw that the tree
was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be
desired, to make one wife, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave
also unto her husband with her, and he did eat, v. 12. And the man said, the
woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat, 1 Timothy 2.14. Adam was not deceived (i. e. first, and by Satan) but the woman
being deceived, was in the transgression: not only sinning her self, but
drawing her husband into transgression also.

3. From the titles of head and guide given to the husband in the Scriptures,
which declare him to be the Superior, 1 Cor. 11.3. -- The head of the woman is
the man, -- Ephesians. 5.23. For the Husband is the head of the Wife, even as Christ
is the head of the Church -- Prove. 2.17. Which for saketh the guide of her
youth, and forgets the Covenant of her God.

II. Reverence. Ephesians. 5.33. Let the wife see that she reverence her husband.
Reverence is a mixture of love and fear.

1. The wife must entirely love her husband, Tit. 2.4. And desire to do him
good and not hurt all the days of her life, Prove. 31.12. Love must sweeten her
whole behavior toward him. And this love must proceed from a due estimation
of him, as her Head and Guide. Judgment it is the sourse and spring of
affection. What the mind esteems not, the heart affects not. That which we
highly prize, we dearly value. And if the wife truly esteem her husband, her
carriage and behavior toward him will be with all sweetness, amiablenesse,
and due respect and regard.

2. She ought to fear (not with a servile, slavish, but a liberal, free,
ingenuous fear; like that true Converts bear to God, springing from love, and
joined with love) least she give him any just occasion of displeasure and
discontent, 1 Cor. 7.34. -- The unmarried woman cares for the things of the
Lord, that she may be holy, both in body, and in Spirit; but she that is
married, cares for the world, how she may please her husband.

III. Obedience, 1 Cor. 14.34. The Apostle tells us, women are commanded to be
under obedience, as also says the Law. What Law? Why, Genesis 3.16. Thy desire
shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. Also, Tit. 2.5. To be
discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that
the Word of God be not blasphemed. And in 1 Pet. 3.6. Sarah is propounded as
their pattern, Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, etc. B^t what kind of obedience is
it the wife is to render to the Husband? The Apostle tells us, Col. 3.18. Wives
submit your selves to your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord. Which hints
to us these two things,

1. It must be done in obedience to God; to the Commandment and the Ordinance
of God. It must be a religious, conscientious submission. A Heathen woman may
do all the outward duties of a good wife, for her credit sake, or peace at
home, or from principles of natural honesty. But a Christian woman besides
these motives, should do it out of Conscience to Gods Command, out of a desire
to please God, and to approve her heart to him, as unto the Lord, as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.22. Having a respect to the precept and enjoynment of
Christ. This may take away that common Objection of some women, if my husband
do not his duty to me, Why should I do mine to him? His faultiness and neglect
of his duty, will not excuse thy non performance of thine. For thou owe this
duty not only and principally to him, but to the Lord (who requires it of thee)
whether thy husband do his or no. And further, the worse the husband is, the
more need there is for the wife to carry her self with such gentleness and
sweetness toward him, as may be most like to win him; for so the Apostle
advises, 1 Pet. 3.1. Likewise ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands,
that if any obey not the Word, they also may without the Word be won by the
conversation of the wives.

The discreet kind and loving behavior of the wife toward her husband (though
a bad man) may be a great means to reclaim him; whereas the ill fruits of the
wives unquietness are very notorious. How many are there, that to avoid the
noise of a froward wife, have fallen to company keeping, and by that to
drunkenness, poverty, and a multitude of mischiefs. Let all wives therefore be
careful not to administer such a temptation.

2. It must be in the Lord; i. e. in all lawful commands: It must not extend to
any thing that is against God. For otherwise, it is here, as in the case of
other Superiors: God must be obeyed rather than man. If the Husband command a
thing though not unlawful, yet very inconvenient and imprudent, let the Wife
calmly and mildy show him the inconveniences thereof, and persuade him to the
contrary; but if she cannot win him by fair entreaties, let her not finally
refuse to obey, nothing but the unlawfulness of the command, being a
sufficient warrant for that.

And further, she must manifest her obedience in two things.

1. In being willing to be admonished of her husband in case of any failing
(not returning a snappish answer again) but readily reforming what is amiss.

2. In being willing to be advised by him: Not but that she may advise him in
some cases, and on some occasions. For what a servant may do, much more may a
wife do (as we find, 2 King. 5.3. 1 Samuel 16 15, 16.) but this must be done with
wisdom and discretion. The admonition must be given seasonably, not as Physic
in a fit. It must be done with that softness and mildness, that it may appear,
it is love, and not anger that makes her to speak.

4. And lastly, She is to be a meet helper to him, both in spiritual and
temporal concernments.

1. In the mannaging of domestical affairs, the house being her proper sphere,
Tit. 2.5. The Apostle says, Wives should be keepers at home: Not daughters of
Dinah, but of Sarah. They must have a vigilant and watchful eye over the
affairs of the Family. They must guide the house, as it is, 1 Timothy 5.14. Every
wise woman Solomon says, Prove. 14 1. builds her house; but the foolish
plucketh it down with her hands. Prove. 31 27. She looks well to the ways of
her household, and eats not the bread of Idleness.

2. She must bear a part in all the crosses and troubles that the Providence of
God shall cast upon them.

3. She must be a chearer and comforter of him in health and sickness. What
shall we think then of those women, who in stead of being a comfort, are a
continual disquiet to their husbands? Like Eve, in stead of being helpers,
prove tempters, and hinderers and drawers off from God and Godliness.
Certainly, there is no outward condition in this world, so comfortable, as the
married, when things are carried between man and wife, with piety, wisdom, and
love; and none more miserable, where things are otherwise.

Genesis 2.18. And the Lord God said. it is not good that the man should be alone,
I will make him an help meet for him. V. 21. And the Lord God caused a deep
sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept, and he took one of his ribs, and closed
up the flesh in stead thereof. V. 22. And the rib, which the Lord God had taken
from man, made be a woman, and brought her unto the man. V. 23. And Adam said,
this is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called woman,
because she was taken out of man. V. 24. Therefore shall a man leave his Father
and his Mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh
Prove. 5.18. -- Rejoice with the wife of thy youth. V. 19: Let her be as the
loving Hind, and pleasant Roe; let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and
be thou ravished always with her love. Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands, love your wives,
even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it. V. 28. So ought
men to love their wives as their own bodies, he that loves his wife, loves
himself. V. 29. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church. V. 31. For this cause shall a man
leave his Father and Mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two
shall be one flesh. V. 33. Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so
love his wife, even as himself, and the wife see that she reverence her
husband. Col. 3.19 Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them. 1
Pet. 3.7. Likewise ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving
honor unto the wife as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of
the Grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered. Ephesians. 5.22. Wives, submit
your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. V. 23. For the husband is
the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church, and he is the
Savior of the body. V. 24. Therefore, as the Church is subject unto Christ, so
let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing. V. 33. Nevertheless, let
every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself, and the wife
see that she reverence her husband. Col. 3.18. Wives, submit your selves unto
your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord. 1 Pet. 3.1. Likewise ye wives, be
in subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey not the Word, they also
may without the Word be won by the conversation of the wives, V. 2. While they
behold your chaste conversation, coupled with fear. V. 3. Whose adorning, let it
not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of Gold, or
of putting on of apparel. V. 4. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in
that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
which is in the sight of God, of great price. V. 5. For after this manner in
the old time, the holy women also who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being
in subjection unto their own husbands. V. 6. Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham,
calling him Lord, whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not
afraid with any amazement. 1 Timothy 2.11. Let the woman learn in silence, with
all subjection. V. 12. But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp
authority over the man, but to be in silence. V. 13. For Adam was first formed,
then Eve. V. 14. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was
in the transgression. V. 15. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in
childbearing, if she continue in Faith, and Charity, and Holiness with
sobriety. Tit. 2, 4. That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love
their husbands, to love their Children. V. 5. To be discreet, chaste, keepers at
home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that the Word of God be not
blasphemed. Prove. 19.14. House and riches are the inheritance of Fathers; and a
prudent wife is from the Lord. Prove. 12.4. A virtuous woman is a Crown to her
husband; but she that makes ashamed is as rottenness in his bones. Prove.
18.22. Whose finds a wife, finds a good thing, and obtains favor of the
Lord. Prove. 19.13. A foolish son is the calamity of his Father, and the
contentions of a wife are a continual dropping. Prove. 27.15. A continual
dropping in a very rainy day, and a contentions woman are alike. Prove. 21.9. It
is better to dwell in a corner of the house top, than with a brawling woman in
a wide house. V. 19. It is better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a
contentious and an angry woman. Prove. 31.10. Who can find a virtuous woman? for
her price is far above Rubies. V. 11. The heart of her husband does safely
trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil. V. 12. She will do him
good, and not evil all the days of her life. V. 13. She seeks wool and flax,
and works willingly with her hands. V. 14. She is like the Merchants ships,
she brings her food from afar. V. 15. She rises also while it is yet night,
and gives meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens. V. 16. She
considers a field, and buyeth it; with the fruit of her hands she planteth a
vineyard. V. 17. She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her
arms. V. 18. She perceives that her merchandise is good; her candle goes not
out by night. V. 19. She lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold
the distaffe. V. 20. She stretched out her hand to the poor, yea, she reaches
forth her hands to the needy. V. 21. She is not afraid of the snow for her
household, for all her household are clothed with Scarlet V. 22. She makes her
self coverings of tapestry, her clothing is silk and purple. V. 23. Her husband
is known in the gates, when he sits among the Elders of the Land. V. 24. She
makes fine linen, and sells it, and delivers girdles unto the Merchant.
V. 25. Strength and honor are her clothing, and she shall rejoice in time to
come. V. 26. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the Law of
kindness. V. 27. She looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not
the bread of Idleness. V. 28. Her children arise up, and call her blessed, her
husband also, and he praises her. V. 29. Many daughters have done virtuously,
but thou excellest them all. V. 30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain,
but a woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised. V. 31. Give her of the
fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates. CHAP. XII.
Of the Duties of Masters and Servants. First, Of the Duties of Masters.
MAsters ought to be careful of these things.

I. To instruct their Servants, to inform them in the right knowledge of God,
and the things that concern their salvation: To Catechize them, to pray with
them, and for them; to bring them to the public Ordinances, and cause them to
observe the Lords Day; To exhort them to private prayer and reading the Word,
and to be diligent and conscientious in their places, etc. Genesis 18.19. I know
that my servant Abraham will teach his Family. But of this I have spoken more
in the Tenth Chapter of the Duties of Governors of Families.

II. To give them a good example. A wife Carriage, and a pious, honest,
unblameable Conversation does much tend to the bettering of servants. If the
Master be a swearer, a company keeper, a prophaner of the Lords day, have no
prayers in his Family, be a slighter and neglecter of Gods Worship and Service,
it is madness for such an one to expect a sober Family.

III. To command them only just and lawful things ( things equal as the
Apostle speaks, Col. 4.1.) and to require of them only such service as they may
well do, with moderate care, and industry; and that which other servants of
like condition with them usually perform. A Master must not overtask his
Servants, nor oppress them with labors, so that they shall have no time to
bestow on their souls; which is a ruling over them with rigor, as it is called,
Lev. 25.43.

IV. To allow them wholesome, fitting, and sufficient food, convenient rest, and
moderate refreshment, that they may do their work with the more cheerfulness.

V. In time of sickness, to take care that things necessary for their recovery
be not wanting to them; such as fitting Diet, Physic, and Attendance. A Master
at such a time, is in place of a Parent, Mat. 8.5, 6, The Centurion went to
Christ to heal his servant.

VI. To encourage them in well-doing, by using them with that kindness and
bounty, which their Piety, faithfulness and diligence deserves.

VII. To admonish and reprove them, when they do amiss; and that not only in
faults against themselves (wherein few Masters are backward) but also and more
especially, in faults against God, whereat every Master ought to be more
troubled, than at those which tend only to his own loss or inconvenience. The
dishonor of God, or the hazard of the meanest man's soul, being infinitely more
worthy our disquiet, than any thing of the other kind can be. Therefore when
Masters or Mistresses are presently on fire for any little negligence and fault
of a servant toward themselves, and yet can without trouble see them run into
great sins and miscarriages against God, it is a sign they consider their own
concernments too much, and Gods Honor and their servants souls too little.

But as it is the duty of Masters to admonish and reprove their servants in case
of fault, so they must also look to do it in a due manner, i. e. so, as may be
most likely to do good; not in passion and rage, which can never work the
servant to any thing but the despising and hating of them. Their rebukes must
be just, sparing, moderate, Ephesians 6 9. Forbearing threatening, or moderating
threatening, as some render the Word. They must reprove in such a sober and
grave manner as may convince them of their faults, and may plainly show them
that it is love and good will to their souls, and a desire of their amendment
that makes them thus reprove them. But if no warnings nor reproofs will
restrain them from ill courses, neither will they be corrected by words, as
it is, Prove. 29.19. then (in due circumstances) moderate correction of another
sort, may not be inexpedient.

VIII. To listen to their just grievances, and redress them, Job 31.13. If I
did despise the cause of my manservant, or of my maidservant, when they
contended with me. v. 14. What then shall I do when God rises up? and when he
visits, what shall I answer him?

IX. And Lastly, to pay them their wages, and justly to perform to them those
conditions on which they were hired.

And that Masters may be the more careful and conscientious in these things,
let them consider,

1. They have a Master in Heaven, who is Omniscient, righteous, and just, to
whom they must give an account of the usage of their meanest servant on earth,
Ephesians. 6.9. And ye Masters, do the same things to your servants, farbearing
threatening; knowing that your Master also is in Heaven, neither is there
respect of persons with him. Do the same things, i. e. That which is good and
right, and shall be rewarded of the Lord. For Service, give due recompense; for
good will in serving, return good will by encouraging; if Servants be faithful,
be ye good and gentle; if they obey you in the Lord, do ye command them in the
Lord, i. e. Only things just, equal, and pleasing to God.

2. They and their Servants are of the same mould, all of the earth as to the
body; and their Servants have reasonable souls, capable of Grace here, and
Glory hereafter, as well as they. They should not therefore use them like
slaves. They should not carry themselves imperiously, harshly, churlishly, and
Nabal-like unto them.

3. Those Servants that are truly gracious, are Gods freemen, and so fellow
servants with their converted Masters, in respect of God. They are members of
the same mystical body, whereof Christ is the Head; and may have a greater
measure of Grace here, and so a higher place in Heaven, a greater degree of
Glory hereafter than their Masters.

4. And Lastly, let them consider how easily God could have set them in their
servants place, and their servants in theirs. And therefore let them give them
such usage as themselves would think fit and reasonable, had God disposed them
into the condition of Servants.

Psalm. 101.2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way; I will walk within
my house with a perfect heart. V. 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of
the Land, that they may dwell with me; he that walks in a perfect way, he
shall serve me. V. 7. He that works deceit shall not dwell within my house,
he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. Col. 4.1. Masters give unto
your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a Master
in Heaven. Ephesians. 6 9. And ye Masters do the same things unto them, forbearing
threatening; knowing that your Master also is in Heaven, neither is there
respect of persons with him. Exodus 21.26. And if a man smite the eye of his
servant, or the eye of his maid, that it perish, he shall let him go free for
his eyes sake. V. 27. And if he smite out his man-servants tooth, or his maid
servants tooth, he shall let him go free for his tooths sake. Lev. 25 43. Thou
shall not rule over him with rigor, but shall fear thy God. So much of the
Duties of Masters.

I now come to speak of those that belong to Servants.

Servants owe to their Masters these four Duties, 1. Reverence. 2. Obedience.
3. Faithfulness. 4. Diligence.


I. All due Reverence, and that of three sorts.

1. In their hearts; honoring them, and fearing to give them any just occasion
of distaste.

2. In their words, speaking respectfully to them, and to others of them.

3. In their behavior, carrying themselves with due regard and respect toward
them; remembering the superiority, power, and authority they have over them, 1 Timothy 6.1. Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own Masters
worthy of all honor, etc. Mal. 1.6. -- If I be a Master, where is my fear?
etc. 1 Pet. 3.18. Servants be subject to your own Masters with all fear, etc.
Not with a slavish, but a Christian, ingenuous fear, which makes a man careful
not to neglect any duty, he is bound to perform, nor to offend, or provoke any
person whom he ought to please.

II. Obedience.

1. In carefully minding and observing their instructions and counsels.
especially those given them for the good of their souls.

2. In performing and executing their lawful and just Commands. This is
expressly required by the Apostle, Tit. 2.9. Exhort servants to be obedient to
their own Masters, and to please them well in all things, etc. And this
obedience must not be a grumbling, unwilling one, but ready and cheerful, as
it is, Ephesians. 6.7. With good will doing service.

And to help them herein, they are to consider, It is to the Lord, and not only
unto men, (as it is in the next Words) that they pay this obedience, which may
make them the more cheerful in it. Christian Servants should look beyond their
Masters unto God, who has placed them in that condition, and enjoined them
this obedience. Whatsoever ye do, says the Apostle, Col. 3.23. (i. e. Of your
own duty, or your Masters business) do it heartily, as unto the Lord, i. e. as
before God, and in his sight, desiring to glorify God, and approve your hearts
unto him. Let not Servants therefore dispute their lawful commands, but do
them; and that with an eye to Gods Command. If their Masters should command any
thing, though lawful, yet imprudent, let them humbly offer their reasons to the
contrary; but if they persist, let them not finally refuse to obey them.

3. In patiently and meekly submitting to their reproofs, when they do amiss,
not answering again, as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 2.9. i. e. Not making such
surly and rude replies as may increase their Masters displeasure. A thing too
frequent among Servants, even in the justest reprehensions. Whereas St. Peter
directs them to suffer patiently the most undeserved correction, even when they
do well, and yet suffer for it, 1 Pet. 2.20. And further, they must know, that
the giving their Masters the hearing, and the patient suffering of rebuke, is
not all that is required of them in this matter; but they must speedily amend
the faults they are rebuked for, and reform what has been amiss.

III. Faithfulness. They must be true and faithful.

1. In their words, speaking the truth always. Lying doubles a fault. A lying
tongue is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 6.17. and Rev. 21.8. Liars are of
the number of those that shall be shut out of the new Jerusalem, and shall have
their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. When therefore they
are charged with a fault (if they be guilty) let them remember, that an humble
ingenuous confession, with promise of amendment, is the best and most pacifying
excuse, they can possibly make.

2. In their actions: 1. In not purloining, as the Apostle commands, Tit. 2.10.
not converting that which is their Masters to their own use, or disposing of
any thing that is His, without his leave; contenting themselves with such
things as are fit for a servant to have, and not secretly filching such things
as they know are not allowed them by their Master, or appointed for them. Where
the fear of God is in the heart, there will be a care of these things; Where
it is not, servants think they may do any thing, what they please. 2. In not
wasting and imbeziling their Masters goods, (as the unjust Steward was accused
to have done, Luke 16.6.) by their neglect and carelessness. Every Master is
supposed to entrust his affairs, as well to the care, as to the honesty of his
servant; therefore unfaithfulness is a great sin, and (in some respects) worse
then common theft, by how much there is a greater trust reposed, the betraying
whereof adds to the crime.

3. They must be faithful in their work and business, and in the managing all
things entrusted to them, laboring to preserve and increase their Masters
estate, by all good and lawful means. This the Apostle hints in those words,
Tit. 2.10 Showing all good fidelity. And with what uprightness and integrity
servants should carry themselves herein, the same Apostle tells us in those
words, Col. 3.22. In singleness of heart, fearing God. If the fear of God be
in the heart, that will make servants faithful. Such a servant was Eleezer,
that wife, faithful, praying servant, of whom we read, Genesis 24. And such
honest, upright servants were Jacob and Joseph, who were great blessings to the
Masters whom they served.

4. They must be faithful in respect of their Masters children, (if any care
of them be committed to them) endeavoring their good and welfare every kind of
way; infusing good principles into them, and the seeds of piety and virtue, and
abhorring to speak or do any thing before them, that may tend to corrupt or
deprave them. They must not conceal their faults and miscarriages, much less
be accessory to the drawing them into any evil course, or be any way
isntrumental to their ruin, as too many servants are.

5. They must do all the good they can to their fellow servants, by prudent
suggestions, a good example, and an unblameable conversation.

6. They must preserve (by all good means) the reputation of their Master and
his family; and not like idle tale-bearers, divulge every thing done in the
house, which is an unfaithfulness an honest servant should abhor.

IV. Diligence; constantly attending to all those things that are the duties of
their place, and not giving themselves to idleness and sloth, remembering their
time is their Masters, and therefore not to be squandred away or misspent. They
must do all true service to their Masters, not only when their eye is over
them, but when they are absent, and not like to discern their failings. Not
with eye service, Ephesians. 6.6. Good servants, when their Masters eye is not upon
them, see him that is invisible; and desire to perform the duties of their
places carefully and conscientiously, that they may escape, not only their
Masters, but Gods anger, who will call them to account.

So much of the duties of servants.

The Motives to encourage them to a cheerful performance of them are these two:

1. By performing their duties in this manner, they will adorn the doctrine of
God our Savior, Tit. 2.10. The world will then see True Religion is not merely
a Name, but a powerful thing, rendering men good in all their relations. It
will render Religion amiable to the World.

2. They shall not lose their reward. God will plentifully reward them, if out
of conscience to his command they be faithful. Ephesians. 6.8. Knowing that
whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord,
whether he be bond or free. Col. 3.24. Knowing that of the Lord ye shall
receive the reward of the inheritance; for ye serve the Lord Christ.

Let servants therefore set these two motives always before their eyes, to
make them faithful and cheerful in their duties.

Ephesians. 6.5. Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters, according to the
flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ. V.
6. Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing
the will of God from the heart. V. 7. With good will doing service, as to the
Lord and not to men. V. 8. Knowing, that whatsoever good thing any man does,
the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. Col. 3.22.
Servants, obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh, not with eye
service, as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God. V. 23. And
whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men. V. 24.
Knowing, that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of inheritance; for ye
serve the Lord Christ. V. 25. But he that does wrong, shall receive for the
wrong which he has done, and there is no respect of persons. 1 Timothy 6.1. Let
as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all
honor, that the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. V. 2. And they
that have believing Masters, let them not despise them because they are
brethren, but rather do them service, because they are believing and beloved,
partakers of the benefit: These things teach and exhort. Tit. 2.9. Exhort
Servants to be obedient to their own Masters, and to please them well in all
things, not answering again, V. 10. Not purloyning, but showing all good
fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things. 1
Pet. 2.18. Servants, be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward. V. 19. For this is thank-worthy, if a
man for Conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. V. 20. For
what Glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it
patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently,
this is acceptable with God. Mat. 8.9. For I am a man under authority, having
Soldiers under me, and I say to this man, go, and he goes, and to another,
come, and he comes, and to my servant, do this, and he does it. Luke 16.2. --
Give an account of thy Stewardship, etc. Prove. 30.21. For three things the
earth is disquieted, etc. V. 22. For a Servant when he reigns, etc. CHAP.
XIII. Of the Duties of Parents and Children.
FIrst, Of the Duties belonging to Parents, which are these Nine.

I. To dedicate their children to Christ in their infancy, and by the Sacrament
of Baptism to enter them into his Family. This is a Duty Parents ought not to
delay: It being most reasonable, that they who have been instruments to convey
the stain and pollution of sin to their poor Infants, should be careful early
to bring them to Christ, and give them up to him, to be washed with his blood,
and to be sanctified by his holy Spirit. For Infants stand in need of Christ
for their Savior: They are capable of Grace, and the principle of a new life,
as well as of Original sin: They are capable of the Spirit of Christ, of being
united to him; of being blessed by him: They are capable of receiving a
Sacrament (viz, Baptism, the Circumcision made without hands, Col. 2.11, 12.)
as well as the Infants of the Jews, who were Circumcised, and thereby admitted
visible members of that Church, and sealed and marked (as it were) for God. And
it is plain, the Covenant of Grace stands now in force to the Children of
Believers under the Gospel, Act. 2.39. The promise is to y^^ and to your
Children. Were it not so, the converted Jews should have loss by believing in
Christ, if their children should be excluded from the promise, who stood in it
two thousand years before, under the other administration. And how then could
the blessing of Abraham come on the Gentiles? According to Galat. 3.14. Which
blessing was, I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed, Genesis 17.7. How could
Believers be Heirs according to the promise, as it is, Gal. 3.29. if their
Children should be excluded from the promise? For the Childrens right to the
promise, is part of the Fathers inheritance. The promise is, I will be a God to
thee and to thy seed. Further consider how the Covenant of Grace (for substance
though not for manner of administration) has always been one and the same:
And in the Old Testament it took in Children, And can we think, it leaves them
out now under the Gospel? Therefore seeing the Children of Believing and
Christian Parents are within the Covenant, they ought to partake of the Seal of
the Covenant, and to be admitted visible Church Members by Baptism; the only
way under the Gospel of admitting members into the Church. Gods Seal is to be
put upon them in their Infancy; and when they come to riper years, they are to
ratify and confirm their engagement. If they will own that Master and
faithfully serve him, into whose Family they were listed when young; they may
enjoy many happy privileges thereby; if not, they shall be sure to smart for
their falling off and Apostasy. Therefore Christian Parents should early bring
their Children to Christ, and by Baptism enter them, and enroll them into his
Family; humbly beseeching him to receive them into his Favor and Love, into
his Care and Protection; to unite them to himself by his holy Spirit, to
regenerate them, to destroy the old Adam, the corrupt nature in them, and to
renew them after his own Image, in knowledge, holiness and righteousness; and
lastly, to strengthen them by his Grace, that they may resist and prevail
against the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and may serve the Lord in newness
of life all their days. And if this be the duty of Believers and Christian
Parents under the Gospel, it will thence follow, that those that wilfully
neglect it (as much as in them lies) do withhold their Children from Christ,
debar them of the blood of Sprinkling, keep them from the blessing, leave them
under the curse, cast them out of Gods Family, and dangerously expose them to
the Adversary both of God and man.

II. The Second Duty of Parents is to teach and instruct their children, to
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. Having given
them up to Christ by Baptism, let them imagine they hear our blessed Savior
saying to them, as Pharoahs Daughter said to Moses's Mother, Exodus 2.19. Bring
up this child for me, etc. They must as Solomon speaks, Prove. 22.6. Train up
their Children in the way they should go. They must have a special care to
provide that they may be rightly instructed and educated. As soon therefore as
they come to the use of reason, they are to be instructed in those things that
concern their everlasting welfare. They are by little and little to be taught
all those things which God has commanded them as their duty to perform; As
also what abundance of joy and comfort they will find in the practice of them;
and what glorious rewards God has provided for them, if they do them; and what
grievous punishments if they do them not. These things ought to be early
instilled into their minds, which like new vessels do usually keep the savor
of that which is first put into them. The seeds and principles of Religion and
virtue, are to be sown in them betimes, and their minds possessed with a love
of goodness, and an abhorrence and detestation of evil and wickedness, as
that which is shameful and abominable. If they be not thus early acquainted
with the ways of God, the devil (that arch enemy of souls) will be ready and
forward enough to instill his wicked principles into them, and to blow up the
corruption of their natures, and hurry them on in ways leading down to
endless perdition. And what a sad account will those Parents give to God, who
have neglected their duty in this kind, suffering their children to remain
almost as rude and ignorant, and unacquainted with the principles of Christian
Religion, and their duty to God and man, as if they had been born among Pagans
and Infidels?

III. A Third duty of Parents is, To bless their children; and that 1. By their
prayers. They should by daily and earnest prayers commend them to Gods favor
and blessing, craving all needful mercies, both temporal and spiritual for
them. Children of many prayers seldom miscarry. 2. By laboring to be such
persons themselves, (so truly Religious) that a blessing may descend from them
on their posterity. This is frequently promised in the Scripture to Godly men,
That their seed shall be blessed. The best course any Parents can take to
intail a blessing on their children, is to be truly gracious themselves.

IV. They ought to set them a good example, else all their precepts and
counsels will do no good. How many Parents are there, that by their wicked
conversation do corrupt and deprave their own children? This Consideration
lays a most strict tie and obligation upon all Parents, to lead an holy and
religious life; else they do not only hazard their own souls, but endanger
their childrens also; And what an inhumane cruelty is that?

V. They must watch over them, and by a prudent discipline govern them, and
guard their education. 1. Encouraging them when they do well, and winning them
by love, and a fair and kind carriage, that they may delight to do their
duties. Some Parents by too much austerity and harshnesse, and a rigorous use
of their parentall authority, provoke and exasperate their children, so that
they dread coming into their presence, and have no heart to study to please
them, seeing they will afford them no countenance. This is contrary to what the
Apostle prescribes, Col. 3.21. Parents provoke not your children to wrath, etc.
2. If fair means, persuasions, and encouragements will not prevail, nor make
them mind their duties, then another course must be taken. Sober, yet sharp
reproof must be used: If that fail too, then correction becomes necessary: For
in this case, as Solomon says, He that spares his rod hates his son, Prove.
13.24. It Is a cruel and foolish fondness to spare stripes, when all other
means have been unsuccessfull. But this correction should be 1. Timely, before
children have been suffered to run on so long, that they have got a habit to
evil, and have contracted a stubbornness of Will. 2. Moderate, not exceeding
the quality of the fault, nor the tenderness of the child. 3. Not inflicted in
anger, for then the Child will think he is corrected not so much for his fault,
as because his Father is angry. He must therefore be made sensible of his
fault, showed the evil and danger of it, and directed how to amend it, and this
is the way (with Gods blessing) to reform him.

VI. They must maintain them, and allow them a competency (according to their
estates) for their comfortable subsistence. Some Parents are of such a covetous
humor, they cannot abide to part with any thing (almost) as long as they live.
And thereby, 1. Lessen their Childrens Affection toward them, so that some
have proceeded so far, as to wish their Parents death; Which, though it be such
a horrible sin, as no provocation from a Parent can excuse in a child, yet it is
also a fault in a Parent to give such a temptation. 2. It puts them upon
shifts, and sharking tricks, to maintain themselves, and acquaints them with
bad company, and makes them surfeit the sooner, when they come to their
estates. 3. The Parents hereby loose that contentment which they might have, in
seeing their Children live prosperously and comfortably, which is such a joy
and contentment, that none but a Miser, or Earth-worm would exchange for that
poor pleasure of having Money in the Chest.

VII. They must provide some good and honest profession, or some fit way of
employment for them, that so they may be serviceable in their generation to God
and the World, and may avoid Idleness that great snare of the Devil.

VIII. They must lay up for them, and provide for them as God shall give means,
as it is, 2 Cor. 12.14. -- The children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but
the Parents for the children. But let the Parent be careful to get that wealth
honestly, which he makes his childs portion, lest a curse go along with it.
Let him satisfy himself to make such provisions for his children, as God shall
enable him honestly to make. A little honestly got being better than great
riches gotten unjustly and unrighteously, Prove. 16.8. Better is a little with
righteousness, than great revenues without right.

IX. And lastly, they must command them only lawful and reasonable things;
using their power and authority over them with equity and moderation, and with
a gentle hand. In all things of moment they require of them, let them consider
the real good and benefit of their children, (and guide themselves by that) and
not merely their own advantage or pleasure, or the exercise of their own
authority. This is a Rule (as one says well) whereof Parents may often have
use; but especially in the business of marrying their children; wherein many
Parents out of a covetous humor to bestow them wealthily, have forced them to
marry against their inclinations, and where they could not love (which is a
horrible Tyranny) and thereby have betrayed them to infinite mischiefs, such as
all the wealth in the world cannot repair. There are two things therefore
(says the same Author) that Parents ought especially to consider in the
matching of their children. 1. That they may live Christianly; and to that
purpose to choose a pious and virtuous person to link them with, that may not be
like to hinder but to further them on in the way to Heaven. This ought
principally (and above all other things) to be minded. 2. That they may live
comfortably and cheerfully in this world: And to that end, though a competency
of estate may be necessary to be regarded, yet surely abundance is not
requisite; and therefore that should not be too vehemently sought after. That
which much more tends to the happiness of that State is the mutual kindness
and liking of the parties; without which, marriage is (of all other) the most
uncomfortable condition; therefore no Parent ought to force a child into it.

Ephesians. 6.4. And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Col. 3.21. Fathers provoke not
your children to anger, lest they be discouraged. 2 Cor. 12.14. -- For the
children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but the Parents for the children.
1 Timothy 5.8. But if any provide not for his own, especially for those of his own
house, he has denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. Deuteronomy. 6.7. And
thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when
thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up. Prove. 19.18. Chasten thy son while there
is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying. Prove. 13.24. He that
spares his rod, hates his son; but he that loves him, chasteneth him
betimes. Prove. 29.17. Correct thy son and he shall give thee rest: yea, he
shall give delight unto thy soul. Prove. 22.15. Foolishness is bound in the
heart of a child: but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him. Prove.
10.1. -- A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish son is the heaviness
of his mother. Prove. 1.8. My son hear the instruction of thy father, and
forsake not the law of thy mother. Deuteronomy. 4.9. Only take heed to thy self, and
keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have
seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life; but teach
them thy sons, and thy Sons sons. Duties of Children toward their Parents.
Children owe to their Parents these three duties especially, 1. Reverence. 2.
Obedience. 3. Thankfulness.


I. Reverence; which they must express,

1. By honoring them in their hearts, bearing not only an awe and respect, but
a kindness and affection toward them; loving their persons, fearing to do any
thing may justly provoke them; and highly esteeming them, as the instruments
under God of their being, Lev. 19.3. Ye shall fear every man his Mother and his
Father. The Mother is placed first, because children, though they stand most in
need of their Mothers in their younger years, yet when they are grown up (many
times) do most wickedly neglect and despise them. But how cursed a thing it is
to set light by Parents, and even in our secretest thoughts to despise them,
God himself declares, Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he that sets light by his
Father, or his Mother, and all the people shall say, Amen.

2. By speaking to them with due respect and regard, and to others of them.
What a heinous sin then is mocking Parents? Prove. 30.17. The eye that mocketh
at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the valley shall
pick it out, and the young Eagle shall eat it. But there is a more horrid Crime
than that, which is cursing Parents, Exodus 21.17. And he that curses his
Father or his Mother, shall surely be put to death. And to this Head we may
refer that great and high offense that those wretched Children are guilty of,
who either through impatience of the Government, or greediness of the
possessions of their Parents, do wish their deaths; And let them not think to
excuse themselves, by saying, they wish them in Heaven; for that they do it,
not so much that they may have ease and rest at their journies end, as because
they must needs take death in the way. But whoever does thus embrue his soul in
bloody wishes of his Parents death, let him know, there is one above that sees
and observes that great wickedness: And if long life be promised as a reward of
honoring Parents, it is very agreeable to Divine Justice, that untimely death
be the punishment of the contrary. And so they who so eagerly desire the death
of their Parents, take the direct course (untimely) to meet with their own.

3. By giving them (in their outward carriage) all due respect and observance;
behaving themselves with humility toward them, and giving them all those signs
and expressions of civil honor which are to be paid by Inferiors to
Superiors. How contrary to this is that detestable sin of smiting Parents?
Exodus 21.15. And he that smites his Father or his Mother, shall be surely put
to death. The punishment the Heathens inflicted on such unnatural children, was
to sew them in a sack with a dog, cat, viper, and ape (as emblems of
unnaturalness) and so drowned them together: So much does the very Light of
Nature abhor such monstrous undutifulness.

II. Obedience, which they must manifest,

1. By harkening to their instructions, and carefully laying up their precepts
in their hearts; especially those that concern the welfare of their Souls.
There is ordinarily such a pride, and headiness in youth, that they are apt to
slight the counsels and directions of their Elders, and to look upon them as
proceeding either from too much severity, or from dotage, when they are indeed
the fruits of wisdom, sobriety and experience. To such the counsel of Solomon
is necessary, Prove. 23.22. Hearken unto thy Father that begat thee, and despise
not thy Mother when she is old. Many more Texts there are in that book to this
purpose, that show how the wisest of men have thought it necessary, that
Children should carefully attend to the Counsel of their Parents.

2. By obeying their lawful Commands; most gladly and cheerfully doing those
things that may bring joy and comfort to them, and carefully avoiding what they
apprehend will grieve or afflict them. And that out of Conscience, and in
obedience to God who enjoins it, and not merely from some outward advantages or
benefits to themselves, as too many children do. This is not only contained in
the fifth Commandment, but expressly enjoined in other places of Scripture, Col.
3.20. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well pleasing unto
the Lord. Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right.
In the former place it is in all things: In the other, in the Lord, i. e. If
their commands are not contrary to Gods; for in that case, our duty to God must
be preferred. If any Parent shall be so wicked as to command his Child to
steal, or lie, or do any wicked thing, the Child does not offend against his
Duty, if he disobeys; Only let him do it in such a modest and respectful
manner, that it may appear, that it is Conscience, and not stubbornness that
moves him to refuse Obedience.

3. In bearing patiently their reproofs, and submitting to their corrections,
and reforming thereupon what is amiss. Prove. 29.17. Correct thy son, and he
shall give thee rest; yea he shall give delight unto thy soul. Heb. 12.9.
Furthermore, we have had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave
them reverence; Shall we not much more be in subjection to the Father of
Spirits, and live? Prove. 13.1. A wise Son hears his Fathers instruction; but
a scorner hears not rebuke.

4. In forbearing to do any thing of moment without craving their advice and
counsel; especially in the business of marriage: For of all acts of
disobedience that of marrying against the consent of Parents, is one of the
highest. For (as a late Author well observes) Children are so much the goods
and possessions of their Parents, that they cannot (without a kind of theft)
giveaway themselves without the allowance of those that have such a right in
them. And therefore we see under the Law, the Maid that had made any vow, was
not suffered to perform it without the consent of her Parent, Numb. 30.5. The
right of the Parent was thought of force enough to cancel and make void the
Obligation even of a vow; and therefore surely it ought to be so much
considered by Children, as to keep them from making any Contract whereby that
right is infringed.

III. Gratitude and Thankfulness, which they must express,

1. In a hearty affectionate acknowledgment of their love and care over them.
Certainly those Children that duly weigh, how their Parents have been the
Instruments under God, not only of bringing them into the world, but of
susteining and supporting them after, and do further consider the cares and
fears that go to the bringing up of a Child, will judge, that thankfulness is
but a moderate return for so great benefits.

2. In ministering to their necessities of what kind soever; whether weakness or
sickness of body, decayednesse of understanding, poverty and lowness of
estate: In all these cases the Child is bound according to his ability, to
relieve and help his Parents; and thereby (as much as in him lies) to
recompense their care, love, and kindness toward him. As his Parent bare with
him when a child, so he must bear with his Parent, though froward, and twice a
Child; and though God should raise him in dignity above him, yet that must not
cancel his Duty toward him, nor make him (with some base disposition'd and
wicked Children) ashamed to own him. In Genesis 47 12. we find that wealthy Joseph
nourished his Father and Brethren in want; and the same duty the Apostle
enjoins, 1 Timothy 5.4. But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn
first to show Piety at home, and to requite their Parents; for that is good and
acceptable before God. And our Savior himself when he left this world,
commended his Mother to the care of his Beloved Disciple, Joh. 19.26, 27.

There is one thing more, (which I may couch under this Head) wherein such
children as are really good and truly religious themselves, may express a high
degree of Gratitude, if the case so be (as it sometimes happens) that their
Parents are as yet unacquainted with, or negligent of the great concernments of
their souls. Now in such a case as this, What a high Office of filial Duty is
it, for a child in a wise and humble manner to insinuate into his Parent such
things as may (with the blessing of God) tend to his everlasting welfare; and
so be an instrument of his new birth, who (under God) gave him his first birth
and being in this world? This is a Duty wherein some Children should take
themselves more concerned, than usually they do.

3. In praying for them. The debt Children owe to their Parents is so great,
that they being not able to satisfy it themselves, they ought earnestly to beg
of the Lord, that he would please to recompense it) by multiplying his Graces
in them and his blessings both spiritual and temporal upon them, and to requite
their care and love a thousand fold into their bosoms.

4. In covering their infirmities. It Is the Duty, and will be the endeavor of
good and ingenuous children, to cover and conceal the infirmities of their
Parents (with Shem and Japhet) and not with cursed Cham to publish and disclose
them, Genesis 9.23. How detestable is it for Children to deride and scoff at the
infirmities of their Parents?

5. And lastly, By imitating their good example. Whatever was good, virtuous,
and commendable in their Parents, let Children imitate: But their vices and
miscarriages let them decline, and not entail them on their posterity. Let them
remember what a dismal sound is in those words, Jeroboam the son of Nebat who
made Israel to sin, 2 King. 3.3.

There are two great Motives to press Children to a careful observance of
these things.

1. It Is right and just, and that which should be, Ephesians 6.1. And it is well
pleasing to the Lord, Col. 3.20.

2. It has a promise of reward, Ephesians. 6.2, 3. Honor thy Father and Mother
(which is the first Commandment with promise) that it may be well with thee,
and that thou may live long on the earth. The words in Exodus 20.12. may be
rendered, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that they (viz. By their prayers)
may prolong thy days: Parents prayers are great blessings to children. And
further consider what Solomon says, Prove. 10.27. The fear of the Lord
prolongeth days. And Godliness has the promise of this life, and that which
is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. If God take away some good and dutiful children betimes
out of this life, they are no losers by it. For God is better to them than his
promise: In stead of a long lease in this life, he gives them present
possession of a freehold of much better value in the Kingdom above.

Col. 3.20. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well pleasing
unto the Lord. Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is
right. V. 2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother (which is the first Commandment
with promise. V. 3. That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on
the earth. Prove. 23.22. Hearken unto thy Father that begat thee. and despise
not thy Mother when she is old. Prove. 1.8. My Son hear the Instruction of thy
Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother. V. 9. For they shall be an
Ornament of Grace unto thine Head, and chains about thy neck. Luke 2.51. And he
went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them. Heb.
12.7. If ye endure chastning, God deals with you as with Sons, for what son
is he, whom the Father chasteneth not? V 9. Furthermore we have had Fathers of
our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall we not much
more be in subjection unto the Father of Spirits, and live. Mal. 1.6. A Son
honors his Father, and a servant his Master: If I then be a Father, where is
mine honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear? says the Lord of Hosts,
etc. 1 King. 2.19. Bathsheba therefore went unto King Solomon, to speak unto
him for Adonijah, and the King rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her
-- Genesis 27.34. And when Esau heard the words of his Father, he cried with a
great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his Father, bless me, even me
also, O my Father. Mat. 15.4. For God commanded saying, Honor thy Father and
Mother, and he that curses Father or Mother, let him die the death. Prove.
30.17. The eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother,
the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagle shall eat it.
Lev. 20.9. For every one that curses his Father or his mother, shall surely be
put to death; he has cursed his Father or his Mother, his blood shall be upon
him. Exodus 21.15. And he that smites his Father or his Mother, shall be surely
put to death. Prove. 20.20. Whosoever curses his Father or his Mother, his Lamp
shall be put out, in obscure darkness. Prove. 13.1. A wise son hears his
Fathers instruction, but a scorner hears not rebuke. 1 Samuel 2.25. --
Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because the
Lord would slay them. Genesis 47.12. And Joseph nourished his Father and his
Brethren, and all his Fathers household with bread, according to their Families.
1 Timothy 5.4. But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn first to
show Piety at home, and to requite their Parents, for that is good and
acceptable before God. Mat. 15.5. But ye say, whosoever shall say to his
Father, or his Mother, it is a gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by
me, V. 6. And honor not his Father or Mother, he shall be free, thus have ye
made the Commandments of God of none effect by your Traditions CHAP. XIV. Of
the Duties of such as are in Office, and of Inferiors.
ALL those that are in any Office or place of public trust ought to be very
careful to discharge the duties of their respective places faithfully,
diligently, and patiently, with an upright heart, and a right tempered zeal,
aiming at the Glory of God, and endeavoring that Piety, Justice, and peace may
be preserved and maintained among men. They should consider how much more easy
it is to bear the anger and displeasure of men for the conscionable discharge,
than the wrath of God for the unconscionable neglect of their Duties.

Exodus 18.21. Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the people able men, such
as fear God, men of Truth hating Covetousness, and place such over them, to be
Rulers of Thousands, and Rulers of Hundreds, and Rulers of Fifties, and Rulers
of Tens. 2 Samuel 23.3. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me,
he that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Deuteronomy. 1.13.
Take ye wise men, and understanding, and known among your Tribes, and I will
make them Rulers over you. Romans 12.8. -- He that rules with diligence -- Romans
13.3. For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil, will thou
then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have
praise of the same. V. 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good; but
if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain,
for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does
evil. 1 Samuel 2.30. -- Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise
me, shall be lightly esteemed. The Duties of Inferiors.
Inferiors ought to yield all due subjection to those Magistrates and
Governors God has set over them; remembering that Magistracy is Gods
Ordinance, and none but Libertines think that Religion freeth them from
Subjection thereunto. They are to consider how sharply the Apostle in 2 Pet.
2.10. Reproves those that despise Government, that are presumptuous,
self-willed, that are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. Subjection it is a
hard duty to corrupt Nature. Man naturally is like the wild Asses Colt, as
Zophar speaks, Job 11.12. And that both for the rudeness of his mind, and
untamedness of his Affections. He would fain be free and yokelesse: Being
proud, he loves not the Superiority of others: And being licentious, loves not
to be restrained by others He would neither have his heart subject to God,. nor
his actions to man. He would have none to be Lord over him, as it is, Psalm.
12.3. But this despising of Dominions is flatly against the injunctions of Gods
Word, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is
no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God. Tit. 3.1. Put them
in mind to be subject unto Principalities, and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to
be ready to every good work. And it is a trespass against the common good of
humane Societies. Let all Inferiors therefore in obedience to God, for the
honor of true Religion, and for the preserving Order and good Government in
the world, make Conscience of these three Duties.

1. To pray for Magistrates. 2. To honor their Persons. 3. To yield all due
Subjection and obedience unto them.
Jude v. 8. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise
Dominion, speak evil of Dignities. Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their
dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor. 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme. V. 14. Or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort therefore,
that first of all' Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made for all men, V. 2. For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty. Exodus
22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people. Acts
23.5. Then said Paul, I wist not Brethren that he was the High Priest, for it
is written, thou shall not speak-evil of the Ruler of thy people. CHAP. XV. Of
the Duties of people toward their Pastors and Ministers.
HAving spoken of the Duties of Children to their Natural Parents, and of
Inferiors to Magistrates, their civil Parents, I come now to those of people
to their Ministers, their Spiritual Parents. Thus St Paul tells the Corinthians,
1 Cor. 4.15. That in Christ Jesus he had begotten them through the Gospel. And
the Gallatians, Chap. 4.19. That he travels in birth of them, till Christ be
formed in them.

Their Duties to them are these four.

First, To esteem them very highly in love for their work sake, as the Apostle
commands, 1 These. 5.13. And surely this will seem very reasonable, if either,
1. The Nature of their work be considered, or 2. Who it is that employes them.


I. Their work is of all others most excellent. No Calling or employment more
honorable than the rescuing of precious Souls out of the hands of Satan, and
from endless perdition.

II. It Is a great and an hard work. They are, 1. To instruct the people, to
feed them with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3.15. And teach them the right
way to Salvation. 2. To pray for them: To be the Lords remembrancers, and their
Sollicitors in the Court of Heaven. 3. To be an Example to the Flock in a holy
and unblameable life and conversation. 4. To visit the sick. 5. To labor the
settling the distressed Conscience. 6. To watch over the Flock to preserve them,
1. From corrupt Doctrine. 2. From a corrupt Conversation.



And to this end to endeavor the reclaiming the disorderly by admonitions, and
such other Censures as Christ has left in the Church.

Their work therefore is such as ought in all reason to procure them love and
esteem, it being of so great advantage to the world. Joseph's Office in
delivering out corn in a time of Famine, made him justly honored by the
Egyptians. How worthy an employment is it then to deliver out the Manna of Gods
Word, the food of life to the souls of men, who without it, are in danger to
perish everlastingly.

2. Consider who it is that employes them. They are Ambassadors for Christ, 2
Cor. 5.20, Ambassadors by the Law of Nations are to be treated with a respect
answerable to the quality of those that send them. Therefore Christ tells his
Disciples, when he sends them out to preach, He that despises you, despises
me; he that despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10.16. It seems,
it is a worse business than people ordinarily consider, to despise the
Ministers of Christ. Let those think of this, who make it their design and
sport to put affronts upon the persons, and to deride the Calling of the
Ministers. Certainly there will be a strict account required of all that
derision, slanders, reproaches, and hard usage, the faithful Ministers of
Christ do meet with in the discharge of their places and calling. And further,
if it be Christ that employes them, then let those consider seriously of it,
who dare presume to exercise the Offices of this sacred function, without being
lawfully Called thereto. What is this, but as if a man on his own head, should
go as an Ambassador from his Prince. The Apostle says of the Priests of the
Law (which yet are inferior to those of the Gospel) That no man takes this
honor to himself, but he which was called of God, Heb. 5.4. Certainly they
that usurp sacred Offices, for which they are not duly fitted, and to which
they were never lawfully called, will be able to give but a very sad account to
God, when he reckons with them for this their presumption. Let me advise such
to read the story of Corah, in Numb. 16. Who being arrogant and ambitious,
would needs take upon him the Priesthood, and he, and his accomplices rise up
against Moses and Aaron, and their plea is, all the Congregation are holy, ye
take too much upon you; Wherefore lift you up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord? So that we see this levelling humor is no new thing
in the world. To make head against Moses and Aaron, to oppose Magistracy and
Ministry you see was Corahs sin; Take heed of imitating him, lest you perish
likewise in the gainsaying of Corah, Jude v. 11. You may read the sad end of
him and his Company Number. 16.32. And so much of the first Duty people ought to
pay to their Ministers. They ought to love and esteem them.

Secondly, They ought to pray for them, that they may be furnished with all
those Graces and Gifts, and blessed with such assistances of Gods Spirit, as
may enable them to discharge that holy Calling faithfully and successefully: Of
this I have spoken more, P. 323.

Thirdly, They ought conscientiously to attend upon their Ministry, and submit
to their Spiritual guidance and direction, really endeavoring to grow in
knowledge and Grace thereby. Obey them says the Apostle, Heb. 13.17. that have
the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, etc.
Whatsoever they out of Gods Word shall make manifest to be his Will and
Command, is to be obeyed, seeing it is not they, but God requires it, according
to that of Christ, He that hears you, hears me, Luke 10 16. And this
whether it be delivered by way of public preaching, or private exhortation;
for in both, so long as they keep them to the Rule, which is Gods Word, they
are the messengers of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2.7. People therefore must labor
to grow in Spiritual knowledge and Grace answerably to the means of Grace
afforded them, and thereby strengthen the hands, and encourage the heart of
their Minister in his work. The proficiency of the people in knowledge and
holiness is the Crown and rejoicing of every Faithful Minister, and though God
will not reward him according to his success, but his sincerity and industry,
yet nothing more troubles him then to see his multiplied pains not answered
with desired success. Let people therefore look to it, that they bring forth
the fruits of the Gospel that is preached to them. The Husbandman lays his
ground fallow, when he sees it will not bring forth Corn, so as to quit
charges. The Kingdom of Heaven says our Savior, shall be taken away from you,
and given to others which will bring forth the fruits thereof, Mat. 21.43. It Is
just with God to take away the means of Grace from a people, when he sees they
live unprofitably under them.

Fourthly, Seeing Ministers sow Spirituals, the people should not begrudge
them, if they reap some of their temporals, 1 Cor. 9.14. God has ordained that
they that preach the Gospel, should live upon the Gospel. It Is but just and
reasonable, that they who by undertaking that holy Calling, are taken off from
the ways of gaining a livelihood in the world, should be provided for by them
whose souls they watch over: And seeing the people receive Spiritual things
from them, viz. Instruction and Assistance toward the obtaining eternal life,
it is agreeable both to reason and Scripture they should receive temporals from
the people. Yet this ought not to be a Ministers chief end and aim in setting
his hand to this plow; but to Glorify God in the saving of Souls. For what
will it profit a Minister to gain his peoples Tithes, and by negligence and
carelessness to lose his peoples Souls. Ministers are to be Lights to their
Flocks, and both by their Doctrine and life to show them the way to Heaven.
What a horrible ingratitude and unworthiness is it then in those men who
endeavor to extinguish those Lights either by withdrawing the Oil of
maintenance, or blowing them out with the wind of persecution?

Prove. 29.18. Where there is no vision, the people perish. Hos. 4.6. My people
are destroyed for lack of knowledge. Jer. 3.15. And I will give you Pastors
according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.
Mal. 2.7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the
Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Isa 30.20. And
though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction,
yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes
shall see thy teachers. Mat. 13.52. Then said he unto them, therefore every
Scribe which is instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a man which
is an Householder, which brings forth out of his treasury things new and old.
Ephesians. 4.11. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers. V. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. 1 Cor. 12.28
And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets,
thirdly Teachers, after that miracles, then Gifts of healings, helps,
Governments, diversities of Tongues. 2 Cor. 3.6. Who has made us able
Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter but of the Spirit. 2 Timothy
2.15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to
be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. Col. 1.28. Whom we preach,
warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus. 1 Pet. 5.1. The Elders which are among you,
I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and
also a partaker of the Glory that shall be revealed V. 2. Feed the Flock of God
which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. V. 3. Neither as being
Lords over Gods Heritage, but being ensamples to the Flock. Col. 4.17. And say
to Archippus, take heed to the Ministry which thou have received from the Lord,
that thou fulfill it. 1 These. 2.4. But as we were allowed of God to be put in
trust with the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, which
tries our hearts. V. 5. For neither at any time used we flattering words, as
ye know, nor a Cloak of Covetousness, God is witness. V. 6. Nor of men sought
we Glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been burdensome
as the Apostles of Christ. V. 7. But we were gentle among you, even as a Nurse
cherishes her Children. V. 8. So being affectionately desirous of you, we were
willing to have imparted unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own
souls, because ye were dear unto us. V. 10. Ye are witnesses, and God also, how
holily and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves among you that
believe. V. 11. As you know, how we exhorted, and comforted, and charged every
one of you (as a Father does his Children) V. 12. That ye would walk worthy of
God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and Glory. V. 13. For this cause also
thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the Word of God, which
ye heard of us, ye received it not as the Word of men, but (as it is in truth)
the Word of God, which effectually works also in you that believe. V. 19. For
what is our hope, or joy, or Crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming. V. 20. For ye are our Glory
and Joy. 1 Cor. 16.15. I beseech you Brethren (ye know the house of Stephanas,
that it is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves
to the Ministry of the Saints.) V. 16. That ye submit your selves unto such,
and to every one that helps with us and labors. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls,
as they that must give an account, that they may do it with joy and not with
grief; for that is unprofitable for you. V. 24. Salute all them that have the
rule over you, and all the Saints: They of Italy salute you. 1 Timothy 5.17. Let
the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially they
who labor in the Word and Doctrine. 2 Cor. 12.15. And I will very gladly spend
and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be
loved. 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? Who
planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a
Flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? V. 8. Say I these things as a
man? or says not the Law the same also? V. 9. For it is written in the Law of
Moses, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn. V.
11. If we have sown unto you Spiritual things, Is it a great thing, if we shall
reap your carnal things? V. 13. Do ye not know, that they which minister about
Holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar? V. 14. Even so has the Lord ordained,
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Romans 15.27. For
if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their Spiritual things, their duty
is also to minister to them in carnal things. Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught
in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches, in all good things. V. 7. Be
not deceived, God is not mocked; whatsoever a man sowes that shall he reap,
etc. Mat. 10 41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall
receive a Prophets reward, etc. CHAP. XVI. Of Christian and Brotherly Reproof.
THat excellent and Christian Duty of reproving and admonishing an offending
Brother, is (in these days) too much neglected, and grown out of use; though
it be the reallest good turn that can be done from one man to another. Men are
forward enough to scoff and deride the sinful miscarriages of others behind
their backs; but few there are that make Conscience of reproving them seriously
and soberly to their faces: When people fall out and are angry, then ordinarily
out comes all that they know (and perhaps more too) in a rude and passionate
manner to disgrace each other: But how seldom do they admonish one another in
love, in order to their amendment and the saving of their souls? Being
therefore to treat of this duty in this Chapter, let me premise that there is a
double admonition.

1. Paternal or authoritative. 2. Fraternal or charitative.
Of this latter only I intend to discourse here, and I shall show, 1. What
great and pressing Arguments there are for it. 2. Shall endeavor to remove the
main prejudices and objections that lie against it. 3. Shall show how, and in
what manner it is to be performed. 4. Give some reasons why it ought to be
exceeding kindly taken by those to whom it is performed, and whose benefit is
thereby intended.


Of the first, the Arguments for this Duty.

I. We have Commands for it, both in the old and new Testament.

Levit. 19 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Mat. 18.15.
Moreover if thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone, if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother. Ephesians. 5.11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them. II. Hereby we may much advance Gods Glory,
may discountenance sin, may promote Piety in the world. Many sins may be
suppressed, if standers by would but bear witness against them, and give check
unto them by a wise and mild reproof.

If we can but persuade men to break off their sins, and embrace the ways of
Holiness, we shall thereby bring much honor and glory unto God. And what
should not we poor Creatures do, to advance the Glory of so Gracious a Father?

III. It Is the most blessed and charitable work we can possibly be employed in,
viz. the rescuing of precious souls out of the hands of Satan, and saving them
from everlasting perdition, Jam. 5.20. He which converteth the sinner from the
error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of
sins. We read, Exodus 23.4. If thou meet with thine enemies Ox or his Ass
going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again. V. 5. If thou see
the Ass of him that hates thee, lying under his burden, and would forbear
to help him, thou shall surely help with him. Should we take pity and care of
our neighbors Ox or Ass, (yea though it were our very enemies) and not of
his Soul? If thou hear men swear, toss Gods Name vainly and lightly in
their mouths, jest with his Word, talk filthily, deride Holiness, slander good
men, plead for prophannesse, or see them walk in unconscionable courses;
Ought thou not to admonish such men, and to entreat them to bethink
themselves, and to consider whither such courses tend? If thou should see a
man tottering on the brink of some deep and dismal pit, where he must needs
perish if he fall in, had not thou a hard heart, if thou would not catch
hold of him, and endeavor to stay him? Alas! Why do not men consider then what
it is to fall into the bottomless pit of Hell, and to lie there in everlasting
burnings.

IV. We shall hereby keep our selves from partaking in other men's sins. By
neglect of this Duty, we may become accessory to men's going on in sinful
courses, and dishonouring God; and so draw upon our selves the guilt of their
sin and ruin. But if we faithfully admonish offenders, we shall hereby deliver
our own soul, and if they perish, they perish to themselves. Paul could not
have said, Acts 20.26. I am pure from the blood of all men, if he had not been
a faithful reprover, as well as a diligent instructor.

V. If this Duty were conscientiously practiced, it would rob Satan of one of
his greatest advantages to destroy souls, which is, the fashionablenesse and
creditablenesse of Sin. It would discredit sin, and bring Christianity into
reputation: It would drive away that frivolous, impertinent, empty
Conversation, that wanton, noisome discourse, that passes for the only
entertainment of this corrupt world. It would drive away backbiting, judging,
censuring, rejoicing in the folly and shame of others, which are the very bane
and shame of converse and society,

VI. The advantage is great that will acrue unto us, if we discharge this Duty
faithfully, Dan. 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and
ever. Prove. 24.25. To them that rebuke the wicked, shall be delight, and a good
blessing shall come upon them. A great delight will arise in their souls from
the testimony of their Consciences, that they have endeavored to discharge
their Duty; and a good blessing from the Lord will come upon them for it.

So much of the Arguments for this Duty: I come now to the second thing;
Namely, to remove the prejudices and answer the Objections that are conceived
against it.

Obj. 1. It Is hard and painful and uneasy to flesh and blood to practice this
Duty. I shall be thought uncivil, rude, impertinent in most companies where I
come: I shall be laughed at for my pains, or jeered for my preciseness (and
it is hard to bear disgrace) or I shall get ill will and anger from the party I
reprove, and I am fearful of giving offense, etc.

Sol. Has God commanded thee a Duty, and will thou not do it for fear of
offending man? Is it not a sad case, we should more fear to displease a sinful
creature, by admonishing him of his sin, than to offend God by neglecting our
duty? This Objection supposes a man loath to serve God or his brother of that
which costs him any thing. Art thou to let him drop into Hell quietly, for fear
of angring him, or deriving some of his displeasure upon thee? Art thou out of
fearfulness or bashfulnesse, out of a sluggish cowardice, and want of zeal to
the Glory of God, and the good of thy brother, to be silent, and to comply with
him in his sin, and let him go undisturbedly to Hell? The civility of not
reproving a brother (when there is need) amounts to this, to have the heart to
see him be poisoned, and not dare present him with an Antidote, least that
should let him know he is conceived to be in danger of perishing. Should such
an irrational custom come into the world, to make it uncivil for Scholars
(when they meet together) to talk of books; allowing them any other kind of
discourse but that which tends to the bettering one another; What were to be
done by Students in this case, but to take up a resolution to bear down this
irrational custom by bringing in the contrary? So truly, if it be the civility
and mode of the world, to talk profanely, to scoff at Religion, to deride
strictness, etc. and must be counted rudeness and unmannerlinesse to
discharge this duty of admonishing an offending brother, or speaking any thing
to him, that may tend to the saving his Soul; What should all sober Christians
do in this case, but even resolve unanimously to bear down such an irreligious
custom (which betraies many souls to everlasting ruin) and to be no more
pusillanimous and faint-hearted, but faithfully to practice this excellent,
though disrellished duty, maugre all opposition from the world? And this were
the way to bring Piety into repute, and to make sin sneak and hide its head,
when it shall be seen that Religion is owned and openly avowed by the
Professors of it.

Obj. 2. To reprove offenders is to little purpose, they will amend never the
sooner.

Sol. Who art thou that thus reply against God? Do the Duty he enjoins thee,
and leave the success to him. Can thou tell how, or when, or by what means,
God will work upon the heart of a sinner? Though thy reproof should do no good
for the present, yet thou know not what impression it may make, and what
operation it may have afterward. The seed may take root in the ground, and
after many days spring up, though it do not instantly. Many sinners are of a
proud humor, and will not for the present acknowledge any crime, least that
should pass for a submission, yet afterward (possibly) upon sober judging and
considering the reasonableness and equity of the reproof, may be willing to
amend that privately upon their own choice, which they would not do upon their
brothers admonition. We must have patience, and in meekness instruct those
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the Truth, as the Apostle directs us, 2 Timothy 2.25. Men that
have taken heart and cast off this sluggish Cowardice, (which always pretends
a Lion in the way, when any duty is to be done) have not repented it in the
end, but found much comfort in the performing of it.

Obj. 3. Why should I meddle in other men's matters, and so be accounted a
busie-body: I will look to my self, let them look to their own Souls.

Sol. This is an ordinary excuse, but it savours of little Grace. How much
comes this short of Cain's speech, Am I my Brothers keeper? St Paul teaches
directly the contrary, Phil. 2.4. Look not every man on his own things, but
every man on the things of others. We are not born only to consider our selves,
but in our sphere to endeavor the good of others. This coyness, tenderness,
niceness of reproving any whom we may hope to amend by it, whence springs it
but from an inordinate self love that will not venture the censure of a
busie-body, etc. for the safety of a perishing Brother; though we have Gods
Command to back us; which indeed should be a back of steel unto us, though we
meet with some temporal inconveniences in performing obedience to it.

Obj. 4. I am but a private Christian, and unlearned; I cannot speak so as
others can. This duty belongs to Ministers: I hope I may be excused.

Sol. This is a duty not only of Ministers (who are to do it by virtue of their
Office) but of every brother or common Christian by virtue of Gods Command,
Lev. 19.17. It Is a work of Charity, a common Office of one neighbor to
another. Thou art not therefore so unlearned but thou know that no
unrighteous man shall inherit the Kingdom of God: That all Liars, drunkards,
swearers, whoremongers, sorcerers, adulterers, murderers, thieves,
extortioners, covetous, envious, malicious persons, etc. (that break not off
their sins by timely repentance) shall have their portion in that Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone for ever. As we read, 1 Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.21.
Rev 21.8. Ought thou not therefore to tell guilty persons of their danger,
and entreat them to bethink themselves, where such courses will end, and to
have some pity upon their own souls. Alas! It Is not so much want of knowledge,
as want of zeal to Gods Glory, and want of compassion to their neighbors
souls, that makes men so negligent of this duty.

Obj. 5. But is this a duty incumbent upon me at all times, whenever I see or
hear a brother offend? Must I not expect convenient seasons to do it in?

Sol. It Is true, he that is bound to reprove, is bound also to do it as wisely
and prudently as he can. Therefore for the season of reproof, a Learned man
sets down this Rule; Whenever admonition may probably do good, to the person to
whom it is designed, and not harm either to him or any other, then, it cannot
be unseasonable: Whatever censure falls on me, it matters not, so the brother
reproved receive Benefit thereby, and I were the person from whom it was due to
him, Thus he.

The more private a reproof is (in probability) the more effectual it will be;
yet a public calm reproof (when the offense is public) may (besides the good
of the person to whom it is addressed) prove beneficial to the whole company.
1. It may give them an example, which possibly they may transcribe from thy
practice, though they have not from Gods Precept. 2. It may arraign and condemn
the like vices in other men, which are now reprehended but in one. It Is good
therefore to take the present season of reproving, except there be hope of
springing some happier opportunity for this performance at some other time,
which may make it more prudent and charitable, to defer it till then: But as
Felix dismissed Paul for that time, and promised when he had a more convenient
season to send for him, yet is never read to have done it; or as the sordid
scandalous Miser quarrels with somewhat in almost every object of Charity he
meets with, to excuse himself from Almsgiving; so we must take heed that we do
not pretend unseasonableness for our excuse, when it is merely our cowardice or
the coldness of our Christian Charity that is the true cause of our neglecting
this duty. Life is uncertain; we may die, or the party may die; then he is for
ever out of the reach of our Charity. The longer he lies in sin, the more God
is dishonored, the more wrath is treasured up, the harder his heart ordinarily
grows, and his recovery will be the more difficult. Therefore St. Jude,
speaking of secure sinners, says, we should snatch such out of the fire, v. 23.

Obj. 6. But does not our Savior say, we must not give that which is holy to
dogs, nor cast pearls before swine, Mat. 7.6. And what are lewd sinners but
such.

Sol. Every disorderly liver is not to be accounted as a dog or a swine (in the
sense our Savior uses the word:) For of some such Paul speaks, 2 These.
3.15. And says, We must not account them as enemies, but admonish them as
brethren. Whom therefore we are to account as dogs and swine, appears by our
Saviors own words in that place, even such as not only out of a swinish
baseness trample under foot the precious Word of God, offered to them in a
reproof, but out of a doggish rage and fierceness are ready to fly at the
throats of such, as out of good will to their souls, offer to loosen them from
the devils thraldom, and to help them on toward Heaven. Lest (says our
Savior) they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent you. If
you meet then at any time with such desperate wretches, that you are in danger
of violence from (if you stop them in their course of sin) you may forbear
meddling with them. And seeing they will be filthy, let them be filthy still.
Seeing there is no other remedy, let them swear on, swagger on, drink on, and
at last despair, die, and be damned. O sad condition! Whose bowels do not turn
within him that thinks of their woeful misery! But as for others (as we have
opportunity) let us endeavor their amendment and salvation.

Thus much for the Second thing, the removing the prejudices, and answering the
Objections that are conceived against this duty. I come now in the third place,
to give some Directions for the right practice of it.

I. Labor to walk circumspectly thy self; look well to thy own life and
conversation, that it may be (as much as in thee lies) blameless and harmless;
that so thou may be more capable of performing this duty (with advantage)
toward others.

II. Look well to thy own heart, that thy ends and intentions be upright and
sincere in this business. Take need thou be not moved to this duty out of any
proud humor of contradicting or controlling others, or of purpose to disgrace
others, or out of vain glory, and a secret ambitious desire of purchasing to
thy self a Name; or for any such by and base end; but let thy motive be an
earnest desire to discharge thy duty to God, to abate sin, and advance holiness
in the world, and to save thy brothers soul.

III. Look well to it that the thing thou offerest to reprove, be a fault in it
self, and a fault that he is guilty of to whom thou addressest thy reproof,
else thou mistakest thy mark.

IV. Before thou set upon this work, send up fervent prayers (either solemn
supplications, if thou have time, or secret mental ejaculations) unto the Lord,
for the pardon of thy own sins, and to direct, assist, and bless thy
endeavors to his own Glory, and the amendment and salvation of the party to
whose benefit thy admonition is designed.

V. Let the reproofs thou do minister, be ushered in with prefaces of good
will, and managed with evidences of love, pity, and real affection to the
party reproved. Reproof is a bitter pill, and (sometimes must be lapt up in
Sugar and Pap; but not so neither, as to make it lose its operation. When we
reprehend the faults of men, it is not amiss (many times) to commend what is
good in them; that they may see we are as forward to take notice of what is
good and commendable in them, as to reprehend what is evil. And this will make
them take reproof the better.

VI. Be serious in reprehending others. A loose and trifling reprehension
between jest and earnest, usually does more harm than good, and rather confirms
the sinner in his sin, than reforms him. Well may he think, it matters not much
whether he leave his sin or no, when he sees others make but a jest at it.
Solomon says, fools make a mock at sin, Prove. 14.9. Let thy heart therefore be
deeply affected with the dishonor done to God, the danger the parties soul is
in if he go on in his sin; and then show him plainly and seriously the evil of
it.

VII. Back and confirm thy reproofs with plain places of Scripture, that the
party may see and feel that it is God reproves him rather than thou; and that
thou do but mind him, what God has declared concerning men in his condition:
Tell him, it is not as thou will, nor as he will, who shall be saved, and who
shall not, but as God will: Now God has revealed that such as live thus and
thus, shall never enter into his Kingdom: Therefore entreat him to consider
where such courses will end, and what must needs become of his soul, if he do
not timely repent and forsake those evil ways.

VIII. Be discreet in ministering reproofs: Call in prudence to assist Charity.
Distinguish prudently between person and person: For though all are to be
reproved, (except they be dogs or swine, or obstinate obdurate Heretics, Tit.
3.10.) yet all are not to be dealt with in the same manner. This Caution St.
Jude gives us, Jude v. 22. Of some have compassion, making a difference, and
others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire. Some are of a more
flexible nature, and therefore fair and loving admonitions are likeliest to
work upon them. Some are hardened and obdurate sinners, these should be rebuked
sharply, Tit. 1.13. (when gentler means will not do) and with fear must be
pulled out of the fire, i. e. must be terrified with Gods Judgments, that they
may fear him who is able to cast both soul and body into Hell.

IX. Be impartial in reprehending those it is thy duty to rep^ehend. Do not do
in reproving men, as Saul did in executing the Command he had against Amalek,
who spared the fat and chief, and destroyed only the refuse. Put on a truly
noble and Christian resolution; and fear not the face of men in performing thy
Duty to God. God is dishonored by one man's sins as well as by another; and
sin is destructive to the soul of one man as well as another. Therefore one
should be admonished as well as another: Great men should be admonished,
because their temptations are great; and because they may do great good or hurt
by their example. And the meanest should be admonished also, because their
souls are as precious as the others, and (poor creatures) they are (many of
them) very insensible of their sin and danger.

X. Do not strive to make any man more guilty than he is. If he denies the
charge, and pleads his innocence, fairly and friendly lay open the grounds upon
which thou speak; but at no hand stand much upon doubtful proofs; nor wrest
things to the worst sense; but accept of the most favorable construction of
words and actions; remembering that Charity thinks no evil, but believes all
things, hops all things, etc. 1 Cor. 13.7. Yet labor from false rumors, and
uncertain scandals to raise Arguments for greater circumspection for time to
come. Seeing men are so apt to wait for our haltings, we ought to be very
careful how we walk.

XI. By all means forbear bitter and reproachful Language: Many reproofs are
quite lost, because there is more of passion in them, than compassion. Though
there must be (many times) some warmth in a reproof, yet it must not be
scalding hot. Such is the nature of most men, that they are apt to be won with
love and mildness, but angry and vilifying terms do make them more stubborn
and obstinate. Therefore the Apostle says, the servant of the Lord must not
strive, but be gentle unto all men, patient, in meekness instructing them that
oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2.25. Abundance of meekness and gentleness, and
especially patience is needful for those that have to do with sinners in this
kind. It Is ordinary for them to grow testy and angry, and fall foul with the
reprover. And if you should be angry too, then all hope of doing good is lost;
the business will end in an uncivil storm and tempest. Come therefore resolved
before hand to bear all things, and endure all things. If the party reproved
storm at you, let tears of compassion rather drop from your eyes, than words of
anger and reproach come forth of your mouth.

XII. When thou have discharged thy duty, go to God, and pray earnestly to him
for success. Ply the Throne of Grace, in secret by fervent prayer, that God
would prosper thy endeavors, for the Glory of his Name, and the recovery,
amendment, and salvation of the party reproved. To begin, and end this duty,
with prayer, is the way to engage God in it.

I come now in the last place, to give some Reasons why this excellent and most
charitable duty ought to be exceeding kindly taken by them to whom it is
performed.

1. Consider, Faithful admonition is the most precious part of friendship, the
reallest and kindest good turn one man can do for another. David cal's reproof
a precious oil, Psalm. 141.5. Solomon, an ear-ring of gold, an ornament of fine
gold, Prove. 25.12. Our blessed Savior, a pearl, Mat. 7.6. But notwithstanding
all this, how few are there that can or will bear it patiently? Go about to
admonish a man of a fault, and tell him of an error, he presently looks on you
as his enemy: You are as Paul tells the Galatians, chap. 4.16. become his enemy,
because you tell him the truth. Such a pride there is ordinarily in men's
hearts, they must not be told of any thing that is amiss, though it be with no
other intent, but that they may amend it. A strange madness I confess this is,
and the same that would be in a sick man, to fly in the face of him that comes
to cure him, on a fancy that he disparaged him by supposing him sick.
Certainly he were not your friend, that should see your house on fire, and
would not call to you and tell you of it for fear of disturbing you out of your
sleep. None hate you worse then they that suffer sin upon you. This is the true
and great use of friendship, to admonish one another, and to endeavor the
bettering one of another; else, (as one well observes) it is but an empty,
formal, juicelesse thing. Dives in hell was more charitable to his wild
brethren on earth, then some people will allow us to be to them; for he would
have had a messenger dispatched to them, to admonish and warn them that they
come not to that place of torments, Luke 16.27, 18. But some people will not
endure we should admonish them, though we put our selves upon a very uneasy
and unpleasing task for their good.

2. Rejection of reproof is a great aggravation of sin, and commonly a
forerunner of judgment. It Is a despising not of men only, but of God: It
fortifies a man in his sins, it raises such mounts and bulworks about them,
that no man can come to assault them. And if we may believe Solomon,
destruction will not fail to attend it. Prove. 29.1. He that being often
reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy. Refractorinesse to faithful reproof can look for nothing but ruin:
It Is as if a man should be riding post to hell, and will endure no stop. That
people was in a desperate state, Hosea 4.4. when God gave forth that
prohibition, Let no man reprove another, for this people are as they that
strive with the Priest. And Eli's sons were in a sad case, when they refused to
hearken to the voice of their father: The text says, 1 Samuel 2.25. -- They
hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay them.
It Is a shrewd sign God has left men to themselves, when they reject reproof.

3. And lastly, It Is a good sign (in conjunction with others) of a gracious
heart, for a man to take reproof and admonition well, and to amend his errors
and failings thereupon. Prove 15.5. He that regards reproof is prudent. In
Psalm. 141.5. You may find how well holy David took reproof. Let the righteous
smite me, and it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me, and it shall be
an excellent Oil, which shall not break my head. You may read in the Life of
that good man Gerson, that he rejoiced in nothing more than to be lovingly and
brotherly reproved by any. I shall conclude this with that excellent saying of
the wise man, Prove. 27.6. Faithful are the wounds of a Friend, but the kisses
of an Enemy are deceitful.

Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Prove. 25.12. As an
ear-ring of Gold, and an Ornament of fine Gold, so is a wise reprover upon an
obedient ear. Eccles. 7.5. It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than
for a man to hear the Song of Fools. Prove. 9.7. He that reproves a scorner,
gets to himself shame, and he that rebukes a wicked man gets himself a
blot. V. 8. Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee, rebuke a wise man, and he
will love thee. Prove. 15 12. A scorner loves not one that reproves him,
neither will he go unto the wise. V. 31. The ear that bears the reproof of
life, abides among the wise. Prove. 17.10. A reproof enters more into a wise
man, than an hundred stripes into a fool. Prove. 28.23. He that rebukes a man,
afterward shall find more favor than he that flattereth with the tongue. Ephesians.
5.11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them. Mat. 18.15. Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee,
go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone, if he shall hear thee,
thou have gained thy brother. V. 16. But if he shall not hear thee, then take
with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word may be established. V. 17. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it
unto the Church, but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as
an Heathen man and a Publican. CHAP. XVII. Of the Duties of the Rich and Poor.
First, Of those that concern the Rich.

I Cannot better begin this Chapter, than by setting down that strict charge
the Apostle directs Timothy to give to rich men, in 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge
them that are rich in this world (He says not entreat or persuade them, but
charge them, charge it upon their Consciences) that they be not high minded,
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy. V. 18. That they do good, that they be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate. V. 19. Laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on eternal life.

From this and other Scriptures, we may gather, that the duties that concern
the rich, are these following.

I. They ought to look to it, and be especially careful that they be really
religious and truly Godly. They have many great engagements to it: God has
dealt bountifully with them: The things of this world serve them, and flow in
unto them. When poor people must take pains and work hard to earn their bread,
before they eat it: They have their Tables spread to their hands. God has
raised them above many of their Brethren, and therefore they ought to honor,
love, and obey him from whose bounty alone they receive all their plenty. And
as they have greater engagements, so they have greater opportunities and
advantages to be religious than others have. They may spend more time upon
their souls than poor people can. They have more leisure (if they have hearts
so to employ it) to attend the means of Grace, and to work out their salvation.
They should consider, though they are rich in this world, yet there is another
world that is to be looked after. Though they enjoy the good things of this
life, yet there is a life to come which must be cared for. Though they are
increased with worldly goods, yet if they have all their portion here, they are
most miserable. Seeing it is well with them here on earth, their main design
should be to secure their state in Grace, and their title to Heaven. They
should above all things be careful to lay hold on eternal life. This life they
cannot hold, nor their riches, estates, and possessions here: They should
therefore lay hold on that which they may hold, and which will never fail them.
They should be so wise as to take the right course to be heirs of the Kingdom
of Heaven; that when they must bid farewell to this life, and their estates
here, they may enter upon that glorious inheritance. And yet strange it is to
see how this one thing absolutely necessary is neglected by far the greater
part of them that are rich in this world. In those places where Silver and Gold
are found (they say) there grows neither grass nor plant, nor other thing
that is any thing worth. Many rich men's hearts are as barren of true Piety, as
those countries are of grass: Job speaking of such, says, Chap. 21.13. They
spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave. v. 14.
Therefore they say unto God depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways. v. 15. What is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what
profit should we have, if we pray unto him? It Is grown almost into a Proverb, a
little Religion goes far in a rich man or Gentleman. How do such persons
usually bless themselves in a few formal outward performances of religious
duties? And if they live not in the gross defilements and pollutions of the
world, but are of a fair and civil conversation as to men, how easily can they
dispense with themselves from engaging in the stricter and more serious parts
of Religion? Nay, those things wherein the life and power of Godliness
consists, are (too often) matter of their scorn; and slighted and neglected by
them as more ado than needs. And thus it often happens that they that have
fullness of estate, have leanness of soul, as it is, Psalm. 106.15. And they
that are well provided for in this life, take no due care to provide for
eternity, not to lay up for themselves a good foundation against the time to
come, 1 Timothy 6.19. They that should be examples of Piety and goodness to those
among whom they live, and by their power, wealth and greatness should
countenance and promote the power of Godliness, prove many times the greatest
discouragers of it. Solomon observed this as a sore evil under the Sun, Eccles.
5.13. Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. And not only for their
hurt, but the hurt of many others round about them. Many could never have been
such great sinners, and dishonourers of God, if they had not had so great
estates.

II. They ought to be exceeding thankful unto God. The more God has bestowed
upon them, the greater is their debt of thankfulness, and the greater is their
duty of obedience. If the Lord has lifted them up, if he has shined upon
their Tabernacle, and given them power to get wealth, as it is, Deuteronomy. 8.28. Let
them not sacrifice to their own net, to their own wit or wisdom, their own
labor or industry, but thankfully acknowledge his favor, whose blessing
makes rich, Prove. 10.23. Let them consider, Promotion comes neither from the
East, nor from the West, nor from the South, but from above, Psalm. 75.6, 7.
It Is reported of one of the Kings of France, that he was wont to say, that many
thousands (no doubt) were born on the same day he was, yet not one of them born
to be a King but himself; which he noted as a free favor of Divine Providence
to him, in that he was born to the Honor and Happiness of a Kingdom, when at
the same time, many others were born to mean conditions; some possibly to
beggary and want. It Is God alone that sets up one, and pulls down another. He
gives power, riches, and estate to one man, and sets another in a mean
condition. And therefore those whom he is pleased to bless with a rightful
possession of riches, should be exceeding thankful, and constantly remember who
has made them (in this) to differ from others. Gods impost on all his
blessings is thankfulness. If we neglect to pay this impost, the commodity is
forfeit. God can quickly blow upon and blast all our blessings, if we be
unthankful, as it is, Mal. 2.2. If ye will not hear and if ye will not lay it to
heart, to give Glory unto my Name, says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a
curse upon you, and will curse your blessings, etc. Yet notwithstanding, such
is the baseness of man's Nature, that the more God gives to some, the less
they own him; and if they attain to a fullness, it is ten to one, if they do not
plainly deny him, and ask who is the Lord?

III. They ought to be exceeding humble. Charge them (says the Apostle) that
they be not high minded. Of most men, the Proverb is true, Their good and their
blood rises together. Prosperity is to many a kind of intoxication, it makes
their heads giddy. It argues a great deal of Grace, to carry a low mind in a
high condition; to be lifted above others in the world, and not to be so in a
man's own spirit. And yet if the matter be well considered, what little reason
have rich men to be proud? Have they not all as stewards, and therefore should
be thinking how to make their accounts, rather than pride themselves in their
receipts? Does not God declare himself (very frequently in Scripture) the proud
man's professed enemy? Jam. 4.7. He resists the proud, Prove. 6.16. A proud
look is an abomination to the Lord, And Prove. 8.13. Pride and arrogance do I
hate. And V. 18. Pride goes before destruction. And he that has so great an
enemy as God engaged aginst him, is like to smart for it to purpose.

IV. They ought to be sober and temperate in the use of their estates, not
lavishing out their wealth excessively upon their backs and bellies. How many
with that rich man in Luke 12.19. are ready to say to themselves, Soul, thou
have much goods laid up for many years, eat, drink, and be merry? How many rich
people live like Epicures, letting out their hearts inordinately to sensual
delights; studying to please all their appetites; spending their estates in
riot and luxury, neither remembering the account they are to make to God of
their talents, nor considering that want and beggary (by the just judgment of
God) is usually heir apparent to riot and prodigality. Such persons should
think what became of that Gentleman in the 16th of Luke, Who was clothed with
Purple, and fared deliciously every day, etc. Certainly (as a late Author says
well) One plain Coat put upon a poor man's back, will better become a wealthy
man, than twenty rich ones put on his own.

V. They ought not to sqander away their precious time in Idleness, and sloth,
or immoderate following of recreations; but should employ themselves so, as
they may honor God, and be serviceable to the world. How many are there that
verify that vulgar definition, What is a Gentleman but his pleasure? What a
sad thing is it, that many such know not what to do with their time? Their
hours lie upon their hands, neither have they discretion to improve so precious
a Talent. Certainly they can never want business, who are to work out their
salvation, and to secure the state of their souls to all eternity. I confess
indeed sometimes we may have a just title to recreations, and moderate
refreshment, when we have tired our minds or bodies in some honest employment.
But then we must be careful that our recreations have these qualifications.

1. They must be lawful, not dishonorable to God, nor injurious to our
neighbor.

2. Expedient, not such as usually minister occasion to sin and scandal.

3. Seasonable, at fit and convenient times, not on the Lords day.

4. Moderate, not spending too much time upon them. What a sad account will
they give to God, who spend whole days and nights at Cards and Dice, or other
Sports; who possibly never bestow a quarter of so much time in secret upon
their Souls?

5 The end of recreation must be only to give us a moderate refreshment, and to
fit us for business, and not to be it self a business to us. Therefore here
two things are to be noted (as one well advises) 1. We are not to use sports
only to pass away, or drive away our time (as the worlds wicked phrase is)
which we should study to redeem, and well improve. Surely we have little reason
to study ways of driving away that which flies away so fast of it self, and
which it is so impossible to recall. 2. Covetousness must have nothing to do in
them. The end of our Recreation, should be merely to recreate our Spirits, and
not to win money. They that do so, run themselves into two great dangers: The
one of coveting and greedy desiring their brothers money; And how such (upon
sober consideration) can make their peace with the tenth Commandment, I see
not. The other of rage and anger, if they happen to lose. Both which are apt to
draw on other sins: Covetousness will tempt to cheating and cozening: Anger to
swearing and cursing, as common experience shows. And how careful should every
sincere Christian be to avoid the occasions and temptations leading to sin?
Those that mind the salvation of their souls, will consider these things; Those
that do not, I know will slight them. To conclude this Particular, Let all
those whom God has raised to wealth and riches in this world, remember what
were the sins of Sodom, that they may carefully avoid them. And those the
Prophet tells us, Ezekiel. 16.49. were pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
Idleness, neither did they strengthen the hands of the poor and needy.

VI. They should take heed of trusting in their riches, as the Apostle
advises, 1 Timothy 6.17. And the Psalmist to the same purpose. If riches
increase, set not thy heart upon them, Psalm. 62.10. It Is hard to possess riches
or estates, and not to confide in them, How many are there that make Gold their
confidence, as it is, Job 31.24? That think their mountain so strong it shall
never be moved, Psalm. 49.11? When alas! Who knows what a day may bring forth?
Prove. 27.1. Riches have wings and fly away, Prove. 23.5. And Experience of late
years, has taught us, that even Lands are movables. Therefore they that have
estates, should take heed of trusting in them. They should labor to get weaned
hearts from their present enjoyments, and prepare their minds to be willing to
part with any thing God calls for. They should live upon God, and account him
all in all, even in their fullest and highest enjoyments of the Creature. Trust
and dependence is the greatest homage we can yield to God. But of this I have
spoken more largely, page 207.

VII. They ought to be very charitable and open-handed to the necessities of
the poor, and liberal to good and pious uses. They that have riches, have a
multitude of tools to work with (as one of the Ancients spoke wisely) and may
do God much service with them. Such ought to endeavor not only to be good
themselves, but to do good, to be rich in good works. They should as the elect
of God, put on the bowels of compassion, Col. 3.12. Holy Job could comfortably
say, The blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon me, and I caused
the widows heart to sing for joy; I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to
the lame. I was a Father to the poor, etc. Job 29.13, 15, 16. This is the best
way for rich men to improve their estates, Prove. 19.17. He that gives to the
poor, lends to the Lord, and he will repay him again. Though the poor man
cannot pay thee, yet God becomes his surety, and will pay thee assuredly, yea,
fully and abundantly. No man shall be a loser by God. It Is good therefore to
lay up treasure where it may be sure to be forthcoming; to put it into Christ's
hands by relieving his poor members here on earth. But alas! though God has
made so many gracious promises to the charitable, yet strange it is to see how
hardly people are persuaded to the practice of this Duty. They can spend freely
on their pride or lusts, or pleasures, and sacrifice liberally to the Idol of
their Credit; but what niggardize and pinching is there when it comes to a work
of mercy? Let them meet in an Inn or Tavern, upon business, or in a way of
kindness, then what striving is there who shall pay, and who shall pay most?
What throwing down their Money on the Table? etc. But how backward, and dull,
and close-fisted are they, when it comes to a work of Charity? Certainly at the
day of judgment, this will be a better account, Item, so much spent to relieve
the poor and needy; so much laid out for the advancement of Religion, or good
Learning; so much expended for public good uses; Rather than this, Item, so
much spent on pride, so much spent on lust, so much in gaming, and in Luxury,
and riot, etc. And therefore it concerns those that have this worlds goods, to
consider how they use and employ them. And here it will not be amiss to
persuade rich men not to defer and put off their Charities till their death,
out of an Infidel fear, they should want themselves before they die. They
should (as one well advises) make their own hands their executors, and their
own eyes their overseers. It Is better to be like the sheep, to do good while
they live, than like the Swine, to be good for nothing till they die. I shall
conclude this Head, with some few Directions as to the manner how we should
exercise our Charity.

1. Do it in sincerity. Do it in obedience to Gods Command and with an eye to
his Glory. Take heed the praise of men be not thy Motive. He that gives (says
the Apostle, Romans 12.8.) let him do it with simplicity, and Mat. 6.1. Take heed
ye do not your Alms before men, to be seen of them; otherwise ye have no
reward of your Father which is in Heaven.

2. Cheerfully, God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. Deuteronomy. 15.10. Thine
heart shall not be grieved when thou give to thy poor Brother, etc.

3. Liberally; according to the proportion of thy estate, 2 Cor. 9.6. He that
sowes sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he that sows bountifully, shall
reap bountifully. We should think him a very imprudent Husbandman, that to save
a little seed at present, would sow so thin, as to spoil his crop. And the same
folly 'twill be in us, if by the sparingness and niggardize of our Alms, we
make our selves a lank Harvest hereafter, and lose the reward God has provided
for the liberal Almes-giver. Now liberality is to be measured, not so much by
what is given, as by the ability of the giver. It Is not how much, but out of
how much, that God looks at. In 1 Cor. 16.2. The Apostle advises, Upon the
first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has
prospered him. Surely it were very expedient to lay by something in bank for
good uses, either weekly, monthly, quarterly, or yearly (as may best suit with
the variety of men's conditions) that so they may not be unprovided of somewhat
to give, when occasion offers it self; and then their Charity would flow more
steely, without any regret, or grudging of heart, which those that leave all to
occasional Charity are many times in danger of.

4. Humbly and thankfully. Let thankfulness to God attend thy Charity to men.
Bless God thou art not the needy person thy self. Bless him for giving thee
both an ability and a heart to distribute and communicate. Though God has
lifted thee up in this world, above those thou relievest, yet let not thy heart
be lifted up, but be low in thine own eyes. I shall conclude this, with that
Divine and affectionate thanksgiving of holy David, in 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Thine O
Lord is the greatness, and the power -- V. 12. Both riches and honor come of
thee. V. 13. Now therefore our God, we thank thee and praise thy Glorious Name.
V. 14. But who am I, and what is my poeple, that we should be able to offer so
willingly after this sort, for all things come of thee, and of thine own have
we given thee.

Deuteronomy. 8.12. When thou have eaten and art full, and have built goodly houses,
and dwelt therein, V. 13. And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy
silver and thy Gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is multiplied. V. 14.
Beware lest thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God -- V.
17. And thou say in thy heart, my power and the might of my hand has gotten me
this wealth. V. 18. But thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that
gives thee power to get wealth. 1 John 3.17. But whosoever has this worlds good,
and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from
him, how dwells the love of God in him? Prove. 29.7. The righteous considers
the cause of the poor, but the wicked regards not to know it. Eccles. 11.1.
Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it after many days. V. 2.
Give a portion to seven, and also to eight: for thou know not what evil
shall be upon the earth. Isa 58.6. Is not this the fast that I have chosex? --
V. 7. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor
that are cast out, to thy house? when thou see the naked, that thou cover
him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? V. 10. And if thou
draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the aflicted soul; then shall thy
Light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness as the noon day. Acts 10.4. -- And he
said unto him, Cornelius, thy Prayers, and thine Alms are come up for a
memorial before God. Heb. 13.16. But to do good, and to communicate, forget
not, for with such Sacrifices God is well-pleased. Prove. 22.9. He that has a
bountiful eye, shall be blessed, forbe gives of his bread to the poor. Prove.
28.27. He that gives unto the poor shall not lack, but he that hides his eyes
shall have many a curse. Prove. 11.24. There is that scatters, and yet
increases; and there is that withholdeth more thanis meet, but it tends to
poverty. Prove. 21.13. Whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also
shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. I come now to speak of the Duties
belonging to the poor.

Poverty has its dangers, evils and temptations, as well as riches and
abundance. And there are Duties belonging to those that are poor, as well as to
the rich; and they are these that follow.

I. They ought to take heed of murmuring or repining against God; and to be
well-pleased and contented with the condition and station wherein he has
placed them. We are Gods Creatures, and he has a right to do with us what he
will. 1 Samuel 2.7. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich; he brings low, and
lifts up. And who art thou O man, that reply against God? Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the
potter power ever the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel to honor, and
another to dishonor? etc. As the Apostle reasons, Romans 9.20, 21. Let not the
poor therefore murmr against Gods dealing with them, but labor to be well
satisfied with their Lot. Let them not compare their condition with those they
count more prosperous and happy than themselves, but rather with them they see
more miserable: And then they will have cause to bless God for their own
portion. Let them pray earnestly to the Lord, for that great blessing of a
contented mind, without which, the wealthiest condition is very uneasy and
irksom; and with which the poorest is pleasing and delightful. I have learned
(says Paul, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.) in whatever state I am, therewith to be
content. I know how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where and in
all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound
and to suffer need, I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.

II. They ought to be very humble. With their low condition, they should carry
a lowly mind. They should give due respect to those, whom God has set above
them in the world, and from whom they receive benefit. There are some poor
people that have as ugly a pride and insolency of Spirit in them, as is to be
found any where among men. There is a leathern pride, and a russet insolency,
it is not always couched under gorgeous apparel: But surely those whom God has
made low in this world, should be lowly in their own eyes. They should labor
to be poor in Spirit, deeply sensible of their spiritual wants, and then there
is a great blessedness belongs unto them, Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in
Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. The rich must be thus poor, if
they intend to come to Heaven.

III. They should be diligent and painful in their Callings. The Apostles
Charge is, 2 These. 3.10. That they that will not work, should not eat.
Idleness and laziness is the sin of many poor people. If they would work,
they might eat their own bread, and not be chargeable to any. A poor man to
whom God gives health and industry to get his living, ^is possessed of a great
treasure, and a stock yielding him daily rent. The labor that gets him bread,
gets him also an appetite to eat it, and sleep to refresh him when he is weary,
and health to continue his labor, Eccles. 5.12. The sleep of a laboring man
is sweet, whether he eat little or much, but the abundance of the rich will not
suffer him to sleep. His many Children give him less care, then few Children
to the rich, and less trouble to provide for them. For in rich men's houses, the
Charge grows always as the Children grow. In poor families that live by
labor, the Charge grows less as the Children grow up. The Sons serve the
Father in his work, the Daughters spin by their Mother. Their portion is their
Trade and Labor, by which (with Gods blessing) they live comfortably.

IV. They should be frugal, not presently, as soon as ever they have got a
little money, going to the Alehouse, and drinking it away (as too many do) but
should lay it up to supply their necessities. And they should be careful and
provident to improve the opportunities that God puts into their hands. As in
such times when work is plenty and provisions cheap, they should then lay up
something against a time of need, and not slacken their industry, and grow
slothful; nor be proud and scornful, lavishing out all they get, on their backs
and bellies; and so when work is scarce, provisions dear, and sickness comes,
they suffer want, through their own improvidence, and become burdensome to
others.

V. Above all things they ought to be exceeding careful of the welfare of their
souls, and very diligent to work out their salvation. And now, O all ye that
are poor in this world, Come, and let us reason together. Your outward
condition in this life, ('it is confessed) is mean and poor, and possibly you
cannot expect it will be much mended; yet lift up your hearts, and comfort your
selves with this consideration, you are as capable of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and the Glory of the world to come, as any others; if you (through your own
folly and negligence) be not wanting to your selves. Here (possibly) with all
your labor, you cannot raise your selves to any considerable estates. He would
be a welcome man unto you, that could direct you how in an honest and just way,
by using due care and industry, you might attain a hundred pounds a year, How
diligently would you listen to his advice, and how earnestly and punctually
observe his Directions? Now therefore come on, and consider seriously, whether
it will not be an extreme folly and madness in you (having so golden an
opportunity in your hands of attaining (not sosmal a matter as a hundred pounds
a year) but a Kingdom, a glorious and never-fading Kingdom) to continue in your
ignorance, stubbornness, ungodliness, slighting the Directions that are given
you for the attaining thereof, and wilfully neglecting and disregarding the
means of Grace. And so, after you have lived a poor life here, to be
everlastingly miserable hereafter: From a poor Cottage, to go down to a dungeon
of darkness, to a lake of fire and brimstone, there to be tormented with the
Devil and his Angels for ever. You think (may be) because you are poor, and not
book learned, that God will require little of you: But do not flatter and
delude your selves; God will require of you according to the means of Grace he
affords you. Though you are ignorant, would not your Minister instruct you? Or
have you no neighbors that you may ask, and learn the way of Salvation from?
Do you think you are exempted from seeking after knowledge? from Family duties,
from a conscionable and constant attendance on the public Ordinances? Do ye
think it will be a sufficient excuse, when you come to stand upon your Trial at
Gods Tribunal, to plead, you wanted clothes, and therefore could not come to
the public Ordinances; when it is well known you can dress your selves in a
tollerably decent manner (at any time) to go to a dinner? There is an absolute
necessity you must be instructed, and get knowledge in the things that concern
your Salvation, or you will die in your sins. And believe it, you had better
die in a ditch, than die in your sins. Were you sufficiently sensible of the
great and weighty concernments of your souls, you would wrestle against all
difficulties, and seek after knowledge with all seriousness. And if you would
set your selves in good earnest to it, you might quickly attain much more than
you can imagine; you might soon grow rich in knowledge and Grace: Though you
are poor here, you might be heirs of Heaven, and when you die, with Lazarus, be
received into Abraham's bosom. Oh therefore bestir your selves! You labor hard
to get a little money here; Oh take some pains to get a Kingdom that is offered
to you on very fair terms. Labor to be sensible of your spiritual poverty, of
the vileness of your natural condition, and the manifold sins of your life;
Seek for help from Christ, (where help only is to he had) Give up your souls
to him, and beg of him pardon and Grace: Receive him for your Lord, as well as
your Savior; beg his Spirit to sanctify you, and be willing to live in
obedience to his Laws and Precepts. And if you be once thus united unto him,
being rich in Faith and the fruits thereof, you are heirs of the Kingdom, even
the Kingdom of Heaven, and shall shortly enter into your inheritance gloriously
and triumphantly: Oh therefore though you are poor in this world, yet labor to
be spiritually rich: Mind not only the present, but secure your future state.
And not only look to your selves, but to your children also: Oh let not them be
bred up in ignorance and prophannesse. One main reason of the great blindness
and irreligion that is among poor people, is, the cannot read; neither do many
of them take any care their children should learn. They had rather they should
earn a penny, than spend two or three hours in a day to get that skill. If
there were a book extant, and ordinarily to be had as the Bible is, which men
did generally believe to contain a plain and easy way for all men to become
rich, and to live in health, and pleasure, and this worlds happiness, Can it be
imagined that the poorest people would not learn to read it? or would neglect
to study it? Whatever pains it cost, or difficulties it put them to, be sure
they would not fail herein. How is it then, that so many that have the name of
Christians, can be content that both themselves and their children should be
unable to read the Scriptures, and so commonly remain as ignorant of the things
of God, as if they had been born among the Indians.

VI. Those that are poor should be especially careful to avoid these four
temptations which they are in great danger of.

1. Let them take heed of distrusting God when they are in straits. Let them
often call to mind and meditate on our Saviors words in Mat. 6 from v. 25. to
the end. Let them consider, God provides for Creatures, that cannot provide for
themselves. Beasts sleep quietly, not knowing nor thinking where they shall get
meat the next day. If you say, it is because they have no reason nor foresight;
consider, whether ever God gave us reason to make no other use of it, than for
our vexation and dishonouring himself. It Is a high injury and dishonor to God,
to distrust his care and providence over us, seeing he takes care of bruit
Creatures.

2. Let them take heed of stealing, or putting their hands to any indirect
courses. Theft is the poor man's danger, as the wise man intimates, Prove. 30.8,
9. Give me neither poverty not riches, feed me with food convenient for me,
least I be full and deny thee, and say who is the Lord? and lest I be poor and
steal, and take the Name of my God in vain. Let them not think to excuse
themselves by saying they are poor, and he from whom they steal is rich: For
who made them dividers of other men's goods? Let them not think to pretend, it is
a small thing they steal; the more abject sinners they, who will defile their
Consciences for a trifle. Though the world should be hard, and men should
afford them no help, let them not make themselves incapable of Gods help. Let
them remember, it is better to suffer than to sin.

3. Seeing the poorer sort usually live together, and generally are apt to be
envious, malicious, and extremely quarrelsom, slandering and reviling one
another; and (upon small provocations) cursing, and using dreadful imprecations
against each other, and sometimes also against those that do not relieve them,
or not so liberally as they desire; let all these wickednesses be carefully
avoided and abandoned by them, if ever they intend to see Gods face with
comfort.

4. And lastly, seeing poor people for the most part depend on rich men that
employ them, and thereupon are apt to flatter them and humor them, and bring
tales to them, and comply with them, even in sinful courses, and to be molded
after their example, and usually hate and oppose Godliness it self, if they see
it disrelished by them. Therefore it should be the care of all poor people to
decline these courses, and by fidelity, industry, and integrity to commend
themselves to all those that employ them; and walking humbly, and
conscientiously before the Lord in their place and calling, they need not doubt
of his Gracious Providence over them, of his favor goodwill to them.

Isa. 45.9. Woe unto him that striveth with his maker: Let the potsherd strive
with the potsherds of the earth; shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it,
what make thou? Prove. 28.6. Better is the poor that walks in his
uprightness* than he that is perverse in his ways, though he be rich. Psalm.
37.25. I have been young and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed (forsaken, though) begging bread. Phil. 4.6. Be careful
for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving,
let your requests be made known unto God. Jam. 2.5. Hearken my beloved
Brethren, Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith, and heirs
of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him. Prove. 17.5. Whosoever
mocketh the poor, reproacheth his Maker, and he that is glad at calamities,
shall not be unpunished. Psalm. 10.14. The poor commits himself unto thee,
thou art the helper of the Fatherless. Matthew. 6.25. Therefore I say unto you,
take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor
yet for your body, what ye shall put on; is not the life more than meat, and
the body than raiment? V. 26. Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not,
neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your Heavenly Father feeds
them, Are ye not much better than they? V. 27. Which of you by taking thought,
can add one Cubit unto his stature? V. 28. And why take ye thought for raiment?
consider the Lilies of the field how they grow, they toil not neither do they
spin. V. 29. And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his Glory, was
not arrayed like one of these. V. 30. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of
the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not
much more cloth you, Oh ye of little Faith? V 31. Therefore take no thought
saying, What shall we eat? Or what shall we drink? Or wherewithal shall we be
clothed? V. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness
and all these things shall be added unto you. V. 34. Take therefore no thought
for the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self,
sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. See more Scriptures to this
purpose, page 215.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Duties of the Young and Old.
First, Of those that concern the younger sort.

ALL young persons should consider that it is their duty, and high concernment,
to endeavor to be really good, and truly religious betimes. In order hereunto,
I shall, 1. Lay down some Reasons and Arguments to press them to it. 2. Answer
such Objections, and labor to remove such prejudices, as are conceived against
it. 3. Give some Directions to them, who are willing to be advised herein.


There are many weighty Reasons and Arguments to persuade them to it.

I. God now invites them to it, Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth, etc. And let them consider, 1. God has no need of them,
but they have need of him, and cannot possibly be happy without him. 2. He is
willing to be reconciled to them, if they will turn to him, though for their
sins he might justly destroy them. 3. He offers them better terms and
conditions (if they will serve him) then they can possibly have any where else,
either in the service of sin or Satan, Romans 6.21. What fruit had ye then in
those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death.
The two genuine and natural fruits of sin are shame and death. Is it not then
an intolerable indignity and affront put upon the great God of Heaven and
Earth for any to refuse to serve him, who offers them so fair terms, and to
continue in the Devils slavery, who (they know) intends the ruin both of their
souls and bodies?

II. Delays are exceeding dangerous.

1. Life is uncertain, Prove. 27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou
know not what a day may bring forth. Young men may reckon upon years, when
possibly they have not months to live. Consider how quick God is with some,
cutting them off in their sins. Time is precious, Redeem it; for on this moment
depends Eternity.

2. Grace is uncertain. It Is not in man's power to have Grace when he will. The
Spirit of God will not always strive with the children of men. To day, and
while it is called to day, hear his voice, Psalm. 95.7. And harden not your
hearts. Gather the Manna while it falls; come in while the door of Grace stands
open: Take heed of being like Esau, coming too late for a blessing.

3. The longer thou delayest, the more unfit, unable and indisposed thou will
be to return. Now thy parts are fresh, and thy affections vigorous. If thou will enter thy self into the School of Christ now, what a great deal of
knowledge and Grace and spiritual experience may thou attain unto? What a
good Scholar, a good proficient may thou be?

But if thou delayest, then consider in what a sad condition thou art. 1. Sin
will be every day more and more hardening thy heart, and stupifying thy
Conscience, and so will make thy return, the more difficult. Now (may be,) thou
have some tenderness of Conscience: Thou will quickly lose it; if thou refusest
to hearken to Gods call. 2. The world, and the cares of this life will more and
more engage and entangle thy Affections. If thou give not thy self to God
while young, before thou art much engaged in the cares and businesses of this
life, it is very hazardous, whether the world will not carry away thy heart, and
whether thou may not lose thy soul in an eager pursuit of these outward
things. 3. The Devil will get stronger possession. Every soul is either Gods
Temple, or the Devils house. 'Twill be hard to cast Satan out, where he has
had many years possession. The longer any go on in sin, the greater power God
permits the Devil to have over them. 4. The longer thou delayest, the more thou
provokest God to give thee up to thy own hearts lusts, and to leave thee to thy
self. 'Twas a sad word, Isa. 6.10. Go and make the heart of this people fat,
and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their heart, and convert and be healed. God may justly
refuse to hearken to thee, when thou call for mercy, who would not before
hearken to the call of his Grace. The Spirit of God after many repulses may go
away aggrieved. God may smite thee with stupidity and senslessenesse (that
great Spiritual judgment) And then what will become of thee? And besides, do
thou think that any man whose wise should be false to him, and run away from
him* and follow after strangers in her younger time, would receive her at last
in her old age? Why will thou think then to deal so with God? Upon the whole
matter then, if thou art not converted, and do really turn to God when young,
it is a hundred to one, whether ever thou be converted or no. It Is rarely seen
that men habituated and long accustomed to sin, do ever change their black
skins, as the Reverend Mr. Burgess well observes.

III. Consider, whether there be any part of a man's life wherein he may
reasonably think he has a liberty to serve the Devil? If not, why will thou not
speedily turn to God? Why should not thy youth be consecrated unto him? As long
as thou remainest unconverted, and in the state of Nature, thou art doing the
Devil service; And who would serve such a Master?

IV. Consider, There are many great advantages that will come unto thee by
turning to God betimes.

1. Multitude of sins and sorrows will be hereby prevented. Those that get
bruises and strains when young, feel them when they grow old. O what anguish,
and pain of Conscience have they that have lived long in sin (and committed
great ones) if they be brought home to God at last! O what a cutting
consideration must it needs be to old people to cast their eyes back upon a
life spent in sin and dishonouring God; and hurting the souls of others by
their ill example! O what a deal of sorrow would Manasses and Mary Magdalen
have escaped, if they had been converted in their younger years? So if Paul had
been betimes brought home to God, he had not had all that trouble and grief of
Spirit for persecuting the Church.

2. Thou may hereby come to some eminency of knowledge, and Grace, and
Spiritual experience. A young man that is a good husband betimes upon his
trade, we say, is like to grow rich; whereas one that has been prodigal in his
younger time, and a spend-thrist, if he should in his elder years begin to be
wise, yet having lost so much time, we are apt to think, he will never do any
great matter at it. So they that give up their hearts to God betimes, and
consecrate their younger years to him, O how rich in knowledge and Grace may
they grow?

3. Thy joys and comforts will be the greater. Thou art a hinderer of thy
peace and comfort all the while thou art going on in the way of sin. Thou art
feeding on Onions, when thou might have Manna, Thou art feeding on husks with
the Prodigal, when thou might have the fatted calf. What are all the noisome
pleasures of sin to the peace of a good Conscience, the enjoyment of God, the
delights and joys of the Holy Ghost?

4. The more service thou will do for God Suppose a man be called at the
twelfth hour, alas! it is little he can do for God before night. An old man that
was late converted, ordered this to be written upon his Tombstone, Here lies
an old man of seven years old: Suppose a man (after many years spent in sin)
should at last be converted, he had need of Methuselah's age to bewail his
former miscarriages, and to do service for God, whom he has so dishonored. Oh
think what an honor it is to live to glorify God, and to do him service! And
can thou begin too soon to honor him, who deserves so infinitely well of
thee?

5. It will make not only thy life, but thy death also comfortable. When death
comes, thou will have this good evidence of thy sincerity, that thou did turn
to God betimes, in thy youth, and in the flower and prime of thy days. Thou will not then be afraid to look God in the face, nor dread him as an enemy, but
think delightfully of him as a long experienced friend, and be willing to
surrender thy soul unto him. It Is reported of Adrian, that when he came to die,
he cried out, O my soul, whither art thou going? thou art going where thou
shall never be jovial nor merry more. O my soul, whither art thou going?
Therefore do those things now, which (when thou come to die) thou would
wish thou had done; and leave those things undone, which thou supposest will
not yield thee comfort in that hour.

6. And lastly, The sooner thou engagest thy heart to God, and the more service
thou do him in this life, the greater will be thy reward in Heaven, Gal. 6.7,
8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; whatsoever a man sows that shall he
reap. He that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

I come now to the second thing; to answer the Objections that young persons
may make, why they should not turn to God so soon.

Obj. 1. We shall hereby lose our chief time of pleasure.

Sol. You shall exchange dirt for Gold, and the draff of swine for the food of
Angels, your sinful pleasures for the delights of the Holy Ghost, and the
joys of a good Conscience. Religion will abridge you of nothing but sin, which
is rank poison to your souls. It will allow you recreations that are lawful,
expedient, seasonable and moderate, and which may fit you more to glorify God
in your general or particular Calling, See the Rules set down in the foregoing
Chap. under the fifth Direction to the Rich. Page 490

Obj. 2. We do but as most young people do, and as others have done before us.

Sol. If you sin with others, you must expect to suffer with others. They that
are like Simeon and Levi brethren in iniquity, must be brethren also in misery.
The old world sinned together, and were drowned together. You must not live by
examples, but by precepts. Look not at what others do, but at what God
commands, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.

Obj. 3. There needs not so much ado to get to Heaven.

Sol. Is it more ado than Gods Word requires? read and judge, Luke 13.24.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many, I say unto you will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able, Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, etc. Ephesians. 5.15. See that ye walk circumspectly, not as
fools but as wise, redeeming the time, etc. Phil. 2.12. Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling. 1 Pet. 4.18. If the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? If the righteous hardly,
(i. e. with much striving, diligence and watchfulness) attain salvation; what
will become of the negligent secure sinner? Can any think of ever coming to
Heaven, which is a state of holiness and purity, whose hearts disrellish
Holiness, and cannot away with it, as too much strictness and more ado than
needs?

Obj 4. We are young enough: We intend to turn to God hereafter, but not yet.

Sol. Concerning the danger of delays see before page 510 In all likelihood
there are many in Hell, that thought of turning hereafter.

Obj. 5. We shall be flouted and jeered if we begin to be religious and precise
so soon.

Sol. What are reproaches to the great things others have suffered for Christ?
What is the enduring a jeer to the enduring a burning for the sake of Christ? 1
Pet. 4.14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the
Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you. 2 Cor. 6.8. By honor and
dishonor, by evil report and good report; as decievers and yet true. Mat.
5.11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall
say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, V. 12. Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven.

Obj. 6. We shall shift as well as others.

Sol. So you may, and yet make but a bad shift neither, It Is small comfort to
have companions in Hell. Dives did not think it would ease his torments to have
his Brethren come to him.

Obj. 7. We see many that once seemed forward in Religion, do fall off, some to
open profaneness, and some into error and strange opinions.

Sol. I confess it is a very sad thing to see any that seemed Lights in the
Firmament, to prove Meteors, and falling stars. But though some fall, yet
(through Grace) many stand, and continue faithful to the end. There was a Judas
among our Saviors own Disciples, and yet it follows not from thence, that any
of the rest were such. The falls of some professors should teach us not to be
high-minded, but continually jealous over our own hearts. We should be
exceeding humble, and cease from trusting in our selves; and put all our trust
in God, to be kept by his power through Faith unto Salvation, The Devil aims
all he can to foil professors. If he can but foil one of them, he blurs their
profession, makes others shie of it, and so advances his own Kingdom mightily.
Therefore the fall of some should not discourage us, but make us more humble
and watchful, and cause us often to examine our hearts whether Gods Glory be
our aim and end, and whether we do in humility and integrity walk before him.

Obj. 8. God is merciful. We see Mercy was afforded to the thief on the Cross,
a little before his death.

Sol. 1. It Is an example without a promise. Here is an example of a late
repentance, but where have we a promise that God will give repentance at last
to such as go on in a long course of sin? It Is not examples but the promises of
God that is a foundation for Faith to build upon.

2. This was an extraordinary time. What if our Savior on this extraordinary
occasion, was pleased by this rare Miracle of Mercy to honor his Cross, will
this afford any ground of hope that he will do so ordinarily and especially to
wilful sinners?

3. We do not find that this thief had ever known Christ before, or had ever
neglected or refused any offers of Grace made unto him. Thou have little reason
to plead this, who sit daily under the calls and entreaties of the Gospel;
This case will minister little comfort to thee, if thou go on in thy sins.

I come now in the third place, to give some Directions to such as are willing
to be advised in this matter of so much concernment to them.

I Let them take heed of those things that usually undo young people. Such are.

1. Carelessness, want of consideration, and laying to heart the things that
most concern them; going on in a dissolute negligence, without ever asking
themselves what their state and condition to God ward is?

2 An eager following youthful lusts and sensual pleasures. Therefore the
Apostle exhorts, 2 Timothy 2.22. To flee youthful lusts, and 1 Pet. 2.11. As
pilgrims and strangers to abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the
soul. Let them consider that the feet of those lusts that have carried away and
buried millions of other young persons in perdition, stand ready to carry them
the same way, if preventing Grace come not in to deliver them.

3. Pride of wit, parts, strength, beauty, etc.

4. A headiness and wilful obstinacy against good counsel. Carnal reason,
flesh and blood are usually young men's counselors, and very bad Ones.

5. Slighting religion, and whatever is serious, as too strict for them.

6. Putting the day of death far from them, and flattering themselves with
hopes of long life.

7. Ill company, that great snare of the Devil.

8. Comparing themselves with such as are worse than themselves, thinking that
an excuse for them that others are worse.

II. Let them be especially careful to be well grounded in the Principles of
Christian Religion. If there be a good foundation of saving knowledge laid in
their minds betimes (so that they thoroughly understand how the Religion they
profess, is grounded on the Scriptures) they will not be like children, easily
tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, as too many now a days are. And
for this purpose I refer them to the first Part of this Treatise containing the
Principles of right Knowledges.

III. Let them labor to understand betimes, wherein the chief happiness of
man consists, namely, in the pardon of his sins, a gracious frame of heart, and
communion with God. Every one naturally desires to be happy; but people
commonly mistake the way to it: Therefore it highly concerns all young persons
to be early acquainted and deeply possessed how they may steer a right course
both to be happy here, and hereafter.

IV. Let them acquaint themselves well with the Scriptures; be much in secret
prayer, and self-reflexion, keep close to the public Ordinances, and listen to
the awakenings of Gods Spirit, they shall meet with in them.

V. Let them take heed of sinning against Conscience. When Conscience says, do
it not, let them listen to that voice; let them labor to keep their
Consciences tender.

VI. Let them decline such occasions and temptations, as they foresee are like
to ensnare them; and especially ill company, which has ruined Thousands.

VII. Let them acquaint themselves with serious, sober minded, and experienced
Christians. From such they may reap exceeding great benefit.

VIII. And Lastly, Let them take heed of Spiritual pride, which has thrown
down many young professors from a great hopefulnesse. Let them remember, the
Devil will attempt (if it be possible) to foil them, by drawing them either
into some erroneous Doctrines, or some scandalous practices. Let them therefore
be sure to set the Glory of God before their eyes, and endeavor to walk humbly
with God, suspecting themselves, and leaning on his goodness to preserve them
from falling.

Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them. Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and those that seek me
early shall find me. Prove. 22.6. Train up a child in the way which he should
go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it. Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal
shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy
Word. Tit. 2 6. Young men likewise exhort to be soberminded. 2 Timothy 2.22. Flee
also youthful lusts, but follow righteousness; faith, charity, peace, with them
that call on the Lord out of a pure heart. 1 Kings 18.12. -- But I (Obadiah)
thy servant fear the Lord from my youth. 2 Chronicles. 34.3. For (Josiah) in the
eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, began to seek after the God
of David his Father, etc. 2 Timothy 3.15. And that from a child thou have known
the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation. 2 John v.
4. I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children walking in the Truth, as we
have received a Commandment from the Father. Psalm. 32.9. Be ye not as the
Horse, or as the Mule, which have no understanding, whose mouth must be held in
with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee. Jer. 22.21. I spoke unto
thee in thy prosperity, but thou said I will not hear; this has been thy
manner from thy youth, that thou obeyedst not my voice. Prove. 1.24. Because I
called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded. V.
25. But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof. V.
26. I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. Lev.
19.32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old
man, and fear thy God, I am the Lord. Isa. 3.5. And the people shall be
oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his Neighbor, the child
shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the
honorable. So much of the Duties belonging to Young persons.

I come now to speak to the Ancient.

The main and principal care of those that are in years, should be, to make all
strait and even between God and their own souls; to secure their state in
Grace, and their Title to Glory. For their Sun is setting, their race is almost
run; Though the younger may die, yet the old must die, and after death comes
judgment.

Let all ancient persons therefore take these following Particulars into their
serious consideration.

I. The case of all old people that are yet in an unconverted state, is very
sad and dangerous. For, 1. This world, and the contentments thereof are (in a
manner) done with them. The evil days are come upon them, wherein (they must
needs say) they have no pleasure in them. 2. Usually they labor under many
weaknesses and bodily infirmities: If they have not the comfort of a good
Conscience to support them, and to be the staff of their age, how exceeding
miserable must they needs be? 3. If they have lived long under the means of
Grace, and continued unconverted till old age, it is a hundred to one whether
they ever be converted or no. It Is rare to hear of any that have gone on in a
long course of carelesseness and security, and been habituated and hardened in
sin, that in their old age have turned to God. See the Reasons before
mentioned, p. 510. 4. If they die in their sins, they will receive a greater
condemnation. The furnace will be hotter for them than for young sinners. They
have contracted a greater debt. The heap of their sins is greater: Certainly it
will be more tolerable in the day of judgment for Er and Onan who were cut off
betimes in their sins, than for sinners that are threescore or fourscore years
old. If the Judge at the Assizes do meet with an old thief, or an old cut
purse, that have had many warnings, and still go on in their wickedness, they
seldom escape. Let all old impenitent sinners think of this. How may God say of
such, Here Is an old covetous, worldly-minded man, an old swearer, or drunkard,
an old hater of Godliness, and slighter of Religion, an old ignorant,
careless wretch, a neglecter of Family Duties, one that should have instructed
his children and servants, and bred them up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord, but in stead thereof, has given them an ill example, and done me a
great deal of dishonor, etc. I have forborne him forty, fifty, sixty years: He
has often quenched the good motions of my Spirit, my Ambassadors could never
prevail with him to leave his sins. Now therefore O ye evil Angels, this day,
this week, this year require his soul of him, and bring him to judgment. O how
exceeding sad is the case of an old unconverted man or woman!

II. Nothing is more to be admired at than that ancient people should go on in
their sins, not minding speedily and seriously to turn to God. For, 1. The
lease of their lives is almost expired, And is it not a strange madness, they
should make no provision for another world? 2. They have many warnings they
must go hence, dim eyes, feeble legs, trembling joints, Eccles. 12.3. The Sun
and the Light is darkened, the keepers of the house tremble, the strong men bow
themselves, the grinders cease, etc. Their bodily weaknesses warn them they
must not ftay long here. 3. They have but a little time to watch, and the
Bridegroom will come, and if they get not Oil into their lamps now, they will
be for ever shut out.

III. Though their condition be very sad and dangerous, yet it is not
desperate, if they will yet bestir themselves. For let them consider these four
things.

1. God has declared a greater delight in the conversion of sinners, whether
young or old, than in their destruction and damnation, Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto
them, as I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live, turn ye, turn ye from
your evil ways, for why will ye die, O House of Israel?

2. The promises of God do stand in force, and will be made good to repenting
returning sinners whether young or old. True Repentance is never too late, but
late repentance is seldom true. All sorts of sins are pardonable to real
penitents and true believers.

3. There is efficacy and virtue enough in Christ's blood to cleanse not only
young, but old sinners from all their sins.

4. Christ is willing to accept old sinners, if they will repent and forsake
their sins, and really turn to him, and close with him on his own terms, being
willing to take him not only for their Savior, but for their Lord and King,
and to yield up themselves in sincere obedience to him, and to be guided and
governed by his Grace and holy Spirit. Christ did not come to save men, by
bringing them to Heaven in their ungodliness, or to Glory in their sins, but
to destroy their sins that would keep them out of Glory.

IV. Though ancient people, that have gone on in a long course of ignorance,
carelessness, neglect of God, and the concernments of their souls, should be
convinced they are at present in a bad condition, in an unconverted state, yet
it does not thence follow, they must needs so continue, and utterly and finally
despair; but they should awaken themselves, delay no longer, and speedily set
themselves to get out of this miserable condition, while there is a possibility
of escaping the danger of it. It Is no folly to be wise for their souls, to be
wise for Eternity at last. Therefore let them remember, now if ever.

V. They should be exceeding careful they do not deceive themselves with ill
grounded hopes of Heaven, peesuming it will go well with them in the other
world, when they have no real foundation for such a confidence. A false
ungrounded hope is but a dream of a waking man. If a condemned Malefactor
should frame a pardon for himself in the prison, and think to be saved by that,
would it not prove a miserable cheat put upon himself? Does it not concern
every one therefore to consider, whether the hope of pardon and forgiveness
they pretend unto, be of Gods granting, or their own framing? whether they have
any warrant, or promise from Gods Word that they shall be saved: Or whether
they do only strongly presume it, without any sufficient ground. Oh what loose
and sandy foundations do many build their hopes of Heaven upon? such as these,

1. Their outward profession of Christianity, and a formal performance of
religious duties. But as the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a Jew,
who is one outwardly (who has only the circumcision of the flesh) but he is a
Jew, who is one inwardly, whose heart is circumcised. So he is a true Christian
upon whose heart the saving work of conversion has passed; who has felt the
power of Grace upon his soul, really turning it unto God. The fair and broad
leaves of an outward profession will nothing avail, if the fruits of real
holiness and sanctification be wanting. Gal. 6.15. For in Christ Jesus, neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature.

2. Their moral and civil deportment, their fair and honest conversation in the
world, and freedom from gross sins. Now though outward righteousness be not
only exceeding commendable, but also necessary to Salvation, yet it is a
dangerous thing to rest upon; and by that only, we cannot conclude any man to
be in a good state and condition to God ward. For, 1. You shall find it many
times accompanied with ignorance, or very little savoury knowledge of God, and
spiritual things. 2. Such persons usually see no necessity of regeneration,
and the new birth; but content themselves with a mere moral change and freedom
from gross sins, and the practice of some moral virtues; no new nature being
wrought in them, but the old nature only varnished over with civil education.
3. There you shall not find for the most part any great prizing of Christ, or
laboring to get an interest in him; and yet if the soul be not really united
to him, no justification sanctification, or salvation can be expected. 4. The
chief care is usually about an outward fairness, and unblameableness of
conversation; little care about mortification of inward lusts, and right
tempering the affections. True Grace presses upon us heart-duties, as well as
external obedience, and prohibits inward and heart-sins, as well as outward
filthiness, 2 Cor. 5.18. If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature; old
things are passed away, behold all things are become new. 5. The Glory of God
is not the chief aim and end, as it should be in whatever we do, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. 6.
There is usually a greater care to perform the Duties of the second Table, then
of the first. You shall have some men very just in their dealings, good
neighbors, and of a commendable conversation as to the world, who yet (may be)
are very negligent and careless of Gods Worship, of Family duties, of the
Lords day, etc. Nay, many times are professed haters and enemies to the
practical power of Godliness: So that we see more is required than mere
civility, and an outward, moral uprightness to ground a hope of salvation upon.
Paul before his conversion, was concerning the righteousness of the Law
blameless, Phil. 3.6. Yet when God had savingly enlightened his soul, what a
doom does he pass upon himself? and calls his self righteousness dung, which he
accounted Gold before.

3. Some reformation that is wrought in them. They have left some sins they
were formerly given to. But it is not only the forbearing of some sins, but an
inward loathing, hating, abhorring, and forsaking all known sins, that is a
good evidence of a gracious state. There must be a care to mortify inward
lusts, and the corruptions of the heart, as well as to abstain from outward
acts of sin. To mortify our sins, is a Sacrifice well-pleasing to God: In a
Sacrifice, these two things were required. 1. That it should be slain, not die
of it self: If thy lusts and sins rather leave thee, than thou them; or abate
and die merely through age, or the decay of natural vigor, this change is
wrought in thee, not by Grace, but by age. 2. A Sacrifice was to be offered to
God. If thou do leave thy former sins, and do it not out of obedience to God,
but for thy credit sake, or profit, or some temporal advantage, this is not the
Sacrifice God delights in.

4. The good opinion others have of them. Others think them good Christians;
why should not they think so of themselves? But let them consider, that which
is a sufficient ground for another to think well of us, is not a sufficient
ground for us to think well of our selves. A fair, outward deportment, free
from scandal and offense, is a sufficient ground for another to think well of
us; but we must feel some inward saving work of Grace upon our hearts, before
we judge our own condition to be good.

5. Comparing themselves with others, they find they are not so bad as many
others. But it is no security to any man's soul to be better than others, except
those others be in a safe condition.

6. The untroublednesse of their Consciences. All untroubledness of Conscience
is not an Argument of a safe condition. Some peace of Conscience arises from
ignorance, security, sleepiness, deadness. It Is one of Gods greatest
judgments to afford a man an untroubled Conscience in a sinful course. To be
like Jonah, ready to be drowned, and yet fast asleep. But now the peace of a
good Conscience usually follows upon humiliation and sorrow for sin, and
closing with Christ, and resigning the soul up to him for pardon and Grace.
Such a Conscience does not only not accuse (as the slumbring Conscience of a
wicked man may do) but acquits, and discharges, and comforts upon Gospel
grounds.

7. They thrive and prosper well in the world. So they may, and yet have all
their portion in this life, if they have no other evidence of Gods favor.

8. God is merciful and ready to pardon. It Is true, the King of Heaven is a
merciful King, pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin. But upon what terms
has he promised pardon to sinners? for our hope of pardon must have some
promise in the Word for its bottom and foundation, or else we do but merely
delude our selves. And we must also know, that God is just, as well as
merciful, and his threatenings are the object of our Faith, as well as his
promises. Try your hopes therefore, before you trust them. Examine and prove
whether you are such to whom God has promised pardon, or no? Has God in the
Scriptures declared he will pardon sin to any that go on in their sins, that
repent not of them, nor betake their souls to Christ for pardon and Grace? But
possibly most ancient people will here tell me, they do repent, they do believe
on Christ with all their hearts, and hope to be saved by him. But alas! how
miserably do many delude themselves both in the nature of Repentance and Faith?
never rightly understanding what a repenting frame of heart means, nor what it
is savingly to believe in Christ. I desire them therefore to read over once and
again those two Chapters concerning Repentance and Faith (which are the second
and third in this part of the Treatise) and to examine themselves thereby; that
so they may not think they are true penitents, and true believers, when indeed
they are not. And let them take heed of building their hopes of Heaven upon
such deceiving foundations as these now mentioned.

VI. Ancient persons should redeem the time that yet remains unto them, for
the working out of their salvation. They have but a little while to stay here,
and they have a great deal of work to do, to retract the sins of a long life,
and to secure their interest in Christ. They should not content themselves with
a little formal devotion and the performance of some few religious duties, as
too many old people are apt to do. They should rid themselves of worldly
employments and businesses, and the cares of this life, (as much as they can)
that so they may have the more time to bestow upon their souls. Bernard says,
Time were a good commodity in Hell, if it were there to be bought. Oh how much
would the damned give for a little time, wherein they might have liberty and
power to recover themselves out of that woeful state? How much then should all
of us both young and old, prize and improve the time now allowed us to settle
the great affairs of our souls, before we go hence and be seen no more.

VII. If they have not been well instructed before, they should think it no
disparagement to apply themse^ves to their Minister, or some faithful,
spiritual guide to be showed and taught what they must do to be saved. If a
traveller has most part of the day been traveling out of his way, (though it
may trouble and vex him at length to understand his error and wandering) yet
there is no remedy for it, he must enquire and labor to get into the right way
at last. Let old persons consider, knowledge they must have, or they will die
in a sad condition: And therefore let them not stand upon their terms, and
think instruction only belongs to young people. If the old be ignorant, the old
must be instructed, or they will die in their sins. And therefore it will be
wisdom in all ancient people to associate themselves with the most knowing and
experienced Christians, that they may thereby benefit their souls, and daily
grow both in knowledge and Grace.

VIII. They should study to bring much honor and glory to God in their latter
days, Tit. 2.1, 2. But speak thou the things which become sound Doctrine. That
the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in Faith, in Charity, in
patience.

1. They should be exemplary in piety and goodness, contrary to other trees,
bringing forth most fruit in their old age, Psalm. 92.14. They shall bring forth
fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing. They should like old Noah,
be preachers of righteousness to the younger sort, exhorting them earnestly, to
consecrate their youth and best days to God. Multitude of years should teach
wisdom, as it is, Job 32.7.

2. They should be very charitable according to the proportion of their
estates. And not as too many old covetous misers do, grasp the world with a
dying hand, Dan. 4.27. Wherefore O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto
thee, break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor, etc. Luke 11.41. But rather give alms of such things as you
have, and behold all things are clean unto you.

IX. And Lastly, They should be often meditating on the four last things, and
the life to come, and make it their great business to prepare for their
dissolution.

Tit. 2.1. But speak thou the things which become sound Doctrine. V. 2. That
the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in Faith, in Charity, in
patience. V. 3. The aged women likewise, that they be in behavior as becomes
holiness, not false accusers, nor given to much wine, teachers of good things.
V. 4. That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their husbands,
to love their children. V. 5. To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good,
obedient to their own husbands, that the Word of God be not blasphemed. Prove.
16.31. The hoary head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness. Job 32.7. I said, days should speak, and multitude of years
should teach wisdom. Job. 5.26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age,
like as a shock of Corn comes in, in his season. Psalm. 71.9. Cast me not off
in the time of old age, forsake me not when my strength fails. V. 18. Now
also, when I am old and gray headed, O God forsake me not, etc. Isa. 46.3.
Hearken unto me O House of Jacob, and all the remnant of the House of Israel,
which are born by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb. V. 4. And
even to your old age I am he, and even to hoary hairs will I carry you; I have
made, and I will bear, even I will carry, and will deliver you. Job 20.11. His
bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with him in the
dust. Psalm. 25.7. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions;
according to thy mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord. Job 13
26. For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
iniquities of my youth. 2 Samuel 19.35. I am this day fourscore years old, and
can I discern between good and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or what I
drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men, and singing women?
wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden to my Lord the King. Acts
21.16. There went with us also certain of the Disciples of Cesarea, and brought
with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old Disciple, with whom we should lodge.
Psalm. 92.14. They shall bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and
flourishing. 2 Cor. 4.16. For which cause we faint not, but though our outward
man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. Isa. 40.31. But they that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings
as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk, and not faint. 2 Timothy 4.6. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at
hand. V. 7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the Faith. V 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me
only, but unto all them also that love his appearing. CHAP. XIX. Directions to
the Healthy and to the Sick.
LET such as enjoy health of body, the right use of their understandings,
entirenesse of limbs and senses, humbly bless God for so great a mercy. Few
people value their health enough. It Is an ancient saying, He that is in health,
is rich, and knows it not. Want would teach us the worth of mercies. Let such
therefore often call to mind and consider how many distracted, diseased,
maimed, deformed people there are in the world, and it is Gods peculiar mercy
that they are not such, or worse. Let this consideration make them very humble
and thankful: Let them be often lifting up their hearts to the Lord, and
saying, with holy David, What shall I render to the Lord for all his Benefits
toward me? Psalm. 116.12. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits, Psalm. 103.1, 2. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name
give glory, Psalm. 115.1. And let their main care be in time of health to work
out their Salvation, to secure their state in Grace, and their title to Glory,
and to lay a good foundation against the time of sickness. It Is sad, exceeding
sad, when a dying person is then to be instructed in those Graces, he should
now exercise. He that prepares not for death before his last sickness, (as one
says well) is like him that begins to study Philosophy when he is going to
dispute publicly in the faculty. In health, while a man has a right and steady
use of his reason, before the Acts of his understanding are disturbed with
pain, or his mind clouded, or his heart annoyed with fear and amazement, he
should apply himself to learn this great Art and Skill, how to die well. Let
the following Directions therefore that are given to the sick, be carefully
minded and regarded by them that are in health. To turn to God in health, to
seek reconciliation with him in and through Christ, to devote and consecrate
our hearts then to him, to walk in a steady course of sincere obedience before
him, and to do all this out of judgment and choice, out of love to God, and a
desire to please him, before death seem to make any near approach unto us, will
be a huge argument of sincerity, and a great foundation of comfort when
sickness attaches us. Whereas they that are negligent and careless of these
things, must needs run themselves upon such desperate hazards and such great
incertainties, that a wise and considering man would not for all the world be
in their condition.

Directions to the Sick.
There is hardly any thing wherein a Minister is at a greater loss, than what
to say to sick persons: the condition of most being such, that they need a
serious awakening and rouzing out of the deep sleep of carnal security, and to
be made sensible of the great danger they are in, as to their everlasting
state. But while we do this, the sick party and those that attend, are apt to
think we go about to drive them to despair, not understanding the true nature
thereof: For to despair, (I mean, utterly and finally) is this; when a man
shall conclude that his sins are greater than cna be forgiven, that God is
irreconcilable to him, and therefore it is in vain to set himself to repent, or
humble his soul, or turn from his sins, but (seeing his condition is desperate)
resolves to go on in his former course, to enjoy the pleasures of sin here,
while he may have them, seeing when this life is done, nothing remains for him
but certain damnation: Such a man as this may be truly said to despair. But for
any person to be so awakened, as to see himself for the present in a lost
condition; and under the wrath and curse of God by reason of his sins, to see
his own utter inability to help himself, to be enquiring and earnestly
sollicitous what he must do to be saved, to have his heart full of doubts and
fears and troubles, concerning the state of his soul; this is such a despair as
is usually the forerunner of a saving conversion. And therefore for people that
have spent their time in sin and vanity, in ignorance and worldliness, in
living to themselves, and to the flesh, and have never felt any work of Grace
upon their hearts, nor ever have been truly humbled under an apprehension of
the evil and danger of their sins; to expect a Minister should speak comfort to
them, is to desire to be soothed and flattered to their own destruction.

The Directions therefore I think needful for sick persons are these following.

I. Let them consider that no sickness, disease, or distemper of body comes by
chance, but by the wise and orderly guidance of the hand of God; that it is his
messenger, and sent by him unto them. And therefore let them hear the rod, and
who has appointed it, Micah 6.9.

II. Let them set themselves before the Tribunal of Christ, before whom they
may (for ought they know) shortly appear. And let them consider, he is a Judge
that cannot be deceived, nor will be mocked: That he is just as well as
merciful, righteous as well as gracious, and all their sins original and
actual, of omission, of commission, against the Law and against the Gospel,
against mercies, against judgments, against promises and vows of better
obedience, all their sinful thoughts, and sinful affections and motions of
their hearts; all their sinful words and sinful actions, with the several
aggravations of all these, are known unto him; yea, their secretest sins are
set in the light of his countenance.

III. Let them seriously examine themselves, and put these six questions home
to their Consciences.

First, What abiding sense they have had upon their hearts (in the whole course
of their lives) of their own vileness and wretchedness by nature, the
odiousness and defilement of their sins, their just desert of wrath, their
natural impotency and inability to good, their pronenesse to evil? Whether they
have ever been deeply sensible of the darkness of their minds, stubbornness
of their wills, deceitfulness of their hearts, inordinatenesse of their
affections, sinfulness of their practice? If they have, what effects has the
consideration of these things produced? what sorrow, what fear has been stirred
in them? What course has it put them upon for remedy? What industry have they
used, what pains have they taken to be delivered out of this miserable estate?
Let their Consciences have liberty to speak freely to them, and to tell them
the truth, whether ever they have been affected (in any considerable degree)
with these things or no.

Secondly, Whether they ever rightly apprehended what are the conditions of the
new Covenant, the Covenant of Grace. Most will grant Repentance toward God,
and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ are necessary to salvation; but then their
apprehensions and conceptions are different from, and inconsistent with the
nature of these Graces. There is a great deal of danger in mistaking about
these things. Therefore let them ask themselves seriously, whether they do
indeed understand that true repentance follows upon a clear and full conviction
of the evil, odiousness, and filthiness of sin, as that which is contrary to
Gods holy Nature, and is flat rebellion against his Laws and Authority, as
that which defaces his Image, depraves, defiles, pollutes the soul; weakens its
powers, disenables it for holy operations, and conforms it to the Image of
Satan. Whether they rightly apprehend the danger, desert, and mischievous
effects and consequents of sin; how it exposes the sinner to judgments
spiritual, temporal, and eternal. Whether ever they apprehended their own deep
guiltiness both of Original, and a huge number of actual sins? Whether there
ever has been wrought in them any deep contrition and hearty sorrow for their
sins; and that upon Gospel-grounds because they have so exceedingly dishonored
God, pierced our dear Lord and Savior, grieved the holy Spirit, brought a
stain and defilement upon their souls, and rendered themselves justly liable to
the wrath and curse of God? Whether their hearts have been wrought to a hatred
and loathing of sin, and to a forsaking of every known sin; and are now really
turned unto God? Whether they have clearly and without guile of spirit
confessed and bewailed their sins unto God; their particular known sins
particularly, and all secret, undiscovered, unknown sins with a general
confession? And here that the sick person may the better examine himself, and
awaken his Conscience, and may understand (in some measure) the number of his
sins, the several kinds of them, and the various ways of offending God; let
him consider and ponder seriously of the duties commanded and sins forbidden in
the Law or ten Commandments; and the special sins against the Gospel: For the
more particular his repentance is, the more pungent and afflictive it will be,
and so the more sincere and effectual.

Of the duties commanded and sins forbidden in the Law or ten Commandments.

The first Commandment requires us to own and acknowledge Jehovah to be the
only true God, and our God, and to adore, worship and glorify him accordingly.

The sins against this Commandment are,

1. Atheism; not believing there is a God; or so living as if there were no God
in the world to be obeyed and worshipped. 2. Idolatry, in having or worshipping
more Gods than one; or any with or in stead of the true God: praying, or giving
any religious worship to Saints, Angels, or any other Creature. 3. All
compacts, and consulting with the Devil; all resorting to Witches and
Conjurers, which is in effect to go to the Devil himself. 4. Making men the
Lords of our Faith and Consciences. 5. Ignorance, misapprehensions, misbelief
concerning God; not laboring after the true knowledge of God, nor endeavoring
to understand aright his nature, properties, and works. 6. Infidelity, not
believing his word, or not believing it effectually and practically so as to
live according to our belief; not believing his threatenings so as to be afraid
of them; nor his promises so as to be invited by them unto obedience, and
newness of life. 7. Diffidence and distrust of his care and providence; not
depending on him for the supply of our wants: not looking up to him for a
blessing on our lawful endeavors; tempting him by using unlawful means, in
stead of waiting his leisure: Creature-confidence, trusting in wit, wealth,
friends, etc. and thereby withdrawing our hearts and dependence from God. 8.
Want of love to God: Not cleaving to him with a fervent love, apprehending him
the chief good; not loving him for his own infinite excellencies, and for his
goodness to us; not loving him with all our affections and might; but loving
our selves, our pleasures, or profits, or credit before him; inordinate setting
our minds and affections on other things besides God. 9. Want of zeal and
forwardness to promote his Glory: Lukewarmnesse, indifferency in the things of
God; not sorrowing for those reigning sins whereby his honor is eclipsed. 10.
Not fearing God so as to keep from any wilful offending of him; timorousness,
fearing man more than God, by committing sin to shun some outward suffering.
11. Not rejoicing in God, nor in his ways and Worship; counting his ways
grievous and burdensome: Apostatizing from him, forsaking his Worship and
Service. 12. Presuming groundlessely on his mercy, while we go on in any wilful
sin; or despairing of it, so, as to neglect duty. 13. Unthankfulness for those
great mercies he has so freely bestowed upon us; not acknowledging them, or
letting them slip by, without any regard or notice; being too apt to ascribe
Gods blessings to our deserts or endeavors; sacrificing to our own net, to our
own wit or parts, not ascribing all Glory to God. 14. Insensiblenesse under his
judgments, or discontent at his dispensations; Impatience under his Fatherly
chastisements; not accepting the punishment of our iniquities without murmuring
or repining; not amending by his corrections, but either fainting, despairing,
and charging God foolishly. 15. Not yielding such sincere and universal
obedience to him as we ought both in heart and life. 16. Not having a high and
an adoring esteem of God, not demeaning our selves humbly before him, according
as our vileness and his infinite surpassing excellencies do require.

The second Commandment shows the manner how the true God must be worshipped,
and requires the observing and keeping pure and entire all such religious
Worship and Ordinances as he has appointed in his Word. Inward Idolatry is
opposed to the first Commandment, outward to this. The true God is to be
worshipped only in that way that he himself has appointed: Therefore
Idolatrous and superstitious Worshippers of him, he calls haters of him; and
expresses a very fervent zeal for his own Worship, and a revengefull
indignation against all false Worship as being spiritual whoredom.

The sins against this Commandment are, 1. All will worship, superstition or
corrupting the Ordinances of God by man's inventions. 2. Making any Images for a
religious use either of the true God or of false. 3. Making any representation
of God; of all, or any of the Three Persons in the Trinity; either inwardly in
our minds, or outwardly in any kind of Image or likeness of any creature
whatsoever; or worshipping of it, or God in it and by it. 4. Worshipping of God
any way not agreeable to his Nature, and not warranted by his Word; which
requires he should be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, with uprightness and
sincerity; he being a spiritual and most pure Being, without any visible form
or shape: Therefore all formality, unspiritualnesse, and mere bodily Worship is
that which he cannot away with.

The third Commandment requires we should honor and reverence the most holy
and glorious Name of God; and that all his Titles, Attributes, Ordinances, or
whatever else he is pleased to make known himself by, be holily and reverently
used by us. This Commandment seems to have regard principally to that which we
call the common Worship of God, i. e. the right carriage of our selves for his
honor in all the common affairs of our life (as well as in the exercises of
Religion) so far forth as we have any thing to do with him therein.

The sins against this Commandment are, 1. Light and irreverent using and
naming the name of God, Deuteronomy. 28.58. Not fearing this glorious and fearful
Name, the Lord thy God. 2. Customary swearing, and in ordinary communication.
3. Swearing falsely, or perjury, not swearing in truth, judgment and
righteousness, Jer. 4.2. when lawfully called thereunto. 4. Blaspheming. 5.
Cursing. 6. Charms and Exorcisms. 7. Profane jesting on Scripture. 8. Unlawful
and unwarrantable vows. 9. Calling on God with our lips, when our hearts are
far from him.

The fourth Commandment requires the keeping holy to God such set time as he
has appointed in his Word; expressly one whole day in seven to be a Sabbath
unto the Lord.

The sins against this Commandment are, 1. Not preparing for it by taking care
so to dispatch and dispose our worldly businesses, that we may be more free and
fit for the duties of the day. 2. Not resting from worldly employments and
servile works; excepting necessary and charitable offices to men and beasts, to
our selves or others. 3. Neglect of, or a careless heartlesse performance of
the private and public duties that concern the sanctification of it. 4. Being
weary of the Sabbath, not delighting in it, nor the duties of it, but wishing
it were gone. 3. Profaning the day by Idleness, vain thoughts, worldly
discourse, making it a day of carnal rest, of feasting, jollity, immoderate
eating and drinking; visiting, a day of sports and recreations, which alienate
the mind more from God than the ordinary labors of our callings. 6. Not taking
care that those under our charge do sanctify the day and keep it holy to the
Lord, but by our carelessenesse, or connivance, and ill example encouraging
them in the profanation of it.

So much of the duties commanded and sins forbidden in the first Table.

The second Table enjoins the duties of Charity and Justice toward our
Neighbor. Against this we sin, when we do not love our neighbors with such a
true unfeigned love as our selves, when we do not so deal with them, as we
desire they should deal with us.

The fifth Commandment requires the giving of that honor and performing those
duties which belong to every one in their several places, and which we mutually
owe in our several relations, as Inferiors, Superiors, Equals. By Father and
Mother are meant, not only natural Parents, but all Superiors in age and
gifts, and especially such as by Gods Ordinance are over us in place of
authority, whether in Family, Church, or Commonwealth.

The Sins of Inferiors against Superiors, are, 1. Not paying them due
reverence in heart, word and behavior. 2. The envying at, contemning of, or
rebelling against, their persons, places, lawful commands, counsels, or
corrections. 3 Not praying for them, not imitating their Graces and virtues, 4.
Cursing, mocking, and all such scandalous and refractory carriage toward them.

The sins of Superiors are, 1. Neglecting the duties of their respective
places. 2. Seeking themselves and their own Glory. 3. Commanding things
unlawful. 4. Counselling, encouraging or favoring that which is evil; and
discouraging that which is good. 5. Undue correction. 6. Dishonouring
themselves, and lessening their Authority, either by too rigorous, or too
remiss a behavior.

The sins of Equals, are undervaluing the worth, envying the gifts, grieving at
the advancement, or prosperity, or esteem one of another; and usurping
pre-eminence one over another.

The sixth Commandment requires all lawful endeavors to preserve our own
life, and the life of others.

The sins against this Commandment are, 1. Murder. 2. Striking, maiming or
hurting the body of our neighbor. 3. Sinful unadvised anger. 4. Hatred, envy,
desire of revenge. 5. Railing, reviling, contumelious speeches, quarrelling,
threatening, scorning, and provoking. 6. Sowing strife and contention among
neighbors. 7. Drunkenness, surfeiting, uncleanness, or drawing any to those
vices which are sins against the body, and may bring diseases and death. 8.
Inordinate passions, worldly grief, immoderate carking and caring, or whatever
else tends to the destruction of the life of man.

The seventh Commandment requires chastity of body, mind, affections, words and
behavior; and the preservation of it in our selves and others. It forbideth,
1. Lodging, or entertaining in our minds unclean thoughts and fancying unclean
matters with delight. 2. Unclean desires, affections, and lusts, though they
come not into act, which is the adultery of the heart. 3. Wanton looks. 4. Not
shutting our ears against unclean talk. 5. Filthy discourse. 6. All unclean
acts, and sinful pollutions. 7. Idleness, intemperance, and pampering the
body. 8. Wanton immodest attiring. 9. Light behavior, and society with light
persons. 10. Lascivious gestures, revellings, dancings, plays, pictures,
amorous books, songs, or whatever else tends to foment the fleshly
concupiscence, which we ought to labor by all good means to quench and
suppress.

The eighth Commandment requires the lawful procuring, and furthering the
wealth and outward estate of our selves and others. It forbids, 1. Violent
taking or withholding from our neighbor what justly belongs unto him. 2.
Fraudulent dealing, false weights and measures, overreaching in contracts. 3.
Unfaithfulness in matters of trust. 4. Covetousness, and inordinate love of
money. 5. Discontent at our own estates, distrust of Gods Providence. 6. Not
paying what we borrow, and what is justly due from us, if we be able. 7.
Exaction, extortion, oppression, and not making restitution of ill gotten goods
where there is ability.

The ninth Commandment requires the maintaining and promoting of truth between
man and man, and of our own and our neighbors good names; especially in
witnesse-bearing. It forbids. 1. Giving false evidence, and suborning false
witness, and all forgery. 2. Wittingly appearing and pleading for an evil
cause, outfacing, and overbearing the truth. 3. Credulity, sinister suspicions,
rash belief, a ready listening to tale-bearers; receiving and countenancing ill
reports, that tend to the defaming of others; misconstruing intentions, words
and actions; and interpreting doubtful matters in the worst sense. 4. Lying,
speaking untruth of any man; a readiness to speak ill, and spread the faults
of others, when it does no way concern us, nor is like to benefit others.
Slandering, raising false rumors, backbiting, detracting, talebearing,
whispering scoffing, reviling, rash, harsh, and partial censuring, and
uncharitable judging. 5. Speaking too highly, or too meanly of our selves or
others. 6. Undue silence, when we ought and may defend the innocence of our
neighbor.

The tenth Commandment requires purity and integrity of thoughts, desires, and
wishes, contentment with our own estate and condition, and the portion God has
given us, and a right, charitable, well-wishing frame of spirit toward our
neighbor, and all that is his. The sins against this Commandment are, 1.
Discontent with our own estate. 2. Having and harboring in our minds evil
fancies, roving and ranging lusts, and covetings of that which is our
neighbors, arising from our corrupted natures, and accompanied with delight
and pleasure, though our wills do not consent to the accomplishing of them.
Before in the other Commandments, the deed was condemned that was hurtful and
injurious to our neighbor, as also the settled will and resolved determination
to act it; but here evil thoughts and stirrings in the soul, the first bublings
of concupiscence, the very desire and lust, and loose hankering after any thing
that is our neighbors is forbidden, though there be no full consent given
thereto. 3. Envying and grieving at the good of our neighbor, and rejoicing at
his sufferings. 4. All inordinate motions, affections, and desires of heart
after any thing that is his. 5. Not endeavoring to suppress evil thoughts and
the first motions to sin; but favoring and entertaining them, rouling them
with delight in our minds; not laboring to keep our hearts with all diligence
and to subdue lust and concupiscence, which is the root and fountain of all sin
and wickedness.

The sins against the Gospel are reducible to these two Heads.

Unbelief. Impenitency.
Unbelief has several degrees.

I. Not laboring to acquaint our selves with the History of the Gospel, nor
with the duties, promises and privileges thereof, though it contains the best
glad-tidings and of the greatest consequence to us that can be imagined.

II. Not assenting to it so firmly as we should, but being apt to be carried
about with every wind of Doctrine, with any new erroneous fancy, and so to
have our minds corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, and to prove
unsound in the Faith.

III. Not so loving, esteeming and highly valuing of it, as we should; not
sufficiently admiring that miracle of Divine bounty, wherein the love of God
was so wonderfully manifested toward us, in sending his only begotten son
into the world, that we might live through him.

IV. Making light of Christ, and undervaluing the great love of our blessed
Redeemer, treading under foot the Merits of the Son of G^d, and profaning
the blood of the Covenant, and thereby laboring to render Christ's passion of
none effect; not counting all things loss and dung in comparison of the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord; not counting him all in
all, not rejoicing, and glorying in him, and him crucified, by whom alone we
receive atonement; not esteeming his favor and loving kindness better than
life it self.

V. Not living by Faith in all estates and conditions, not embracing the
promises of the Gospel, with so much readiness, and adhering to them with so
much steadfastness, as the excellency and certainty of them does require; not
improving nor applying this rich treasure of Gospel-promises, unto the various
occasions of this temporal life; not looking upon them as our Heritage, and
esteeming them the joy of our hearts.

VI. Being apt to rely on our own righteousness, our own services or Graces;
and thereby endeavoring (as much as in us lies) to deprive Christ of his
Saviorship.

VII. Not owning Christ in all his offices, not being willing to accept of him,
as well for our Lord as our Savior; for our Prophet to guide us, as well as
for our Priest to make atonement for us; not being willing to be obedient to
his Laws and Precepts; to be sanctified by his Grace and holy Spirit, as well
as to be saved by his merits; and this heart of unbelief does prove many times
a root of apostasy, and departure from the living God.

The second sin against the Gospel is Impenitency, which has several degrees
also. I. When notwithstanding God has in some measure discovered to us our
miserable, and lost condition by reason of the Covenant of works, (which
admitted of no repentance) we have not yet humbled our selves in any proportion
to the multitude and greatness of our sins, though the Gospel and Covenant of
Grace call us to it, and require it of us, as that without which we are not to
expect pardon.

II. Not being inquisitive after our sins, nor endeavoring to examine and find
out our particular failings, but rather to hide and excuse them.

III. Not being humbled and grieved for them, considering the great injustice,
folly, unkindnesse we have expressed by them.

IV. Not resolving and striving against them, not improving advantages for the
avoiding and subduing of them.

V. Refusing to repent, though God vouchsafe time and means, hardening the heart
by a custom and delight in sin, being prone to maintain, justify, or
extenuate sin.

And thus much of the sins against the Law and against the Gospel. Upon these
Heads not only sick persons, but such as are in health also should examine
themselves, when they intend more solemnly to humble their souls before the
Lord. And they may have further helps herein from Dr, Wilkins's discourse
concerning the gift of prayer.

When sick persons therefore have advanced thus far, let them then in the next
place ask themselves,

Thirdly, Whether they do indeed rightly understand and firmly believe the
history of the Gospel? who Christ was? what manner of person? what were his
Offices? what he did and suffered? for what ends and purposes he came into the
world? Whether they understand that he came, not only to save and deliver from
Hell, and everlasting punishment, but also to destroy sin, undo the works of
the Devil, to crucify and subdue our lusts, mortify our earthly members, turn
us from darkness to light, to illuminate our mind, to give repentance, to work
Faith, to make us alive to God, to enable us to serve him in righteousness and
holiness, to recover Gods interest in us, and to bring us back to him again:
And let them consider how their hearts have been affected with these things.

Fourthly, Whether they have, and how long they have in truth and sincerity
applied themselves to Christ, to receive from him these great and glorious
benefits? namely, to have their pardon procured by his Merits and intercession,
to have a supply of all Grace from him, and their natures sanctified? Whether
they have sought to him as to a Physician, to heal their souls, and rid them
of their distempers? Whether they have accepted him as their Prophet to guide
them, as their Lord and King to govern them, as well as their Priest to make
atonement for them? Whether they do not believe in him and trust in him
groundlessely and presumptuously (as carnal people do) only to be delivered and
freed from Hell and wrath to come, without yielding up their hearts in sincere
obedience to him, desiring unfeignedly to be guided and governed by his holy
Spirit, and to be sanctified by his Grace.

Fifthly, Whether they have received power and strength from Christ by the
effectual operation of his holy Spirit to mortify the old man, (the old
Adamical nature) to crucify the flesh, with its affections and lusts, to fight
with, and to subdue pride, earthly-mindedness, sensuality, self-love, malice,
envy, and other vile affections; so that they are not under the dominion of
sin, but of grace? Whether they have put on the new man, and have a new nature
wrought in them, which consists in knowledge, righteousness, and true
holiness? Whoever is in Christ is a new creature, old things are past away, 2
Cor. 5.17. And whoever has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his. Romans 8.9.
They that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh, but they that
are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit, V. 5. To be carnally minded is
death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace, V. 6. Let them consider
therefore whether ever they found a powerful work of Grace upon their hearts?
whether the Spirit of Christ dwell in them? whether his Law be written in their
hearts? whether his Glory be their end? whether indeed they are alive unto God?
what strength they have for active and passive duties? whether the Word be
their delight? whether they pray fervently? delight in communion with God, in
his ways and Worship? whether they obey him sincerely, and walk humbly before
him? whether they bear afflictions patiently, suffer reproaches joyfully?

Sixthly. Whether they have for any considerable time made Religion the great
business of their lives; apprehending the chief happiness of man to consist
in reconciliation with God pardon of sin, in a gracious frame of heart, in
communion with God, and a faithful serving of him? whether they have set their
affections on things above, have had their conversation in Heaven, have pressed
earnestly after the Glory of the other world, have laid hold on eternal life,
have been treasuring up for eternity, have improved their Talents for God, have
been serviceable to him in their generation.

If their Consciences (upon a serious search) can bear witness that (through
Grace) it has been thus (in some good measure) with them, then they have great
reason to encourage their hearts in the Lord, and to awaken all the powers of
their souls to bless his holy Name for working so gracious a frame of heart
in them. And let them still seek to the same fountain of Grace, that he would
please to perfect holiness more and more in them, till he bring them into the
City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, to the spirits of
just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb.
12.22.

But if the case has not been thus (in any considerable degree and measure)
with them, but upon a serious search they find they have been ignorant and
mistaken about, or too negligent and careless of the great things that concern
their salvation, then let them bewail their sad condition, and cry mightily to
God to give them his holy Spirit, to enlighten their minds, to convince them
thoroughly of their sins, of the danger, folly, and pollution of them; to give
them a heart to repent in good earnest; to bestow upon them a broken and a
contrite Spirit; to dissolve their stony hearts into that Godly sorrow which
works repentance to salvation, never to be repented of, and which brings
forth fruits meet for repentance; to discover to them their great need of a
Savior; to draw their souls effectually unto him, that they may close with
him sincerely and resolvedly for those ends and purposes for which he came into
the world; namely, to procure our pardon by his Merits, and to sanctify our
natures by his Grace and holy Spirit; to mortify our corruptions, to deliver
us from Satan's power, and to bring us back again unto God. And for the better
information of their minds in the things they should know and believe in order
to their salvation; and to direct their practice, I must refer them to the
three first Chapters of the first part of this Treatise, and the second and
third Chapters of the second part; which I desire them heedfully to mind and
ponder upon.

Besides these Directions already mentioned, there are some others also very
requisite for sick persons to mind and regard. As,

I. They should settle their estates and worldly affairs (if they have not
already done it, as in prudence they should in time of health) so that their
minds may be free and vacant for spiritual exercises, and not disturbed with
earthly cares and businesses. And those that have estates let them not forget
to be charitable, and to dispose something to pious uses; knowing that with
such sacrifices (offered in a right manner and to a right end) God is well
pleased.

II. If they remember any wrongs or acts of injustice they have done to their
neighbors, or those with whom they have had dealings, let them make
restitution or labor to give them satisfaction as they are able; that the
guilt of those sins remain not on their Consciences.

III. If they be at variance with any, let them seek reconciliation, and freely
and heartily forgive those that have done them wrong, remembering how much they
stand in need of forgiveness from God.

IV. Let them give good counsel to those about them, and the friends that come
to visit them, and exhort them earnestly to mind the working out their
salvation in time of health, and not to set their hearts on this world, on the
pleasures or profits of it, which will not avail them in the day of death: Let
them advise them now to live unto God, now to lay a good foundation against the
time to come. The words of sick and dying persons use to be much heeded and
remembered.

V. Let them (in the intervals of sharper pains) look over their life past, and
recollect Gods wonderful favors and blessings bestowed upon them, to stir up
their hearts to praise and magnify his holy Name. How many are there that if
they would read over the history of their life past, may find matter enough of
praise, and to provoke them to send up some such thankful ejaculations as
these? Blessed be the Lord in all my life time I never broke a bone, never fell
into the hands of robbers, never into public shame* or noisome diseases: I have
not begged my bread: God gave me a right shape of body; the right use of my
understanding, careful and pious Parents, good and bountiful friends, a
religious education; delivered me in such and such a danger, heard my prayers
in such particular pressures of my spirit, etc. O what shall I render to the
Lord for all his benefits toward me!

VI. Let them decline (as much as they can) the visits of vain and worldly
persons, who (by their carnal and frothy discourses) are like to disturb and
hinder them in their preparations for death, and those spiritual meditations
and exercises they should be employed in. Those that visit sick persons, or
attend about them should not talk to them (as it is too common) of vain,
worldly, needless businesses; but of things that concern the welfare of their
souls. And to this Head I may also refer this one thing more, that at such a
serious time no vain, idle, frothy books should be read to them, or by them (as
is by many used to make them merry) but such Treatises as may better them to
Godward; and further them in the way to Heaven. To meditate and seriously
ponder on the four last things treated of in the next Chapter will not be
unprofitable for them.

VII. Let them consult with, and take the advice of their spiritual guides,
while they have some strength of body, and the right use of their
understandings; before their Spirits are so spent that there is no conversing
with them.

VIII. Let them consider Gods aim and design in sending sickness upon them:
Let them enquire into the meaning of it, This Direction is useful not only for
such as are under sickness, but under any other affliction.
and consider what God now calls them to: let them hearken to the voice of the
rod: Let them consider what corruptions they are especially to mortify, what
sins to leave, what duties to perform, what Graces to exercise: And (though
they may and ought to use lawful means for the removing of their sickness,
seeking to the Lord for his blessing thereupon) yet let them not forget to pray
as earnestly to have their sickness sanctified as removed. Blessed is the man
whom thou correctest and teach, Psalm. 94.12.

Afflictions alone are not enough to evidence a man to be blessed and in a
happy condition, except they prove teaching, sanctified afflictions. Evidences
of Grace and the favor of God consist in inward impressions, not outward
dispensations. It Is not said, Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest and
deliverest out of trouble, but whom thou corectest and teach. When God takes
away the disease, and does not take away the guilt and dominion of sin, does
not pardon and sanctify the sick person* it is not a complete deliverance, but
only a reprieval from present execution. Bare deliverance is not the blessing
thou should desire: The blessing of affliction is Divine Instruction.
Therefore those who are put by God into the School of affliction should
seriously apply themselves to learn those lessons which in that School they
ought to learn. And they are such as these.

1. Obediential submission to the will of God. We must not dispute our Cross,
but take it up. Aaron held his peace, Lev. 10.3. We may indeed and ought to
seek unto the Lord, and to use lawful means (as I said before) for deliverance
from a sickness, or other affliction; but yet with resignation of our selves to
his holy will. Patience is not a stupidity, or insensiblenesse of Gods hand,
but a calmnesse of mind upon wise and holy grounds: And therefore, if the
sickness he sends upon us, prove either very long, or tedious and painful, yet
we must take heed of murmuring, or repining, or charging God foolishly. For God
is so just, he is not to be questioned; so good, he is not to be suspected, and
so strong, he is not to be resisted. Impatience therefore, will but augment our
pain, and increase our guilt. It Is indeed a hard matter when we are afflicted,
in patience to possess our souls. But we should consider not so much what we
feel as what we deserve. Any thing on this side Hell, is mercy, and will so
appear to a truly humbled soul.

2. To pray more earnestly and fervently. They that were wont before to content
themselves with cold, short, slight, sleepy, formal devotions, will (by
sanctified afflictions) learn to pray better, more heartily and fervently, and
to cry mightily unto God for pardon and Grace, for help and relief.

3. To be better acquainted with our own hearts. Affl^ctions sanctified
discover the unknown and secret corruptions of the heart, Deuteronomy. 8.2. The Lord
thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee and to
prove thee, to know what was in thine heart.

4. To understand these three things more clearly and experimentally. 1 The
evil and danger of sin. 2 The emptiness of the Creature. 3. The preciousnesse
of Christ, and what a high value we ought to set upon his sufferings.

5. To mind and esteem the promises of God more. Through distractions without
(in time of health) and corruptions within, people (many times) neglect to
study the promises of God. But in time of sickness, or other distress, there
are no cordials like unto them.

6. To enquire into, and examine our evidences for Heaven; not to venture our
souls on general ungrounded hopes and sinking foundations.

7. To live by Faith. Faith takes the soul off from creature-confidences, and
teaches it to stay it self on God alone. The right course to obtain mercies
from God, is in the way of an humble trust. When we see and apprehend our own
insufficiency, and Gods All Sufficiency, and cast our selves on his wisdom,
power, and goodness, then he usually affords help and succor to us.

8. To prize communion with God more, and to be more Heavenly minded. In the
glaring of prosperity we are too apt to forget God, and to content our selves
with Creature-enjoyments: But in the night of adversity, and in sad
dispensations; Oh how delightful is a beam of his love and favor!

9. To be more humble. By afflictions God takes down the pride of the heart,
and makes it humble, and soft and pliable to his will.

10. To be more thankful for the mercies we enjoy. We seldom are sufficiently
sensible of the worth of our mercies till God begin to deprive us of them.

11. To set a high value and price upon time. Sickness cries aloud in our
ears, redeem time, O redeem time, for praying, for meditating, for clearing
our evidences for Heaven, etc. How many are there, who when their time is
almost done, have their great work then to begin. O in what a sad condition are
they?

These, and such like lessons should be learned in the School of affliction.
But now they whom God shall please to bring forth out of their troubles, to
deliver from their sickness, and renew the lease of their lives, should be
exhorted to these five things.

1. Let them consider what they have learned in the School of affliction: What
the Spirit of God has taught them? If they find they have learned (in some
measure) those lessons beforementioned, then let them study to be thankful.
Let them consider, God has done more for them, th^n if he had never brought
them into affliction. He has given them deliverance and instruction both. He
has turned their water into wine.

2. Let them take heed of forgetting the lessons they have learned. Let them
labor to keep alive the teachings of Gods Spirit upon their hearts. Let them
study to maintain that sweet, gracious, humble frame of spirit into which God
brought them by their afflictions. If they be not exceeding watchful, they will
quickly find a great deal of difference between their hearts under afflictions,
and when the affliction is taken off. There is much of a Pharaoh-like
disposition in every man: We are very prone to harden when the storm is over.

3. Let them renew often upon their souls the remembrance of the sharpness and
bitterness of their afflictions. Let them call to mind their sad discourses and
reasonings, their fears and tremblings, the mis-givings of heart and sad
apprehensions they had in time of their distress. Let them remember their
aptness to impatience and to hard thoughts of God. Let them recall how happy
they thought those that were free from their troubles and pains: These
remembrances kept alive will make them humble and thankful.

4. Let them remember their vows and promises made to God in time of their
sickness and distress. Let them labor to be such out of sickness, as they
promised God, themselves, and (possibly) others, they would be, when they were
in it. The Emperor Sigismond demanded of King Alphonsus, what was the directest
course to be happy; Perform (says he) when thou art well, what thou promisedst
when thou were sick. It Is very remarkable what is recorded of the mariners,
Jonah 1.15, 16. And the Sea ceased from her raging, then the men feared the
Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, and made vows. Then
when the Sea ceased; here is the wonder: Had they made vows in the midst of
the tempest, the matter had not been great; but now, when the tempest was over,
then to make vows, is worthy of our observation, and worthy of our imitation.
One vow made and kept after the tempest, is worth a thousand promised in the
same.

5. Let them pity and pray for those that are under affliction; Lord teach them
as well as correct them, that they may be blessed; let them come forth out of
affliction as Gold purified seven times; let them lose nothing in that furnace,
but their dross; let them be purified from their sins, and purged from their
iniquities; strengthen their Faith and Patience, and (in thy due time, if it be
for thy Glory and their good) vouchsafe them a gracious deliverance.

Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy
Word. V. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn
thy Statutes. Isa. 27.9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin -- Zach. 13. ult. And I
will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is
refined, and will try them as Gold is tried, they shall call on my Name, and I
will hear them, I will say it is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is my
God. Heb. 12.11. Now no chastning for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous, nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby. Prove. 24.10. If thou
faint in the day of adversity; thy strength is small. Rev. 13.10. -- Here is
the patience and the Faith of the Saints. Heb. 6.12. -- Be ye followers of them
who through Faith and patience inherit the promises. Psalm. 9.10. And they that
know thy Name will put their trust in thee, for thou Lord have not forsaken
them that seek thee. Lam. 3.26. It is good that a man should both hope, and
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. V. 27. It is good for a man that he
bear the yoke in his youth. Psalm. 146.5. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob
for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God. Psalm. 56.3. What time I am
afraid, I will trust in thee. Psalm. 112.7. He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. 2 Cor. 5.6. Therefore we are
always confident, knowing, that whilst we are at home in the body we are
absent from the Lord. V. 7. For we walk by Faith, not by sight. John 18.11. --
The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Luke 21.19. In
your patience possess ye your souls. Job. 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him. -- 2 Chronicles. 16.12. And Asa in the nine and thirtieth year of his
reign was diseased in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great, yet in
his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians. Psalm. 41.4. I
said, Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.
Psalm. 107.17. Fools, because of their transgression, and because of their
iniquities are afflicted. Neh. 9.33. Howbeit thou art just in all that thou
have brought upon us, for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly.
Psalm. 119.75. I know, O Lord that thy judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me. Micah 7.9. I will hear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him. Hab. 3.2. O Lord in wrath remember
mercy. Job. 34.31. Surely, it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement, I will not offend thee any more. Psa. 94.12. Blessed is the man
whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy Law. Job 34.32. That
which I see not, teach thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.
Heb. 12.6. For whom the Lord loves he chastneth, and scourges every son whom
he receives. Prove. 3.12. For whom the Lord loves he corrects, even as a
Father the son in whom he delights. Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke
and chasten, be zealous therefore, and repent. 2 Cor. 4.16. For which cause we
faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day
by day. V. 18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen, for the things which are seen, are temporal, but the
things which are not seen, are eternal. Psalm. 41.1. Blessed is he that
considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. V. 3. The
Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of his languishing, thou will make all
his bed in his sickness. 2 Chronicles. 32.24. In those days Hezekiah was sick to
the death, and prayed unto the Lord, and he spoke unto him, and he gave him a
sign. V. 25. But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto
him; for his heart was lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon
Judah and Jerusalem. Jonah 2.6. Thou have brought up my life from corruption, O
Lord my God. V. 7. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my
prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy Temple. V. 9. I will sacrifice unto
thee with the voice of thanksgiving, I will pay that that I have vowed,
salvation is of the Lord. Psalm. 50.14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy
vows unto the most High. Psalm. 66.13. I will go into thy House with burnt
offerings, I will pay thee my vows. V. 14. Which my lips have uttered, and my
mouth has spoken when I was in trouble. Psalm. 56.12. Thy vows are upon me O
God; I will render praises unto thee. Psalm. 116.13. What shall I render unto
the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? V. 13. I will take the cup of
salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. V. 14. I will pay my vows unto
the Lord, now in the presence of all his people. CHAP. XX. Of the Four last
things Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven.

I. Of Death.
ONE of the main businesses of our life should be to prepare for death.

In order hereunto observe these directions.

First, Meditate often and seriously on thy death and dissolution even in time
of thy health. Joseph of Arimathea made his Sepulcher in his garden, that in
the midst of his delights he might think of death. Often retire, and take thy
self alone, and walk in the valley of the shadow of death. Do not start from
the thoughts of it. Do by thy soul, when thou find it shy of such
meditations, as we do by our horses, that are given to boggle and start when we
ride them, when they fly back, and start at a thing in the way, we do not yield
to their fear, and go back (that will make them worse another time) but we ride
them up close to that they are afraid of, and so in time break them of that ill
quality. So do thou, bring up thy heart, and inure it to look upon death, and
to handle that Serpent. Consider, death is making its approaches to thee, and
may be upon thee before thou art aware. O therefore, prepare for it, that when
it comes, and attaches thee, thou may be found in such a gracious state, with
such a frame of Spirit, and walking in such a holy way of life that thou may
bid it welcome, and be able to say with blessed Paul, I desire to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ.

The frequent meditation of death will be an excellent means

1. To quicken thy soul to a deep humiliation and repentance for thy past sins.

2. To repress the eager and insatiable desire of riches, and the love of this
world.

3. To antidote thee against sin for time to come.

4. To make thee improve time, and carefully to work out thy salvation. Think
often of death, and it will keep worse company from thee.

Secondly, Labor to take away from thy own death the power and strength
thereof, The Philistims seeing Sampson so exceeding strong, labored to know
wherein his power and strength principally consisted; and when they understood
it to lie in the hair of his head, they ceased not till it was cut. Consider
therefore, wherein the strength of death lies: The Spirit of God teaches us
that, in 1 Cor. 15.56. The sting of death is sin. The power and force and sting
of every man's particular death lies in his own sins. Death cannot hurt us, but
by the force of our own sins. A man may safely handle a Serpent when the sting
is out. If death be disarmed of its sting and poison, it cannot hurt us. It
concerns us therefore to use effectual means that our sins may be removed and
pardoned, and to labor before we die, to abolish the strength of death. Now
the way to do this is,

1. To humble our souls unfeignedly before the Lord, and to repent of all our
sins.

2. To fly to Christ and to close with him for pardon and Grace.

3. In the strength of his Grace to amend our lives, and to walk in the ways
of holiness. The sting of death is taken away by Christ Jesus as to all real
converts, and true believers, so that it cannot hurt them, nay, will be an
advantage to them: It will be only a dark and short passage to a glorious
Palace, to the blisseful mansions above. So that they may triumph as Paul did,
O death, where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? Thanks be to God,
who gives us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. But now to all impenitent,
unpardoned sinners, how deadly, how incurable is the sting of death? Death is
death with a witness, and Hell into the bargain to them that die in their
sins. No sight in the world more dreadful than to see a dying sinner (with his
Conscience newly awakened) conflicting with death, and sin, and the Law, and
Gods Curse together. O how sad, how intollerably sad is it to see a man that
has gone on in a long, careless, obstinate course of sinning, now at the
point of death to have his eyes first opened, and to see himself on the brink
of the dreadful pit, unavoidably falling into the lake of fire and brimstone.
To such a person, death brings its poisoned arrow, and executes him with its
venomous sting.

Thirdly, Give all diligence in this life, to lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy
6.12. That is, to enter into the first degree of life eternal. Eternal life may
be looked upon under three considerations. As Initial, as Partial, as
Perfectional:

1. The eternal life initial is that which is obtained in this life, and is an
earnest of that which is to follow. It Is the life of Grace: Of this our Savior
spoke, Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to life. And Joh. 3.36. He that
believes on the Son has everlasting life. --

2. The Partial life eternal is that which belongs (though to the nobler) yet
but to a part of man, namely, to the Soul. The happiness which the Souls of
Saints enjoy between the time of their death, and the last day, is the partial
life eternal.

3. The Perfectional life eternal is that which shall be conferred on the
Saints immediately after the blessed reunion of their souls and bodies, and that
gracious sentence pronounced, come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. So that we see we must in
this world enter into the first degree of eternal life, if ever we intend to be
partakers of the other two. We must be raised from the death of sin to the life
of grace. We must as the Apostle speaks, Col. 1.13. Be delivered from the power
of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of our blessed Savior. We must
with Paul be able to say, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me, i. e. By his Spirit guides and governs my will, affections, and all the
powers both of my soul and body. Whoever would be saved when he is dead, must
begin to be saved while he is living. We must begin to live that blessed and
eternal life before we die.

Fourthly, Inure thy self to die to this world and the enjoyments of it, every
day, more and more. Paul tells us, he died daily, 1 Cor. 15.31. If we would
learn to do so, it would not be so hard to die, when we come to it in good
earnest. Death is not so strong to him whose natural strength has been wasted
with a long, pining sickness, as to him who lies but a few days sick, and has
strength of nature to make resistance. That Christian, whose love to his life,
and the contentments of it, has been for many years consuming and dying, will
more easily part with them, than he whose love is stronger to them; As the
Reverend Mr. Gurnal excellently expresses it in his Christian Armor. We should
consider, we are but pilgrims and strangers here: Heaven is the proper country
of holy Souls. We should therefore be providing for our removal out of this
strange country. We should pack up, and send our best things aforehand,
namely, our love, our hearts, our delights, our joys, before we set out our
selves for those Heavenly mansions.

Fifthly, Consider what great reasons there are, that those that are truly
Godly should not much fear death. I confess nothing can sweeten death, and
make it desirable to a Christian, but only an interest in Christ. Things that
are in their own nature sour and sharp, will ask much Sugar to make them sweet.
Death is one of those things, that has the most harsh, and ungrateful taste to
a creatures pallat that may be. Believe it, a man cannot think (with any
comfort) of putting his head into another world, if he has no solid ground to
hope Christ will own him there for his. But if he have, there are many reasons,
why he should not dread death.

1. They that are truly godly, shall die but once, i. e. a natural death only:
The wicked die twice, not only a natural, but a spiritual death. The natural
death stands in the separation of the soul from the body. The spiritual, in the
separation of soul and body from God, Rev. 20 6. Blessed and holy is he that
has part in the first resurrection, on such the second death has no power. He
that is born but once, (namely naturally) shall die twice, naturally and
spiritually: He that is born twice, i. e. besides his natural birth, has been
spiritually regenerated and born again, shall die but once, namely, a natural
death.

2. Death is not a destruction, or annihilation either of soul or body, but
only an alteration and change of the condition of them both, and that for the
better to all those that have an interest in Christ. Such may say with Paul,
Phil. 1.21. To me to live is Christ, to die is gain. For, 1. Though death
separate soul and body, yet it can separate neither of them from Christ. As in
Christ's death, his soul and body were separated each from other, yet neither
of them from the second Person in the Trinity, in which both of them did
subsist at that time in the personal Union; so though when the Saints die, soul
and body be separated; yet after this separation, both remain united to Christ
in the mystical Union; because their bodies as well as their souls are part of
the mystical body of Christ, who is the Head and Savior of the whole person,
consisting of soul and body. And when Christ who is their life shall appear,
then shall they also appear with him in Glory, Col. 3.3, 4. We see then that
though body and soul be severed each from other at death, yet (as to all those
that die in the Lord) neither of them are severed or disjoined from Christ; but
the conjunction which is begun in this life, remains for ever: Which must
needs be matter of exceeding joy and comfort to them that by a lively Faith are
united to him here. 2. The body being resolved into dust, is freed from all
sickness, and pains, from all the miseries, troubles and calamities of this
life. 3. It cease to be, either an active, or a passive instrument of sin;
whereas in this life it is both. Sin, and the temptations to it, are the great
grievances and burdens of the servants of God, which they groan to be delivered
from. As sin therefore brought death into our bodies, so death carries sin out
of them. 4. The bodies of the Saints shall be raised in a far greater glory at
the general resurrection, and be joined again to their souls, to live an
everlasting life of glory and happiness with them.

So that we may from hence conclude the body will be no loser by this change.
Neither will the soul; for it will gain this threefold advantage thereby,

1. It will change its place, and be removed from a prison to a palace, from a
Tabernacle of clay, to a Heavenly Mansion.

2. Its qualities. Here it is infested with sinful and unruly passions and
affections of all sorts, which are a great annoyment to it: But there it shall
be freed from all these, and made perfectly holy.

3. Its company. It leaves the company of sinners, and gains the company of
Saints and Angels: Yea, shall have fellowship with the blessed Trinity, in
whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Let all such therefore as have an interest
in Christ look upon death, not in the glass of the Law, but of the Gospel.
Death in the Law is a curse, and a downfall to the pit of destruction. In the
Gospel it is an entrance into Heaven. Christ has taken away the sting and
mischief, and destructive power of death. He has altered the property of it,
and in stead of being a door to Hell, has made it a gate to bliss and
happiness for all those that are his. Let the truly Godly and serious
Christian therefore, not fix his mind so much on the pangs and torments of
death, as upon the blessed estate, that is to be enjoyed after it, and so
fortify his heart against the fear of it. See the Reverend and Worthy Mr.
Baxters considerations against the fear of death, in the 4th Part of his Saints
everlasting Rest, Chap. 2.

Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this, the Judgment.
Job 30.23. For I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house
appointed for all living. Job 17 14. I have said to corruption, thou art my
Father, to the worm, thou art my mother and my sister. Jam. 4.14. -- For what
is your life? it is even a vapor, that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away. Isa. 40.6. The voice said, cry, and he said, what shall I cry?
All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the
field. V. 7. The grass withers, the flower fades; because the Spirit of the
Lord blows upon it: Surely the people is grass. Psalm. 90.12. So teach us to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Psalm. 39.4. Lord
make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; that I may
know how frail I am. V. ^. Behold thou have made my days as an hand breadth,
and mine age is as nothing before thee, verily every man at his best state, is
altogether vanity, Selah. Job 14.2. He comes forth like a flower, and is cut
down; he flees also as a shadow, and continues not. P^al. 146.4. His breath
goes forth, he returns to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish
Job 9.25. My days are swifter than a post, they flee away, they see no good.
Eccles. 12.5. Man goes to his long home, and the mourners go about the
streets. 2 Pet. 1.13. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle,
to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance, V. 14. Knowing, that shortly I
must put off this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me.
Psalm 37 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that
man is peace. Job 27.8. But what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he have
gained, when God takes away his soul? II. Of Judgment.
It is mainly necessary in order to the practice of Godliness, and ordering our
conversation aright, that we firmly believe, and have frequent, deep, and
serious meditations of the day of judgment.

In treating of which I shall enquire,

1. How we may be assured there is a judgment to come?

2. Who will be the Judge at that great Assizes?

3. What will be the nature and manner of that judgment? What the judicial
proceedings at that day?

4. What the Consequents of it?

For the first.

The Scripture seems to hold forth unto us a twofold judgment to come.

First, Particular, which follows immediately after death. Thus is that
understood, Eccles 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was,
and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it, i. e. to be judged by him, as
the Chaldee Paraphrast does well explain it. And that Historical Parable of
Dives and Lazarus shows how immediately after they were dead, the one went to
Hell, the other to Abraham's bosom. That (I say) does show, that every one
particularly, when he dies, is judged, and receives either reward or
punishment.

Secondly, General, at the end of the world. The certainty of which may appear
to us from these Arguments.

1. From the voice of natural Conscience, which is very sensible of it. Foelix
trembled, when Paul preached of it, Acts 24.25. And when he discoursed to the
Athenians, those great Lights of the Gentile world, Acts. 17.31. That God has
appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that
man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in
that he has raised him from the dead; found some who mocked when they heard of
the resurrection of the dead; but against the day of judgment none replied. So
true it is which the same Apostle elsewhere says of the Gentiles, who had but
the light of Nature (and so a natural Conscience) that they show the work of
the Law written in their hearts, their Consciences also bearing witness, and
their thoughts the mean while accusing, or excusing one another, Romans 2.15.

2. From the Justice of God, which requires it. God being the Judge of the
world, as well as the Creator, we may infallibly conclude he will judge the
world in righteousness. But as the affairs of this present life are ordered
(though they lie under the disposition of Providence) yet they show no sign of
an universal Justice. Oftentimes the wicked flourish and prosper, while the
righteous are afflicted and in misery. In this life nothing more certain, than
that rewards are not correspondent to the virtues, nor punishments
proportionable to the sins of men. If therefore there be a Judge of the world
(and that judge be just) there is a judgment to come in another world, and the
effects thereof concern another life. In that day there will be a revelation of
the righteous judgment of God, Romans 2.5. God will then show a perfect
demonstration of his Justice, and men shall discern between the righteous and
the wicked, between him that serves God and him that serves him not, Mal.
3.18.

3. From the clear and manifest declaration of the will of God. We have an
express manifestation of Gods will and purpose concerning a judgment to come,
Eccles. 12.14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Acts 17.30. But now God
commands all men every where to repent. V. 31. Because he has appointed a
day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he
has ordained. No Doctrine more clear and fundamental in the Word of God, than
that of Eternal judgment, Heb 6.2. Wherein the Judge will sentence to an
eternal state.

4. From a representation of it to the eyes of some of Gods servants in Divine
visions. As to Daniel, Chap. 7.9. I beheld till the Thrones were cast down, and
the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of
his head like the pure wool; his Throne was like the fiery flame, and his
wheels as burning fire, V. 10. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before
him: Thousand Thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him: The judgment was set and the books were opened. And likewise
to St. John, Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead small and great stand before God,
and the books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of
life; and the dead were judged out of those things, which were written in the
books, according to their works. The Throne therefore has been already seen;
the Judge has appeared sitting on it; the Books have been already opened; the
dead, small and great have been seen, standing before him. The representation
of it to the eye, in those Divine visions, is a farther assurance of the
certainty of it, than if it had only been foretold, and so represented to the
ear.

We see then there will be a day of judgment.

2. In the second place, let us enquire who that Person is who shall be the
Judge at that great Assizes; who shall sit upon the Throne; before whose
Tribunal we shall all appear; from whose mouth we may expect our, sentence. The
judiciary power is the power of God. The power and authority of judging is
common to the three Persons, being one and the same God; but the execution of
this judiciary power is committed particularly to the Son; and so the Father
and the Holy Ghost will actually judge the world no otherwise but by him. He is
ordained of God to be the judge of quick and dead, Acts 10.42. He will judge
the world by that man whom he has ordained, etc. Acts 17.31. The Father
judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son. He has given him
authority to execute judgment, John 5.22, 27. There is therefore an original,
supreme, judiciary power, and a judiciary power delegated, derived, given by
commission. Christ as God has the first, together with the Father and Holy
Ghost. Christ as man has the second, from the Father expressly, from the Holy
Ghost concomitantly. John 5.27. All power is given him in Heaven and earth,
because he is the Son of man. The Father therefore who is only God, and never
took upon him either the nature of men or Angels, judges no man, (and the same
reason reaches also to the Holy Ghost) but has committed all judgment to the
Son. And the reason why he has committed it unto him, is, because he is not
only the Son of God, (and so truly God) but also the son of man, and so truly
man. And because,

1. He is the son of man, who suffered so much for the sins of man, He humbled
himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, wherefore
God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name, which is above every Name:
That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth. And that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.8,
9, 10, 11. So Romans 14.11. For it is written, as I live says the Lord, every
knee shall bow to me, every tongue shall confess to God. Both which places have
reference to Isa. 45.23. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my
mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall
bow. So that this Prophecy receives not its full and final accomplishment
till the day of judgment. As Christ in his humane nature was unjustly judged,
so in that nature shall he justly judge. At his first coming he was not a
sinner, but he came in the garb of a sinner, in the similitude of sinful flesh,
Romans 8.3. But at the day of judgment he shall come as one discharged of that
debt and burden, without sin. Heb. 9.28. And as one highly honored by God the
Father.

2. Because God making a general judgment, will have a visible judge, which all
they which shall be judged may see. John 5.27. And has given him authority to
execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man, and every eye shall see
him. God is invisible; the Son of man therefore will be Judge, who will so
appear as to be seen both of those whom he shall crown, and those whom he shall
condemn.

The Son of man therefore being represented in the Scriptures, as making the
great decretory separation between man and man; as an husbandman separating the
wheat sometimes from the chafe, sometimes from the tares; as a fisherman
gathering the good fish, casting the bad away, as a bridegroom receiving the
wise, excluding the foolish virgins; as a Master distinguishing the servants of
his Family, rewarding the faithful, punishing the unprofitable; as a shepherd
dividing his sheep from the goats, placing one on the right hand, the other on
the left: It will from thence follow, that the same Son of man (who is also the
Son of God, God and man in the same person) is appointed Judge of the world. Of
Christ's first coming indeed its said, John. 3.17. God sent not his son into the
world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. He
came not then as a Judge, but as a Redeemer; but his second coming will be to
judge the quick and the dead.

We have seen who shall be the Judge.

3. It follows in the next place, that we enquire into the nature and manner
of this judgment.

And here we shall speak, 1. Of the preparations to it. 2. In what manner it
will be performed.


I. The preparations for the Judg's approach, the Scripture sets down in these
two Particulars.

1. The Archangels Trumpet, by which all the world shall be (as it were)
summoned to appear before Christ's Tribunal. 1 These. 4.16. For the Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the Trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Mat. 24.31. And
he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather
together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other. At
the giving of the Law, the voice of the Trumpet was exceeding loud; but what a
terrible blast will this be? Such as shall be heard all the world over,
startling the dead out of their graves, and summoning the whole world to come
to judgment.

2. The sign of the Son of man. What that is, we cannot certainly tell, till
experience manifest it. Interpreters probably conjecture, it will be some
mighty brightness, some forerunning beams of Majesty and Glory which shall
darken the great Luminaries of the world, and strike a terror into the hearts
of men.

II. Let us consider the nature and manner of this great judgment. The
Scripture represents it to us, under a formal, judiciary process, wherein,

1. The Judge himself will appear exceeding glorious, adorned with Majesty, and
clothed with unspakeable luster: He will come with power and great glory, Mat.
24 30. Even the Glory of the Father, Mat. 16.27. The Glory of a thousand Suns
made into one, will be nothing to that wherein Christ shall appear in man's
nature at that great day. The beams of his Glory shall dazzle the eyes of
sinners, and delight the eyes of Saints. When his Glory shall be revealed, the
Saints shall be glad with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4.13.

2. His attendance will be very glorious. The glorious Angels shall be Christ's
attendants at that day. If at the time of his nativity, tentation, passion,
resurrection, ascension they readily gave him their attendance, how much more
shall they do it at this great day? Mat. 25.31. It Is said, the Son of man shall
come in his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him. And if all the Angels must
wait on Christ, the number will be exceeding great, and the train will be
exceeding glorious. What Glory shall be in that day when the servants of the
Judge shall be Angels of power, every one stronger than an earthly Army;
Angels, whose countenances are like Lightning, and as much exceed in Glory the
greatest Emperor in the world in his highest pomp, as the Sun does a Clod of
earth. O how great, how illustrious will the splendor of this appearance be?
when the Judge coming in the clouds shall come thus attended?

3. There will be a Throne set, a Tribunal, a judgment seat erected. Mat.
19.28. And Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, that ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, when the son of man shall sit in the Throne of
his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. And that this Throne is a seat not only of Majesty, but judicature, may
further appear by Romans 14.10. But why do thou judge thy brother? or why do
thou set at naught thy brother? we shall all stand before the judgment seat of
Christ. And 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Christ shall therefore appear in
the proper form and condition of a Judge, sitting upon a Throne of judicature.

4. There will be a personal appearance of all men before that seat of
judicature, upon which Christ shall sit. For we must all appear, and we shall
all stand before that judgment seat, Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead small and
great stand before God, etc. Mat. 25.32. And before him shall be gathered all
Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides
his sheep from the goats.

5. When those who are to he judged are brought before the judgment seat of
Christ, all their actions shall appear, 1 Cor. 4.5. Therefore judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts. Eccles.
12.14. For God shall bring every work into judgment with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil. To this end in the vision of Daniel
when the judgment was set, the books were opened, Dan. 7.9. And in that of St.
John, The books were opened, and the dead were judged out of the things that
were written in the books, according to their works, Rev. 20.12.

Divines speak of a threefold book that will then be opened.

1. The book of Statutes, or the book of Gods Word, wherein the Law and Gospel
are written, with all the duties commanded and sins forbidden in them both.

2. The book of Gods Omniscience and remembrance, Mal. 3.16. And a book of
remembrance was written before him, etc.

3. The book of Conscience, which God maintains as a Register in every man's
breast, Jer. 17.1. The sin of Judah is written with a pen of Iron, and with the
point of a Diamond; it is graven upon the Table of their heart. Men will then
be awakened to purpose, and all their sins, with the aggravations of them will
be set in the view of their Consciences. Hidden things shall be brought to
light in that day, 1 Cor. 4.5. etc.

6. After the manifestation of all their actions, the Judge will pronounce his
definitive sentence upon all their persons, according to their actions. The
sentence of absolution upon the Godly, in these words, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world,
Mat. 25.34. The Saints of God, and the elect will first be acquitted, before
the ungodly are condemned, that they may afterward join with Christ in judging
the world; according to that in the 1 Cor. 6.2. Where it is said, the Saints
shall judge the world, i. e. by way of approbation, approving and magnifying
Christ's just sentence on devils and wicked men; giving some such approbation
(in probability) as that of the Angel, Rev. 16.5. Thou art righteous O Lord,
which art, and wast, and shall be, because then have judged thus. And thus all
the Saints shall be Judges: But some of them more eminently as Assessors with
Christ, as is intimated concerning the Apostles, Mat. 19.28. Ye also shall sit
upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

We have showed what the sentence of absolution will be, which shall pass upon
the Godly. The sentence of condemnation follows, that will pass upon the
wicked; which we find recorded, Mat. 25.41. Then shall he say also unto them on
the left hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.

7. After the promulgation of the sentence, follows the execution, and
sending of the persons judged to their everlasting state, as it is written,
Mat. 25.46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the
righteous into life eternal.

We have seen what will be the Judiciary proceedings of this great day.

4. It now follows in the fourth and last place that we speak something of the
consequents thereof.

1. Christ's resigning up his Kingdom, (not his essential, but that which he
administers as Mediator) to the Father; having subdued sin and death, and put
all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.24. Then comes the end, when he
shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have
put down all rule, and all authority and power. V. 25. For he must reign, till
he has put all enemies under his feet. V. 26. The last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death. V. 27. For he has put all things under his feet; but when
he says all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted,
which did put all things under him. V. 28. And when all things shall be subdued
unto him, then shall the son also himself be subject unto him that put all
things under him, that God may be all in all.

2. The burning of the world, of which we read, 2 Pet. c. 3. v. 12. Looking
for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens being
on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat. By
this fire it is probable the world will not be consumed, but renewed, clarified
and purged. For it is compared to a melting fire, V. 10. -- The Elements shall
melt with fervent heat. -- And the Apostle says elsewhere, The Creature shall
be delivered from the bondage of corruption, Romans 8.21. In the everlasting
state God will have all things new, even the world it self. The use of this
renewed world may either be, for an habitation for the just, or that it may
remain as a standing monument of Gods wisdom and power.

Thus we have seen ^. That there will certainly be a day of Judgment. 2. That
Christ will be the Judge. 3. What manner of proceedings there will be in that
day. 4. The Consequents thereof.

What now remains, but that we carefully provide for this great and notable
day of the Lord, (as it is called Acts 2.20.) By breaking off our sins by true
and serious repentance, and making our peace with God, in and by Christ. O let
us labor to secure our interest in Christ, and our union with him. He is the
Judge: If he be our Advocate, we need fear nothing. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. The Head will not condemn his own
Members.

2. Let us do good, and communicate, and be merciful to the poor, while we have
ability and opportunity. In the 25 Mat. 35, 36. Compared with 42, 43. Christ
has told us aforehand what questions he will ask when he comes. Have you fed,
have you visited, have you clothed? It Is good we should be prepared for an
answer.

See the Scriptures concerning the last Judgment in the first part of this
Treatise, page 74, etc.

Of Hell.
We h ve seen there will be a day of Judgment, and that the Judge will judge
the world in righteousness. We have seen there will be a twofold sentence
pronounced by him: Of absolution upon the Godly, Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: Of condemnation upon the
wicked, v. 41. Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. We shall therefore here speak of the state of the
wicked, after the righteous Judge has pronounced the sentence of condemnation
upon them: and shall show how their bodies and souls being reunited, shall be
so continued in that life for ever, to undergo the punishment due unto their
sins. Here three things are to be taken into consideration,

1. The duration and continuance of their persons, without ever dying or being
destroyed or annihilated.

2. The duration of their pains, without ever being taken off.

3. The dreadfulnesse of those infernal pains and torments.

I. The Scripture speaks expressly that the wicked after the day of judgment
shall not be consumed or annihilated, but remain alive in soul and body, to
endure the torments to be inflicted upon them by the Justice of God, for all
the sins committed by them while they were in the body. The Word of God indeed
speaks of the wicked as of such as shall be destroyed, and perish, and die. But
we must know that a man may be said to be destroyed and perish, to be lost and
dead, who is rejected, separated and disjoined from God the fountain of glory
and blessedness. And that person may still subsist, and be what in his own
nature he was before, and live the life which does consist in the vital union
of his soul and body, and so subsisting undergo the wrath of God for ever. The
same Scripture which says the wicked shall be destroyed, and perish and die,
says also that they shall be tormented with never-dying pains, Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed (shall the Judge say to the wicked at the last day)
into everlasting fire. And least any should imagine that the fire shall be
everlasting, but not the torments; at the 46 v. it follows, and these shall go
away into everlasting punishment. Now if the fire be everlasting by which God
punishes the damned; and the punishment inflicted be also everlasting, then
must the damned everlastingly subsist to endure that punishment: Otherwise
there will be a punishment inflicted, and none endured; which is a
contradiction. Indeed the eternity of that fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels is a sufficient demonstration of the eternity of such as suffer in it.
And as that fire is termed eternal, so that eternity is described as absolute,
excluding all limits and determination. The end of the burning of fire is by
extinguishing, and that fire which cannot be extinguished, can never end: But
such is the fire which shall torment the damned. For he whose fan is in his
hand, shall burn up the chaff with unquencheable fire, Mark 3.12. Luke 3.17.
And he has told us plainly, (and thereby given us a fair warning) Mat. 18.8.
that it is better to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two
hands or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire: (Or as it is Mark 9.43.)
To go into Hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched. And he has
farther explained himself by that unquestionable addition, and undeniable
description of the place of torments, where the worm dies not, and the fire is
not quenched. And that we may be yet farther assured, that this fire shall
never be extinguished, were^^ that the smoke of their torments ascends up for
ever and ever, Rev. 14.11. And that those who are cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone, shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever, Rev. ^0.^0.
If therefore the fire in which the damned are to be tormented, be everlasting;
if so absolutely everlasting, that it shall never be quenched if so certainty
never to be quenched, that the smoke thereof shall ascend for ever and ever; if
those that are to be cast into it shall be tormented for ever and ever (all
which the Scriptures expressly teach) then shall the persons of the damned never
be destroyed or annihilated; but shall subsist for ever, and be coeternal to
the tormenting flames. When therefore the Scripture speaks, that the wicked
(after the resurrection) shall be punished with death, and that a second death,
it cannot be so understood, that they shall be no more, nor (in any sense) be
said to live, or subsist: For the enduring of this fire is that very death; and
they are therefore said to die the second death, because they endure eternal
torments. He that overcomes shall not be hurt by the second death, Rev. 2.11.
It seems they which shall die that death, shall be hurt by it; whereas if it
were annihilation, and so a conclusion of their torments, it would be no way
hurtful, or injurious, but highly beneficial to them. But the living torments
are the second death. For Rev. 21.8. It was revealed to St. John, that the
fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers,
and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars shall have their part in the lake
that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Now if to have
a part in the lake be the second death, if that part be a perpetual continuance
and permansion in torment, (as is before proved) then to say that the wicked
shall die the second death, is not a confutation of their eternal being in
misery, but an assertion of it; because it is the same thing delivered in other
terms, As is well observed by the Learned Mr. Pearson in his Exposition of the
Creed. Neither will the phrases of perdition and destruction infer an
annihilation of the persons of the damned, or an ending of their torments. For
eternity of destruction in the language of the Scripture, signifies a perpetual
perpession and duration in misery. As in the 2 These. 1.8, 9. When Christ shall
come to take vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, it is said, they shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his power.
Wherefore from what has been said, we may conclude, that the damned shall
continue both in soul and body under the wrath of God, and the torments
proceeding from it, never to be quitted of them by annihilation. Here they
might have life, but would not; there they would have death, but cannot.

II. As the damned shall always be continued in life and being, to endure the
torments due to their sins, so the Justice of God will never fail to inflict
those torments upon them for their sins. The favor of God is not to be
obtained, where there is no means left to obtain it; but in the world to come
there is no place for Faith, nor virtue in Repentance. As no person once
received into the Heavenly mansions shall ever be cast into outer darkness, so
certainly none, who are once cast into the fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, shall ever enter into their Masters joy. As the tree falls, so it
lies. There is no change to be wrought in man within those flames; no
purgation of his sins, no sanctification of his Nature, no justification of his
person, and therefore no salvation for him. Without the mediation of Christ, no
man shall ever enter into Heaven: And when he has delivered up the Kingdom
unto God, even the Father, then shall the office of the Mediator cease. The
condition then of the damned is unalterable; their condemnation irreversible,
their torments remediless, their miseries eternal. See Mr. Manton's excell^nt
Comment on Jude, p. 430.
The Reasons hereof are conceived by Divines to be these,

1. Because of the greatness of the Majesty against whom they have sinned. We
are finite creatures, and so not fit to judge of the nature of an offense
against an infinite God. The Lawgiver best knows the merit of sin, which is
the transgression of his Law.

2. With man, offenses of a quick execution, are judged to deserve a long
punishment; and the continuance of the penalty is not measured by the
continuance of the Act of sinning; therefore no wonder if it be so with God.

3. The damned sinned here as long as they could; if they had to eternity been
allowed to live, they would have improved it altogether in sin. They would have
dallied with God longer, grieved his Spirit longer, had they lived longer; yea
dispositively and in respect of their inclinations, did so. In Hell the desire
of sinning is not extinguished, nor mortified. The damned have not their hearts
there changed.

4. They despised an eternal happiness, therefore do justly suffer an eternal
torment.

5. Their obligations to God are infinite, and their punishment arises
according to the greatness of their obligations against which they sinned. As
the damned therefore shall not be taken from their punishment by annihilation,
or destruction of their persons; so their punishment shall not be taken off
from them, by any compassion showed unto them.

III. We come to consider the dreadfulnesse of the infernal torments. Hell is
set forth unto us in the Scriptures under sundry dreadful notions, viz. By the
worm that never dies, and the fire that never goes out, by a lake of fire and
brimstone, by outer darkness, and blackness of darkness for ever. That which
is most intelligible concerning the woeful state of the damned, I conceive may
be reduced to these four Heads.

1. They shall be tormented with the pain of loss, in being for ever banished
from the presence of God and the joys of Heaven, 2 These. 2.9. Being punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power.

2. With the pain of sense, inflicted on them by the wrath of God, which
abides on them, represented to us by a lake of fire. In this life, if his
anger be but kindled a little, and a spark of it fly into the Conscience, the
poor creature is at his wits end. But how dreadful will their portion be
against whom he stirs up his fierce wrath? Who knows the power of his
anger? Ps. 90.11. We that cannot endure the gripes of the Cholick, the pains
of the stone, or a violent toothache; how can we think of enduring the pains
and torments of Hell?

3. They shall be tormented with the worm of Conscience, that is, with a
cutting reflection upon, and remembrance of their former enjoyments, and by past
pleasures, Luke 16.2^. Son remember thou in thy life time had thy good
things; or when Conscience shall repeat over the passages of their lives past,
and set before them their precious time wasted and misspent, opportunities of
Grace slighted, the folly of their own choice, their turning their backs upon
eternal life offered in the Gospel; their gross neglect of their souls; their
eager pursuit of sensual satisfactions, their disregarding admonitions,
stifling convictions, quenching the motions of the Spirit of God, hating to be
reformed; O these will be sad (woeful sad) remembrances. The scourges of
Conscience we meet with here, are too great a price, for the short pleasure of
a brutish lust: O then, what a raging pain will such reflections as these cause
hereafter? What will they do that are tormented day and night for ever and ever?

4. As they will have a sharp sense and feeling of their present woeful state,
and a bitter discontent and vexation that by their own folly they brought it
upon themselves; so they will be tormented with despair of ever coming out of
it. They will see they must continue for ever in this remediless condition,
under an everlasting pain of loss, because there is no hope of Heaven; under an
eternal pain of sense, because there is no means to appease the wrath of God,
which abides on them. And this despair of ever coming out is the very Hell of
Hells. O, woe and alas! it is for ever, for ever they must be tormented.
Drexellius a learned Author writing upon this Argument, has this awakening
passage; If God (says he) should speak thus to a damned soul, let the whole
world be filled with sand from the earth to the Empyrean Heaven, and then let
an Angel come every thousand year, and fetch only one grain from that mighty
sandy mountain, and when that immeasurable heap is so spent, and so many
thousand years expired, I will deliver thee out of Hell, and those extreme
torments: That most miserable forlorn wretch, notwithstanding that he were to
lie through that unconceiveable length of time in those intolerable hellish
torments, yet upon such a promise would infinitely rejoice, and deem himself
not to be damned. But alas! when all those years are gone, there are thousands
upon thousands more to be endured, even through all Eternity.

O sad and woeful condition! O Eternity, Eternity, Eternity! This word ever
breaks the heart. O Lord, to depart from thee for ever, to lose the sight and
fruition of thy pleased countenance, to be hurled down among devils and damned
fiends into a lake of fire and brimstone, to be always burning, yet never
consumed, ever dying, yet never dissolved, always gnawed upon by the worm of
Conscience, yet never devoured, always gnashing the teeth, weeping, howling,
vexing, without any glimpse of hope, or one drop of comfort? What heart can
think on these things without splitting in pieces? O Lord, whatever thou
deniest me for this life, whatever shall be my lot and portion here, yet deny
me not (I humbly beseech thee) the effectual assistance of thy Grace, to enable
me to work out my salvation, to enable me unfeignedly to repent of all my sins,
and forsake them, and to give up my soul to Christ Jesus for pardon and life;
that by him I may be justified and sanctified, and saved from this dreadful
wrath to come. Even so let it be O Heavenly Father, for thy rich mercy and my
sweet Saviors merits sake.

I shall conclude this discourse of Hell, with a few serious meditations. Let
us consider,

1. How great, how inexcusable is the folly and stupidity of every wilful
sinner* that for the satisfaction of his brutish lusts, will run the hazard of
these everlasting torments! O did we look upon sin with Scripture spectacles,
we should find a greater disproportion between the pleasure and the pains
thereof, than between a drop of honey, and an Ocean of gall. Methinks the
meditation of eternal torments should damp and stop any sinner, in his sinful
heat and fury? Will thou O sinner for a short pleasure be content to pay an
everlasting punishment? Go into Hell by meditation, that thou may not go
thither by condemnation.

2. What interest or concernment have we in the whole world comparable to this,
the making our peace with God? He is the severest enemy, but the sweetest
friend. How should we speedily humble our selves before him for all our sins,
and fly to his mercy in Christ for our pardon. The wages of sin is death.
Nothing can bring us to those everlasting flames, but sin unrepented of.
Nothing can save that man from the never-dying worm, who dies in his sins.

3. How highly should we prize the love of Christ? how great a value should we
set upon his blood? How willingly should we embrace the offers of Grace and
reconciliation made to us in him? How readily and cheerfully should we give up
our selves to him, resolving to be his faithful Disciples and servants, seeing
he laid down his life to deliver us from these everlasting torments, this wrath
to come? In one thing, the sins of men admit of a greater aggravation than the
sins of Angels; These never sinned against the offers of a Savior as men do.

4. How readily should we do or suffer, perform or undergo any thing, this
blessed Redeemer calls us to, who has done and sufferd so much for our sakes.

5. How should we pity and pull back those who are posting toward the pains
of eternal fire? We may (possibly) anger them thereby, but we had better endure
some scalding drops of their wrath, than let them fall, (if we can help it by
doing our duty to admonish them) into the lake of fire and brimstone.

6. How should the consideration of everlasting torments after death, breed in
every heart a fear and awe of the great God; and teach us to tremble at his
Word, and his Threatenings therein denounced against all impenitent sinners. How
eagerly should we embrace that reduplicated advice of our blessed Savior, Luke
12.5. I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear, fear him which after he has
killed, has power to cast into Hell, yea, I say unto you, fear him.

Mat. 25.41. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. V. 46.
And these shall go away into everlasting punishment. -- Mark 9.43. And if thy
hand offend thee, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into life maimed,
than having two hands to go into Hell, into the fire that never shall be
quenched. V. 44. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. V.
45. And if thy foot offend thee cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into
life halt, than having two feet to be cast into Hell, into the fire that never
shall be quenched. V. 46. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. V. 47. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, it is better for
thee to enter into the Kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be
cast into Hell fire. V. 48. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. Rev. 21.8. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall
have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. Rev. 20.10. And the devil that deceived them was cast into the
lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false Prophet are; and
shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. Rev. 14.10. The same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into
the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone,
in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. V. 11. And
the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, etc. Matthew. 22.13.
Then said the King unto his servants, bind him hand and foot, and take him
away, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be weeping, and gnashing
of teeth. Matthew. 23 33. Ye Serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape
the damnation of Hell? Matthew. 7.13. Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is
the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be
which go in thereat. Rev. 2.11. He that has an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit says unto the Churches, he that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the
second death. Ju^e v. 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but
left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains, under
darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. V 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the Cities about them, in like manner giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. V. 13. Raging waves of the Sea, foming
out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever. 2. These. 1.9. Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.
Psalm 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that
forget God. 1 These. 5.9. For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain
salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 These. 1.10. And to wait for his Son
from Heaven, from whom he raised the dead, even Jesus, which delivered us from
the wrath to come. Matthew. 10.28. And fear not them, which kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy
both soul and body in Hell. Luke 16.23. And in Hell he lift up his eyes, being
in torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom V. 24. And he
cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he
may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented
in this flame. V. 25. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy life
time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he
is comforted, and thou art tormented. V. 27. Then he said I pray thee therefore
Father, that thou would send him to my Fathers house. V. 28. For I have five
Brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come unto this place
of torment. Matthew. 16.26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the
whole world, and lose his soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul. Of Heaven.
We have seen what will be the state of the damned. We come now to speak of the
blessedness of those that die in the Lord, i. e. in the favor of God, in a
state of peace with him, being members of Christ's mystical body, When they die,
their souls are carried by Angels to Christ, and by him presented to God the
Father, as the fruit of his purchase. So that they are presently blessed upon
the departure of the soul out of the body; but shall be more blessed at the
general resurrection, when soul and body being reunited, the Judge shall set
them at his right hand, and pronounce upon them this gracious sentence, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation
of the world, Matthew 25.34. Which done, they shall go away into life eternal, as
it is, v. 46.

The Glory and Blessedness of this state, we come now to enquire into, and
there are two things wherein it consists.

1. In a total removal of all evils.

2. In a confluence of all good, necessary to the happiness of the Creature.

First, All evils are removed. There are three great evils we labor under here.

1. The evil of sin.

2. Of temptation.

3. Of affliction. None of which shall trouble the Saints in Heaven.

1. The evil of sin is there removed. Sin is the great evil the children of God
complain of with so much sadness in this world. Here the Spirit lusts
against the flesh, and the flesh against the Spirit; but in Heaven there shall
be no sinful lusts to war against the soul. Paul shall not there complain of a
law in his members rebelling against the law of his his mind: Nor c^y out, Oh
miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death, Romans
7. There shall be no blindness in the mind, perverseness in the will, disorder
in the affections, no concupiscence in the members, no rebellion in the flesh,
the old Adam is left in the grave, never to rise more. The dominion of sin the
Saints are delivered from in this life, but there the very being of it is
removed. Grace weakens sin, Glory quite abolisheth it. Into Heaven nothing
enters that defiles. There we shall be under an^ happy impossibility of
offending God.

2. The evil of temptation. The world is a place of snares, a valley of
temptations, the devils circuit. What abundance of temptations are we assaulted
with here continually, either from the Devil, the world, or our own corrupt
Natures? In Paradise there was a tempter, but there is none in Heaven. No
Serpent can creep in there. Here we had need pray continually, Lord lead us not
into temptation: There we shall be fully delivered from it.

3. The evil of affliction. In Heaven, there is an absolute freedom from all
misery, pain, labor, want, or whatever else might afflict us. All sorrow shall
be done away, as well as all sin. Sorrow is the fruit of sin, and when the
mother is dead, no more offspring can be expected. Whatsoever is painful, and
burdensome to Nature is a fruit of sin, and a brand, and mark of our rebellion
against God. Here we are subject to a number of necessities, hunger, thirst,
cold, wants of several sorts. In Heaven the children of God shall enjoy perfect
freedom from whatsoever is troublesome. Grief, fear, temptation, sickness, pain
of body, anguish of mind, shall be heard of no more for ever. When the Saints
are once past death, they are past the fear of all misery. When their bodies
are once lapt up in their winding-sheets, they are past all tribulation. Heaven
is a happy air, where none are sick. There is no such thing as agues, fevers,
gouts, or the grinding pains of the Stone. There is nothing to discompose the
mind, or afflict the body. The Saints shall there be freed from the necessities
of Nature, such as eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. Meat is for the belly, and
the belly for meat, but God shall destroy both it and them, 1 Cor. 6.12. The
use of meats, and of the stomach and belly is there abolished. Here we are
almost continually in want of something or other; but there we shall be above
meat and drink and apparel, etc. Here we have a mixture of pleasures and
sorrows; (both good and evil are to be received from the hand of God in this
life) but there is fullness of joy for evermore. I shall conclude this, with
that comfortable place, Rev. 21.4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away.

Secondly, A Second thing wherein the blessedness of Heaven consists, is, in a
confluence of all good necessary to the happiness of the Creature. The Saints
in Heaven will be blessed,

1. In their bodies.

2. In their souls.

3. In their Company.

4. In an absolute security of enjoying all this blessedness for ever, without
any fear of losing it, or being deprived of it.

I. They will be blessed in their bodies. The bodies even of the best of the
Saints are for the present vile bodies, instruments of sin, and subjects of
diseases; but the Lord Jesus Christ shall at the day of judgment raise these
vile bodies, and change them into the likeness of his own glorious body, Phil.
3.20, 21. The bodies of the Saints are the members of Christ, and no member of
his shall remain in death. They are the Temples of the holy Ghost; and
therefore if they be destroyed, they shall be raised again. For if the Spirit
of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in us (as he does in the
Saints, and by so dwelling, makes their bodies Temples) he that raised up
Christ from the dead, shall also quicken our mortal bodies by his Spirit that
dwells in us, Romans 8.11. The Holy Ghost will not forsake his mansion and
ancient habitation. Therefore he raises it up, and forms it again into a
complete fashion, like Christ's glorious body. The bodies of the Saints when
dead, and separated from their souls, are not separated from Christ, as we
showed before: And therefore are said to be dead in Christ, to sleep in Jesus,
as it is, 1 These. 4.14. While dead, they are united to Christ, and by virtue of
this Union, Christ as their Head, will raise them at the last day; and at their
resurrection, they shall be changed, as to their qualities, though their
substance shall not be altered. The Ancient Christians when they rehearsed that
Article of the Creed, I believe the resurrection of the flesh, were wont to
add, even of this my flesh: It Is necessary the same flesh should be raised
again. For it cannot stand with Gods justice, that one body should sin, and
another body be damned. That he that sinned in one body, should be punished in
another; or he that pleased God in his own flesh, should see God with other
eyes. It Is also contrary to the very nature of the resurrection; for a
resurrection is when the same body that dies, rises again. Otherwise it is
rather a new Creation than a resurrection. As therefore the body of Christ
after his resurrection was the same for substance, though much more excellent
and glorious, so shall the bodies of the Saints be at their resurrection. If
any shall ask how a resurrection is possible? I answer, to Angels or men this
is impossible; but to an all-knowing God, whose wisdom is infinite, and to an
almighty God, whose power is illimited, this is very possible. It shall be done
according to the mighty working, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto
himself; As the Apostle speaks, Phil. 3.21. He by whom the very hairs of our
heads, and the sands of the sea are all numbered, knows all the scattered
bones, knows what dust belongs to each body. And as his all-seeing eye
observes every particle of dissolved and corrupted man; so does he also see
and know all ways and means by which those scattered parts should be united;
by which this ruined fabric should be re-compos'd. Though the parts of the
body of man be dissolved, yet they perish not. They are laid up in the secret
places, and lodged in the Chambers of Nature, and it is no more a contradiction,
that they should become the parts of the same body of man again, to which they
did once belong, than that after his death, they should become the parts of any
other body, as we see they do. And moreover we see by experience that our most
curious glasses are made by art, even of Ashes. Cannot then the all knowing and
Omniscient God, raise men's bodies out of Ashes? It Is as easy for God to
distinguish between dust and dust, and to give to every man his own dust, as it
is for a Gardener that has diverse seeds in his hand to sever them, and know
them one from another. A skilful Alchimist can extract one metal from another;
much more can God Allmighty distinguish and separate one dust from another. As
it was therefore only an Omnipotent power, which could mould the first dust, of
which man was made, into an humane body, and breath into the nostrils of it the
breath of life, so the same power can still make of the dust, returning from
the bodies of men unto the earth, humane bones and flesh. For the Apostle tells
us in the place before mentioned, that he is able to subdue all things unto
himself. And further the Scripture tells us, that Christ by virtue of the
dominion he obtained at his resurrection, must reign till he has put all his
enemies under his feet; and the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.
Now there is no destruction of death, but by a general resurrection. Christ is
the Lord of the dead, and so has a right by that dominion to raise them all to
life, 1 Cor. 15.22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive. I shall conclude this with those two famous places, John 5.28. Marvel
not at this, for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves
shall hear his voice, V. 29. And shall come forth, they that have done good,
unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation. Acts 24.15. And have hope toward God, which they
themselves also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of
the just, and the unjust.

Well then, seeing there will be a Resurrect^on,

Here possibly some will enquire, what transformations and changes Christ will
make in the bodies of the Saints at the last day?

I answer, That day being to be as it were the marriage day between Christ and
his Saints, he will endow their bodies with glorious qualities, as well as
their souls: For he assumed their bodies as, well as their souls; suffered in
body as well as in soul; died for their bodies as well as for their souls; and
therefore will glorify their bodies as well as their souls. But to speak more
particularly; the Apostle tells us what kind of change this will be, 1 Cor.
15.41. There is one Glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and another
Glory of the Stars, for one Star differs from another Star in Glory. V. 42.
So also is the resurrection of the dead; it is sown in corruption, it is
raised in incorruption. V. 43. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory:
It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. V. 44. It is sown a natural
body it is raised a spiritual body.

1. Our bodies shall be made incorruptible. They are sown in corruption, but
shall be raised in incorruption. They now yield to the decaies of nature, and
are exercised with pains and aches; but hereafter they shall be clothed with
immortality, made wholly impassible. What a comfort must it needs be to the
Saints, to think that there is a time coming when they shall have a body
without aches, pains, and without decaies, that shall be always in the spring
of youth. The resurrection is the Saints best Physician.

2. Our bodies shall be made glorious bodies. They are sown in dishonor, but
shall be raised in glory. All deformities, and defects (which are the fruits of
sin) shall be removed. As the body of Adam in innocence, was lovely and
beautiful, complete in all its parts, so shall ours be at the resurrection: The
righteous shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13.43. If
Moses's face by conversing with God but forty days did shine so exceedingly
that they were glad to put a vail upon it; how glorious shall our bodies be,
when we shall be ever with the Lord? Christ in the Mount when he was
transfigured, Mat. 17.2. His face did shine as the Sun, and his raiment was
white as snow. Peter, James and John were not able to bear the sight of the
glory there manifested, and yet this was but a glimpse of that glory he has
now in Heaven. By this you may guess a little at the glory of the body; when
it is likened to Christ's glorious body. If we would have our bodies eternally
beautiful, let us labor to be truly gracious here.

3. Our bodies shall be made spiritual bodies: They are sown natural bodies,
but shall be raised spiritual bodies. When we come into the other world, that
world of Spirits, even our bodies shall be spiritual; not spiritual for
substance, but for qualities.

1. They shall have no need of meat, drink; sleep, etc. but shall be as the
Angels of God, Mat. 22.30, If Moses upon the Mount, in the state of mortality,
was upheld by the power of God forty days, without meat, and without sleep;
how much more shall we be so upheld for ever in the Kingdom of Heaven?

2. They shall move with great agility and nimblenesse. We shall not be clogged
as now, but shall be able (as the Learned think) to move upwards and downwards
freely, like a bird in the air.

3. Or Lastly, Our bodies after the resurrection may be termed spiritual,
because they will then be more fitted and disposed for spiritual uses, for the
enjoyments and employments of Grace.

4. Our bodies shall be made powerful. They are sown in weakness, but shall
rise in power. The power and strength that glorified bodies shall have, will be
wonderful. In this life the eye is dazeled at the brightness of the Sun; but
then it shall be strengthened to behold glorious sights, and not be dazeled at
them. The body shall be enabled and strengthened by God, to bear that exceeding
and eternal weight of Glory that shall be allotted to it.

5. Unto all these glorious perfections, and endowments, we may add this one
more, the great privilege and happiness we shall have to beh^ld with our
bodily eyes our blessed Savior as man. That we shall see our Redeemer with
these eyes, Job plainly testifies, Job 19.25. For I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the later day upon the earth. V. 26. And
though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.
V. 27. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another, etc. And that this sight will add much to our happiness, we need not
doubt. The sight of Christ as man is the next object (as one says well) to the
beatifical Vision. Mr Calamy in his Sermon at Dr Boltons Funeral.
For the fullness of the God head dwells in him bodily, and does as it were
radiate through his body. Hence there must needs arise much joy to the
beholder, both from the eminency of, and our interest in this Object. Christ in
Glory, and Christ in Glory ours. As much of the Creator, as is possibly visible
in the Nature of man, will be to be seen in Christ. As much contentation as the
Creature can be made partaker of, by the sight of any visible Object, will be
the portion of the beholders of Christ as he is man. See Mr. Nortons orthodox
Evangelist.

So much for the blessedness of the Body.

II. The Saints in Heaven shall be blessed in their Souls. Let us enquire
wherein this blessedness consists.

1. The understanding being enlarged and widened shall have a right knowledge,
a clear sight and vision of God. Now we see through a glass darkly, 1 Cor.
13.12. but then face to face; now we know but in part, but then we shall know
even as we are known; our knowledge of God now is very imperfect, but then we
shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2.

2. The will shall be perfected with absolute and indefective holiness, with
exact conformity to the will of God, and perfect freedom from all servitude to
sin.

3. The affections shall be set right by an unalterable regularity. There shall
be a constant cleaving of heart to God, a constant loving of him, without
satiety or weariness. Here are many startings aside to the creature; but in
Heaven there will be an eternal fixed delight and complacency in God.

4. The Soul will enjoy a full, immediate, uninterrupted communion with God,
and fruition of him. Whilst we are here at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.6. Here our comforts come in by the
ministry of Ordinances, but there God will be all in all to us immediately, 1
Cor. 15.28.

III. The Saints in Heaven shall be blessed in their Company. Oh what blessed
company is there in the new Jerusalem! There is God, and Christ, and Angels,
and Saints. How will God the Father welcome us? Well done good and faithful
servants, enter into your Masters joy. How will our Redeemer welcome us? How
joyful will he be to receive us, who shed his blood to bring us thither? How
will the Holy Angels welcome us? They delight in the good of men. When man was
created, those Morning Stars sung together, and those Sons of God shouted for
joy, Job 38.7. When Christ came to redeem man, an Heavenly host of them praised
God, Luke 2.13. When man is converted; there is joy in Heaven among those
blessed Spirits, Luke 15.10. How much more rejoicing will there be when we come
to be glorified? Lastly, How will the blessed Saints welcome us? Our old
acquaintance, with whom we have prayed, suffered, familiarly conversed. Memory
is not abolished in Heaven (as one observes) but perfected. Mr. Manton in his
Sermon at Mrs. Blackwels Funeral.
Therefore those whom we knew here, we shall know again. A Minister shall see
his Crown, and the fruit of his labors, 1 These. 2.19. Those that have been
relieved by us, shall welcome us into Heaven, who therefore are said (according
to some Interpreters) to receive us into everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9.
Yea, we shall know those whom we never saw. Why else is it made a part of our
privilege to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? Mat. 8.11. In the
transfiguration, Peter knew Moses and Elias, dead many hundred years before. So
shall we (as it is more than probable) know one another. O what blessed company
shall we converse with in the City that is above.

IV. And Lastly, The Saints in Heaven shall be blessed in this, They shall have
the perpetual enjoyment of all this blessedness secured to them, without any
fear of ever losing it, or being deprived of it. The Saints shall never put off
their glorious robes, after they have once put them on. Their state is a sure
eternal state of actual delights. Though there be several degrees of glory in
Heaven, yet he that enjoyes the least degree, is fully satisfied with what he
enjoyes. He desires not one degree of Glory above what he possesses.

What now remains, but that we press this duty upon our selves, frequently to
meditate on this celestial Glory. Many great benefits will accrue to us
thereby.

1. This will abate our thirst after earthly things. One hours serious musing
on the glory that is above, would cause the soul to be as a weaned child to the
glory that is here below.

2. It will make sufferings light, Romans 8.18. For I reckon (says the Apostle)
that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared, with
the Glory which shall be revealed in us.

3. It will make us serious in Duties. It will make us pray earnestly, hear
attentively, walk circumspectly. Serious thoughts of Heaven will make us shake
off laziness, and sloth, and with fervency of Spirit to serve the Lord.

4. It will stir us up to an earnest desire of that righteousness to which
such a Glory appertains, and to a careful and constant performance of those
commands to which such a reward is so graciously promised. Without holiness no
man shall see the Lord. Men do but deceive themselves, who think to pass
immediately from a state of corruption, to a state of Glory. Would we enter into
Glory, let us labor to secure our state in Grace. Grace and Glory do not
differ specifically, but gradually. When a soul is brought into a state of
saving Grace, it is entered into a state of Glory: For as God has prepared
Heaven for his children, so he prepares his children for Heaven. Grace is the
Nursery of Glory: As the plants of righteousness grow fit for Heaven, they are
removed to Heaven, and shall be for ever with the Lord. O Lord, prepare and fit
my soul for this new Jerusalem, into which no unclean thing can enter. Give me
true repentance for all my sins, and wash away the guilt of them in the blood
of thy dear Son, my Lord and Savior: Sanctify me throughout both in soul and
body by thy Grace and holy Spirit, and enable me to glorify thee in this life,
that I may hereafter enter into thy Kingdom, into that eternal state of Glory,
bliss, and purity. O let me not have my portion in this life, but when thou
sendest for me out of this world by death, Lord receive my soul (for thy free
mercy and my Saviors merits sake) into those Heavenly mansions, where there is
fullness of joy, and pleasures at thy right hand for evermore. Amen.

John 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me, for thou
lovedst me before the foundation of the world. 1 Cor. 2.9. But as it is
written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man the things which God has prepared for them that love him. 2 Cor. 5.1.
For we know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be dissolved, we have
a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Col.
1.12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Heb. 10.34. For ye took joyfully the
spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven, a
better, and an enduring substance. Heb. 12.22. But ye are come unto Mount Sion,
and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of Angels. V. 23. To the general assembly and Church of the
first born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to
the Spirits of just men made perfect. 1 These. 4.17. -- And so shall we ever be
with the Lord. Heb. 6.19. Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both
sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within the vail. V. 20. Whither
the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an High Priest for ever after
the order of Melchizedek. Mat. 25.23. His Lord said unto him, well done, good
and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make
thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. 2 Cor. 12.4.
How that he was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it
is not lawful for a man to utter. Luke 16.22. And it came to pass that the
beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. Heb. 11.10. For
he looked for a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. 1
Pet. 1.4. To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for you. 1 Pet. 5.4. And when the chief Shephard shall
appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away. Glory be to God
in the highest,
On earth peace,
Good will toward men.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be sold by JOHN ROTHWEL, at the Fountain and
Bear in Cheap Side.
A Mr. AInsworth Arrow against Idolatry in fol. and 12 Dr. Ames Cases of
conscience. Engl. Marrow of Divinity. 4 On Peter. 4 D. Arrowsmith Tactica Sacra
sive de milite spirituali pugnante, Vincente and Triumphante. Annotations on
the Bible by the Dutch Ministers, fol. Assembly Confess. Catechism large and
small in 4 with Scriptures at large.
B M. Bradshaw Sin against the H. Ghost 12 M. Bridges Babylons downfall 4 M.
Bohemus on 100 Scriptures opened 8 M. Broxolme on Perkins Six Principles 8 M.
Bucklers Assize Sermon
C M. Church, Miscelanies of the Attributes of God The Creatures of God 4 Good
man's Treasury 12 Of Ejaculations 12 His Golden Sayings 12 Pocket companion 12
M. Culverwells Light of nature 4 White stone (alone) 8
M. Clark Of Persecution and Lives of Ministers. folio. M. Cravens Catechism 8
M. Cotton of singing of Psalms 4 Catechizing and Conference by the Ministers
of the Isle of Wight.
D M. Dales Shepherdizing of Lambs 8 D. Drake De sanguine 4 M. Dyke of Epping,
His Right Receiving of Christ 8 Safety in case of danger 8 Select Sermons of
Quenching the Spirit, and Pardon of sin, etc. 8

F Mr Fenner of Affections 4 Of Conscience 4 Alarm for drousie Saints 4 Wilful
Impenitency 4 Catechism, On the Creed Lords Prayer Ten Commandments,

M. Ford of Baptism, Catechizing, and first Fruits of David's Government 8 His
Catechize against the Anabaptists

G Germany Lamentations Octavo Invasion Octavo Prodigies Octavo
H M. Hughes Of Affliction, the benefit of it 4 Funeral Sermon 4 Parliament
Sermon 4
M. Hooks New-Englands Tears 4 New-Englands Sense 4
M. How of Universal Redemption 4 Pagan Preacher silenced 4
M. Haines Grammar 8 M. Hanmer Of Confirmation
L M. Lockier Balm for bleeding England and Ireland 8 Communion of Church
Militant Discovery of Sincerity 8 Olive Leaf 8 Parliament Sermon 4 Englands
Wounds 4
Love, Grace with its different degrees 8 Zealous Christian 4 Heavens Glory and
Hels Terror 4 Effectual Calling 4 Combat between the Flesh and Spirit 4
Directory of a Christian 4 The Penitent Pardoned 4 The Dejected Souls Cure
Administration of Angels 4 Gods Omni-presence The Sinners Legacy to their
posterity 4 By Mr. Calamy By Mr. Whitaker By Mr. Ash By Mr. Tailor
Longland On the four last things. Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven 12
M M. Milton His Reason of Church Government 4 Apology for Smectymnuus
M. Mathers Catechism 8 Reply to M. Rutherford 4

P M. Pool His Answer to Biddles Denial of the H. Ghost to be God 12 His
Vindication of the Ministry 4 A Pacification between the Lutheran and Reformed
Churches 8 M. Perrot The Scripture Stability
R Bp. Richardson his choice Observations on the Old Testament, as a supplement
to the large Annot. fol. M Robouro^gh against Goodwin about Justification 4 M^
Robinson Christ is all in all 4 M. Ruttons Sermon before the Lord Mayor
S Smectymnuus redivivus first and second Parts about Episcopacy and Presbytery
4 M. Shepherd on the Sabbath, with Cases of Conscience 8 Of Subjection to
Christ 8 On the Parab. of the 10 Virg. 4
D. Sibbs Miracle of Miracles 4 Glorious feast of the Gospel 4 His Glance of
Heaven 12 Spiritual man's aim 12 His Charter of a Christian 12 Conference
between Christ and Mary after his Resurrect. 12 On 2. Epist. Cor. Chap. 4. 4
D. Stoughtons Sermons in his younger years 4 His form of sound words, with the
righteous man's plea to true Happiness 4 Heavenly conversation, Two Sermons 12
D. Seaman of Ordination 4 His Solomon's choice 4 Head of the Church 4 Glass
for the times 4
Mrs. Scots exemplary life and death drawn up by several Minist.
T Thaesaurus Poeticus 12 D. Tuckney Balm for Gilead 12 Death disarmed: A
Sermon at D Hills Funeral 12 None but Christ 12
M. Tutty Funeral Sermon
V M. Venning Orthodox Parodoxes 8 New Command octavo Mysteries and Revelat.
octavo Milk and Honey Second Part. octavo Warning to Backslid. octavo Way to
Heaven 4 octavo Sermon on the 5th. of November

W Wise Virgin, A Narrative of Gods dealing with a child of eleven years of
age; and her gracious speeches in time of her affliction: Published by three
Ministers. 8 M. Whitlock and M Reinolds Funeral Sermon of Francis Pierpointe
Esquire;


