HAERESEO-MACHIA: OR, The mischief which Heresies do, AND The means to
prevent it. Delivered in a SERMON in Paul's, before the Right Honorable, the
LORD MAYOR, and the ALDERMEN of the famous City of LONDON, February the first,
M. DC. XLV. And now printed, for the satisfaction of the hearers, and others.
By JAMES CRANFORD, Pastor of Christopher Le Stocks, London.

(...), Athan. ad Solitar. Diligite homines, interficite errores, sine superbia
de veritate praesumite, sine saevitia pro veritate contendite. Aug. cont. lit.
Petil. lib. 1. cap. 29. Jude 3. It was needful for me to write unto you, and
exhort you, that ye should earnestly contend for the faith once delivered to
the Saints. LONDON, Printed by James Young for Charles Green, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Gun in Ivie-lane, 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS ADAMS, Lord Mayor; THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, THE
SHERIFFS; With the residue of the ALDERMEN Of the famous CITY of LONDON.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
THese Meditations were intended only for the Pulpit, but are enforced to the
Press; not so much by the entreaties of friends, as importunities of
adversaries. I print (to use Theodorets expression) (...). Epist. 83.
not to please or commend my self, but necessitated to apologize, and to
assert the verity of what I have delivered. Many aspersions have been cast upon
me, upon my Sermon: (...). I expected them. The disciple is not above his
Master. The most of you were my hearers, I am contented you should be my
Judges: and rest,

Your Honors and Worships Servant in the Gospel, JAMES CRANFORD.

TO THE READER.
READER,
IT has been my endeavor, in this Sermon, to discover unto thee, The mischief
that Heresies do, and the means to prevent it. It has been my care ((...)) to
deliver the naked truth in plain expressions: Rotten posts need pargetting,
withered faces painting; Truth is most comely in her native colors, and has
strength of her own, (...), to conquer by weakness. It is possible thou have
heard (if not fomented) the great clamours raised against my self and my
Sermon, by Sectaries, whom it would better have beseemed to (...), Nazianz.
Epist. 29. (...). Cyril. ad Nestor. Epist. 4.
have amended themselves, and their own errors, then to have aspersed others,
and given out such unchristian language, when they were not at all injured, but
only reproved, and that for their advantage. It is no great matter to me to be
judged of you, or of man's judgment, -- he that judges me is the Lord. The
testimony of my conscience, and God the approver of (...), etc. Theodoret.
Epist. 99.
my doctrine, sweep away (as a spiders web) the calumnies of sycophants: yet to
the intent I may remove prejudice from thee, I shall speak in a word to three
objections, which are most frequent: First, Some say, It was unseasonable. Why
unseasonable? Because others were silent. Nay rather, it was seasonable,
because others were silent. I conceive, with Theodoret, that speech or silence
in this season, distinguishes (...), etc. Epist. 77.
between the faithful shepherd and the hireling. Paul's spirit was stirred in
him when he saw the City wholly given to idolatry: And is it possible for a
faithful Minister to be (...); Cyprian. ad Nestor. Epist. 2.
silent when the faith is corrupted, and so many subverted? Must we not all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and give an account of our
unseasonable silence? But thanks be to God, there is no ground for such an
objection. Secondly, Others say, I was bitter, the Sermon a bloody Sermon. I
answer: Examine the quotations: Was I more bitter, more bloody then the
Scriptures? then the Fathers? Who called false Prophets ravening wolves, dogs,
evil workers? Who wished them cut off, commanded them to be reproved sharply,
(...), cuttingly? Did not Christ? Did not the Apostle? Did not the Ancients
account them (...); Cyril. in Joh lib. 1. cap. 4.
The workmen of destruction, the huntsmen of the Devil, the snares of death?
Were these bitter, bloody? If so, I will not blush to be in the same
condemnation with my Savior: Bitter pills may be wholesome physic. Thirdly,
Others say, All men speak ill of me: some resolve never to hear more in that
Auditory for my sake, etc. Reader, Let not this trouble thee; I pass through
good report as well as bad. I am satisfied with the testimony of Athanasius, I
have (...). Ad Adelphium.
done as becomes a Minister of the Gospel, and the doctrine of godliness, in
my sharpest reproofs against these men. As for the people, (...). Tom. 2.
I say, with the same Father, I respect those people that adhere to the truth,
not weather-cocks, and such as delight in novelties. I conclude as Austin, You
have heard their reproaches, which they had Audivistis male dicta, quae ab
illis non audirem, si vestram perditionem contemnerem, si charitatis viscera
non haberem. Cont. lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 10.
never cast upon me, if I had been careless of your salvation. Reader, I will
detain thee no longer: the Sermon is now thine, read it, try it, censure it,
spare not; but remember, the scene will be changed, it shall one day try, and
censure thee. Vale.

From my Study, this 16. of March, 1645. JA. CRANFORD.

The Analysis of the Sermon.
D. Erroneous opinions eat as a Gangrene 1. Speedily, 5 2. Incurably, 5 3.
Mortally, 6 1. Faith Quae, 8 Qua, 9
2. Peace Church 10 Civil 10
3. Piety 14


R. 1. Heretics are 1. Subtle, 17 2. Active, 28
2. People are 1. Ignorant, 30 2. Curious, 31
God is just 1. Punishing lukewarmnesse, 32 2. Manifesting the approved, 33

Use. Prevent and stop them, 1. People 1. Adhere to the Ministry, 36 2. Try all
things, 38 3. Avoid Seducers, 39
2. Ministers 1. Convince, 42 2. Cast out, 44
3. Magistrates, what they 1. Have done 47 2. May do 47



HAERESEO-MACHIA, OR, The mischief which Heresies do, and the means to
prevent it.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 17. And their word will eat as does a canker, (or a gangrene) of
whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, etc.
THE blessed Apostle was, at the writing of this Epistle, now ready to be
offered up, as you may see Chap. 4. 6. I am now ready to be offered up, and the
time of my departure is at hand. He writes this Epistle, as his last Will and
Testament, to Timothy his own son in the faith, to give him direction how to
behave himself in the Church of God, which is the house of God, the pillar and
ground of truth. He bestows upon him good counsel (as a legacy) that he
should be painful in his doctrine, and watchful over his conversation, and
proposes himself as an example, Chap. 3. 10. Thou have fully known my
doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, patience:
Disce, puer, virtutem ex me; Learn, my son, painfulnesse and watchfulness of
me; (...), Ignat. ad Ephesians.
I require no more of thee then I my self have given thee in pattern, Thou
have fully known, etc. Now the Apostle, not ignorant of the wiles of the
devil, his main engines against the two pillars of the Church, (...), Id. ibid.
faith and love, (the bonds of our union with our head, and with his body) and
his endeavors to overthrow love by the overthrow of faith, he warns him in a
special manner to hold fast the form of sound words, and to show himself a
workman that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth: to avoid
profane and vain janglings, which would increase to more ungodliness. And he
urges the same exhortation in my Text, from the mischief that will come to
the Church by such vain janglings: Their word will eat as does a gangrene, of
whom is Hymeneus and Philetus.

The Text therefore discovers the mischief of unsound teachers, or unsound
doctrine; where we consider, First, the Subject, Their word: illustrated by an
instance, Of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who have erred, etc. Secondly, the
Adjunct, Will eat, or will have pasture; set out by a similitude, As does a
canker, or a gangrene. Thus you have the connection, the scope, and parts of
this verse, out of which I shall propose one Observation: In the prosecution of
which, other things may happily be touched upon in transitu. The Doctrine is
this:

Erroneous and unsound doctrine is of a devouring (i. e. spreading and
destroying) nature: Their word (says the Apostle) will eat as does a gangrene.

The Apostle Peter, speaking of false teachers, assures us, that they shall
privily bring in damnable heresies, even denying 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
the Lord that bought them: And, that many shall follow their pernicious ways,
by reason of whom the truth shall be evil spoken of. I pray you observe it;
Heresies, erroneous doctrines, are damnable, They shall bring in damnable
heresies. They are of a (...), Theoph. ad Anaylo. l. 2. Tit. 1. 11.
destroying nature. They are of a spreading nature, Many shall follow their
pernicious ways. So also Paul averres to Titus; They subvert whole houses,
teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre sake. Heresies are of a
destroying nature; They subvert the house, (...), they undermine it, and
overturn it from the foundation: They are of a spreading nature; They subvert
whole houses, many houses are overturned. But by what is all this? speaking
things which they ought not, for filthy lucre sake. Our Savior Christ warns
his disciples to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces,
Matthew. 16. 6. 11, 12.
which is expounded of their doctrine: Their erroneous and false doctrine is
compared to leaven, which is a fit (...), Cyril. de ador. in sp. and verit.
lib. 15.
resemblance of all doctrine. The doctrine of the Gospel is compared to leaven,
Luke 13. 22. and the corrupt doctrine of the Pharisees is compared to leaven,
because, As a little leaven leavens the whole lump, and quickly sowres all; so
doctrine, (...), Cyril. ibid. l. 17.
when it once sinks into a man's mind, and gets into the heart, it does (as it
were) translate the soul, and spirit, and body, even the whole man, into the
similitude, quality, nature of it self. It is not only thus spreading over a
person; but (the Church is a body, as says the Apostle, Ye are the body of
Christ, and members 1 Cor. 12. 27.
in particular) erroneous doctrine no sooner gets into a Church, but it
overspreads it, runs through all, and corrupts, and sowres all, as says the
Apostle, Gal. 5. 9. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. Erroneous
opinions are interpreted by (...), Just. Mart. ad ortho. qu. 1.
some to be those tares, which the envious man and the adversary sowed in the
field where Christ had sowed his good seed, Matthew. 13. 25. Tares, if they be
sowed in a field, quickly overspread the whole field, and choke up the good
seed, and are therefore (if we may believe Basil (...), In Hexam. hom. 5.
) a fit resemblance of such who put a false stamp upon the doctrines of Christ,
and, being themselves infected with the doctrine of the devil, intermingle
themselves with the healthful body of the Church, that they may, undiscerned,
diffuse their poison into the souls of those that are unlearned, or well
meaning. The same Father in another Hex. hom. 2.
place compares heresies and erroneous opinions (...), to a noisome canker, or
carbuncle, which is no less dangerous then infectious.

Saint James tells us of a tongue that is set on fire by hell, Jam. 3. 6.
and sets on fire the whole course of nature. Would you know what tongue
this is? It is the false tongue, the lying tongue, which David compares to
sharp arrows of Psalm. 120. 3.
the mighty, and coals of Juniper. I am not ignorant that Hilary, Chrysostom,
Augustine understand this of the punishment: In locum.
Moller, Marlorate, Amesius, etc. of the mischievousnesse of the false tongue;
which is compared to coals of Juniper, hot burning, hard to be quenched,
keeping fire exceeding long, and easily spreading it into every subject; such
coals is an heretical tongue. Arius in Alexandria scintilla una fuit, sed quia
non statim oppressa, totum orbem ejus flamma populata est, Hieron. in Gal. 5.
lib. 3.
Arius was but one single spark, yet, because not speedily put out, he set the
whole world on fire; so that the world did admire that it was become Arian. And
the Prophet compares the tongue to a bow, (Jer. 9. 3. They Jer. 9. 3.
have bent their tongues, their bows, for lies) and the words to arrows,
Psalm. 64. 3. That they may shoot out their arrows, Psalm. 64. 3.
bitter words. If these things be true of a slanderous tongue, that calumniates
men; how much more true of a false tongue, that perverts truth, and blasphemes
God? There are no words so bitter as the words of heresy; they are Instar
sagittarum sermones ipsorum corda vulnerant, Novar. l. 9. Elect. sac. Sect. 13.
sharp arrows, (...) arrows that have teeth: these words are devouring words,
Psalm. 52. 4.

Our Savior Christ compares false prophets to ravenous wolves, whose property
it is, not to worry a sheep, but make havoc of a flock; not to devour one, but
scatter all: The truth is sufficiently declared out of Scripture; Heresies do
eat as does a canker or a gangrene. Let us now consider,

1. The resemblance between a gangrene and heresy in the manner of eating. 2.
What it is that heresies eat. 3. How it comes to pass that they so eat: And
then make some Application.
First, for the resemblance: First, Heresies, like a gangrene, eat speedily: a
gangrene, though it show it self in the farthest part of the body, yet in a
very little while will be gotten to the heart, the principal part of the body,
and quickly kill the man. Heretical opinions do on the sudden make a large
progress; I marvel (says Gal. 5. 6.
the Apostle) you are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace
of Christ, into another Gospel. It bred admiration in the Apostle, not so much
that they were moved, as that they were so suddenly moved; that there should be
such a strange, because speedy, alteration. According to the exposition of Beda
and Tyconius apud Pareum. Apoc. 6. 5.
some, S. John sees heresy on horseback, with a pair of balances in the
hand: it goes not on foot slowly, but rides, for more haste. Arianisme in a
short space overspread the East, Pelagianisme the world. We need not search
stories for presidents, it is lamentable what success errors have had amongst
our selves in these last three or four years of Ecclesiastical Anarchy and
confusion, whether we respect the numbers of errors, or of the erroneous.
Amsterdam, Poland, Transylvania, places most infamous for heresies, are now
righteous, compared with England, London, which in so short a space have
broached, or entertained above 160 errors, many of them damnable, of which you
shall have an M. Edwards Gangrene.
account not long hence.

Secondly, Heresies, like a gangrene, eat almost incurably: It is an hard
matter to stop the spreading of a gangrene. Ure, seca; it is the Chirurgians
rule, Cut, and burn: the dismembring of the part affected will scarce stay the
gangrene; and it becomes altogether incurable, if it once come to that which
they call (...), the height of it. I will not give you the reason of it in
nature, I come not to read a Physic lecture: sure I am, it is so amongst
opinions; if they be once received in, they are hardly, or never cured: they
are always growing to mortification, to make the party senseless and
livelesse in whom they are. The Apostle tells us, that they that speak lies in
hypocrisy, have their conscience seared, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
as it were, with an hot iron: They are past feeling, they 2 Timothy 3. 8.
are men (...).
of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith: They have laesum
principium, are without understanding: They are as trees, twice dead, and
pulled up by the roots: and Jude 11, 12.
can we expect a cure? It was the complaint of the Church concerning Babylon,
We would have healed Babylon, and she would not be healed: It may be our
complaint concerning such as are mislead by opinions, We would have healed
them, but they would not be healed; but rather, as the Prophet speaks, When I
would have healed Hos. 7. 1.
Israel, the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the sin of Samaria, etc.
they grow worse and worse under their medicine. (...), etc. Athan. tom. 1.
contra Arian. orat. 4.
Athanasius compares some in his time to the serpent Hydra, of which the Poets
fable, that when one head was cut off, diverse rose in the stead of it; it
increased by being diminished: so (says he) these fighters against, and
haters of God, though often convinced, confuted, silenced, yet will not yield;
study new arguments, find out new cavils, and are more impudent then their
father the Devil himself, who would be ashamed, and tremble to oppose such
light as they contradict and murmr against. Thus much that Ancient; which our
experience verifies.

Thirdly, Heresies, like a gangrene, eat mortally: A gangrene, in what part of
the body soever, if not prevented, is mortal; it strikes to the heart: so it
is with heresies, and errors in opinion, though they seem at first but little
spots (as a gangrene discovers it self by little black spots in the outside of
the skin) yet, if they be not stopped, will attach the heart. In the verse
before the Text, They will increase to more ungodliness: Dato uno absurdo,
sequentur infinita. But of this more in another place. The Apostle Peter gives
them the Epithete of Damnable: Paul reckons them up amongst the 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Gal. 5. 19.
works of the flesh, which shut out of the kingdom of God. This seems an harsh
doctrine to Arminians, Sectaries, other patrons of error; but it is the
doctrine of the Scriptures, of the Church in all ages. (...), Ignat. ad Ephesians.
Ignatius, one of the most ancient, and a scholar of the Apostles, assures us,
that both seducing and seduced heretics shall perish for ever, and that with
as good reason, as, amongst men, they that break houses are put to death. O,
that we did seriously consider this, Heresies are as mortal as gangrenes. The
thief John 10. 10.
comes not but to steal, to kill, and to destroy: The false prophet, like a
roaring lion ravening the prey, devours souls, Ezekiel. 22. 25.
says the Lord by the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 22. v. 25. So Cyril, (...),
Cyril. in Hoseam.
They feast it with the souls of simple people, which they grind with the
teeth of error. O, that this was laid to heart. There is no more safety for
men under the guidance of erroneous teachers, then for sheep under the
protection of a ravening wolf: Heretical opinions are not embraced without
the extremest hazard of the precious soul. We fear a gangrene; it kills the
body: why do we delight in (at least favor, and not abhor) erroneous
opinions, which destroy the soul? What shall it profit a man, if he win the
whole world, Matthew. 16.
and lose his soul? and what will he give in exchange for his soul? Prize we
not that which Christ has purchased with his dearest blood? Or, do we
undervalue that precious blood by which we were redeemed? Shall we renounce
the Lord that bought us? Or, shall we make ineffectuall so great a purchase?
Are we enemies to the cross of Christ? Or, shall we make his death vain?
Naz. orat. 42. (...).
Nazianzene tells us, speaking of heretics, that they are unthankful
creatures, the offspring of the devil, for whom Christ is dead in vain. A hard
sentence, may some one happily say; therefore let us proceed to the second
thing proposed, and see what it is that heresies destroy.

2. The Apostle in the Text uses this phrase, (...), translated, it will eat;
it may be rendered, will have pasture; for the word (...) signifies not only
the action, eating, but the object also, the pasture, the food which is eaten
up. There are three precious things which heresies devour:

First, Faith; which is taken sometimes Fides quae creditur. Fides qua creditur.

for the doctrine of faith, or the truth believed; sometimes for the act of
faith, or the grace of believing: erroneous opinions overthrow and destroy both.

1. Concerning the former, the doctrine of faith, there can no question be
made: Errors destroy truth; And, as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do
these also resist the 2 Timothy 3. 8.
truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. Thus faith the
Apostle of Hymeneus and Philetus, Concerning 2 Timothy 2. 18.
the truth they have erred. False prophets, among the people, stole away the
word of God every one from his neighbor: Jer. 23.
False teachers, amongst us, adulterate and sophisticate the 2 Cor. 2.
word of God. As it is in nature, darkness destroys the light, blindness puts
out the sight, sickness removes health; so is it in this matter, errors
destroy, put out, remove truth. Thus Dum plures fiunt, ad id coeperunt esse ne
ulla sit, Ad Constable.
Hilarious observes concerning the various confessions of the Arians; They made
many, that thy might have none. This is a sore mischief under which our Church
for the present labors; there is scarcely any truth which is not by one
opinion or other directly opposed, or indirectly undermined: And could any
other issue of our wantonness be expected? Abdicata qualibet part Catholici
dogmatis, alia quoque, atque item alia, and deinceps alia, and alia jam quasi
ex more, and licito abdicabuntur. Porro autem singulatim partibus repudiatis,
quid aliud ad extremum sequetur, nisi ut totum pariter repudietur? Si novitia
veteribus, extranea domesticis, prophana sacratis admisceri coeperint proserpat
hic mos in universum necesse est, ut nihil posthac apud Ecclesiam relinquatur
intactum; -- sed sit ibidem deinceps impiorum, ac turpium errorum lupanar, ubi
erat ante castae and incorruptae sacrarium veritatis, Contr. Haeres. c. 3 1.
When any branch of divine truth is by any rejected, (it is the observation of
Vincentius Lirinensis) presently another, and another, after that another and
another will be rejected, till at last none at all be left remaining.

Thus it fell out in the Church of Rome, which, from errors in the beginning
little, in comparison, and almost insensible, is become the mistress and
mother of abominations, the sink and sea of heresies. Thus with the
Anabaptists, who erring at the first but in one particular, have proceeded some
of them in other parts, to eight and forty more, many of them dangerous, and
racing the foundation. Who did not fear whither our late Prelaticall
innovations tended? It was not without cause, that the (...), Greg. Niss.
contr. Eunom.
Ancients accounted the least alteration in matters of faith to be the
extremest blasphemy and ungodliness; (...), Theodoret. Eccl. hist. l. 4. cap.
16.
That they have willingly undergone all kinds of death, rather then deserted
one syllable of the truth: The least error entertained, prepares the way for
greater, disposes the heart to reject all truth, as the pulling one stone out
of an arch, disposes the whole to ruin.

2. Concerning the latter, (the grace, or act of believing) the Apostle speaks
expressly, They overthrew the faith of some. This sad effect of erroneous
teachers is notably described by Athanasius; If (...), De Synod. Arim. Saleu.
(...), Ibid.
themselves (says he) had believed, they would not have made any farther
inquiry; but their disputings have been no small scandal to those that were
initiated in the Christian religion, and a great ground of profuse laughter to
Pagans, in that Christians, as newly awaked out of a profound sleep, enquire
what they ought to believe concerning Christ. Their new opinions make believers
infidels, and infidels more adverse to faith. We see this amongst our selves;
what multitudes, unsettled by unsound doctrine, have changed their faith, either
to Scepticisme, to doubt of every thing; or Atheism, to believe nothing? And
it has been a just reward upon seducers, that themselves have been deservedly
(...); Athanas. ibid.
distrusted and deserted by their followers, whom they had taught, not to
believe their teachers. Thus much of the first mischief of heresies, That they
destroy faith.

2. The second thing which heresies eat up is Peace: they devour Peace, the
legacy of Christ, and Love, the bond of perfection. They overthrow the peace of
the Church, they disturb the peace of the Commonwealth. From hence (that men
consent not to sound doctrine, but are sick about questions) comes envy,
strife, reviling, evil surmisings, etc. And where envy is, where evil
surmisings and jealousies, what peace can there be? When that false doctrine
was broached at Antioch, there was no small dissension Act. 15. 2, 24.
and disputation, the Church was troubled with words subverting their souls:
The troubles arose so high, that an oecumenicall Synod, or Council of the
world was necessary for the composing of that difference. The like befell the
Churches of Galatia. I spare the further confirmation Galat. 5.
of this; it is confessed, it is evidenced by the Holland Arminians, the
New England Familists: it will not be much laid to heart, being conceived by
many as a matter of no great consequence. If errors arise in the Church, the
Commonwealth will not want confusion, it must needs suffer (as the Physician
speaks) per consensum: and that in regard of the just judgment of God
revenging the corrupting of his worship, and profanation of his name. Thus it
befell Israel, They served strange gods, then was war in the gates; and of
all wars Judge. 5.
that which is most cruel and destructive, civil and intestine war, For
Nation was destroyed of Nation, City of 2 Chro. 15.
City, etc. This is the righteous hand of God, that they that will not
maintain peace with heaven, shall have trouble on earth. I read not of any
contentions more bitter, then those grounded on dissentions in religion: The
Jews had no dealings with the Samaritans, not so much Joh. 6. 9.
as for a cup of cold water, or a nights lodging: what was the reason? The
difference in religion: one said, Ye must worship in this mountain: The other,
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. The difference was not
great, only this; the Samaritans would be a Church independent to Jerusalem,
they would worship in that mountain, but there was no dealing between them.
Ephraim did not cease to envy Judah, Judah did not cease to vex Ephraim, till
they were both turned unto the Lord, to serve him with one consent; they grow
not up into one kingdom, Ezekiel. 37.
till they have accorded into one Church.

It is commonly replied in Pulpits, in Presses, That a toleration of all
consciences, even Antichristian, would be a sovereign remedy to cure all
dissentions, and an effectual means to compose the wars of Christendom: all
the blood that has for so many years been shed, is charged upon the restraint
of this licentiousness, ignorantly or maliciously termed persecution.

I answer, It is besides my purpose to discuss this question of Toleration,
which is the work (as I am informed) of another hand; only for the present let
me tell you,

1. That the Toleration pleaded for is not ecclesiastical; for so it is
resolved by two of the Brethren in their answer to A. S. 1. The Minister ought
-- by Scriptures Page 65.
to evince the -- falsehood of such ways. 2. Others that have an anointing of
light and knowledge from God are bound to contribute the best of their
endeavors to the same end. 3. The Magistrate ought to admonish the Minister,
if careless or forgetful of his duty, that he fulfill his ministry in that
point also. 4. Members of a particular congregation, continuing obstinate after
means of conviction, and two or three admonitions, ought to be cast out. 5. A
Church infected ought to be admonished by neighbor Churches, and if it
continue obstinate, communion with it ought to be renounced: Thus, in effect,
two of the brethren; which shows the mischief of heresy in disturbing the
Churches peace: and this, to him that seriously considers it, will appear to be
no small mischief.

2. The Toleration so commended as the mother of peace, may be called civil, a
non-suppression of errors by the Magistrates laws or power: This is that great
Diana so much magnified, so frequent in the mouths of Sectaries. To dispute
the lawfulness of it is (as I said) besides my purpose; I only enquire,

First, Would these men that so hotly defend it, grant that Toleration (if they
had power in their hands) to others, which they desire for themselves? I doubt
it. The Arians did sometimes seem as earnest enemies to persecution as these
men; yet when they had authority on their side, they raised persecution against
the orthodox, more terrible then the heathen Emperors against the Christians,
which the Churches of the East most grievously Binii tom. 1. conc. p. 686.
complained of. Athanasius at large describes, and having spoken much of their
inhumane and more then belluine cruelty against all sexes, all ages, both
living and dead, (...), Epist. ad Solitar.
concludes, that he had said less then their inhumanity was, because it
exceeded all expression. The Donatists did ordinarily plead for toleration, and
seemed the most inveterate oenemies to all disturbance for conscience sake;
yet, when under the Apostate Julian they had gotten power, who can declare (
Quando Julianus vobis, Christi invidens paci, basiacas reddidit, unitatis quae
strages a vobis sactae sint? Quis commemorare sufficiat, etc. Con. lit. Petil.
l. 2. c. 82.
says Austin) what havoc they made of the orthodox? Laccrati sunt viri,
tractae sunt matronae, infantes necati, abacti sunt partus, nulli licuit
securum esse in possessionibus suis, etiam itinera non poterant esse iutissima;
terrebantur omnes literis eorum qui se Duces sanctorum jactabant, Optat. cont.
Parm. l. 2. 3.
All Africa was filled with blood and desolation; men were rent, matrons
dragged, infants slaughtered, women with child miscarried, none were secure in
their houses, the ways were not safe for travelers; the letters of them that
boasted to be the Captains of the saints were terrible to all. Are our men led
by another spirit? Sure I am, that one of them, that with most earnestness, or
impudence pleads for toleration, was lately of another mind in the case of the
Familists and Antinomians in New England.

Secondly, Would such toleration conduce to the establishing of peace in the
Commonwealth? Has it ever done it? Possible it is, that the equality of
powers may persuade each party for a season to suppress their inward rancor;
can toleration take it away, so that it shall not break out upon sensible
advantages by the increase of strength? Let the experience of former ages, and
present times teach this. What peace was there in the Roman Empire upon the
toleration of the Donatists? Optat. l. 2. 3.
Optatus, Aug. con. lit. Petil. l. 2.
Augustine, in the places before alleged, declare, that all places were filled
with confusion; the Circumcelliones, or furious Donatists, not waiting for the
signal of a law to give commission, set the world on fire; Macarius, and
others with the forces of the Empire, were but sufficient to quench the
burning. What peace had Germany upon the edicts of Charles the fifth? The
Smalcaldian war, described by Sleidan, demonstrates, that they yielded only
a time of breathing, that each party might increase in strength, and gain
advantages, and then fight to internecion. Was it not so in France? Will a
toleration satisfy heretics, if they have power in their hands? It did not
content the Irish Papists, witness the blood of 150000 Protestants shed upon
the first advantage, and these unnatural wars so long continued. Error may
tolerate error, saevis inter se convenit ursis: but can darkness agree with
light? or wolves with sheep? Tertullian observes concerning heretics of old,
Pacem cum omnibus miscent; nihil enim interest illis, licet diversa
tractantibus, dum ad unius veritatis expugnationem conspirent, De praescript.
cont. Haeret. c. 41.
They agreed well enough one with another; for though they differed in private
opinions, yet they joined in one in the opposing of truth: Herod and Pilate may
be made friends against Christ. Athanasius relates concerning the Arians,
(...), Epist. ad Solita.
They did not trouble other heresies, their younger sisters, in blaspheming
Christ; their malice was inveterate against the orthodox. Dominicans,
Franciscans, Jesuits have their private differences, and yet agree to live
together; but what safety is there for Protestants amongst them? If we find
not the mischief of our errors in this point, if Holland does not, let them
thank the Spanish arms, and we the common enemy, and both, under God, the
inconsiderable number and weakness of the heterodox. Facitis ubi potestis, ubi
non facitis non potestis, sive legum, sive invidiae timore, sive resistentium
multitudine, August. cont. Petil lib. 2. cap. 83.
You persecute (says Austin of the Donatists) where you are able; where you
persecute not, you are not able to do it, restrained by the fear of laws, or
envy, or the multitude making resistance. I have been long upon this point;
but I will conclude it with that solemn embassy which the orthodox Fathers,
assembled in council at Sirmium, sent to the Emperor Constantius: I have
insisted the longer, (...), Athan. de Syn. Arim. and Seleuc.
that it might appear to all, that the toleration of error is not a way to
peace, as some men pretend, but to disorder and confusion: And yet I am not an
enemy to peace, but a friend to truth, and holiness, without which no man shall
see God.

The third thing that heresies eat up is godliness; they devour holiness,
that is, the power of it: thus in the verse before my Text, They will increase
to more ungodliness. Thus the Apostles, Peter, chapter 2. 2. Jude, v. 8. describe
the heretics of their time: you may read the places at your leisure. Thus
Paul informs the Romans, that they that cause divisions, cause scandals, and
serve not the Lord Romans 16. 18.
Jesus Christ, but their own bellies. An erroneous heretical head, and an
upright pions heart are incompatible; a good conscience, and true faith, like
Hippocrates twins, live and die together. Haeres. 26. (...), etc. Locus
insignis.
Epiphanius observes concerning the Gnostics of old, That they did not only
pervert the judgments of their proselytes, but brought their bodies and souls
into slavery of fornication, uncleanness, and such like monstrous
abominations. But, manum de tabula, I forbear: It would make a volume to relate
the observations of him and other Ancients in this particular. Our Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 1. says, The Spirit speaks expressly, that in the last times men shall
depart from the faith -- etc. and 2 Timothy 3. 1. speaks as expressly, that the
last times shall be dangerous for horrible wickednesses, -- men shall have a
form of godliness, and deny the power of it: It may be so with heretics, they
may have a fair outside; but if you look for uprightness, self-denial,
righteousness, peace, joy in the holy Ghost, in which the kingdom of God
consists, you shall find none of these; they have a form of godliness, but
deny the power of it. This Lib. 2. tom. 1. Haer. 47. (...).
Epiphanius notes concerning the Encratitae, They made ostentation of
continence, and yet conversed amongst women even unto scandal; they were not
indeed such as they desired to be accounted. O, what a full testimony is given
to this truth by that general apostacy from godliness to open profaneness
of many amongst our selves since the unrestrained inundation of our errors!
And this comes to pass (for I touch upon the cause in transitu,)

1. Partly, because that time which might be better employed in the examination
of the conscience, is laid out in the examination of opinions; all the care is
taken up about the notions of the brain, which ought to have been intended to
the bettering of the heart: As in children that have the rickats, their heads
swell and grow big, but their bodies grow crooked, their breasts narrow, their
inferior parts feeble, and pine away: so persons infected with errors (for
errors are the rickats of children in understanding) may perhaps have great
heads, and be something for matter of dispute; but their hearts are crooked,
their affections to goodness straightned, themselves made so weak, as not to
be able to go in the paths of holiness.

2. Partly because in times of such differences, men are for the most part had
in esteem, not according to their godliness, but their faction: Enquiry is
not made concerning the preciseness of walking, and blamelesnesse of
conversation, but concerning opinion; not, How lives? but, What holds such, or
such a man? As (...), etc.
Athanasius concerning the Arians to their followers: Oppose Christ, and take
no care to thy manners, thy opinion suffices to thy commendation. And Haec
omnia vultis nullius esse momenti: at si tibi consenserit, quem seducis, unus
consensus and manus tuae porrectio, and pauca verba jam tibi Christianum
faciunt de Christiano, and ille vobis videbitur Christianus qui quod vultis
fecerit, non quem fides adduxerit, Optat. l. 3. cont. Parm.
Optatus against the Donatists, declares their strange partiality, All were
unto them Pagans, that were not of their way of separation; but if any one
consented to them, and became of their way, he was presently a Christian,
though he knew not what belonged to Christianity. O that it was not so amongst
our selves; that not faction, but faith was the bond of our affections; not
siding with parties, but serving of God the compass of our Christian love:
certainly opinions would not so much thrive, nor godliness so much decay. And
so much of the second thing which was proposed, What it is which heresies,
erroneous opinions devour. Now of the third, Why, or How it comes to pass that
they thus spread and devour, etc.

The spreading and prevailing of heresies may be ascribed partly to the
subtilty and activity of seducers, partly to the curiosity and simplicity of
the seduced; partly to the justice of God, for the manifestation of those that
are sincere, and the punishment of those that received not the truth in the
love of it: Of these in order.

First, The prevailing of heresies may be ascribed to the subtilty of seducers.
Seducers are a subtle generation, and this subtilty it is to which the Apostle
ascribes their great success; Ephesians. 4. 14. Children are tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine through the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. The Apostle in three
words expresses their deceitfulness: 1. slight, (...), they are cunning
gamesters, know how to cog a die, and pack the cards, and Zanch. in loc.
pervert Scripture to their sinister purposes: 2. Cunning craftiness, (...),
they turn every stone, watch all advantages: 3. Lying in wait to deceive,
(...), they have all the arts of couzenage; They bring in damnable heresies
privily, says Peter: I am afraid, (says S. Paul) 2 Pet. 2. 1.
lest, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so 2 Cor. 11.
your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. Satan
arms his instruments with his own arts, fraud, and couzenage; and by these
introduces errors, and cheateth men of faith, peace, piety. Vos estis
aucupes, and illi aut illa sunt aves. Illi vos aucupi similes dico, qui post
discessum noctis, ante lucis adventum -- aridam arborem nullis radicibus fultam
multiplici fraud componit, cui adulterinos inserit ramos, and quae suas
jamdudum succisa perdiderat, alienas accipit frondes, -- etc. locus insignis.
-- Cont. Parmen. l. 6.
Optatus observed this of old in the Donatists, whom he compares to fowlers,
that with exactest cunning and art ensnare the birds. And Lib. 1. Ep. 102.
Isidore Peleusiota compares heretics to fishermen, that conveigh their deadly
hooks in the most pleasing baits. The Scriptures and Ancients have been large
in observing and describing those impostures, by which they cheat men of truth,
and propagate errors; but it would be a work too long for this time to declare
them all: I shall by your favor name some of the principal of them, because
they are practiced amongst our selves by such as draw disciples after them,
who, as they do but rake up old buried errors under the notion of new light,
new truths; so they walk in the same steps with their forefathers.

First, They use sophistical arguments, argumenta tortuosa, knotty and crooked
questions, by which they puzzle and ensnare the simple: of this the Apostle
gives warning, Take heed that no man deceive you, (...), i. e. make a prey of
you, through Philosophy or vain deceit. Tertullian against Hermogenes observes,
that Artificem struendi and destruendi ver sipellem, in sententiis coactam, in
conjecturis duram, in argumentis operariam, molestam etiam sibi ipsi, omnia
retractantem, ne quid omnino tractaverit, De praescript. adv. Haer. c. 7.
Philosophers were the Patriarchs of heretics; and Sophistry, the great
artifice of building and destroying, etc. their maine engine. Seducers have not
learned to cast away reasonings, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God: and whiles, with the ancient heretics, and late
Socinians, they measure truths with the line of their own intellect, and
believe no more then they can comprehend, they make shipwreck of faith, and
drown others in their own destruction. How many were of old made to stagger in
that fundamental point of the eternal Sonship of Jesus Christ, by the curious
inquiries of the Arians, recorded by Epiphanius, in his Treatise against that
heresy, which I will Haeres. 69. 15. (...).
not English, that I may not be a snare in this scepticall age? How many were
taken in that senseless notion, because it was new, and (...), -- etc. Ibid.
16.
they understood it not, He is a creature, but not as one of the other
creatures; a work, but not as one of the works; and begotten, but not as others
that are begotten: that, denying him like other things begotten, they may deny
his natural generation; denying him a creature as other creatures are, they
may assert him to be a creature? So far Epiphanius. Why do you juggle, in
saying, he is a creature, not as one of the creatures; he suffered without
passion? as if a man should speak without speaking, or understand without
understanding, says (...). Athan. contr. Arian. orat. 3. tom. 1. and tom. 2.
Quod Christus passus in Deitate.
another Father concerning the same and other heretics. Multam curam gerunt
fucare phaleris verborum, and versutiis syllogismorum, Bern. in Cant. ser. 41.
This has been their constant endeavor, with pretenses of words, and
sophistry of arguments, to color and paint their horrid opinions. This is that
which Cyril calls De ador. in spir. and verit. l. 8.
(...), multivarious impostures, In Hos. 2.
(...), the inventions of many-times-pleated senses, equivocations,
amphibologies, the strength and garrisons of heretics, unto which they
retreat, being pursued; out of which they issue, to spoil and plunder the
Church of faith, peace, and godliness. And thus much of the first branch of
that subtilty of which heretics make use to spread ernours.

Secondly, They use new and strange expressions, expressions not to be
understood but by their own disciples. These the Apostle (according to
Chrysostom and other of the Ancients) calls (...), new language; and against
these arms Timothy, commanding him to keep the 2 Timothy 2. 16.
form of sound words which he had heard of him: This has 2 Timothy 1. 13.
been of especial use to heretics in the primitive Church, and of later
times; Thus Contr. Arian. de Synod. Confusis permixtisque verbis veritatem
frequentissime eludunt, and incautorum aures communium vocabulorum sono capiunt.
Hilary of the Arians in his time; That by their indistinct and confused
expressions they eluded truth, and ensnared their unwary auditors by the
ambiguity of their phrases. Thus Sic verba temperant, sic ordinem vertunt, and
ambiguae quaque concinnant, ut and nostrum, and adversariorum confessionem
teneant, ut aliter haereticus, aliter catholicus audiat, Epist. 65.
Hicrome concerning the Origenists, They so temper their words, pervert their
order, mingle ambiguities, that in the same sentence they utter the truth and
errouer; their followers understand one thing, and strangers another. Thus they
prevail with many, like Gypsies, canting in their mother tongue; though their
words may be understood, yet not their meaning. And this practice is notably
described by Calvin against the Libertines. But besides this, that they use old
words in new senses, they have another practice, to coin new words, new
expressions of their own, which none can understand, simple ones admire: This
the Apostle points at, 2 Pet. 2. 18. They speak great swelling words of vanity,
and under these high streines, and sublime notions, introduce some old, base,
often confuted heresies; which, were they in plain English expressed, would be
abhorred. Thus (...), Haer. 31.
Epiphaenius assures us concerning the Valentinians, that they introduced the
old heathen fables as matters of faith, only shadowed them under some new
expressions of their own; and of the Gnostics, that they in like manner
deluded their followers. Thus (...), Haeres. 26. 1. Dial. 1.
Cyril of the Nestorians in his time, (...), This speech is not to be
understood. I stand not to parallel this with the practices amongst our selves,
but pass from it with Eadem nunc in veteri, and nova haeresi consuetudo
servatur, ut aliud populi audiant, aliud praedicent sacerdotes, Epist. 61.
Hieroms observation, The same custom is observed amongst heretics of former,
and of our own times; the old Serpent does act his old wiles over again; the
Stage is new, the Tragedy the same; errors dispersed, faith, peace, and
godliness supplanted by the same engines amongst us as in former times.

Thirdly, They use fair pretenses, and glorious speeches, as the Apostle
observes, By good words and fair speeches Romans 16. 18.
they deceive the hearts of the simple: And Peter, Through 2 Pet. 2. 3.
covetousness shall they with fained words ((...), forged and plaistered
speeches) make merchandise of you. This is an usual shift, they parget over
the nakedness and deformity of their opinions, representing sometimes them as
the ways of God, sometimes themselves as the men of God; and thus simple
people (Ixion like) pro Junone nubem, embrace appearances for verities, errors
for truth.

1. They represent their opinions as the ways of God, the secrets and
mysteries of Christ, (but John calls them (...), the profound deep things of
Satan:) and Rev. 2. 24.
thus they are as a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon mount Tabor. Saint
Paul observes, that the worshipping of Col. 2. 18. cum 23.
Angels, and such other kind of monkery, Touch not, taste not, handle not, were
all persuaded under such fair pretenses; they were doctrines of humility,
doctrines of mortification, etc. But in the mean time, these false preachers,
pretenders to humility, were vainly puffed up in their fleshly mind, laid hold
on Angels, but held not the head, etc. In the 17th of the Revelation the whore
has in her hand a golden cup full of abominations and filthiness; the cup is
of gold, but the potion is of the rankest poison: Act. 15. Circumcision, and
observation of the law is Gal. 5.
pretended the way to salvation, though in truth it cut off from Christ in the
notion under which it was obtruded; and, at best, did nothing avail unto that
purpose which was pretended: This has been the practice of heretics, as in
the Apostles times, so in after ages. This e Salvian observes concerning the
Arians, and in general, De guber. Dei lib. 5.
all heretics; but his passage is too long to be transcribed. Thus also (...),
Praefat. in Thesaur.
Cyril, As strumpets paint their faces, and adorn their bodies in greatest
bravery, to hide the filthiness of their practices, and ensnare by their
neatness: so heretics shadow their destructive opinions with the beautiful
veil of godliness, and their errors with the flowers of truth. (...), etc.
Cyril. Epist. ad Valerian.
They are in this like our Apothecaries, they gild their pills, and make their
potions sweet, they make them pleasant to the eye, and delightful to the
taste; and yet they contain such a medicine, as (not being immediately cast
out) will give the patient such a purge as will clear him of faith, and
peaceablenesse, and prevent for the future all danger of surfeting from the
power of godliness. It is no new thing, that opinions of no value, if not
damnable, are vended, and prevail under the notions of free grace, or
Christian liberty, Christ exalted, the kingdom of Christ, the Church way, and
the like commendations: no way is more effectual to engage imbracement.
Plutarch. in vit.
Numa Pompilius pretends the teaching of the Nymph Aegeria for his new
religion; and Turk. Hist.
Mahomet, that grand impostor, if you will believe him, learned his Alcoran
from the Angel Gabriel. The Athan. qu. ad Antio. 46.
Devil was the first that ever mentioned God upon earth, and that in his
temptation, when he was acting against God: And shall it seem strange, that
there are amongst us some, not Christians, but sellers of Christ, vain talkers,
soule-deceivers, that in treachery pretend the name of Christ; that speak of
Christ, not that they may preach Christ, but that by their preaching they may
make Christ of none effect, as was of old the complaint of holy (...), Ad
Trallens.
Ignatius? It is usual with mountebanks to proclaim the virtues of their
oils, salves, receipts, etc. multitudes are drawn together, and fools buy. It
is the practice of false teachers, by crying up the holiness and excellency of
their doctrine, to cause many to flock together, and to deceive the hearts of
the simple.

2. They represent themselves, teachers, followers, all, under the notion of
the most godly, holy, humble, saints, men as precious as any the earth hears,
as unbiased as any at any time likely to be on the face of the earth; a strong
inducement (especially if there be any show of holiness in their conversation)
to persuade simple and well-meaning men into an approbation of their opinions.
By such deceivable pretenses the Pharisees got such interest in the hearts of
the people, that they were quickly credited in whatever they spoke, though
against King, or Priest, as says (...), Antiq Jud. l. 3.
Josephus. In the days of the Apostles there were some that Rev. 2. 2.
said they were Jews, and were not, but upon trial were found liars. The
ministers of Satan were transformed as the ministers of righteousness; and how
they prevailed, and what their pretenses were may be conjectured by the great
pains which the Apostle takes to vindicate himself and his ministry from
their aspersions, 1 Cor. 9. 2 Cor. 11. They were not inferior to the chief
Apostles, would have no pay, (Do you not hear the language of our Sectaries?)
they would preach freely, would not be burdensome, etc. Were not these singular
men? Doubtless they did not want followers amongst such as would serve God
with that which cost them nothing: But the Apostle assures us, they were
deceitful workers, and their end would be according to their works. Such as
these of old were the Donatists, of whom Contr. Parmen. Pelle ovina contegi
vis, ut, si fieri potest, prius te ovis mordentem sentiat, quam praesentiat
venientem? Lib. 1.
Optatus, They covered themselves in sheeps clothing, they were not discerned
to be wolves, till their fangs were felt. No age has afforded heretics whose
ringleaders have not pretended to extraordinary godliness. It is well known
to those that are versed in the writings of the Ancients, what is left recorded
concerning Apollinaris, Photinus, Nestorius, and others, the substance of which
you may find in Cont. haeres. c. 16.
Vincentius Lirinensis; what of Voss. Hist. Pela. l. 1. c. 3.
Pelagius, what of Orat. in obit. ante opera Armin.
Arminius by Bertixs, what of Socinus: but, to pass over all these in silence,
I shall instance only in Arius, that grand impugner of the Deity of Christ,
and impudent boaster; out of whose Thaleia (...), etc. Orat. 2. cont. Arian.
Athanasius relates these vain boastings: I have received my doctrine from the
elect of God, men that knew God, holy men of God, such as knew how to divide
the word of God aright, that had received the anointing of the spirit; of
these I have received, in their steps I have walked, and for this truth have
suffered many things. Surely, this is a plausible inducement; words are
esteemed according to the estimate of the speaker. Solent isti miriones etiam
de quibusdam personis ab haeresi captis, aedificari in ruinam: quare illa vel
ille fidelissimi, prudentissimi, and usitatissimi in Ecclesia in illam partem
transierunt, De Praescript. contr. Haeret. cap. 3.
Tertullian observes it of certain wonderers, that they were edified into
error by the example of others, men of name and note for wisdom, knowledge,
usefulness in the Church, that had fallen into heresy: If this or that were
not the truth, the way of God; how comes it to pass, that he, or she, such a
man, and such a man of such eminent parts, gifts, profession, should be so
misled? But, should we judge of faith by persons? or should we not rather
judge of persons by faith? It Is possible for Nicolas to become, not only an
heretic, but a ringleader of a sect; it is possible for one to come, and say,
I am Christ; it is possible for Simon Magus to profess himself the great power
of God, but should all the city give heed to him? it is possible for (...),
Epiphan. l. 2. tom. 1. contr. Cataphry.
Montanus to proclaim himself no Angel, no Ambassador, but the Comforter
himself; should a Tertullian be seduced? It Is a great temptation, when men that
fall into error, are in name for godliness: it is a greater, when men of
strict life (as in old times) fall into error. If we will not be misled, let
us remember the Apostles charge; If we; not one, but the College of Apostles;
not men, but if an Angel from heaven shall teach any other doctrine, let him be
accursed. Whatever their pretenses be, Diaboli filii sunt, qui homines ab
Ecclesia seducendo interficiunt, Aug. cont. lit. Petil. lib. 2. c. 13.
they are of their father the Devil, who, by seducing men from the Church of
Christ, destroy them. I have been the longer upon this point, because it nearly
concerns our selves, amongst whom a party is risen up that monopolizeth piety,
pretends to transcendent holiness; under which show many are misled, many
muzzled, as not willing to oppose against (as they call themselves) the godly
party.

Fourthly, They use vainglorious boastings, proclaiming the excellency and
eminency of their knowledge, and abilities above other men. The former fair
speeches were but groundless bragges, their opinions and conversations are
far short of (if not contrary to) that holiness they profess; but in this
that I now speak of, their boasting has been notorious, as if with them
wisdom began to live, and should die with them; as Maximilla the prophetess
of the Montanists in Epiphanius, Haeres. 47. Col. 2. 18.
(...). As the affecting of wisdom above what is written, and a bold intrusion
into things they have not seen, has caused many to fall from the truth to
error; so the profession of 1 Timothy 6. 21.
knowledge (as the Apostle) falsely so called, and the having of the gifts and
persons of men in admiration, has 1 Cor. 4. 8.
drawn many to follow their pernicious ways: Vincent. Lirinens.
Error magistri tentatio discipuli; if the master falls, the scholar stumbles.
Indeed, men of parts usually broach errors, (the devil makes use of the
Serpent, not of the Ass, in seducing into heresy) as being the fittest
instruments to stagger the Church. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram died not alone in
their transgression; they were Princes of the Congregation. But if any man
shall become a Dogmatist, an asserter of strange and new opinions, he shall be
cried up by his followers as a man of parts, that they may seem to be mad with
reason. This conceit that they knew and taught something which other men
neither knew nor taught, procured scholars to seducers of old, as says (...),
De Trin. Dial. 2.
Cyril. The followers of Basilides in (...), Haeres. 24.
Epiphanius professed themselves only to be men, all others dogs and swine.
Hieron. in Hos. 5.
Semper se scire altiora jactitant, and in Ecclesiae contumeliam debacchantur
(they boast always of their own sublime and abstruse speculations, in
comparison of which others are blind) is the observation of Hierome. I will
conclude this with that of (...), etc. Orat. 33.
Nazianzene, concerning the boastings of Eunomius: Be it granted (says he)
seeing you will have it so, that you are a sublime man, and transcend
sublimity, a beholder of things that no man else sees, an hearer of things
which it is not lawful to utter; after Elias, you have been rapt up in a fiery
chariot; after Moses, you have seen the face of God; after Paul, you have been
taken into the third heavens; but why forge you saints in one day, make them
ministers, inspire them with learning, etc.? This is not peculiar to the
Eunomians; I would we had not some amongst our selves as vain-boasters, and
pretenders to knowledge, that have, in their own conceit, more skill in the
mystery of Christ then the Apostles, with the old heretics: e Solent dicere,
non Tertul. de praescr. contr. haer. c. 22.
omnia Apostolos scisse, -- non omnia omnibus tradidisse, in utroque Christum
reprehensioni subjicientes, etc. The Apostles knew not all things, taught not
all things to all men (as they say;) in both which they calumniate Christ. Te
fautores tui disertiorem Demosthene, acutiorem Chrysippo, sapientiorem Platone,
contendunt, etc. Epist. 61. ad Pammach.
The favorers of John of Jerusalem were bold to assert, that he was more
eloquent then Demosthenes, acute then Chrysippus, wise then Plato, etc. The
Papists adorn some of their Schoolmen, Doctors, with the titles Angelical,
Seraphicall, Illuminate, Irrefragable, Resolute, Subtle, and such like. The
Jesuits prevail mightily by their impudency in boasting, as De stratagem.
Jesuitarum.
Alphonsus de Vargas declares concerning them: The Sectaries amongst us, if
they do it not in imitation of such worthy presidents, yet walk in the same
steps; their misleaders are with them heavenly men, spiritual teachers, the
preachers of Gospel Truths, New Testament-spirits, men of admirable parts,
though some of them but of late commenced from the Tailors shop-board, or the
Cobblers stall to the ministry; men of as great abilities as those teachers of
the law, of whom the Apostle, Not understanding what they say, nor whereof they
affirm. But so much of this fourth point.

Fifthly, They use subtilty in concealing their opinions, save only from their
proselites, to whom they discover them in part, and with a reserve of changing
upon further inquiry or more advantage. This was of old the practice of
Basilides in Haeres. 24. (...).
Epiphanius, he concealed his opinions from such as were able to examine them,
men that had their senses exercised to discern between things that differ; but
made them known to those whom he had seduced, unto whom also he gave in
charge, (...), Id. ibid.
That they should conceal these things amongst themselves, and not reveal them
saving to one of a thousand, and two of ten thousand: that they should know all
things, all men; but that no man should know them, or what they hold. It was
long before the Arians discovered their malice against the Deity of the Lord
Jesus Christ; their quarrel (as they pretended) was only against the word
(...), as Epist. 61. ad Pammach.
Hierome relates, (I pray God others, from whom no requests or engagements can
draw a model of their opinions, nihil monstri alaut, be not hatching some
hateful monster:) and when they had discovered it, they were all upon
uncertainties, ever waiting for new light, Hill. ad Constant.
Annuas atque monstruas fides decernimus, they had every year, every month a
new confession, as Hilary: (...), De Synod. Arim. and Seleuc.
They had many and diverse alterations, being ready to change as often as they
could obtain any to hire them, any to hear them, any to lead them: they could
change their opinions as often as they could get customers for new ones. Thus
(...), Epist. 72.
Basil assures us, that they did all things for their own profit and advantage,
changing, and rechanging, and professing a liberty of future changing; a course
most contrary to the truth of God, (Faith is but one) to the stabilitie in the
truth required in believers, Coloss. 2. and the manner of the orthodox, who,
though never so low and little esteemed in the eyes of men, yet were always
the same, and consented not to such changes and alterations. As the Polypus
hunts fishes, and takes them by the often changing of his color; so heretics
hunt and take unstable souls by the concealing of themselves, and professed
unsetlednesse in their tenants. Though much more might be said of the subtilty
of heretics, in calumniating the truth, slandering the professors of it,
mingling truth with error; yet let this suffice for the present.

The second means by which heretics divulge their errors, is their Industry
or Diligence; they are (...), not only subtle, but industrious workers: As
Satan goes up and down like a roaring lion seeking whom he 1 Pet. 5.
may devour; so these, with the Pharisees, would compass sea and land to make
one proselyte, creep into houses Matthew. 23.
to lead captive silly women: in this, like hunters, or fishers, whose labor
is their pleasure, if they can take their prey;

Ut jugulent homines surgunt de nocte. --

There is a strange activity in these men for the spreading of errors: in men
did I say? nay in women; the woman Jezebel taught and seduced the servants of
God. It is the observation of Tertullian in his time, That their women were
audacious even to Ipsae mulieres, quam procaces sunt, quae audeant docere,
contendere, and fortasse etiam tingere? De praescript. cap. 41. (...). Epiphan.
de Pepuzian. haeres. 49.
admiration, they dared to preach, to dispute, yea possibly, to baptize. And
this amongst some of them, not by intrusion, but by permission and approbation;
women were Bishops, women Elders, women in all other offices. Satan having
found the usefulness of that sex for seduction, upon all occasions makes use
of them. Apelles dispersed Tertull.
his heresy by the help of a woman, Phylumene: Montanus Epiph. haer. 48.
disperseth his by the help of Priscilla and Maximilla, two women: And have not
we made some progress, and grown up to some height in this heretical
practice? Do not women, whom the Apostle permits not to speak in the Church,
but to be in silence, (transgressing this Apostolical precept, and forgetting
the modesty and weakness of their sex) presume to preach, and vent their
braine-sick fancies? But I pass over this shame. Optatus could not keep
silence De vestris silere quis possit? De illis quos aut factione, aut
subtilitate, ut vestros faceretis, seducere potuistis; non solum mosculi, sed
etiam soeminae, de ovibus facti sunt vulpes, -- post quod ad vos delapsi sunt,
aut dilapsae, dolent alios ibi esse ubi nati sunt, been stantes in lapsus suos
invitant, etc. Cont. Parmen. l. 6. Vide.
concerning the activity of such men and women, whom fraud or faction had
adjoined to the Donatists, in seducing and perverting others into their own
errors and schism. Athanasius tells us what use the Arians made of women,
(...), Epist. ad Solitar. (...), etc. Ibid.
to ingratiate them with Princes and great men, whose favor is most desirable
to them, as being most advantageous to their persons and ways. But enough of
this. Experience teaches, that when men sleep, the enemy comes, and sowes
tares among the wheat, and goes his way undiscerned. The harlots feet abide
not in her house; now she is without, now in the streets, and lies in wait at
every corner: Such is the diligence of Sactaries.

The second general head, giving such success to heresies, and erroneous
opinions, is taken from the people, the persons that are seduced: The prince of
this world comes and finds something in them. The shaking of the glass may
raise some froth in the water, but no filth, if there be not mud in the
bottom. Diseases prove infectious by reason of the dyscrasy of our inward
temperature. People are made obnoxious to seduction by two things; their
simplicity, and curiosity: Of which briefly.

First, The simplicity, ignorance, ungroundednesse of the people affords great
advantage to seducers. Where the foundation is not well laid, the building
cannot stand long, though not meddled with; but will presently fall, if the
least violence be used: A people uncatechised in the principles of religion,
are a facile and obvious prey to false teachers. This the Apostle has an eye
to, Children are easily tossed to and fra with every wind of doctrine; Ephesians.
4. 14.
as a ship on the seas, not having sufficient balast, is driven with every
wind, and in danger of being overturned with every wave. The simple believes
every word (says Prove. 14. 15.
Solomon,) but the prudent looks well to his going. They lead captive silly
women, laden with diverse lusts, ever learaing, 2 Timothy 3. 6.
but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Seducers are furnished
with subtilty to deceive, and people prepared, through simplicity, to be
deceived; and from simplicity it is, that subtilty prevails. Besides, that the
Scripture does ordinarily point out ignorant and ungrounded men the object of
seduction, it is observed by the Ancients; Haereses apud eos multum valent qui
in fide non valent, -- de quorundam infirmitatibus habent quod valent, nihil
valentes si in been valentem fidem incurrant, De praescript. c. 2.
That heresies are strong where knowledge is weak, and prevail not so much by
their own strength, as by the weakness of the adversary: Dispensatio ista, ac
libratio prudens verborum indoctos decipere potest, cautus auditor and lector
cito deprehendet insidias, and cuniculos, quibus veritas subvertitur, aperte in
luce demonstrabit, Hieron. ad Pammac. Epist. 61.
That all their knotty arguments, and glozing speeches may happily deceive the
unlearned and ignorant, but a prudent and wary hearer will easily discern their
sophistry, and discover the fraud by which they endeavor to undermine the
truth. Heretical arguments are but bare pretenses, in this resembling the
spiders cob-web, that they are fit to hold the weaker Christians, whilst the
stronger break away, and save themselves. And let this consideration stay us,
that we stumble not; and seducers, that they triumph not in the great
defection unto several opinions now amongst us. They have deceived (...),
Nazian. or. 33.
children, Egregiam laudem; and we have lost (...), Athan. de incarnat. Christ.
chafe, Spolia ampla: what great prize, that a stumbling block has been laid
before a blind man, and he has stumbled at it? Certainly, such are they,
even children, many in years, most in understanding, that, amongst us, are
perverted by new opinions.

Secondly, The curiosity of the people administers no small advantage to
seducers. Men are not content with sound doctrine, and old truths, but, as the
Athenians, spend Act. 17. 21.
their time to tell or to hear some new thing: men that have itching ears heap
to themselves -- teachers after their own 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
lusts, and turn away their ears from the truth, and are turned to fables,
(says S. Paul.) To be always learning, is that which 2 Timothy 3. 6.
betrays silly women to be led captive by seducers: And the Apostle Peter tells
us, that not only by the lusts of the flesh, but much wantonness (wantonness
of the brain) they that were clean esaped from them that live in error, are 2
Pet. 2. 18.
allured. It is a notable expression of (...), etc. De Trinit. Dial. 1.
Cyril, comparing some in his time to heifers, that run at their ease, leave
the herd and wholesome pasture, to gnaw upon briars and thorns, and so possibly
catch a prick in their foot, that they never go upright after. Sure I am, it is
so with many amongst us, who, in the wantonness of their wits, withdraw
themselves from the public Assemblies, from the Ministers whom God has set
over them, from the pastures in which they ought to feed, and betake themselves
to coppices, to gnaw (at the best) on briars and thorns; possibly, (if I may
allude to the vision of Robertus Gallus) on rocks and stones: It is no marvel
if they be lean and ill liking, if many catch pricks, and come halting home. To
pass from this; the Apostle, that he might preserve entire in the faith,
gives especial caution against curiosity, that questions be avoided, and
oppositions of science falsely so called. But of this hitherto.

The third general head, from which the success of heresies arises, is the
providence of God justly permitting that it should be so:

First, as a punishment of the luke-warmnesse of men, and want of love to the
truth: The sin grievous, the undervaluing of light; the punishment dreadful,
light is removed, darkness sent in stead of light. God will not endure the
despising of light. The Gentiles held the truth in unrighteousness, they
delighted not to have God in their knowledge, Romans 1. God gave them over to a
reprobate sense, and when they professed wisdom, they became fools, their
foolish hearts were darkened. Thus God dealt with Ahab; he hated Micaiah, with
whom the word of the Lord 2 Reg. 22.
was, and cared not to hear him; the Lord therefore gives commission to a lying
spirit to seduce his prophets, and prevail with him to his destruction. Thus
with Israel; Prophecy not, say they (the people) to them that prophecy: They
shall not prophecy, says the Lord: but if a man walk Micah 2. 7, 12.
in the spirit and lie, he shall be the prophet to this people. Thus with the
Jews; They that would not receive Christ that came in his Fathers Name, will
certainly receive an impostor that comes in his own name. Thus with Christians;
as says the Apostle, because they received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved; and for this cause God shall send them strong delusions,
(...), the efficacy of error, error in the strength, that they may believe a
lie. This sin made way for Mahumetanisme in the Eastern Churches; Popery in
the Western was the punishment of this sin: God is the same still, the same in
revenging his despised truth. Truth has been preached amongst us, despised
amongst us, embraced by very few in the power, in the love of it; God revengeth
it, and this revenging hand of God may be sensibly felt and discerned in our
distractions. Was it possible that a man should burn one piece of a tree, and
worship another, if God had not shut up his eyes? (...), Epiph. de Encratitis.
Haeres. 47.
A prudent man may see, and wonder, and be amazed at the tenants, carriages,
etc. of seducers, how inconsistent they be, how far from show of truth, and at
the great defection to them: Doubtless, this is none other but the hand of God
upon the seduced, for their want of love to that truth which they had received.

Secondly, as a trial of those that are sound: There must 1 Cor 11.
be heresies amongst you, (says the Apostle) that the approved may be made
manifest. It is the wind that discovers and severs the chafe from the wheat.
Ob hoc haereseon non statim divinitus eradicantur authors, ut -- unusquisque
quam tenax, and fidelis, and fixus catholicae fidei sit amator, appareat. Et
revera, cum quaeque novitas ebullit, statim cernitur frumentorum gravitas, and
levitas palearum; tunc sine magno molimine excutitur ab area, quod nullo
pondere intra aream tenebatur, etc. Vincent. Lyrinens. cap. 25.
They that are carried about with diverse and strange doctrines never had any
solidity: if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. The house
founded on the rock does not fall, though the winds blow, the waters rise, and
waves beat upon the house, yet is the rising of the winds, and beating of the
waves upon the house, a sore temptation: it had certainly fallen, had it not
been founded on a rock. It was a seasonable question which our Savior moved to
his disciples upon the defection of the Capernaites, Joh. 6. Will ye also go
away? It was a brave resolution that Peter put on, Though all men forsake thee,
yet will not I; though I die with thee, yet will I not deny thee: but he could
not perform it; when his Master was taken, he follows a far off, a
praeludium to his denial: Qui timide confitetur, negat; when he was in the
high Priests hall, he not only denied, but forswore him, the knowledge of
him, with execrations. The rising of heresy is a great trial, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2,
3, 4. The Lord your God tries you, says Moses: the prevailing of heresy is a
greater; an hard matter it is to resist the solicitations of the father of our
flesh, the son of our loins, the wife of our bosoms, the friend whom we
love as our lives: an hard matter it is to swim against the stream: he is a
soldier that stands to his arms, when some throw them down and run away, some
throw them down and call for quarter, ready to take pay under the enemy. When
men of name for parts, knowledge, piety, sufferings, shall desert the truth, he
stands fast that does not stagger: If Peter dissemble, Barnabas is carried away
with his dissimulation. Look to your selves, take heed lest you fall, God
suffers these things for your trial: He suffers the evil of heresies, that
by reason of them his truth may be more cleared, his people more confirmed,
hypocrites discovered, and shed out of the Church, and a purer body left
behind. But thus much of the reason: And let what has been spoken suffice to
be said of the Doctrinall part, That heresies, or errors in opinion, are of a
spreading and destroying nature: wherein I have showed, 1. That they eat as a
Gangrene, speedily, incurably, mortally. 2. What they eat; they eat up faith,
peace, piety. 3. How it comes to pass they thus eat; from heretics, their
subtilty and industry; from the people, their simplicity and curiosity; from
God, his justice both to revenge the want of love to the truth, and manifest
those that are approved. Now a word or two for application.

gangrenes, because many heresies, and all things are bending to a (...), (as
the Chirurgians call it) the height of mortification: This is matter of
lamentation, as Ezekiel speaks, and shall be for a lamentation. Jobs case, over
which his friends for seven days wept, was not so bad as ours: his sores were
boyles, ours gangrenes; his would endure scraping, ours will not endure
touching; his body was affected, our souls. How is the faithful City become an
harlot? How is our wine mixed with water, our silver become dross? Is it
nothing to you, O all ye that pass by? Was any sorrow like unto ours? But
sorrow is an helpless passion: It Is for a child to sit still and cry.

Physicians of no value, that would have them, if not tolerated, connived at;
if not so, yet not proceeded against with any vigor: as if (like a slight
green wound) they would cure of themselves; or, if not cured, they were not
dangerous: men of the temper (...). Haeres.
of the Samsaeans in Epiphanius, who were neither Christians, nor Jews, nor
Gentiles, but desirous to hold fair correspondence with all religions, they
were of no religion, they were yet to choose of what religion they would be.
But,

Amice, vide ut me extrahas: if you love me, endeavor to heal me of my sores,
endeavor to help me out of my errors. I shall apply this to three sorts of
persons whom I see before me; the People, the Minister, the Magistrate; and in
all be very short, and so conclude.

First, To the People: Dearly beloved brethren, for you the net is spread, it
is for your precious souls that deceivers hunt, it is for your sakes that I
have pitched upon these meditations; I beseech you, take notice of what a
spreading, what a destroying nature heresies are, and keep your souls with all
diligence, lest by any man, by any means you be deceived. You are fallen into
dangerous times, into times of great temptation; errors, like a flood, come up
over all their channels, go over all their banks, overflow, go over, and
reach even unto the neck, and cover the land, as the waters the sea: And let me
tell you, (whatever some men say) they are dangerous errors, many of them
razing the foundation, and drowning men in destruction and perdition; the least
of them such as (if not deadly in themselves, and in their own nature) may
prove deadly in their consequences and sad effects, as preparing the heart to
entertain those that are in their own nature deadly. I beseech you therefore,
as you love the Lord Jesus Christ, as you tender the everlasting salvation of
your souls, watch, be careful that no man deceive you: And that you may not
be deceived, I commend (passing by many others) these three rules:

First, Adhere unto your own ministry, and wait upon them whom God in his
providence has set over your souls. The end why God has given to his Church
Pastors and Teachers, is set down by the Apostle to be, that we may be no
longer children in knowledge, tossed to and Ephesians. 4. 14.
fro with every wind of doctrine. God will bless and be effectual by his own
ordinance: by it he will lead in wisdom, and in understanding. May we not go
abroad to hear? This is besides my purpose: But why should you go abroad to
buy, when you have food at home? God has been gracious to this City; I may
speak it without arrogance, it was hardly ever better provided for; the loss
of the country has been your gain: Why should you withdraw your selves? The
mothers milk is most natural for the infant; the sheep that wanders from the
flock is in most danger of the wolf; change of diet is not wholesome for the
body; is it for the soul? Another man may have better gifts then thy Pastor;
can he have more love to, and care of thy soul then he that must give an
account for it? Children that often change their Masters, seldom prove good
scholars; nor they solid and understanding Christians, that change their
Ministers. But I will not insist on this: I am not against hearing abroad
occasionally; but, for the preventing of misleading, desire to persuade the use
of the public Ministry, and of your own Ministers, whom God has given you to
be your guides. And let me tell you of one great miscarriage, and not the
least cause of so much defection; it is this, The people are so strange from
their Ministers, from private conference, communicating their fears, their
doubts, their temptations, asking advice and counsel of them, at whose mouths
they should enquire the law: they bury all in their own bosoms to their great
disturbance, or ask of others, who seduce them by misinformation. To pass
from this, if any of you be mislead, ye have the means to prevent it, your
blood will be upon your own heads. If a virgin betrothed to an husband was
ravished Deuteronomy. 22. 23.
in the city, not only he that ravished her, but she her self should die; she
cried not out that she might have been helped: if she was ravished in the
field, she was not to die, because no help was near; but he that ravished her
was to die. Beloved, you are espoused to Jesus Christ as a 2 Cor. 11.
chaste virgin, (...), etc. Cyril. de ador. in spir. and verit. l. 8.
seducers are your adulterers, they corrupt you from the simplicity that is in
Christ; if this be done in the city, i. e. in the Church of God, in the City of
Christ, where Ministers reside that may succor you when assaulted, your blood
will be upon your own heads, you cried not out for help, you betrayed your
chastity to the lust of your ravisher. People that sit in darkness, where are
no Misters, if they fall, may be excused a tanto; they had none to help them:
but your blood will be upon your heads.

Secondly, Try all things: This is the counsel of Saint John, Believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits whether they 1 John 4. 1.
be of God or no, for many false prophets are come into the world. Try all
things, (says S. Paul) and hold fast that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
Far be it from Christians, that they should be the scholars of Apelles or
Papists, (...). Eusebius lib. 5. 12.
not at all to search the Scripture; like infants, to gape and swallow
whatever the nurse puts into their mouths. Consider that notable speech of
Athanasius to this purpose, (...), etc. Tom. 2. p. 325.
Shall I believe unreasonably? Shall I not search what is possible, or
profitable, or comely, or pleasing to God, agreeable to nature, consonant to
truth, etc? This has been the sole and adequate original of all error to
those that have been deceived. Many want will to do it, they will not take so
much pains, and what needs so much ado? they (we hear) are honest, godly, etc.
But would you not tell money after them, and weigh gold? and will you take
doctrine upon trust without trial? May not every man deceive, and be deceived?
Is there not danger in being deceived? Should your faith be built upon man?
Many pretend they want skill, they cannot do it: The most filly creature has
so much from the instinct of nature, as to be able to know wholesome food, if
it be well; and some of them their physic, if they be sick: and art thou a
man, a Christian, a professor, a forward one, unable to discern between light
and darkness? To what purpose serves the anointing which we have of God, but
to inform 1 John 2.
and teach us concerning those that seduce us? (...); Ignat. ad Ephesians.
Why are we not wise, seeing we have understanding? Why remain we ignorant,
that are taught of God? Why neglect we the gift bestowed on us, and perish like
fools? (...), Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7.
Wariness is not required in any thing more then in matters of religion: Some
errors are so like truth, that they can hardly be discerned: All desire to walk
under the veil of truth; have your eyes in your heads, that you be not
deceived. It is besides my purpose to lay down cautions in trial, rules of
trial; I only assure you, as In compendio est apud religiosas mentes and
simplices and errorem deponere, and invenire, atque eruere veritatem; nam si ad
divinae traditionis caput atque originem re^ertamur, cessat error humanus,
Cypr. ad Pompei. contr. lit. Stephan. Epist. 74.
Cyprian did another, It is not an hard matter for godly and sincere people to
escape out of the snares of error, and to find out, and to discover truth. If
they bring all things to the touchstone of the Scripture by an impartial and
unprejudiced trial, error will be dispersed, as mists are dissipated by the
beams of the Sun.

Thirdly, Avoid those that are erroneous, their congregationall meetings, and,
as much as may be, their personal converse. In times of infection men do not
only make use of antidotes, but with all care shun places and persons that are
infected, that they may prevent the danger of infection: the like caution is in
this case commended; I Romans 16. 17.
beseech you, brethren (says S. Paul) mark those which cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which you have received, and avoid them. And
S. John, If there come any unto 2 John 10.
you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, nor bid him
God speed. If with one called a brother, being a fornicator, -- a railer, -- we
must not eat; how ought we to shun such as adulterate the word of God, and
blaspheme the truth? How (...), Ignat. ad Smyrn.
comely is it not only to abstain from such things, both the private and
public discourse of them, but to shun the authors of infamous heresies and
sects, as the original of all mischief? St. John Niceph. l. 4.
would not endure the company of Cerinthus in the bath: Policarp abhorred
conference with Marcian, as the firstborn of the devil: Athan. in vit.
Antonius detested all communion with such as had corrupted the faith, and
divided the Church: the Christians in the days of Basil (...), Bas. Epist. 69.
, when Arianisme had so prevailed, shunned their meeting houses, as the
Schools of error; and is there not reason for it? Consider those laid down by
the Apostles: First, Such (whatsoever their pretenses be) serve not the Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own bellies; they sin not of ignorance, or being
deceived, but knowingly: to adhere to them, is to desert Christ. They sin to
serve their bellies, as (...).
Theophylact upon the place. Every heresy has its original to be subservient
to some lust; and should not a brother of Christ blush to make such a servant
to his own belly his master? Secondly, with fair speeches -- they deceive the
hearts of the simple: there is much danger of infection; Can a man touch pitch,
and not be defiled? Can he carry coals of fire in his bosom, and not be burnt?
May not Satan seize upon thee, finding thee amongst his own, as upon the woman
in the Tert. de spect. cap. 26.
Theater? Thirdly, He that bids him God speed, is partaker of all his evil
works: thy sitting and eating in an idols temple may be a snare and scandal to
thy weak brother, may be an encouragement unto sectaries, etc. Thou may bring
upon thy head the guilt of blasphemies, the blood of souls. Shall I add one
reason more? Thou may possibly perish with them. I have often thought of the
speech of (...), Ad Philadelph.
Ignatius, They that adhere to such as adhere not to truth, shall not inherit
the kingdom of God: they that depart not from false teachers, shall be
condemned unto hell. He that would not be drawn away with the wicked, and the
workers of iniquity unto perdition, as David prays, must Psalm. 28. 3.
learn to hate the congregation of evil doers, as David Psalm. 26. 4.
pleads. There Is reason enough to dissuade from their meetings: Dubitas illo
momento quo in Diaboli ecclesia fueris, omnes Angelos prospicere de coelo, and
singulos denotare, quis blasphemiam dixerit, and quis audierit? quis linguam,
quis aures Diabolo adversus Deum administraverit? Tertull. ib. cap. 27.
Do not the Angels, think you, look from heaven? Do they not observe who speak
blasphemy, and who hear it? who lend the Devil their tongues against God, and
who their ears? May I not conclude this with the Prophet, Though thou Israel
Hos. 4. 15.
play the harlot, let not Judah offend, and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither
go up to Beth-aven? (...), Ignat. ad Trallens.
Avoid Atheistical heresies, they are the inventions of the Devil; such
fruit, whosoever tastes of, shall die, not a temporal, but an eternal death.
I press this upon you, not for your selves only, but your families, your
wives, children, and servants, for whom you are responsible. It was Joshua's
resolution, I and my house will serve the Lord: the elect Ladies comfort, that
her children were walking in the truth: You would restrain them from taverns,
brothel-houses, stage plays; restrain them from these meetings, of which I may
say, as (...), etc. Orat. 2. contr. Jud. tom. 6.
Chrysostom of the Synagogues of the Jews, they are some of them worse, the
dens of thieves, the Devils meeting houses: therefore betray not their
salvation. Thus you have directions for the people to prevent the spreading of
this gangrene: But O, how are they neglected! The public ministry is
forsaken, opinions embraced for truth, not only before they be tried, but
before they be declared what they be: the inconsiderate people flock to the
meeting houses of Sectaries, as swarms of flies (if it may not be offensive to
use the similitude of Plutarch) in an hot summers day, to a galled back, thence
to suck out filth and corruption. And is it a wonder that errors prevail? But
of this hitherto.

Secondly, To you, my brethren in the Ministry, I desire to speak something,
and to my self: God expects at our hands, as officers in the Church, that we
endeavor with all our gifts, all our power (which he has given us for
edification, and not for destruction) not only to prevent the spreading, but
(if it be possible) the being of heresies: And to this purpose it is required,

First, That heresies be discovered, that heretics by sound doctrine be
convinced: As a word, an erroneous word makes the wound, [Their word does eat
as does a canker;] so a word, a sound word does make the cure, [(...).] The way
to stop the further proceedings of seducers, is to make their folly manifest to
all men: And 2 Timothy 3. 9.
to this purpose God requires of Ministers, not only to teach the ignorant,
but to convince gainsayers. Other men of abilities may do it ex charitate, you
must do it ex officio: God has made you watchmen, not only to warn, when
grievous wolves from without make havoc of the flock; but then to take heed,
when subtle foxes from within teach (...), crooked and perverse things, to draw
disciples after them. God has left unto all men the judgment of discretion,
to you is committed the judgment of direction; every man is bound to see for
himself, you are commanded to see for others: The commission of the Minister
is, They shall teach my people the difference between the Eze. 44. 23, 24.
holy and profane, and cause men to discern between the unclean and the clean.
And in controversy they shall stand in judgment, and they shall judge it
according to my judgments; and they shall keep my laws, and my statutes in
all mine assemblies, and they shall hallow my Sabbaths. And it is the direction
of the Apostle, that the spirits of the Prophets be subject to 1 Cor. 14. 32.
the Prophets. The declaration of what is heretical, what orthodox; what is
lawful, what scandalous, belongs to you: you will be found as guilty of
violating the law, and profaning the holy things of God, if you put not this
Eze. 22. 25, 26.
difference, as others if they confound them. This is the Scripture way: The
Angel of the Church of Ephesus is commended, Thou have tried them which say
they are Apostles, Rev. 2. 2.
and are not, and have found them liars. Paul and Barnabas had Acts 15. 2.
great dissension and disputation with them that corrupted the doctrine of the
Gospel in Antioch. This has been the way of the Churches of Christ in all
ages: the Ministers have been employed severally, and in Councels, in the
discovery and confutation of all errors that have arisen. This truth is so
notorious to all that have had the least acquaintance with Antiquity, that it
would be lost labor, and time misspent to prove it: the writings of the
Fathers, the histories of the Councels bear ample testimony to it, being for
the most part taken up with this occasion. Let him that has a desire, read
Ambrose in his 32. Epistle to the younger Valentinian, and in his 33. Epistle
ad sororem. This is our duty in the behalf of our people, as (...). Orat. 40.
Nazianzene said sometimes to his, Leave the battle to me; Let me build the
ship, do thou sail in it; Let the fight be mine, thine the victory; Let me
grapple with the adversary, be thou in peace. O that in these times of
defection we all of us had hearts to discharge in this particular our duties;
which we have never discharged, till such time as we have discovered and
convinced errors, and that boldly, plainly, fully, and with authority: and in
Baldu. de casi. lib. 4. cas. 2. cap. 7.
some cases erroneous persons, that the people may know of whom to beware, as
our Apostle, Of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus. I know this duty of a Minister
is not more neglected then decried: What needs so much fire? Can you not preach
Christ, faith, and repentance, and let these points in controversy alone? Do
not they preach Christ that discover errors? Did not the Apostle to the
Galatians preach Christ? Is it not time to speak, when, under a pretense of
preaching Christ, Christ is almost preached out of the Church? This much
commended Moderation, in which many forbear this duty, is no other then the old
shift of Auxentius, Ursacius, Valens, and other debauched Arians in the
Council of Ariminum, revived of late by Papists in Germany, Arminians in
Holland, Prelates in England, who found the silencing of disputes the most
efficacious and plausible way to advance their designs. I desire we may
strengthen our selves against all temptations in this kind, with such like
considerations as (...), etc. tom. 2. Conc. ap. Bin. Conc. Ephesians. part. 3.
Cyril sometimes did: O man, there will be no excuse for thy silence, for thy
moderation; thou stand guilty by reason of it before God and man, etc. But
verbum sapienti. I pass from this to a second duty.

Secondly, That heretics be censured, and by the sword of discipline cut off,
that they have their mouths stopped. In the former was exercised the power of
order; in this, the power of jurisdiction. By whose hands this sword should be
wielded, I stand not to dispute; but sure I am, wielded it ought to be, and in
this case drawn forth by some hands. Timothy was left at Ephesus, to charge
some men to teach no 1 Timothy 1. 3.
other doctrine: and Titus receives it in commission, to reject Tit. 3. 8.
an heretic after the first and second admonition: Christ blames the Angels of
the Churches in Pergamus and Thyatira, Rev. 2. 14, 20.
that they suffered such as held the doctrine of Balaam, and the woman Jezebel
-- to teach, and seduce his servants. This was the medicine which Paul applies
to Hymeneus and Alexander; he delivered them over to Satan, that they might
learn not to blaspheme: Satan teaches to blaspheme; but the delivering over
unto Satan, teaches not to blaspheme. The sharpest censures in the Church are
of a curing nature; the wounds, not of an enemy, but of a Physician: the
casting out of an heretic is either healing to the person cast out, or
preventing infection to the people. It has been the ultimum remedium in the
purest ages of the Church: instances I might give; I content my self with one,
and that in an ill time of the Church for the orthodox. The Fathers assembled
at (...). Apud Athan. Epist. de Syn. Arim.
Ariminum unanimously deposed Ursacius, Valens, and some others (though upheld
by the power and favor of the Emperor Constantius) that the Christian faith
might remain in peace, and entire: and this advice gives (...), etc. Orat. 27.
Nazienzene, Let them be cast out as the pests of the Church, and the poisoners
of truth.

But this may seem to some an hard sentence, to others an unprofitable course.
Say some, Will you have good, holy, learned, painful, useful men cast out of
the Church? Say others, What will it avail? they separate from you, they have
already renounced their ministry, deserted their stations, imbodied themselves
in another way, they will not care for your censures.

The Apostle answers both these objections Tit. 3. 9. To the first, says he,
Reject him that is an heretic, knowing that such a one is subverted, (...),
has the fairest side outward: (the word is a metaphor drawn from foul linen,
as Favorinus, the foul side turned inward) as if he should have said, Such a
man, whatever shows he makes, is a naughty man: He that consents not to
wholesome words, the 1 Timothy 6. 3.
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, says the Apostle. If you look to the
outside, you see the clothing of a sheep; if you could look to the inside, you
should see the ravening of a wolf: the outside of the sepulcher is painted,
the inside is filth and rottenness: possibly we may have high thoughts of
truth-corrupters, but God has not, the primitive Church had not: They none of
them are better then (...). Ad Philad.
pyramides, or sepulchers of the dead, that have written upon them the names of
dead men: Their opinions, their incorrigibleness in their opinions, is a plain
manifestation of the rottenness of their hearts; which if you could discern,
you would never think it strange that the Apostle commands such men to be
rejected. The skillful Chirurgian falls to cutting and searing, so soon as the
gangrene begins to appear; a little delay may endanger the life, the whole will
not be preserved but by the loss of a part: heresies are a gangrene (a
leprosy in the head) they may endanger the body, the Church; there is no other
ecclesiastical way to prevent it, if once come to this height, but rejecting;
and this possibly may not only preserve the body, but recover the member. And
thus much for the first branch.

To the second, They have cast out themselves, etc. Reject him, says the
Apostle, he is condemned of himself; it is self-guiltinesse that persuades
separation: If such men have passed a sentence against themselves really, that
they are unworthy of the communion of faints, the fellowship of the Church, the
kingdom of heaven; confirm their sentence, cast them out judicially, let them
bear that necessarily, which they have chosen voluntarily to undergo. Though
that be true which Quos omnes manifestum est a semetipsis damnatos esse, and
ante diem judicii inexcusabilem sententiam in semetipsos dixisse, etc. Epist.
75.
Firmilianus has in his Epistle to Cyprian, It is manifest, that they are all
condemned of themselves, and have passed against themselves a dreadful
sentence before the day of judgment: yet possibly the lenity of the Church,
waiting with patience, and seeking with clemency to gain these men, may hide it
from their eyes, and beget such high thoughts as in the Donatists of old, Si
male facimus, quare nos quaeritis? If we be so bad as you pretend, why do you
forbear us, why do you court us, why do you seek our communion? Non quaeruntur
nisi qui perierunt: -- Posset and illa ovis tam absurd pastori dicere, Si male
facio quod a grege aberro, quare me quaeris? non intelligens quare se putat non
esse quaerendam, hanc esse una^ causam quare quaeratur. -- Quaerimus ergo vos
ut inveniamus; tantum enim vos diligimus ut vivatis, quantum vestrum errorem
odimus ut intereat, qui vos perdit, Cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 37.
Austin gives to this a satisfactory answer: Nothing is sought which was not
lost; Should a wandering sheep say to the shepherd, If I do ill to wander, why
do you seek me? -- We seek them that we may find them, that they may live;
our love to their persons being as great as our hatred of their errors. But
seeing patience and lenity may be made advantage of to the fomenting of
obstinacy in some, and insnaring of others; the rejecting of such men (as have
abused lenity) from the communion of the Church, may be, by the blessing of
God, a great means to open their eyes, to stay others that waver, at least, to
free the Church from the guilt of blood, the blood of souls. How lightly soever
some men speak or think of the censures of the Church, yet are they ratified by
Christ in heaven; and a dreadful thing it is to be condemned by the judgment
of the Church.

Thus much of the second ecclesiastical course to be taken for the
suppressing, or staying the progress of heresy. I confess, it is a point
finds opposition, and from such as it ought not: some teaching, that there is
no intrinsecall power in the Church for suppressing heresy and schism. Did
the Apostles exercise none? Was there none in the Church for 300 years after
Christ? Did they usurp what they exercised? If not, who took away from the
Church the power sometimes exercised, never usurped? Others say, Doctrine is
the most effectual way to root out heresy. That heretics should be convinced
by sound doctrine, has been already declared: whether doctrine be the only or
most effectual way to root it out, I will not dispute: (I hate so to compare
doctrine and discipline, as the Prelaticall party of late did preaching and
prayer; so to advance the one, as to bring the other into dis-respect) only I
say, that discipline has been very useful and effectual to prevent the rising
of heresies, as in the Church of Scotland; to suppress their growth, as in the
Church of Holland: to give instance nearer home, England is sensible of the
good of discipline: In eighty years there did not arise amongst us so many
horrid opinions and blasphemous heresies under Episcopacy, (a Government
decryed as Antichristian) as have risen in these few years, since we have been
without Government: and in those days the errors that were, walked in
darkness; but in ours, they outface the Sun. Why do all our Sectaries oppose
the establishing of Government? Would the wolves so earnestly desire the
putting away of the dogs, were they not the fafety of the flock? But, as I
said, I will not dispute.

Lastly, (that I may speak something also to you, Right Honorable, and the
residue, unto whose care the Government of this great City is, by the
providence of the Almighty, committed) God expects it at the hand of the
Magistrate, that he should put forth all that power with which he is invested
from on high, for the suppression of heresies and schisms in the Church, and
the cure of this spreading canker. I know, that in this scepticall time it is
questioned by nullifidians, as most other truths are, whether the Magistrate
has any calling to intermeddle in matters of religion: or if in matters of
religion, whether in matters of opinion. I will not meddle much with disputes
in this question. It is confessed by all, that the Magistrates, the Kings of
Judah, did intermeddle for the abolishing of errors, and reformation of the
Church: Why may not Christian Magistrates walk in their steps? Because, say
some, they were types, their actions in this point M. S. to A. S.
typical. But this is said, not proved. Because they meddled only with
Idolaters for idolatry, not Sectaries for opinions. Where is it read that they
punished Pharisees, Sadduces, Esseans? Where is it read, that there were any
such Sectaries in Judah, till the Scepter was departed? We read the Law, that
not only the Prophet that spoke in the Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
name of another god, but the Prophet that presumed to speak in the Name of the
true God, a word which he had not commanded, should die: the false, or lying
prophet, was guilty of death, as well as the idolatrous prophet: And quaere,
Was not Jeremy questioned upon this law? Where in all the New Jer. 26.
Testament has the Magistrate power given him against heresies and schisms?
Where has he power given him against adulteries and murders? Speak out,
Socinian: take away all Magistracy; if thou leavest him in his Vice-gerentship
to God, as his minister, a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil,
thou will never be exempted from the edge of his sword, till thou can prove
heresies good; and that thou may do, when thou can prove Gal. 5. 19, 20. 2 John 11. Rev. 2. 15. to be no Scripture. I know diverse Treatises have been
published against this power of the Magistrate, which this time, this place
permit not to examine: if God permit, the weakness of them shall be in another
manner discovered. For the present I lay down these three Propositions.

First, There was never in the world any godly Emperor or King that can be
produced, but thought the care of religion did appertain to him, that it was
his duty to suppress idolatries, heresies, schisms, and accordingly has been
acting, more or less, to this purpose. That this care lay upon the Kings of
Judah, is confessed: what Christian Emperors have done, would be too long to
relate. The first that ever was, gave this in charge to his deputies, That
above Hujus rei potissimum competentem curam gerant, Eusebius. l. 10. c. 6.
all other things, they should have this in especial care, that the people,
members of the orthodox Churches, should not be corrupted with schismatic or
heretical opinions; but that they that did design such a mischief, should be
severely punished. His godly successors walked in his steps.

Secondly, That those Emperors and Kings who are recorded voluntarily to have
tolerated all religions, or carelessly to have neglected the growth of heresies,
and schisms in the Church, have been, the former, Apostates, Atheists,
Heretics; the later branded for their neglect. It would be too long to
instance in particulars: The first that ever did it (after Constantine) was
Julian, infamous for his Ex famulo Dei factus est minister inimici, Apostatam
se suis edictis testatus est. -- Ire praecepit voto suo, quos intellexerat ad
destruendam pacem cum furore venturos esse. Erubescite, si ullus est pudor.
Eadem voce vobis libertas est reddita, qua voce idolorum patefieri jussa sunt
templa, Optat. cont. Parm. l. 2.
apostacy; of a professed Christian, he degenerated into a real Pagan, and
gave a toleration to Sectaries, that he might disturb the peace of the Church,
and overthrow Christianity.

Thirdly, Never did any orthodox Divine constantly deny this power to the
Magistrate, or plead for a toleration of all sects. Indeed Retract. l. 2. cap.
5.
Austin was for a time of this opinion, that none ought to be compelled to the
faith; but he retracted it. And (...), Epist. 77. Olymp.
Nazianzene was sometimes too indulgent to the Apollinarians, but confesses,
that he was ignorantly so, not knowing that he had almost undone both them and
the Church by his unseasonable philosophy; for, as Solomon, A servant will not
be corrected with words. But no more of these at this time.

If any man ask, What has the Magistrate done for the suppressing of heresies?
I answer, A learned Knight has written a The primitive practice.
Treatise upon this subject, in the fifth Section of which, he tells us, that
the Magistrate has made use of banishment, imprisonment, fining: to this
purpose he makes mention also out of Severus, of one Priscillianus put to
death; which act, says he, the Church was offended at: Possibly the Church
might be offended at the manner of the doing, but, I think, hardly at the deed
it self; both because Epist. 93.
Leo, who lived not long after that time, expressly commends the fact, and Quasi
in vindictam Dei nullus mereatur occidi. Nemo erat laedendus ab operariis
unitatis, sed nec ab episcopis mandata divina contemni debuerant. -- Si occidi
malum est, mali sui ipsi sunt causa, etc. Vide lib 3. cont. Parmen.
Optatus, who lived in the same time, justifies the practice of putting
Schismatics to death: unto whom I might add Augustine in diverse places; and
De ador. in spirit. and verit. lib. 8.
Cyril of Alexandria, who taught, that heretics, that steal away and make
merchandise of the souls of men, might with as much reason be put to death, as
those under the law, that were found stealing of men, and selling them, Exodus
21. 16. And Theodosius made a law, that whosoever rebaptized any one baptized
in the Church, should die, and in some cases the party rebaptized also. But of
this more will be said, if God permit, in another way.

Besides these courses acknowledged by that learned Knight, there was also
great care taken for the suppressing of the writings of heretics, which were
by the imperial laws Sez. l. 1. c. 20.
condemned to the fire, (...), Niceph. ecel. hist. l. 8. c. 25.
and that upon pain of death, to be without mercy or delay inflicted on
whomsoever should be found to conceal any of these writings: so great zeal
there was to remove the very memory of heresies. There was no less diligence
and severity used to prohibit the meetings of heretics, it being by law
forbidden them Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 63.
to assemble together publicly or privately; their public places were
commanded to be thrown down by Constantine. Theodoret. Eccl. hist. li. 5. c. 2.
He that entertained them in his house privately, if the owner of the house,
forfeited it; if the tenant, without the consent of the owner, he forfeited 10.
1. in gold; if not worth so much, and a freeman, he lost his Cod. de sum.
Trin. l. 2.
liberty, and was made a slave; if a servant, he was beaten with clubs: And all
this reaches not so far as the Scripture commands, and practices; where such
places, and not only such, but the dwelling houses of such as spoke evil of
the God of Israel, were pulled down, and employed to an unclean use. I could
tell you upon what grounds the Naz. Or. 46.
Fathers pressed these laws, but I reserve them for another occasion.

But our pleaders for toleration against the Magistrates power, object, some of
them, that such severity will be a let and hindrance to the Churches growth.
Ought not the Church to grow? It ought to grow, but not into a monster. We
would have our children grow, we would not have them have new members: Si
quidem ad profectum pertinet ut in semetipsa unaquaeque res amplificetur, etc.
Vincent. Lirinens. cont. haeres. c. 28.
We would have faith grow, but we would not have a new faith. Tert. de
praescript. c. 8.
It is one property of true faith, to believe, that nothing else is to be
believed. Others, that these courses will not suppress heresies, but rather
spread them. Indeed, truth will not be suppressed by opposition, but errors
will. By the laws of the Emperors put in execution, many of the ancient
heresies were destroyed, if ye will believe (...), Lib. 8. cap. 52. Sozom. ubi
supra.
Nicephorus and other Historians. Most of them plead the severe judgments of
God against the persecuters of the saints. Who denies it? but are heretics
saints? Whether God be pleased or displeased with toleration of errors, if it
may be concluded from the acts of his providence toward those that have
tolerated, or not tolerated diverse religions, I shall desire them to compare
his dealings with Constantine the Great, and Theodosius the Great, who, of all
the Christian Emperors, were the most zealous in suppressing Sectaries, and the
most prosperous both in peace and war; and his dealings with Julian, Valens, or
the Valentinians, that were most indulgent to Sectaries: and then let them tell
me with whom God is best pleased. All cry out, Persecution, persecution. But
that suffering which is not for righteousness sake, is not persecution: If you
suffer for your faults, -- what thank have you, though you bear it patiently?
But would these men be thought to deny all power to the Magistrate in
suppressing heresies? By no means: the Magistrate (say they) may deny such as
are erroneous, places of trust, places of honor, places of profit; he may
discountenance them, etc. My Lord, this (it is confessed on all hands) you may
do, you need not fear ye sin in doing this: Let this be done, let Sectaries be
discountenanced, let heretics be denied places of trust, honor, profit, and
you shall have few false prophets; for they, says the Apostle, teach things
which they ought not, for filthy lucre sake. I will Tit. 1. 9.
conclude in one word: It has pleased God to stir up your hearts (I speak of
the honorable court of Common Council) to be active for the settlement of
Government, and suppression of sects: For what you have done, I bless God, and
beseech you not to be weary of well-doing, but proceed in the work undertaken.
I might urge you by the bond of the Covenant, which we have all taken, and you
have lately renewed: I might tell you, It will never be any grief of heart, to
have owned the cause of God in evil times, and to have kept your hands clean
from the blood of souls: I only say, It was the glory of Constantine, that he
had freed the Empire from tyranny, the Church from heresy. O that the same
might be this Cities glory. You are famous over Christendom, and shall be to
all ages, that you have not spared estates or lives to deliver the Kingdom
from oppression: press hard on, that you may have interest in this glory, to
have delivered the Church from confusion. Which that you may do, let us pray,
etc.

FINIS.

