Gospel-libertie, In the Extensions Limitations
of it.

Wherein is laid down an exact way to end the present dissentions, and to
preserve future peace among the SAINTS.

Whereunto is added good news from HEAVEN; TO The Worst of SINNERS on Earth.

The former in nine Sermons on 1 Cor. 10.23.

All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. The latter in
three Sermons on LUKE 2.10.

Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to
all people. By WALTER CRADOCK Late Preacher at All-Hallows Great in LONDON;

James 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law
of Liberty. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1648.

AN EPISTOLAR PREFACE, Touching Things indifferent. The Moral Law. Expediency.

THE Author absent, entrusted the elegancy of printing, with that Artist. But
bequeathed the Pre-epistling to a Brother-Elder; let him be accountable for his
Artifice; I of the Subject Matter. Epistolar Commendations of Authors of
Books, as it were to their faces, before all the world, is more common with
most, then commendable with candid ingenious modest men on either side. The
Pulpit having made the Author more famous, and in a more expedient way than my
pen can imitate; and this his book sufficiently speaking for its self; I shall
only preface (as I can amidst these trouble; of times, and mine own business)
something suitable to the Contents of the Book.

The Title tells you it is GOSPEL-LIBERTY, meaning NEW TESTAMENT LIBERTY. For
that the Author seems to intend, and attend throughout his discourse. The
Contents or Table leads you to the things where he gives you the just
dimensions of his sense therein. And as often as he is not pleased to be
express, and punctual, he leaves you hints, and generals, whereby to abound
in your own sense. But beware how ye apply, lest ye mis-apply. Ministers in
nothing are more in danger in their whole Ministry, then in their managing of
the Doctrine of Christian liberty: And people are most in danger in the
application thereof. For as the Doctrine is Case-divinity (to me the most
comprehensive, and curious, especially in the bringing of it down to the
infinite of particulars:) so men's consciences in these most Gospel-abusing
times, are exceedingly complexioned to licentiousness. So that we may sadly
sigh forth this strange paradox. In medio consist it vitium, that is, In the
use of middle indifferent things, is committed most vice. For in these things
Professors also generally offend. Things expressly forbidden, or commanded, are
too gross, and ignominious; for a face that is but modestated by profession:
But in things indifferent there appearing a character of lawfulness stamped
upon them, professors grow too resolute and peremptory in their use, to
deliberate what, when, how much, etc. is convenient or expedient. And thus they
precipitate themselves into licentiousness, in these offence-giving, and
offence-taking times, to the occasioning of many to spew up that rligion they
had taken down. For men now a days will not rightly understand the bounds of
things indifferent; they cannot bear the weight of the moral Law under its
proper notion, which states what things are necessary, by prohibition or
injunction; and so do not drink in kindly the Doctrine of Expediency: but are
at a loss in the application of it, and at every turning go out of their way.
A little of each of these three is all I have to say to the tractable Reader in
this Epistle.

1. THINGS INDIFFERENT, chrysostom.
some call them (...) that is, Things that partake of nether extreme, so as to
be diffenced thereby in relation to moral good or evil: but are in that
respect (as they say) (...) all alike, neither good, nor evil. The meaning is;
That these things considered in themselves, Arist. Rhet.
though physically they differ in their essence and kind, (...).
or in their natural qualities, yet morally (I say still considered in
themselves) as in relation to good or evil manners, they carry no difference
upon them. But if morally they be transformed into any such difference; it is
not as they are entia or talia, that is as they are things, or such things, but
as they are considered and used.

Indifferency in simple terms or things is thus distinguished. God, and
graces, as physically and essentially, so morally are absolutely and positively
and peremptorily good. So that we cannot change their natures, we cannot, (as
such) abuse them So the great Philosopher of virtue proving thereby that
happiness consists in virtue.
On the contrary, Satan, as Satan, and sin as (...) a swerving from the rule of
restitude, are morally all together evil. So that we (I say we) cannot change
their natures; we cannot (as they are such) well use them. But for meat and
drink, mirth or mourning, recreation, sleeping, wakeing, several ways of
Arts, and tradings, with infinite more; they all are morally indifferent.
Arist. etc.
They are morally in themselves neither good nor evil, but as they are used.
Meat used to surfeiting or wantonness, drink to drunkenness, or raginst
clothes to pride, Arts to deceive; trading to covetousness, etc. become evil.

Indifferency in complex expressions, or compounded actions, consisting of
several acts or actings, is thus distinguished. Those exppessions or actions
which are clearly, or by evident consequence, commanded or forbidden, those are
necessarily either good or evil, morally. Those which are neither so commanded
or forbidden, are indifferent.

The Apostle to keep us from failing about (...). Things indifferent, calls us
to a consideration of things as they are (...) differenced, Phil. 1.10. That
ye approve the things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere, and without
offense till the day of Christ. Sincerity is put in the midale, as the heart in
the middle of the body, to minister Spirits and life to the other two. As if
the Apostle should say, as ye will approve your selves to be sincere (...) tried
at the beams of the word, Of (...) the light or splendour of the Sun and (...)
to discern or judge.
as young Eagles, or Chap men's cemmodities at the light of the Sun, and found
right, able to endure the divine light, and not discovered of any wittingly
concealed deceit, so ye must (...) Try, and discern (...) things or actions, or
expressions as they differ, either from indifferency by reason of circumstances
in the use, or from mediocrity of goodness by eminent qualities as they may be
improved. And so (says the Apostle) ye may be (...) neither stumbling, nor
causing to stumble, ^ Compare 1 Cor. 10.32. same word.
neither taking, nor giving offense *.

Under this notion of indifferency there is couched a liberty in the use of
such things that bear that character. A liberty either of contradictio^, to
use them, or not to use them; or of contrariety, or diversity to use them
variously, according to several particular circumstances. So as in the
general we dishonor not God, offend not our brother or neighbor, nor
prejudice our own good.

Others call things indifferent (...) Things put, Nazianz.
or placed in the middle. That is, between that which is absolutely good, or
absolutely evil morally, according to Gods description of things in his Word.
For God alone who is the only Creator and Lawgiver can make things to be
indifferent, so as none can unmake them from being such.

Therefore if Magistrates or Ministers, or both make things by divine
appointment indifferent to be necessary, that is, peremotorily commanding or
forbidding them, under what spiritual pretense soever of Conformity, or
uniformity, or order, or edification, etc. they feign to themselves a power of
impossibles, as if they could physically uncreate things from their own nature
in which God create^ them, or could bind the conscience, where God (the alone
Lord of Conscience) has not at all bound it; and morally they act a part of
Antichrist, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
latter times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits,
and doctrines of Devils speaking lies, and forbidding to marry, and commanding
to abstain from meats which God has CREATED to be received with thanksgiving
of them that believe, etc. For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
resused; For it is sanctified by the WORD, etc. So that it is high impiety to
make that necessary under a pretended religious consideration, (as DOCTRINES,
V. 1.) which Gods Creation and regulation in his Word have left indifferent.

Others call things indifferent (...) that is, Basil.
as they must be middle things, so feisable things; things that are within our
sphere, and faculty, facil to be done. For instance. Tobacco in it self is
neither good nor bad morally; and the actions of taking or not taking it (now
its use is common) are morally indifferent in themselves. If it must
necessarily be taken or forborne, the reason is physical. If a men does
morally well or ill in taking it, it aepends on moral circumstances, as
serving God better, or excess, or etc. But for one to vow be will take it,
whiles by nature be cannot bear it, or another to vow he will absolutely leave
it, when with safety of his health he may not forbear it, is to undertake that
which is without and beyond the circle of their power: and so this thing, and
those actions about it are not properly indifferent to such.

Here much might bemost usefully spoken (were I not bounded with an Epistle) of
the many and large nets men make to catch themselves, and ensnare their
consciences, by tying themselves about the use, or non-use of things
indifferent, where God has not tied them. There being this seed (I know not
what one name to give it) of Adam in us that we are more eager after that from
which we are tied, whether by God or men, or by our own selves. So far then
does a kind of liquorishnesse of nature, and curiosity of brain, hagge and
bewitch us as that we are sick in conceit to know that which is concealed,
and to have that which is denied. And this is so apparent, that not only
Saints, in relation to a divine law, but Heathens in relation to the law of
nature, have found by experience, Romans 7. v. 8. But sin taking occasion by
the COMMANDMENT, wrought in me all manner of CONCUPISCENCE. The Heathens have
complained often of some such thing. ( Gens humana ruit, per vetitum nesas.
Nitimur in vetitum se^per cupimusque negata.

-- Video meliora proboque
Deteriora sequor --)
Viz. That they were mad after things forbidden, because forbidden. For alas,
there wants not Satanicall temptations to rub this itch, and to foment this
concupiscence. And perhaps a temptation to make a rash vow, an inconsiderate
knot; that after we may be tempted to cut or break it, when we cannot loosen
it. Therefore about things indifferent, if we perceive their use, or non use
prove inconvenient to us, conditional prayer and careful watching against
occasions, are far better than rash vows, or peremptosy engagements.

For clearing all past, and making way for the rest, understand 1 A Middle;
which is either of Participation, as warm water partakes of hot and cold. And
so no things or actions, or expressions, are indifferent in themselves and in
the same respect, as if they were compounded of goodness and badnesse. Or else
of Negation, As a stone, or tree, etc. is a midde between blindness and
seeing. For a stone or tree, or etc. may justly be denied either to be blind,
or to see, because neither to see, nor to lose sight belongs to such things.
And thus indifferent things, whether entities or acts, are said to be in the
middle, viz. when it belongs not to them as such: and considered in themselves,
to be either good, or bad morally. Understand 2ly. That the extremes (as we
must call them in relation to that Middle) are those two between which the
thing indifferent lies. Now an indifferent thing lies either between two
sorts of beings, the one good, and the other bad: such as is true grace and
original Corruption; or between two sorts of rules, the one commanding, the
other forbidding. Understand 3dly, the difference between physical and moral
in the business in hand. Things considered as they come forth out of Gods
creation, or answer to the idea, and platform of Gods mind, so they fall under
the notion of physical or natural. Things considered according to that
concernment they may have to, or about manners, to render us virtuous, or
vicious, holy, or unholy, so they fall under the notion of moral. Understand
4ly, the distinction between things looked on as in themselves, and as looked
on in relation to (...) Things as considered in themselves, that is, according
to their own natures and properties within the latitude of their own essence:
so all entia all things are physically, and naturally good, as entia, as
things, Gen 1. Every particular thing, created every day, singly considered was
(...) but good, positively was good. And when all was put and joined together
into a world; the^ the Lord says, Genesis 1. last. It was (...) exceeding good,
it was superlatively good. Bonum bono additum (say the Philosophers) facit
melius. Good added to good makes better. And therefore from that phrase, Genesis
1. last, Mundus (...).
perhaps the Greeks and Latins call the world fair or beautiful. And thus
likewise Satan is good, namely in his nature and essence, he is of angelical
nature; though morally in manners he is stark naught. Again, all actions
considered in themselves physically as actions or motions, they are good. For
in God we live, move, and have our being, in a natural dependence, Acts 17.
Yea the actions of wicked men, yea their evil actions as natural motions are
physically or naturally good. And thus things are beheld as in themselves. On
the other side, things are considered as in relation to us, when looked upon as
for, or under our use. For our use. And so all things considered according to
their nature and ours, are either good for us as food and physic, or hurtful
for us as poison. Under our use; And so all things and actions steered toward
virtue or holiness are morally good. But all employed and improved toward
vice and unholinesse are morally evil. Though the object in-essence, and the
motion of the action in the nature thereof be good, both of God; yet man's ill
managing and using of them is of his own sinful heart, and so are perverted
into evil. As in that common instance. The going of the horse is justly caused
by the Rider: but the ill going is from the fault in the horse. Understand
lastly, what are Circumstances. Though in natural philosophy we usually reckon
two, the circumstances of all natural things; Ubi and Quando. Every created
natural thing is somewhere, and at sometime; yet in Rhetoric and morality we
count many more.

Quis, quid, ubi, quibus, atque cui, cur, quomodo, quando.

That is, who he is that acts; what he acts; where; and by what means; and
toward, or before whom; and why; and how; and when. And perhaps other
circumstances might upon deliberation, or experience, be found out. As to what
end, how often, how much, etc. These and the like circumstances are those that
give formalitie of moral good or evil to the use or acting about things
indifferent. So that though they be but circumstances, in comparison of
natural bodies; yet they are as it were the essentials of morali actions.

These things being premised, an open fair way is made for these maxims or
main positions about things indifferent.

1. That though actions in their common naked nature have an indifferent
respect to moral good or evil, as to feed, to cloth, to walk, to smile, etc.
Yet as they are clothed with particular circumstances, they put on the garb
of good or evil manners.

2. That though all indifferent actions in their essential and proper nature,
are alike distant from evil, and equally propinque and near to good; yet
custom, occasion, opportunity, common opinion, etc. have annexed some
circumstances to some actions, which picture them as more looking toward
evil. As to dance, to be an Accuser, or Executioner, or singular at some
mere recreations, or to be gay and curious in fashions of apparel. And those
things aforesaid annex other circumstances to other actions, whereby they seem
to reach forth the hand more toward goodness. As to plough, to study, to be
retired from frequent converse with the world.

3. Those actions that clearly tend to order, and edification, are not merely
indifferent. For production of good supposes goodness in the productive cause,
which determines them good, and so not merely indifferent in that respect.
Insomuch that a man is bound to use that gesture in worship, that does most
help his infirmity, and forward his devotion.

4. But some actions of men there are in common conversation, yea and perhaps
in our devotion too, which are not properly humane, that is, actions of men as
men, because they do not proceed from the deliberations of reason, but from the
floting of fantasy; as some actings of the hands, movings of the fingers,
gestures of the body, forms of countenance, etc. whiles we are earnestly
minding some most serious thing, all which undeliberated actions are merely
indifferent.

5. But all actions that proceed from deliberated reason, considered in their
particular exercise, are either good or evil, in regard of their end. For if
they be levelled to a lawfullend, no ill circumstances apparently diverting, or
over-disgracing them, they are good. If they aim not at a good end, they are
so far evil, as they want that good in them, which expressly, implicitly, or
vertually should be in every action a deliberate man does act, 1 Cor. 1.31.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.
You see the Apostle speaks of things indifferent, that they should have a good
aim; and it follows in the next verse, that they should beware of ill
circumstances that might overbalance with evil, that good aim. For the
Apostle immediately sub-joynes these to the former words, Give none offense,
neither to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God.

6. Though an action may be indifferent inregard of one or two circumstances;
yet in regard of all circumstances put together, it must needs be either good
or evil. The coin of money is known by the major part of the image and
superscription.

7. Of all the aforementioned circumstances, the person is not the least. For as
that is double, the Agent, and the Patient (usually) so it implies many other
circumstances of time, place, etc. which wait upon persons. Therefore great
consideration is to be had touching the Person. For as the man that will use
well his liberty in things indifferent, must not offend himself; must not
grieve his own conscience: but Romans 1.4, 3. must be fully persuaded in his own
mind; nothing being impure of it self (Romans 14.14.) But to him that thinks
any thing to be impure or unclean, unto him it is unclean: and he is happy
that condemns not himself (v. 22, 23.) in that which the does allow;

So 1. He that is such a strong Christian as this, settled in faith, and well
skilled in his Christian liberty, must observe these rules toward others. 1.
How he carries himself toward or before weak Christians. 2. How toward or
before strong Christians. 3. Toward or before obstinate unbelievers.


1. Toward weak Christians, weak in their faith, touching things indifferent;
not yet confident of what liberty Christ has left them in the New Testament;
his lesson or rule is this, Romans 14.1, 2, 3. Him that is weak in the faith,
receive, but not to doubtful disputations. One believes he may eat all
things; another who is weak eats herbs. Let not him that eats, despise him
that eats not, and v. 15. If any brother be grieved with thy meat, now
walk thou not charitably, destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ
dyed; let not your good be evil spoken of and 1 Cor. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Turn to the place, it is very considerable.

2. Toward or before the strong Christian, or firm Believer; The rule is this.
Thou that art a strong Christian, must not neglect, but use thy liberty before
other strong Christians, to confute them if they have failed in dissembling it,
and to confirm them in the use of that liberty, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. The
sum whereof is this, that when Peter came to Antioch, Paul withstood him to
his face, because he was to be blamed for his dissembling, and drawing others
into the like dissimulation, to wave and lay by their liberty and freedom from
Jewish Ceremonies, by Judaizing with the Jews for a time, though they were
fully confirmed in their own consciences of their own liberty.

3. Toward the obstinate unbelievers, that are wilfully superstitious, or
maliciously opposite; the rule is by no means to forbear the use of our
Christian liberty before such, lest we weaken it, and strengthen them, Mat.
15.14. In the beginning of the Chapter, the Scribes and Pharisees took offense
at Christ, that his Disciples did eat with unwashen hands, (as intimatingly
blaming him for teaching them no better) our Savior reproves them for
observing humane traditions, and withal gives them a better lesson, viz. That
not that which goes into, but that which comes out of the mouth defiles.
The Disciples come and tell Christ, that at that saying, the Scribes and
Pharisees were yet more offended. Christ instead of any indulgence practiced or
prescribed toward such, returns this answer, verse. 13, 14. Every plant that my
heavenly Father has not planted shall be plucked up. LET THEM ALONE, they be
blind leaders of the blind (wilfully blind.) And if the blind lead the blind,
they shall both fall into the ditch. The like rule some pious learned collect
out of Paul's circumcising Timothy, and not circumcising Titus. He circumciseth
Timothy because of the weak believing Jews, Acts 16.3. But be would not
suffer Titus to be circumcised, lest he should indulge too much unto (...)
insinuating, insidiatorie, false brethren, Gal. 2.3, 4.

Observe hence by the way a golden rule for these present dissenting times.
Circumcision was not indifferent in the thing. For not long before it was an
Ordinance of God, and so necessarily to be used. Since that it was abrogated by
Christ's death, and so de jure of equity in regard of the thing it self, it
could not be used. The reason therefore that must justify Paul in circumcising
Timothy, must be some such like as this. That though Circumcision in esse, in
being now, was not indifferent: but in that regard necessarily to be laid
aside; yet at present in the Cognosse, the general knowledge of it among men,
it had a kind of notion of indifferency upon it. For as yet, in the time of
Acts 16. When Paul circumcised Timothy, the stature for it is repeal was not
come forth under the hands of the Apostles (as after it was peremptorily set
forth, Gal. 5.2.) And so it could not oblige, until a due promulgation of it.
And so mean while, Paul might some how, use it as a kind of indifferent thing
in regard of the several opinions of believers in this intervall of time. For
those that were confident it was in force, would not be offended; And those
that thought it abrogated, would not be offended for the sake of those weak
believers that would be offended at the omission of it; or at least look on it
as a Blank. But for unbelievers that clamoured for it, as necessary, Paul took
more care to assert his liberty, then to please them. All which, prudently
weighed, and skilfully applied by Saints, may be most sovereign to compose
great dissentings, or at least remove grievous scandals taken, if not given (in
these peace-lesse and unkind speaking times) among THEM. The godly Anabaptists
(as they are distinguished) take offense at the godly Presbyterian and
Congregational men for baptizing the Infants of Believers; The godly Classical
Presbyterians take offense at the Congregation way, that it does not receive
the regiment of the classes, nor submit to, as necessary, all their appeals,
and sentences upon appeals; And the godly of the Presbyterian, and
Congregationall way, take offense at the Anabaptists for not baptizing
Believers Infants; As the Anabaptists and Congregationall way take offense at
the Presbyterians, for their set, standing classes, and their peremptory
sentences upon appeals, enjoined without all fail to be obeyed, what ever
they be, or however they look in the view of Scripture, and godly Consciences.
Now if these several judgments, each of them interchangeably in favor to his
contrary, did but aptly apply the Case aforesaid, of circumcision, so as at
least to attain to this result, That however these things, of Baptism,
Classes, Appeals, etc. are in their BEING; yet the Royal Edict for KNOWING is
not yet clear to the judgment scrupling: the OFFENSE both on the one side, and
the other, would be in a great measure, if not altogether removed, and till God
reveal it to those that are otherwise minded, Phil. 3.15.
we all should sweetly agree as Saints, to defend one another, and the
public safety, against the common enemy of unbelievers or worse.

Thus you have, how the strong Christian, or strong Believer ought to carry
himself in the use of things indifferent.

2. If any be a weak believer, a weak Christian, (and he that is weak in his
knowledge, assurance of justification, and faith for mortification, has little
reason to be confident of his strong faith about things indifferent, though it
be the ill custom of weaklings to be most peremptorily censorious about these
things (who so bold as blind Bayard.) I say if any be a weak believer, he must
thus carry himself toward him that is strong. Do thou that art weak, see
him that is strong, use freely his Christian liberty before thee, not
suspecting thy weakness in knowledge and faith in those things? Do not thou
presume rigidly to censure and condemn his knowledge and faith in that liberty
Christ's blood has purchased for him. For so runs the absolute rule, Romans 14.2,
3, 4. One believes he may eat all things, another who is weak, eats herbs
Let not him which eats not, judge him that eats, for God has received him.
Who art thou that judge another man's servant?

The non-observation of this rule, sets the present age on fire. Men cry out
for, and cry up Gospel preaching; profess and applaud Gospel spirits; talk
also apace of love, sweetness, and reciprocal condescension. Thus' it is in the
theory; or every man for himself. But how is it in the practicke? Thus; the
face looks quite is contrary way, the bells ring backward. This man that will
not see hardly his own sinful infirmity, will look keenly into another
Christian liberty, vote it a sin, and pass a condemnation upon it. And by
all means looks that another should be humbled a long time as low as the
lowest Hell for his infirmities, whilst this Censurer himself for his own
evil actions, equivalent, if not more prevalent, and sinfully eminent, will
not be cast down a day, so low as I may say, as Purgatory before men.

This age has not learned any thing to purpose of that Gal. 6.2. Bear ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

No, we add to one another burdens; And if we suppose another be proud,
passionate, etc. we trample upon it with a greater pride and passion.

Thus of the 1. general head. Things indifferent. Next of the moral Law.

2. For the moral law, of the ten Commandments (whose injunctions and
prohibitions directly determine the question what things are necessary, viz.
must be done, or must not be done, and consequentially what it leaves out, it
resolves us to be indifferent) the licentious of this age lay aside, thereby to
attain a vaster liberty; to make more things indifferent, then ever God made,
and so to do even what they please. And their pretended reason is, because
they conclude it to be of the Covenant of works. And I wish they have not
learnt it from Pulpits, unskilfully handling it and putting it wrongfully under
that notion. For the moral law of the to. Commandments is clearly an appendix
or part of the Covenant of Grace. For as Love answers to faith in the New
Testament; so did the ten Commandments answer to the Ceremonial law in the
Old Testament. Will any man that is in his wits (according to Scripture) deny
that either love in the New Testament, or the Ceremonial Law in the Old
Testament, were of the Covenant of Grace? The text is plain, Gal. 5.6. In
Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing (that is then, or at any
time in the outside) nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. And
the Lord Christ, and the Apostles have this often up: The law is fulfilled in
this one word LOVE. And says Christ (of the Ceremonial law) John 5.48. Had ye
believed Moses ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me. I need say no
more to mind men, that love in the N. T. and the Ceremonial Law in the O. T.
were of the Covenant of Grace, and that love in the N. T. answers to the ten
Commandments in the O. T. And is there any thing in the ten Commandments to
bespeake them a place in the Covenant of works? Does commanding? Why then does
Christ so often say to believers, John 14, etc. If you love me keep my
Commandments. It Is far more suitable to a Gospel way and a gracious
Covenanting Spirit, rather to be commanded by the authority of his Savior,
then to pin all obedience upon the power of his own uncertain love. Luther
hints notably to this; Lord (says he) thou command me to pray; I cannot
pray as I would, but I will obey. Though my prayer be not acceptable, yet thine
own Commandment is acceptable to thee. And if ever any man, Luther was of a
most pure, high Gospel Spirit; deny it who can, that has read his Commentary
on the Epistle to the Galatians, now common in English. On the other side what
means the preface to the ten Commandments, viz. I am the Lord (Hebr. JEHOVAH)
Thy God, which have brought thee out of the LAND of EGYPT, out of the house of
bondage? Do not these words usher in the Commandments, and set them down
amidst the Covenant of Grace? For here God as our God upon new terms of
redemption, freely offering himself to us: not upon the old, namely do this,
and thou shall live. We are brought out of Egypt in Christ, Mat. 2.15. That
is, we are brought out of sprituall Egypt, the wicked world, as John expounds
it, Revel. 11.8. An hint of these things is enough to them that will
understand. And do not several promises annexed to several Commandments, as
to the 2d, 4th, 5th sound of Gospel Grace; to the same tune with the preface? I
am importuned to be short, for the accommodation of the Printer; therefore I
can but touch things.

It were strange if God many hundred years after his Govenant of Grace, which
he promised and plighted with man, Genesis 3. Expounded and further confirmed,
Genesis 17. Compare Romans 4. Should at Sinai make a Covenant of works. Learned and
pious Polanus (renowned for both) is bold to speak higher. It were very
unreasonable (says he) to imagine that God should make a Covenant of works
with man after Adams fall, and so, unable to do any spiritual thing, having
made THAT only ONCE, viz. in Paradise, when man was in a CAPACITY to enter
into SUCH a Covenant.

Object. The Apostle Paul often in his Epistles opposes the Law, to faith, and
seems to understand both the Ceremonial, and moral.

Answ. The Apostle does not oppose the Law to faith, as the Law is considered
in it self, but as it is misconceived, and misemployed by the Justiciary
Selfe-justifier. Clear enough the moral law is not opposite to faith, Jam.
2.21. to the end of the Chapter, study the place. For the least thou can make
of it will be thus much, that a working faith is the only living justifying
faith. Working must justify faith to be true faith, as faith justifies us to
be true Saints. But the justiciary, that would justify himself by working, he
looks upon all law, both moral, and Ceremonial, yea and upon the law of
FAITH too, (as the Apostle calls it,) as on works. Those of the Jews that were
such justiciaries obeyed the moral law, not out of faith, working by love
(Gal. 5.) but out of self-love to justify themselves by selfe-wrought
righteousness, Mark 10.20. Luke 10.29. And they sacrificed and used other
things of the Ceremonial law, not as an expiation and atonement, including
Christ as the kernel, but as on works, by them performed, to their cost and
labor, and so rested in the deed done, Jer. 7.4. And so the Prophet calls
Ceremonies there and then lying vanities: And forbids them, Isa 1. Upon this
consideration the Apostle speaks acuratly, and precisely to the false notion of
these Jewish justiciaries, Romans 9.31, 32. They attained not to righteousness,
because they sought it not by faith: but AS IT WERE by the works of the Law,
meaning, that the law moral, or Ceremonial was not in themselves of the
Covenant of works, but by the false notion of justiciaries, they were to them
tanquam WORKS, they were as so to them. to this Luther speaks notably (to this
effect.) Men (says he) look on the law asquint, they look on the law given
by Moses, as MOSES MOSISSIMUS. that is, MERE MOSAIGALL MOSES, i. e. upon the
Outward things and performances abstracted by themselves, and so the Law (says
he) kills: And not on the Law as given by Moses AARONICUS, that is, AARONICALL
MOSES, i. e. as Aaron the High Priest joined with Moses, typifying Christ's
Priestly office, (as Moses did his Prophetical and Kingly) whereby atonement
is signified for our persons, and for the sins of our imperfect obeying the
commands of either law, and so our souls are saved alive. So that as faith and
love cannot be separated, nor may they be confounded in the New Testament; Not
confounded to make the law of faith a work as the Papists and others do,
whiles they adore it as a quality in us, without its object Christ, grasped in
the hand thereof; and so look upon it as love, viz. as a working thing in us,
or to make love as faith, as if love were the form of faith, perfecting it;
nor separated; not Faith from love; for so faith is dead, Jam. ^. Nor love from
faith, for then it is sinful, if not a b^^^ard love; For faith must make
atonement for the failings of love. So nor may Moses and Aaron, the moral and
Ceremonial law be confounded or separated in the Old Testament. They both were
delivered at the same time, and in the same place. As the moral law, Exodus 20.
So the Ceremonial, Acts 7.44. Heb. 8.5. compare Exodus 25.40. Even as Moses and
Aaron lived at the same time, and were in joint Commission in the same
business, instrumentally to save the people. Not to be confounded by looking
on the performance of the ceremonial, as we do on the moral, viz. a matter
of mere obedience, as many now transform many Gospel duties, prayer, hearing,
etc. into a legal notion, resting in the deed done, without taking up Christ
in them. Nor to be separated, not the ceremonial law from the moral. For then
there is a dream of faith without obedience, faith without love. Nor the
moral from the ceremonial; for then there is obedience without faith: and so
not sincere, but altogether sinful.

Obj. The Apostle Gal. 4.24. makes the Covenant at Sinai a Covenant of bondage,
and puts it in opposition to Jerusalem above, that is the Covenant now in the
N. T. with the universal Church. And so seems to make two Covenants.

Answ. The Apostle speaks all this in relation to the ceremonial law, which
formerly was the manner of that religious worship commanded in substance in the
2d Commandment to all ages: and so was then the form and ceremony of much of
their obedience; which ceremonial law indeed was a bondage, and kept men in
servitude, Gal. 4.1. But can not speak it of the moral law, in that the
Apostle himself does so press it upon all believers at the end of every one of
his Epistles; annexing it as the doctrine of love, to the doctrine of faith,
which he profoundly handles in the former part of his Epistles. So that the
Apostle does there signify only two several dispensations, and forms of
promulgation, of the same Covenant of grace, of faith and love. The former
Ceremonious, in types and shadows; the other plain and spiritual. The^ called
the old Covenant, the other the New Covenant (though but two forms of the same
Covenant) as the Apostle evidently explains, Heb. ^.5. to the end of the
chapter. The 1. in regard of the shadows, was Moses veiled; the 2d was Moses
unvailed, and spiritual, God shining in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. 3.13. to
the end, 2 Cor. 4.6.

By all, it appears, that we that are believers, may no more divide the ten
commandments from our faith, then we may divide our love from faith.

The 3d and last thing, to which I will speak only a word is Expediency. The
Apostle to explain the doctrine, and to direct in the practice of expediency,
uses four words.

1. CONVENIENT; to signify, that even in indifferent things we must see that
all be agreeable to our persons, according to all the circumstances aforenamed.
2. EXPEDIENT; Intimating that we should look that those our actions be such as
do further and dispatch some good, or else they be not good. 3. PROFIT. As the
Apostle says, what profit is there of circumcision. Hinting, that we should
see that such our actions be beneficial to us or others; we either do good,
or receive good. 4. EDIFY. Teaching us that we should rather endeavor
edification, then giving offense in the use of things indifferent, or
circumstantiall. And in that the Apostle uses so many words to direct us in
the right use and acting about things indifferent; that one of the four said
ingredients must be in them, or else all is not well.


For a close, observe two rules, which we oppose to two false principles, by
which meu usually go, and so often miscarry.

1. Touching matter of opinion, they usually say it is a truth (as they
conceive) therefore to be contended for at any time, without distinction of
expedience. To which we oppose this rule. All truth, though indeed the very
truth of God, is not to be uttered at all times, Mat. 7.6. chap ^, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. Job. 16.3, 4. Heb. 5.11, 12. neigh these texts for they are strong. 2.
Touching practice, they commonly contend, that it is their Christian liberty,
and therefore they will use it, and not be debarred from it by circumstances.
To which we oppose this Rule, Phil. 4.8. Finally brethren, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, or comely, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think of
these things.
From my Study at Mary Stainings, London, July 10, 1648. Nathanael Homes,
Teacher of the Church there.

The Contents of the ensuing SERMONS.
SERMON. I.
The scope of the words Page 1 The parts of the Text Page 3 The meaning of the
words Page 4 Doct. 1. The Saints in the New Testament not so strictly bound in
point of lawfulness, as the Saints were in the Old Page 3 This latitude is not
in the Moral Law But it is, Page 13 1. In freedom from ceremonies Page 14 2.
In the externalls of Gods Worship Page 15 Reason 1. The Saints under the New
Testament are Sons. Page 17 Reason 2. The Saints now are men of ripe years.
Page 18 Reason 3. The Saints now have more of the Spirit. Page 19 Reason 4.
Gods design in the New Testament to set up a spiritual Kingdom. Page 20
Reason 5. The Gospel being to be preached to different Nations, Christ ties
them chiefly to the substance. Page 23

SERMON. II.
Use. 1. Encouragement for sinners to come to Christ Page 26 The ways of
Christ easy Page 29 1. Because the maine work is done already. Ibid 2. Those
things that are yet to be done are few, and easy, being compared, 1. With the
Jewish service of God in the Old Testament Page 32 2. With the service of
Papists Page 33 3. With the service of natural men Ibid 4. With the service of
the Devil. Ibid
Object. The service of the Devil seems sweet. Page 34 Answ. 1. It will one
day be sour Ibid 2. That sweetness is from distemper Ibid 3. It is because
men taste not the sweetness of Christ's service. Ibid
Object. Some of Christ's servants have turned back to serve the Devil. Page 35
Answ. 1. They are but few. Ibid 2. They were not true members. Ibid 3. The
ways of Christ easy, because he will give his Spirit to do what he requires.
Ibid Believing in Christ three things in it Page 30 1. To give credit to what
he teaches. Ibid 2. To accept of life and salvation from him. Page 37 3. To
submit to his laws. Page 38

SERMON. III.
Use 2. Reproof of two sorts of people Page 39 (1.) Those that err on the
left hand of three sorts, 1. Those that make the way wider than Christ has
Page 40 2. Those that abolish the Moral Law Page 42 3. Those that allow
outward profaneness Page 43 (2.) Those that err on the right hand of two sorts
1. Such as make laws to tie themselves Page 46 2. Such as make laws to bind
others. Page 47
Use 3. Exhortation to Duties, 1. To understand our Christian liberty Page 51
Ignorance of Christian liberty dangerous Page 52 2. Not to infringe our
Christian liberty Page 55 3. Not to abuse our Christian liberty Page 59 4. To
holdfast our Christian liberty Page 60

SERMON IIII.
Doct. 2. Though diverse things be lawful to the Saints under the New
Testament, yet there are but a few things expedient. Page 61 Three sorts of
things inexpedient Page 62 (1.) Things simply evil Ibid (2.) Things simply
good, in three cases, 1. When a greater good comes in Page 63 2. When we
cannot come at the good without doing of evil. Ibid 3. When a greater evil
follows Page 64 (3.) Things indifferent Ibid Expediency, what Page 66 Things
expedient must bring profit Page 68 1. To advance the glory of God Page 69 2.
The good of our brethren three ways Page 70 1. To increase love between us and
them Ibid 2. To conduce to the peace of the Saints Page 71 3. It must tend to
edification Page 73 (3.) To win those without Ibid (4.) To our own souls Page
74.

SERMON. V.
Conveniencie, or Decency what Page 77 1. In respect of a man's person Page 78
2. In respect of his relation Page 79 3. In respect of his profession Page 80
4. In respect of sex Ibid 5. In regard of age Page 82 6. In regard of the
season Ibid Christians must walk laudably Page 83 Christians must walk orderly
Page 86 Things done disorderly 1. When the end is missed Page 87 2. When one
duty hinders another Ibid. Use 1. To have an eye to that which is expedient
Page 88 Use 2 Reproof of those that eye only lawful things Page 89 1. It is a
sign of an hypocrite Page 90 2. Of an Old Testament spirit Page 91 3. It may
damn a man Page 92
Use. 3. The way of the Gospel a strict way Page 94 Liberty of the Gospel
wherein it is Page 95

SERMON. VI.
Use 4. To be strict in point of expediency Page 98 1. It would end
controversies among Saints Page 99 To take heed of vain fears in Gods ways
Page 104 2. The maine is done by Christ already Ibid 3. To study spiritual
things Page 105 4. To get love Page 106 Things to be determined 1. By
Magistrates Page 107 2. By the Church Page 109 3. By Masters of Families Ibid
4. By particular persons Ibid Cautions for Magistrates, and Churches in
determining Ibid 1. It must be in necessary indifferent things Ibid 2. Things
that relate to the Kingdom Page 110 3. Saints to be deals with as rational
men Ibid 4. To take heed of making laws for the future Ibid 5. Not co impose
things on men's consciences Page 111 6. Not to use rigor in determining Ibid
Examples of the old Saints be looked to Page 112 Customs of the saints and
Churches to be looked to Page 113 Right reason to be looked to Page 117 Reason
of three sorts Ibid The law of nature to be looked unto Page 118

SERMON. VII.
Motives to eye that which is expedient Page 123 Motive. 1. It is the right way
to peace Ibid No reason of strife between Presbyterians and Independents Page
125 1. There are Godly men on both sides Ibid 2. There difference is small Ibid
3. They differ about that which is never like to be Page 126 4. Neither side
can prove what they would have Page 127 The present cortentions from five sorts
of men Page 128 1. Weak Christians Page 129 2. Carnal Presbyterians Ibid 3.
Malignants Page 132 4. The godly moderate party Page 133 5. The common
multitude Page 134

SERMON. VIII.
Motive 2. To eye things expedient the way to peace in a man's self Page 138
Guik in Christians whence Page 139
Motive 3. He that eyes not expediency cannot do much for God Page 142 1. He
presents Religion to others as an endless thing Page 143 2. As burdensome
Page 145 3. As ridiculous Page 146 4. He deprives himself of opportunities of
doing good Page 147 5. He can do good but by accident Page 148 6. He intends
good but to a few Page 149 7. He leads others to destraction Page 150
Motive. 4. Without eyeing expediency a man cannot be an excellent Christian
Page 152 1. Because an excellent Christian has the mind of Christ Page 153 2.
He is busied about high things Page 154 3. He relisheth spiritual things Page
155 4. He has stock enough within Page 156
Motive 5. To look to our Principles against suffering times Ibid Motive 6. To
make laws, where God has not, offends him Page 158
SERMON, IX.
Stumbling Blocks removed Page 162 Objections answered Page 166 Hindrances from
walking according to expediency 1. Engagements beyond men's principles Page 171
2. Looking on things with prejudice Page 172 3. Devout jealousy of truth and
Error Page 173 4. Carnal wisdom Page 176 5. Self Page 177 6. Hypocrisy Ibid
Helps to walk expediently. 1. Spiritual wisdom Ibid 2. Sobriety in two things
1. To subject our fancies to the word Page 178 2. To follow notions no farther
than they agree with the word Ibid 3. Watchfulness Page 179 4. Love Ibid.
GOSPEL LIBERTY EXPLAINED.
1 COR. 10.23. ALL thing are LAWFUL for me, but ALL things are not EXPEDIENT:
ALL things are LAWFUL for me, but ALL things EDIFY not.


The scope of the words.
THese words that I have read to you, they are the conclusion of Paul's answer to
certain Questions that the Corinthians (it seems in writing) had proposed to
him. What those Questions were you may read, from the beginning of the 7th
Chapter, to part of this 10th Chapter. I shall only touch them a little; In
the beginning of the seventh Chapter they had written to Paul, and asked him
this question, Whether it were lawful for a man under the Gospel to marry?
Because it seems they thought the profession of the Gospel such a holy thing in
old time (otherwise than Professors do now,) that they thought it a kind of
defilement to that spiritual and glorious profession to marry. That was one
question. Another was Chapter 7.4. Whether being married they might live with
there husbands and wives as before, Paul answers that. They ask him again,
whether a Believer being matched to an unbeliever, might turn away his wife,
and leave his house? He answers that; Then the servants that were believers,
and their masters unbelievers, they wrote, and asked whether they in conscience
should seek their freedom? He answers that also. So there are diverse questions
from that place to the end of the Chapter; as whether it were lawful for
people to marry in the time of persecution; or for people that were once
married to marry any more; he answers that. In the 8th Chapter they have other
sorts of questions greater than these; Whether it were lawful for believers to
eat flesh offered to Idols? that was a great question: for in those Countries
the Gospel was among Infidels, and those that were without they worshipped the
devil in Idols, and sacrificed meat to them; and this meat when it had been
sacrificed was carried to the market and sold: Now they questioned, whether
they knowing that that meat was offered to an Idol, might eat of it? Paul
answers that; And in the 9th and 10th Chapters illustrates it, and so comes to
sum up all his answers in these words, All things are lawful for me, but all
things are not expedient etc. That is, the most of those things that you have
proposed, if not all, they are lawful, I say not they sin if they marry, they
sin not; and for meat offered to Idols, an Idol is nothing in the world. All
these things are lawful, and abundance of things more: but all things are not
expedient. As if he should say, I wonder why you Corinthians ask so many
questions, whether this or that be lawful; you may do lawful things, and yet
damn your souls for ever. I will not hide the liberty of the Gospel from you;
It is lawful to eat meat offered to an Idol: for, an Idol is nothing; and to
marry it is lawful, so it be in the Lord: but yet in the New Testament you
should look higher than that which is lawful, and unlawful, you should look
what is expedient, and what edifies, and those things that do not edify, (as
most of these things did not, though they were lawful in themselves,) you must
not use them: for says he in the verse following, We ought not every man to
seek his own things, but another man's good. So that I say the words are the
sum of Paul's answer to the Corinthians to these questions; you may find the
particular answers to every one of these questions, if you peruse the former
Chapters.

So that come to the words they have in them these two things. Parts of the
Text.


First, here is a concession; they ask the question if these things were
lawful, 1. a concession.
Paul grants that they may be lawful; It is lawful to marry, it is lawful
for a believer to keep his unbelieving wife, it is awful for a servant to
abide with his master, though he be an unbeliever: it is lawful to eat meat
offered to an Idol, Paul grants it, All things are lawful.

Secondly, here is a restriction, an exception against that rule, that although
All things be lawful, 2. a restricton.
all things are not expedient, all things edefie not. So that before I go
about to tell you my thoughts from this place: for the settling of you in these
wavering times, wherein you grope for light; I will open a little to you these
words, that you may the more clearly see the Doctrines.

All things are lawful for me;

[ALL] By ALL here you are not to understand, The meaning of the words.
ALL universally, as it is often used in the Scripture, All, what meant by it.
that is, ALL excepting more, as in Exodus 1.6. The people of Israel, and ALL
that generation died. That is, every one that came into Egypt were gone at that
time, or as it is Romans 5. ^n by Adam entered upon ALL men. That is, every man
in the world became a sinner by Adams sin; Now you are not to understand ALL in
this place so, as though that all things were lawful, that is, that there is
liberty for people to do what they list now, men may swear and lie, and
curse, that men may be professors, and be cheaters, and couzeners, Professors,
and be drunkards, and proud, and covetous. This is not the meaning, Paul does
not mean by the word ALL a universalitie: but by ALL he means many things,
many things are lawful, Many meant by all.
but many things are not expedient, and that all is taken for many, I might
show at large in Scripture it is very usual, Psalm. 118 says David, ALL
nations rose up against me, and compassed me about. David does not mean that
all the nations in the world did come about him, but he means many; diverse
people did come together against him. But more plainly in 2 Timothy 2.6. There is
one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for ALL. Hence diverse now a days do hold a universal
Ransom and redemption, that Christ died for ALL men alike, because of this
word ALL, that Christ is said to be a ransom for ALL: but if you compare this
place with Mat. 20.28. there you shall see the meaning of it, Whosoever will
be chief among you, shall be your servant, even as the Son of man came not to
be ministered unto (to be waited upon in this world) but to minister and serve,
and to give his life a ransom for MANY. That which in the other place is a
ransom for all Matthew. interprets it for many. So in Mark. 10.45. (for we must
expound Scripture by Scripture, or else we shall run giddily and endlessely
into error) for even the Son of man, came not to be ministered unto: but to
minister, and give his life a ransom for MANY. There is the same word. So by
ALL things in this place, you are to understand many things. All things are
lawful; that is, all these things that you propose, and many more: for I
comprehend many more than they questioned, or else he might have said, these
things are lawful: but he makes a general rule from it, These are lawful
particularly, and all things are lawful; that is, abundance more than these.

[ARE] All things ARE lawful. Things lawful now, that were not of old.
There is somewhat in that word Are in the present tense, that is, they are now
lawful under the new Testament, it was not so always: for they could not say
under the old Testament, all things are lawful, that is, many things: for they
were tied; every thing was either commanded, or forbidden to them, their meat,
their drink, their clothes, their worship their manner, and circumstance, the
place where and the time when; nay they were tied to their very oil, and to
the snuff of a candle, nay (with reverence) they were tied concerning their
excreme^ts; the Lord made a law for their excrements. Now, all things are
lawful; they were not before; there are not so many bonds and obligations as
there were then. Now under the new Testament there are many things lawful that
were not under the old. Indeed sometime they were intended by Gods dispensation
in cases of necessity, as David's eating of the shewbread that was not lawful;
God passed by it, but there was a law for that There were but a few things (I
will not say none) but were absolutely sinful or absolutely lawful in the old
Testament.

All things are LAWFUL.

[Lawfull] what is that? Lawful what it is.
A thing is lawful when in it self it is neither commanded nor forbidden in
the word of God: when it is not determined by the will of God whether we shall
do it or not do it: that is lawful so when he says all things are lawful;
he means that there are abundance of things left in the new Testament that are
neither commanded nor forbidden by the Lord.

Misunderstand me not: Sin in doing of lawful things.
you sin when you do unexpedient things; and then you are ready to say is it
not lawful? no; though the thing in particular be not unlawful, yet you sin
in that you cross a general rule; that is, those things that are lawful yet
you are not to do them in extremes. As for insta^ce you may marry, yet you
may sin in marrying, not that you cross a particular command: for it is lawful
to marry; but you cross a general rule, and so you sin.

BUT all things are not expedient.

[BUT] that is when I say all things are lawful, you think you have all
liberty by that, but, hold all things are not expedient. Though it be lawful
yet look not only to that but see that it be expedient, and so if you look to
the rule of expediency you will walk a hundred times stricter, than men that
only look what is lawful, and what is not.

[ALL THINGS] That is, diverse things are not expedient. [ARE NOT] That is, they
are not so altogether, always, in all places, to all persons; all things, in
all places, at all times, and in all circumstances, are not expedient for all
persons: for there is nothing almost but in some places, and at some times,
Expedient what.
and for some persons are expedient [E XPEDIENT] What is that? It does not
edify, it does not beseem the profession of Jesus Christ; it is not lovely,
it is not venerable, it is not true, it is not honorable, it does not edify
the brethren, it does not win sinners, it does not adorn the Gospel, it does
not become our profession. When he says all things are not expedient, it is,
as if he had said, there are abundance of things that are lawful, that do not
honor God, that do not win sinners, and build up the Saints. So now you
understand the words.

All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient.

There are three Lessons that I mean to observe from these words, and which
(if the Lord will) I intend to open to you.

First, you may learn this, that

The Saints under the new Testament, they are not so strictly bound in point of
LAWFULNES as the Saints were in the old Testament.

The Second is this, that

The Saints under the new Testament, are as strictly, or rather more strictly
bound, in point of expediency, than they were in the time of the old Testament.

For you shall seldom read of expediency in the old Testament, but if a thing
were lawful, for the generallity they might do it.

Thirdly, you may learn this Lesson, that

If a Christian will walk honorably, and spiritually as becomes the Gospel,
he must not only (so much eye) what is LAWFUL, as what is EXPEDIENT.

These three things are taught here as I apprehend, in the words; And of these
let me this day only open a little of the former: for you must take them
together, you must not without wrong to your own souls, and dishonor to God,
take one Doctrine, and not all; but hear all, and without prejudice compare
all, and weigh, and try them.

The first Observation, That Sts in the New Testament are not so strictly bound
in point of lawfulnes, as in the Old.
or Doctrine is, that

The Saints in the new Testament, in point of LAVVFULNES are not so strictly
bound, as the Saints were in the old Testament.

That is, many things in the new Testament are lawful for the Saints to do,
that were not lawful in the old Testament: or, there is a greater latitude,
there is more space, for a Christian, for a believer in his walking and
conversation in the new Testament, than there was in the old.

Beloved, There is some truth in this, that you may apprehend presently: for
go no further than these very questions that were here asked; It seems that
in the old Testament all these things were not lawful; it was not lawful for
them to eat all kind of flesh, no flesh that was defiled that was offered to
Idols, it was not lawful to eat; swines flesh, and diverse other things: Now,
all things are lawful; every creature of God is good. If they had unbelieving
wives, strange wives, Ezra 9. Nehem. 9. It was not lawful to keep them, they
must drive them away, and their children: but now it is lawful for a man that
has an unbelieving wife to remain with her. I say, there is somewhat that you
presently see, that the Saints in the new Testament, in point of lawfulnes, are
not so strictly, and absolutely bound up as they were in the Old.

I will give you a few Scriptures, before I come to open it further. Mat. 11.
ult. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest; take my yoke on you: for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. If
you will give me leave to tell you my thoughts upon these words, I conceive
that the meaning of it is this, that Christ Jesus saw poor people trudging in
the way to Heaven (as they thought) and every one thought to be saved in his
own way and labor: as the Papists that do abundance of good works, and by
their own righteousness they will be saved: And there the poor Jews were
under a yoke that they nor their fathers could bear; And by fasting and prayer
they did strive and struggle, and all in vain; Now, says Christ, Come unto me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden. Now I say, (with submission) I think the
meaning is not as we usually take it, come to me all ye that are laden with
sin, and receive salvation, (though that be true) but ye that weary your
selves with the yoke and burden of your own righteousness, Christ's yoke, what.
and laboring to fulfill the law; Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will give you rest: How is that? I will take away the rough yoke,
and the heavy burden that is on you, and I will give you an easy yoke, (as I
shall show anon) you shall have now says Christ, an easier, and more
comfortable way to Heaven than ever you thought of. Christ does not only
pity poor gross sinners that are not in the way to Heaven; but it pitties
him to see men go in odd ways to Heaven; that labor, and go about the bush,
and tire themselves in their own ways, when there is an easy sweet way that
Jesus Christ offers; Come unto me, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light. That is, not only in respect that we have more grace in the New
Testa^ent than there was in the Old, More grace in the new Testament then in
the Old.
(though that be true) but in it self, the way by Jesus Christ, the way to
Heaven, and salvation in obedience to Christ, is a lighter burden and an easier
yoke, than the way that the Saints had (as it were) by works in the
Old Testament, or that sinners now have, that are out of Christ.

In Phil. 4.8. Finally my brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure;
whatsoever things are of good report. If there be any love, if there be any
praise, think on these things. Paul having taught them concerning things to be
believed, matters of faith, he comes to matters of obedience; and now he makes
a general rule: as if he had said, You are Saints of the New Testament, and
Christ has made you an easy yoke; And it is not for me to descend much to
particulars for you: but I will make a general rule, If you find any thing
that is true, any thing that is honest, any thing that is honorable, or
venerable, any thing that is lovely, or any thing that is of good report, if
there be any virtue, or praise, think of those things, lay hold on those
things; I will not tie you, but do you spy them out; if there be any thing
lovely, that makes the Gospel of Christ praise worthy, or any thing that has
virtue, lay hold upon those things; he ties them not to particulars: For they
might say, a thing may be pure, and not lawful it may be lovely, and
venerable, and not lawful; O, says he, talk not of lawful, Not to look so
much to lawfulness as expediency.
you should not walk so much by that rule, but if it be expedient and honor
God, and adorn the Gospel, lay hold on those things, And whatsoever ye have
seen me do, that do.

I will propose one place more, because I desire that you may understand this
point, 2 Cor. 9. Where Paul does show them by his own example, that it was not
fit for them to look to lawful things only, but to what is expedient: for says
he, may I not lead about a Sister as well as Peter, and others? May I not
marry as well as they? and live by my preaching as well as other men? Does not
the Law of God say, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads
out the corn? Yet I did none of these things, I did not marry, nor take any
thing for my pains of you Corinthians; why so? because he might honor the
Gospel of Christ, and not loose his glory in that: for, says he, though I be
free from all men, I make my self a servant to all, that I might gain the
more; to the Jews I become as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews, to them that
are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them that are under the
law, to them that are without law as without law, being not without law to God,
I become every thing to all men, that by all means I might gain some. Paul
would be a Jew with the Jews, and a Gentile with the Gentiles, he would be
strong with the strong, Paul's compliance.
and weak with the weak; how could he complie thus to win and save souls,
unless there were a latitude given by Christ, wherein there is a liberty that
is not determined, and the Saints may apply themselves to, for the glory of God
and the good of others? But Paul he was not without law to God; that is, in his
soul and spirit he did keep close to God. And not only so, but in externals
where God had determined: for he would not sin to co^plie with men: but it
seems things were not much determined, when Paul could be a Jew with the Jews,
and a Gentile with the Gentiles, as if he had not known the Jews, and as he
says, catch them by guile. Not as a cunning abominable creature, but he could
be wise and politic for the glory of God, and the good of others; he could be
a weak professor with the weak, and strong with the strong, and be
circumcised, and shave his head; and when he was among the Gentiles he could
show his freedom, and win them; he could be all things to all men, which he
could not have been, if there had not been a latitude in the Gospel, that
people may use for the glory of God, and the good of others. So that we have
now the lesson, the truth proved.

Now let us open it a little: The Doct. opened.
For the opening of it two things are to be considered.

The first is, 1. Wherein this latitude in the new Testament is.
what are those things that you say are lawful now under the new Testament,
that were not in the Old? wherein is that latitude? what is admitted that was
not then?

Then 2ly why the Lord in the new Testament has given a larger scope for his
people, than God by Moses did in the Old? For could not the Son of God, be so
faithful as Moses that was a servant (I speak with reerence) why could he not
be as strict as Moses?

Beloved, not in the ten Commandme^ts,
you are to understand that the moral Law of God, that is, the ten words, as
God calls it, the ten commandments, with the spiritual exposition of it,
through the book of God: God has not given us more scope, and liberty in
these, than he did to them, if so much. As, thou shall not steal; thou shall
not commit adultery; thou shall not take the name of God in vain: God does
not give us leave now to cozen, and swear, and steal, and be filthy: this is
not the meaning, you are bound as much to this, as ever they were.

Only take that with this exception, So bound to obey the Commandme^ts, though
the curse be gone.
that if you be Saints and borne again new creatures, you are bound to do
this [I shall show upon what grounds and motives anon] but the curse, and
plague, and damnation that should seize on you, and that was to seize upon them
that went to be saved by it, that is remooved. and gone. There is no damnation
to them that are in Christ. But the thing it self stands firm, Christ came
not to destroy the law, but to establish it; heaven and earth shall pass, but
not one jot or tittle of it shall pass. The Law the outward, and the Spirit
the inward rule.
I could show may the law of God is the outward rule, and the spirit the inward
rule; and these are not contrary one to another as men usually make them.
These rules are the same to the Saints in the new Testament as well as in the
old: and as a Saint under the old Testament was a Saint under the Gospel, as it
were: so in the times of the Gospel, a sinner one that is not borne again is
under the law, and under the curse, and damnation of it at this day. So, this
liberty, and latitude it lies not at all in the moral law of God, those
commands of God those last for ever there is no gap opened there.

Wherein then is it:

It in these two things principally: The liberty of Sts. in the new-Testa^ent.


One is that now we are freed from all those ceremonies that lay upon them
under the law; in the new Testament we are freed from them. I need not name
many places. Freedom from Ceremonies.
In Gal. 5.1. compared with verse 13. Standfast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made you free, and be not brought back into bondage. What is that?
be not circumcised, and circumcision is taken diverse times for all the
ceremonial law; you observe days, and times, and months, and years, I am
afraid of you. Christ has made us free from all the ceremonies of the law.

But you will say that it is a poor freedom.

A great freedom.
You are mistaken; it is a great thing: for if you look Act. 15. the Apostles
and Elders there say of the ceremonies, neither we nor our fathers were able to
bear them, they were so heavy. For if we consider the cost they were at, how
they were driven to kill beeves, and sheep, and oxen, and to make morning, and
evening sacrifice, and burnt offerings, and to bestow so much money, to be at
abundance of cost, and charges, and to go to Jerusalem every year, and to a
sacrifice in the Temple, and a great deal of labor; And which is more, there
were abundance of ceremonial restraints; their places they were restrained to
them; they must worship in this place, and not in another: but now in the
Gospel, we must lift up pure hands in every place. And then, for the time they
had days, and months, and they had years of Jubilee, which are all gone; And
for the very creatures, they must have such meat, and such clothes; they were
restrained, and tied in every thing, and crossed that they could not have their
mind; If you consider this, it is a great matter that Christ Jesus has at
once removed all these beggarly rudiments away: so I say, there is so much more
room for you, that unless Popish Mosaicall spirits bring them in again,
Christ Jesus has removed them. That is one thing.

The second, and the chief is this, 2. Libery in in the externalls of Gods
worship.
That there is a greater liberty in respect of the externalls of Gods Worship;
that is, that God has not tied people in the new Testament so stricly to his
outward worship, as he did the people in the Old; I do not mean that he has
not tied them for the substance, or for the matter of it; Nor in the substence
or matter, or manner.
neither do I mean (to speak properly) that he has not tied them for the
manner; but for circumstance; and some circumstances too, it may be, God has
tied us to. So I mean not matter so much as manner, nor properly the manner so
much as circumstances; nor all circumstances: for it may be there are some that
God has instituted and appointed: but there are abundance of circumstances in
the worship of God, that are undetermined in his blessed Word, and are left to
the spiritual discretion of the Saints, to determine, as may agree most with
love, and peace, and charity. As you may see clearly, Punctual laws in the
old Testament.
if you compare the one with the other, the outward worship of God in the old
Testament, and in the New, you shall see for their outward worship there, they
were tied to the snuff of a candle, there must be so many loopes, and so many
pins, and so many ilet holes. Passover.
Nay, come to the passover, you shall see the Lord made them diverse laws; as
they must take a lamb of such a year, and on such a day of the month, and
what kind of lamb it must be, and he shows them what they shall do with the
lamb, how they must kill it, and what their posture must be, they must stand
and have their staves in their hands: and what sauce they must have, and how
they shall roast it, and what they must do with the rest of it. The Lord did
punctually bind them, and stint them in that and other things, the Lord made
all his laws dear to them. But in the new Testament, take the chief of the
holy Ordinances, the Supper of the Lord, we see Christ when he was betrayed,
Lords Supper.
he took bread and wine, saying, This is my body, and this is my blood, and
there is an end. You may ask five hundred questions if you will, what bread it
was? and what wine? and how often it was taken by the Disciples, or administered,
but there you hear no further of it.

And so for Baptism, Baptism.
it is said, John baptized in Jordan; as if it had been known before, though it
were never heard of. And the Disciples when they were to preach after the
resurrection, says Christ, Go preach, he that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved. Go, baptize them in the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost, and there was an end. They might ask a hundred questions, Shall we
do it in a River, or in a Brook? to young, or to old? in Winter, or in Summer?
Who shall do it? and what shall his calling be? and many such questions: but
Christ lays down the sum of the Doctrine, and the end of it, In the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and there is no more of it.

And so for Offices, Offices and Officers.
and Officers in the new Testament. For Offices, you have a lite or two of
Pastors, and Preachers, and Deacons, and two or three lines of his duty, and
this is all, a brief touch, and there is an end. Now do you think that the
Son of God in the new and glorious Testament, would pass over these things
out of carelessness? Or did he slight it, as if he cared not how it were done?
Might not he have made his Supper as curious as the Passover, and all those
ordinances? He might. But to me there are many clear reasons why he left it so:
among the rest this is one, that in the new Testament the Saints are not so
strictly, and so straightly bound, as they of the old were.

But you will say, Why Christ has left the Saints now at more liberty.
How does it appear that it was so? Why did Jesus Christ leave it thus? Why
did he not bind us hand and foot as they were?

There are these four or sive reasons.

First, this is one reason that the Apostle has, why Christ gave this liberty;
because they in the old Testament were Servants, 1. The Saints under the new
Testament are sons, under the old they were servants.
as it were; and we under the new Testament are Sons. You shall read, Gal.
4.1. that the heir as long as he is a child, differs not from a servant. What
is the reason that Paul calls them Servants? You shall see afterward, that
they being servants, were tied to such burdens and rules. You expect from a
son more care than from a servant, and that a son should do more for your
advantage than a servant. But here is the difference between a son and a
servant, you will not lay such burdens on a son as on a servant. And you tell
a servant every day how he shall do every thing one after another, and call
him to account; this is the condition of a servant: But to a son you only
say, Walk honorably, and as becomes your self, do some good, be employed, be
not idle. A son looks to his business, and honors his father more though he
be not tied. It is base to tie a son as much as a servant. So we being now to
be sons, truly and really, the Lord has given us a larger liberty.

Another thing is this, 2. The Saints then were children under tutors, the
Saints now as men in years.
that they were sons too, (though they were as servants) but they were in
their minority, they were under Tutors and Governors, till the time appointed
of the Father; and being so, they were in bondage: they were little children as
it were in their coats, and we are grown strong, grown men to full age. We are
as men in ripe years, but they in the old Testament were little children (as
it were:) you know you must make laws for little children: you say to a little
child, take heed of a knife, that you do not cut your fingers; take heed that
you do not go over the threshold, or over a bridge, or near the fire, or the
water, lest you fall in; and you have laws how he shall do every thing: but
when this child is grown up to twenty or four and twenty years, is it not a
shameful thing that a man should tie such a son, and say, go not over the
threshold, unless you ask leave, nor take a knife in your hand? etc. No, we
break those little laws, and dissolve them by degrees, as the child grows up
to years. So when we were grown to full years, as we are under the Gospel,
the Lord Jesus has broken and dissolved those little childish laws, those
beggarly Rudiments: those A. B. C. laws and accidences wet for children, the
child is led by the sleeve, and reads with a feskew: the Lord has broken
these, and the reason is good that these should be dissolved, and the people of
God should not be tied as when they were children.

Thirdly, 3. The Saints under the new Testament have more of the Spirit.
another reason is this, that the Saints under the new Testament were to have
more of the Spirit of God to teach them within what is the will of God, and
what is for the glory of God; therefore they have less need of teaching by
external things. A word to the wise is enough; the wiser a man is, the less
you need to beat things into his head, to say you must turn at this corner and
at that: to a fool you say, you must do this, and do that; but if it be a
wise man that has brains in his head, you tell him his message, and there is
an end. So they were children, and silly, and things must be beaten into their
heads, and they must be told every meeting, and every turning. But in the
Gospel God has promised to pour out his Spirit, as it is, Joel 2. I will
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh. And in Hebr. 8. In the new Covenant it
shall not be as in the days of old. What is the difference? Then every man did
teach his neighbor, but it shall not be so now, but they shall be all taught
of God, from the least to the greatest. Most of their knowledge in the old
Testament by outward means.
The meaning is this, they in the old Testament had little knowledge but what
they got by outward means; therefore they were to write the law of God upon
their walls, and upon their posts, and to speak of it when they did sit down,
and when they rose up, and those that had most parts, and breeding, and
learning, and most knowledge in the Scriptures, they were the knowingest men:
but now they shall not every man teach his neighbor. Not but that it is
lawful for every one to help another; but the meaning is this, that most of
their knowledge shall not come by outward external ways: But, says God, I
will pour out abundance of my Spirit, and they shall all know me from the
least to the greatest. Therefore we see in 1 John 2. that John himself being
accounted, and that deservedly, the most spiritual Apostle of all, Little
Children (says he) you have an anointing, and I need not teach you. John would
not take upon him to teach them, they had so much of the Spirit. Therefore
under the new Testament the Lord having appointed to pour out abundance of his
Spirit upon his people, he thinks it unfit to go and make such endless laws
as were in the old Testament. Now the Spirit of God does not only teach us
what is the will of God, and the mind of Christ in things lawful, but in
things that were undetermined, that were neither lawful nor unlawful; the
holy Ghost teaches us what is expedient, and what is not: and thou have as
much need of the Spirit of God to show thee that which is expedient and
inexpedient, as to know the will of God, and the rule what is lawful, and what
is unlawful.

Fourthly, 4. God would set up a spiritual kingdom in the new Testament.
if you would know why Christ has given a larger latitude and liberty in
external things, to the Saints now, than to them, it is, because the Lords
purpose and design was, under the new Testament, to set up a spiritual
kingdom: all the old things, the services and offerings in the old law, were
but signs and shadows of spiritual worship. The Kings daughter is all
glorious within; prophesying of the Saints in the new Testament, that their
glory should be chiefly and mainly in inward graces. Therefore as in the old
Testament there is a great deal of external worship laid down in every leaf,
but the spiritual was veiled and covered: so in the new Testament, in every
leaf, and line almost, the spiritual worship is set down in the serving of
God and Christ and the outward in a sort is vayled.

Now you know by experience how hard it is to break a custom, if we be but 20
or 40 years accustomed to a thing, Custeme hardly broken.
it is hard to break it. How hard is it to break a drunkard of his custom? as
hard as to wash a Blackmore white. Now this people being a customed four
thousand years to serve God with offerings, and sacrifice, and Temple, and
Jerusalem, it was not easy to break them of that custom. Therefore the Lord
Christ comes, and when he would set up his worship, he speaks exceeding fairly
of that outward worship, because they had fed so long upon it, that they doted,
As we at this day (as they) would make a curious outward worship: as of old,
they wrung and wrested the Scripture to make it fair, and delicate, and
curious, as that that God would have of them.

But Christ's design being to set up a spiritual kingdom, he shows, that as
in the old Testament, unless there were something internal, the external did
not please God, My soul abhorres your sacrifices, etc. So in the new Testament
much more, the Lord does not regard outward worship at all, without the inward;
and the inward is almost all that God looks after. Therefore consider a few
places of Scripture, Gal. 5.6. There was great question about ceremonies and
outward things, says the Apostle, Neither circumcision avails any thing, or
ununcircumcision, but faith that works by love. For in Christ Jesus, says
he, that is, in the days of Christ, in the new Testament, neither circumcision
nor uncircumcision avails, Externals to be looked to as for as God has let
them down
but faith that works by love. Talk not of outward things, stand not so much
upon them, (not but that the servants of God must look to externals, as far
as God has set them down, but talk not so much of them) but faith that works
by love, see there be that. So in Gal. 6.15. the same words almost: For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, or uncircumcision, but a
new creature. In the time of Christ he looks not whether men be circumcised,
or uncircumcised, but whether they be new creatures. So in 2 Cor. 5.17. there
are the same words almost: The Apostle points out unto us how much God in the
time of the new Testament, regards inward worship. Therefore we see in Romans 14.
where there was great controversy concerning the eating of herbs, and the
keeping of days; Paul answers not directly, but says, The kingdom of God is
not in these things, but in righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost.
He would not have them strive about these things, but go to the inward
worship; see that there be righteousness, and peace and joy in the holy Ghost:
so in Heb. 13. when there was clashing about these outward things; It is a good
thing [saith he] that the heart be stablished with grace. And so in Timothy;
bodily exercise profitteth little, but godliness is profitable for all things.
Therefore. The design of God, being to set up a spiritual kingdom, the work
of grace in the heart, that we might worship him in spirit, the lord has given
more liberty, and is more sparing in laying down of external worship.

Lastly, this is another reason [though I could give many more] that the
Gospel of Jesus Christ was to be preached to all nations and they being
different in customs in clymates in constitution, The Gospel being to be
preached to different nations, Christ ties them chiefly to that substance.
and dispositions Christ tied them in his law for the substance, so left the
rest to be by the spirit of God in his people, to be determined according to
the best advantage for the honor of God, and the good of his people. As for
instance, it is a hard thing to make a law for all England, and for all the
Counties and Towns, that that should be good for one County that is for
another, and for one Town that is for another. But if a man were to make a law
for Spain and France, and Italy and Turkey and for all the world, that are
nations cross, and contrary one to another, in their clymate and disposition;
that law that were good for one Kingdom would destroy another. So here, when
Christ made laws in the old Testament, there was but one nation, and a little
nation, and the Gospel was not to remove from that nation; Therefore he comes
to particulars, but the Gospel now being to be preached to all nations, he has
left a latitude for his people, that they may apply the Gospel, to all
countries and nations for the glory of God, and the good of his people.

As for instance, Baptism,
says Christ, Baptize all nations, that is, go and use water for their
washing) for whatever men find in the word, I speak not of now) go use water
for a spiritual end, to purge their bodies, to signify the purging of the
soul. If Christ had tied men to go into Jordan, as in that country it was so
hot, they might go with a great deal of comfort: but if Christ had made
Baptism such an Ordinance, as that in all Climates, and Countries, and
Regions, they must go over head and ears in a River; we know in some climates
it would have been present death; As with us in this climate, at some times of
the year to be put over head and ears in the Thames it would be death, at
others not. Therefore Christ lays down the substance, and the end; and by the
Word of God and sound Preaching, he left the rest for the Spirit of God, in his
people to apply.

Again, to instance in the Supper of the Lord; The Lords Supper.
The Lord took bread and wine, and blessed, and broke, and gave them; and the
drift of all the business is to show the breaking of his body, and the shedding
of his blood; Now, he has bound us that we should break bread, and drink wine,
that may represent the thing: but he has not bound us to bread so properly
called, or to wine properly so called: for there are some countries that have
neither bread nor wine, but only roots that they called bread, and they have
water for their drink; Now, if Christ had said it must be true bread, and true,
and real wine, that must do the deed, these people could never have the
Supper of the Lord: Therefore the Gospel being not to be limited to one
country, but to be spread to many nations, Christ has left a latitude for the
convenience of all nations. So you have the Doctrine, and the Reasons of it. I
should come to the Uses; but I must leave them for another day.

ENCOURAGEMENT for sinners to come unto Christ.
1 COR. 10.23. ALL things are LAWFUL for me, but ALL things are not EXPEDIENT
etc.


HAving opened these words to you the last day; I observed these three
Doctrines (which by the help of God I shall speak of.)

The first was this, that

There are many things that are lawful to the Saints now under the new
Testament, that were not to them under the Old.

And the second was,

That of those many things that are lawful to the Saints now, there are but a
few that are expedient, or convenient.

The third is this, that

Saints, if they will walks becomes the new Testament, they must not so much
(at least not only) eye what is lawful; but they must eye also what is
expedient.

Concerning the first, that

The Saints under the new Testament, are not so strictly and punctually bound,
in point of lawfulnes, as they were in the old Testament.

This I proved to you;

And for the opening of it, I proposed two Quests.

First, Wherein does this latitude consist?

Secondly, How does it appear. These I answered.

I come now to the Uses of it.

First, Encouragement for sinners to come to Christ.
If there be such a latitude in the ways of Christ in the Gospel; Then here is
a sweet encouragement for all poor sinners to come to Christ; It is his own
Use that he makes, Come unto me (says Christ) Ye that are weary, and heavy
laden, and I will give you rest: for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.
Beloved, Christ pities thee, not only that thou do not go to heaven, but
that thou go with a bundle upon thy back: Christ would have thee come in an
easy sweet way. As for instance here are some that have gone on forty, or
fifty years, that have kept Fasts, and gone to Church, and prayed norning and
evening, and have wept, and howled, and a great deal of labor; Now if you
come to Jesus Christ, and receive him, thou shall find not only a straight,
ready way, but a way unspeakably sweet and easy.

This makes many a man that he runs from Christ and abhors the profession of
Religion, Why men run from Christ.
because he looks upon it as a harsh thing. O, if I be religious, I must not
drink, I must not smile; it is a melancholy mopish thing, I shall be bound
hand and foot, I will never be tied with such a chain; as one said, if I be
Religious I must not dare to drink a pot of beer with a neighbor: so; looking
on the ways of Christ as hard, that will take away all liberty, that they
shall be mere slaves, they are afraid of it.

In Ioh 6. Christ teaches them, you must eat my flesh, and drink my blood. If
they had understood it, it was a sweet doctrine; but they said This is a hard
saying and so they ran from Christ. They thought it had, they would be no
Caniballs; and away they went, by a misapprehension of the ways of God. So
this is one thing that keeps men from Christ, an apprehension that the ways of
God are melancholy, and mopish, and will so restrain them that they shall
have no comfort.

But herein thou art deceived: for as David says, O Lord, thy commandments are
exceeding broad. The ways of God are broad in this respect, (though they be
narrow in other respects) it is a sweet way. This I aver, that it is the
general block that keeps men from godliness, either the Ministers presenting
the ways of God in a grim manner makes them fearful, or peoples
misapprehending them in their own fancy, and through temptation, though the
Minister present them right. Ministers lay stumbling blocks that keep men from
Christ.
And usulaly they lay such blocks in the door and threshold of the Gospel;
There are so many contradictions, a man must be broaken, and humbled, and
damned almost, and go by the gates of Hell before he can come to Christ. We
say stumbling blocks in the way that people cannot come in; and when they are
come in, there are so many that fasten burdens on them, that poor people see
it almost impossible to get in; and when they are in, it is a very Prison. This
makes them that they will not come to Christ, and so loose their souls poor
wretches But when thou come to Christ, thou come not to a Prison, as thou
conceivest. Our work is to preach the Gospel; What is that? To preach the
Gospel what.
to go tell glad tidings; What is that? To tell you that salvation is given by
Christ, that he has laid down his life; and not only so, that you shall have
salvation: but it is glad tidings because, we offer you a better service, if
you will come in; that whereas now you are under the devil, and your own
works, and in a way to damn your selves, if you will come to Christ you shall
have not only salvation, but a sweet service, He will make you Princes with
him. Therefore see the language that God puts into our mouths when he sends us
to preach; he sends us not to hire servants: for that Parable is to another
end; we are not sent to get Gally-slaves to the Oars, or a Bear to the stake:
Ministers to woo men as Spouses for Christ.
but he sends us to woo you as spouses, to marry you to Christ; and in wooing
there must not be harsh dealing; and when a man has wooed and got a wife she
must be kindly used, and not harshly; she has much freedom, otherwise than
when she was a servant, and a drudge. So, we come not as to servants, you shall
be wives of Jesus Christ, you shall have liberty, and Christ, etc all in him
shall be yours. Therefore consider this poor souls that lie dead in sins; we
are sent to adopt you, to be sons to God, and spouses to Christ. Nay, we are to
invite you to a Feast, Siners invited to a Feast.
Mat. 12. And the fatlings, and all things are ready. Now, when men come to a
Feast, when friends are invited to a Feast, we do not make laws on them
presently: but say, I pray Sir call for wine, or what you will: So if there be
laws in a Feast, they be laws of pleasure, and joy, and not otherwise; and
though their be laws of civillity, yet there is liberty, and sweetness, there
is no law that restraines true comfort there. We come to call you to a Feast,
not only in Heaven, but the ways of Christ are a continual Feast in this
world, Gods way is sweet; and if you will come to Christ, you shall not only
go to heaven and be Saints there; but the way is unspeakably sweet. Think of
this; I dare say, you have had strange odd thoughts of the ways of God, that
has kept many of you from Christ; pray to the Lord to present these ways to
you truly; and you will not stand out.

There is a sweet place in Joh. 10. I am the door (says Christ) If any come
to me, Christ a door how.
he shall go in and out, and find pasture. I am the door: But some may say,
we love not to go in at such a door, unless we know when it is locked, and
when it is nor. No, says he, I am not a door that has locks and bolts, that
will bring you into straits; but I am a door that you shall go in and out,
and find pasture for your souls. His meaning is not you shall play fast and
loose, and if you come in to Christ to day, you shall go out to the devil to
morrow: but it is a figurative speech. That Christ is not a door that pens men
up, but there is the liberty of a field, there is spaciousnes and comfort, and
liberty; thou shall not be tied and bound up, as thou and I a long while were
under Hell. Consider this, you that have hard thoughts of the ways of God, and
have been flow in coming to Christ.

But to open this a little. Some man may say.

You say Sir that the ways of Jesus Christ if they be rightly presented to me,
The ways of Christ easy.
they are easy and sweet and comfortable, and there is no such hardness in
them, how does that appear?

It will appear by these four things briefly.

First, thou that art a drunkard, o^ a s^e^rer, The maine work done aheady.
or a poor carnal blind man or woman; if thou will come this day to Jesus
Christ; I say it is easy: for all the maine work is done already. I call thee
not if thou will come to Christ, and tell thee that thou must weep, and pray
and fast it our, and work thine own salvation, No; but understand me well
that thy everlasting salvation is done fully by Jesus Christ already: says
Christ, it is finished; that is, there is nothing in the world for thee to do
if thou will come into Christ there is nothing for thee to do for thy
salvation, (to speak properly) Christ has done that, he has procured the
favor of God, and everlasting life for thee, he has found out a way to do
away all thy sins; the maine is done to thy hand. Therefore we are sent to
preach to Gospel, that is to tell you glad tidings that all is done to your
hands, to invite you to a feast: see what feast Mat. 22 to tell you that the
fatlings are slain, and dinner is ready, and all things are prepared, being
neither bottle, nor basket If you will come to Christ rightly, Christ does not
accept that thou should do the least thing to save thy soul, he has died,
and saved it and he bids us tell thee so.

O therefore, Who would be a drunkard, and a wretch, and stand as a sot mopeing
all the year, and not come to Christ? The Gospel is like the sheet Act. 10.
that was full of fowls, and of all kind of meat, and there comes a voice,
arise Peter and eat, there was nothing else to be done; So thou must not come
and we set thee in a way to get Heaven, and life; but the sheet is let down,
here is life, and salvation, and spiritual blessings in Christ; only, arise,
and eat: only love the Father, and Christ for it. Here it is true as Christ
said, One sows, and another reapeth; Christ has sowed everlasting
happiness, only come thou into the harvest and reap.

But you will say: (for some of you are apt to stumble) are not duties of
Religion, Preaching, and Hearing, and Praying, means of everlasting salvation,
and yet you say, if we will come to Christ there is nothing to be done for
salvation, but all is done by Christ?

Beloved, that you may understand this, Duties means of salvation.
and not stumble, know that duties may be said to be means two ways.

Properly, or Improperly;
That is thus; Prayer, and Hearing, and Fasting, and all those things are
means, that is, they do not immediately, and properly procure everlasting
life, and salvation, for that is false, they are not means so; the Papists
make them so, If you should hear a Jesuit; he would say that peregrinations
and Fastings, and these things are the way to save your souls: this is Popery.
But duties and religious performances are means improperly, that is thus, they
do not procure salvation, but only the blood of Christ does that: if we mix
any thing else with it, we make it vain: But they are means, that is, they
are conduit pipes through which the comfort, and benefit of all that Christ
has done for thee, comes to thy soul; so they are means: if thou come in,
thou shall have them as conduit pipes to reveal and convey those things every
day: but in a proper sense they are not means of salvation: for that, (to
speak properly) is only the death and merit of Christ. Therefore, this is one
thing to encourage thee, that if thou now hear the Preacher inviting thee to
come to Christ, learn one thing more then thou did before, there is not a
jot for thee to do for thy salvation, but take it as done to thy hands;
believe it, and love God and Christ, that gave it: there is nothing else to be
done, world without end in that sense.



Yes, for other ends that the Gospel specifies, that thou may adorn thy
profession, and be like Christ, and serve him in thy generation, and honor him
in this world.

But mark, Those things that are left for us to do are few and easy.
even those things they are but very few in comparison of other things; they
are not so many, nor so great, and grievous: The commandments of Christ are not
grievous, says John. But to open this briefly, Christ's way easy, compared.
If you parallel, and compare them with four sorts of people, or four sorts
of ways; you shall see the easieness of Christ's commands.

As first, 1. With the service of the Jews in the old Testament,
If we parallel the service of God (I mean under the Gospel) with the service
of the Jews, the Saints under the old Testament. I told you what abundance of
services, and pains, and cost they were at: you know what pains and cost
there was in the building of the Tabernacle, and the Temple, if you look upon
particulars: and what cost it was to offer sacrifices twice a day; what a
charge it was to bring Oxen and sheep, and what a drudgerie to go up to
Jerusalem; and how they were crossed in their time, and their meat and their
clothes. It was a burden that neither we, nor our fathers could bears, say
the Apostles, and Elders Act. 10.15. Not only in respect of man's corruption,
but the thing it self was exceeding heavier but the most of those things are
done away in the Gospel.

Secondly, if we parallel it with the Papists religion, 2. With the service of
Papists.
when thou come to Popery, if thou be a Papist there are endless commands;
thou must fast so often in a week, thou must observe so many holy days, and
eves, and whipp, and scourge thy self, and go in peregrinations; There is none
of this trash in the service of Christ.

Then parallel it with the service of natural men, 3. With the service of
natural men.
that go (as it were) by their own righteousness to save themselves; It is a
hard labor, and a rough way, they must keep every commandment of God, if they
miss one, they are damned for ever. Here it is not so, the curse is taken away;
In those few things thou art to do for Christ, if thou fail, there is no
damnation; the hell and curse is gone.

Fourthly, Compare it with the service of the devil, that all men natural are
in; 4. With the service of the devil.
you shall see that in the service of the devil, there is abundance of charge,
and cost, and pains. As for instance, if you look to a drunkard, he spends the
whole week, and wastes his estate in the service of the devil. The adulterer
does not cease to sin; the devil will not give him rest. And the worlding
drudgeth all his life to serve the devil. The service of the devil is a great
slavery, and drudgery; that a Saint often pities a carnal man, not only for
the danger of his soul, but for the drudgery of his life; he pities a worldly
man, to see him rise early, and go to bed late; As we say, he must needs go
that the devil drives. The devil drives the drunkard to the alehouse, and the
worlding to his mammon; and eats out the strength and marrow of his bones. It
is not so in the service of Christ.

But you will say, we see men continue to be his servants, Men find sweetness
in the service of the devil.
and will not be the servants of Christ.

I could speak many things of that, but only a word. 1. It will one day be
sour.
It seems sweet to men: But it will be sour one day.

And besides, though it be sweet to them, 2. That sweetness is from distemper.
yet it is a sweetness that arises from their sickness and distemper. As a child
e that will eat no meat sometimes, but coals and ashes: it is sweet, but it is
a distemper: he is sick, there is no such sweetness in coals. And a man in a
fever, he desires to drink water, it is but his sickness; So if we be
drunk, and swear, and be whoremoungers, and proud men and women, and delight
in worldly things, in pleasures, and the service of the devil; it is an evil
humor, and corruption that makes us find that sweetness.

But the maine reason is this, 3. It is sweet because you never tasted the
sweetns of Christ's service.
you find sweetness in the service of the devil, because you never tasted the
goodness of the service of Christ. I dare say; if there were no heaven, nor
hell, if thou did know the sweetness, and comfort in the service of Christ,
thou would scorn, and disdain, to seek comfort in a cup of drink, or in
worldly things: but that is the reason, thou have not tasted that the Lord is
gracious.

I remember a godly, blessed man, that when carnal men made bonefites, and the
ministers would have reproved them to see what a stir they made on a Candlemas
Even: let them alone says he; that is all the comfort they have; they have noe
acquaintance with better comforts if they had, they would leave them. So he was
ready to weep for their joy. So the pleasure, and comfort thou have in the
service of the devil (the Lord pity thee) it is only because thou art not
acquainted with the sweetness of the ways of Christ.

If you object, servants of Christ have turned the servants of the aevill
again. Some of Christ servants have gone back to serve the devil.


I answer; they are but few, there are more of the devils servants that become
the servants of Christ than of the servants of Christ that become the servants
of the devil. But those people that do so, 1. They are but few.
they are but wooden legs they never drew sap, and sweetness from Christ; they
were never truly members of Christ they did but hang on, 2. They were not true
members of Christ.
they found some sweetness in the back of Religion in the circumstances of
Religion: but if they had tasted of God rightly they would never have gone away
from him. So I say this should encourage thee to come in.

First, that the maine work is done to thy hand.

Secondly, That that, that is left, are but a few, and easy things in
comparison of the service of Satan; and of Papists; and of the Jews under the
Law; and of natural men that serve God for life.

Thirdly, to make it more easy yet, 3. Christ will give his Spirit to do that
he requires.
those few things that are to do, the Lord Jesus will give his Spirit to do
them; he will do all thy works for thee; he expects not that thou should
do them in thy own strength: but he has promised to give his Spirit, and
that shall pray according to the will of God, So here thou shall have a yoke,
an easy one; and in that yoke thou shall have Christ himself to draw with
thee, I can do all, through Christ that strengthens me, says Paul. There
are but a few things that we are bound to do, and those few things Christ
will do for us.

Fourthly, and lastly, Consider those few things that thou have the Spirit of
Christ to do for thee, how weak soever thou art in thy performance; the Lord
Jesus continually accepts of them: that is, the weakest prayer, and the weakest
service, of a sincere Saint in the new Testament, it is a sacrifice well
pleasing to God.

Who would continue in drunkeness; and lie in sin, and refuse to come to
Christ, when the ways of Christ are so comfortable?

You will say; What do you mean by coming to Christ? You would have us come
to Christ, and you say, here is a comfortable way, and an easy yoke; what is
it to come to Christ? Coming to Christ what.


I will tell you that, least we loose all our labor, Joh. 6.35. Jesus said, I
am the bread of life; he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that
believes in me shall never thirst. So that coming to Christ, is believing in
Christ.

But you will say, I am to seek again; I know not what that is, to believe in
Christ.

I will not stand upon the definition, but a word, that thou may understand
what I mean by believing in Christ.

There are three things in it. Believing in Christ what.


First, it is to give credit to all that Christ tells thee. That is one thing.

Secondly, to receive that life, and salvation; all that Christ Jesus gives
thee.

Thirdly, to submit to the laws that Jesus Christ lays upon thee.

To give credit to what he teaches,
I say, if thou would know what it is to come to Christ, or to believe in
Christ, it is, when thou will be taught by Jesus Christ, when thou will give
credit to the things that he teaches; As you see Isaiah 2.2. Come (say the
people) let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of God;
Let us go up. Why so? He will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: for out of Sion shall go the Law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. This is to come to Christ, when our ears are open, and our hearts
are ready to hear and learn whatsoever Jesus Christ shall teach us. Therefore
when we say to a drunkard, or to a carnal man or woman that are in their
sins (as I was) come to Christ; what do we mean by that? Be not
refractorie, be not wise in thine own eyes any more, do not come, and hear
the Preacher, and yet believe as thou list: but lay thy soul at the feet of
Christ, and be willing to receive the instruction that Christ teaches thee.
Do not as children do with their bread, take it and crumble it on the ground
to the dogs, and eat one bit themselves, and throw away another; So do not
crumble the word of God, to take one bit, and throw another bit to thy
neighbor, and another at thy heels when thou go out of doors; no, but
receive all that Christ teaches thee, though it be contrary to thy
corruption, and above thy reason, yet endeavor to believe it. That is one
thing.

Secondly, to believe in Christ, or to come to Christ, 2. To accept life and
salvation from him.
is when thou art willing to accept of, and to receive life, and salvation that
Christ offers. Whereas it may be thou now art a natural man, this is thy
condition; either thou art a sottish creature, and do not think of life and
salvation any where, thou carest not for life, or death, but go on like a
beast; or if thou do, thou have a little devotion of thine own procuring;
or thou lie desperately in sin, either of these is thy condition. Therefore
now this is to come to Christ; look not what thou art worthy to have: but what
God is willing to give; God is willing to bestow everlasting life freely,
therefore look upon the brazen Serpent that is lift up, and endeavor to
receive, and accept of that salvation that is offered by him.

Thirdly, 3. To submit to Christ's laws.
be willing to submit to the laws of Christ: for Christ calls to thee as a
King. Therefore in Mat. 11. (I believe that is the meaning of the place, though
there be more in it) Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will give you rest; for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. What is it
to come to Christ? When I am willing to come out of other services, and to
leave other masters. I will serve the devil, and my lusts no more: but I will
come under the Standard of Christ; Christ has lift up a Standard and expects
that every one should submit to his blessed Law. Therefore put these things
together, labor to understand them, and remember them, and the Lord bless
them to thee, that after this day thou may not lie sotting in sin: but that
every one may come to Christ, that he may teach you and enrich you with life,
that he may rule over you, and that you may be his subjects for ever. There
are other Uses of this point that I must leave till the afternoon.

1 CORINTHIANS 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient, etc.


YOu remember that I proposed to you three Doctrines from these words (tending
I hope to the healing of the divisions that are among the godly.) The first was.

That Saints in the new Testament in point of lawfulnes, are not so strictly
bound, as the Saints were under the old Testament. This you had proved, and
opened to you in some measure the last day.

In the morning we had occasion from this doctrine by the by, to call upon
poor sinners to come in to Christ: because their is such largenes, and liberty
and spaciousnes in the ways of Christ; The yoke of Christ is so easy.

Now I shall go forward to a Use or two more that remain of this doctrine,
that we may proceed to the next.

In the next place therefore, Reproof of two sorts of people.
we may hence see the errors, or mistakes that are in diverse Christians among
us, that do cause contention, we may justly reprove them from this doctrine,
we may discover them at least. I will not use any nicknames, it may be you
would understand more clearly what I mean if I should: But I see the devil
gets much advantage by nicknames, by calling men Prebyterians, and
Antinomians, and Anabaptists, and I know not what; therefore I beseech you
beware, how you use those names, (though I say not it is unlawful) yet there
be mistakes, (let us call them as gently as we can) that are generally among
us, either

On the left hand, or On the right.

Those that err on the left hand.
And both are to be reproved from this doctrine.

On the left hand, I mean those that make every thing lawful, and would have
no band, 1 Those that would make the way wider than Christ has.
nor tie (as it were) they would make the way wider than Christ has made it;
they would makea greater latitude than God has made. Now I say, these all come
to be reproved, from this word ALL in the text: for I showed that by the word
all is not meant all things in a universallity, that I may be any thing, I may
be a drunkard, and be a Christian, I may be a swearer, and be a Christian, I
may do what I list, and yet be a Christian: but (as I said) by all things is
meant many things, and those that take it universally will do nothing.
Therefore on the left hand I say, these do mistake; and of these there be
three sorts, all godly Christians I hope they are, (I wish every one to own his
share, and my self where I am guilty.)

There are one sort of people among us, (you have a name for them, but I will
not use it) that do apprehend so much beauty, and lovelines in spiritual
things, in grace, and the work of the Spirit, in the person, and excellencies
of Christ, and the like that they look upon the external manner of Gods
worship, or government as a small contemptible thing, with a disdainful eye.
Beloved, I make not men of straw to speak to: but I know many godly people that
hold so, that say it is ridiculous, and they care not which way the Church of
God be ordered, or governed, because the Kingdom of God consists in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; And they smile to see
contentions between Presbyterians and others, and think that these are too
mean, and too low things for Saints to look after. Give me leave to tell you
my thoughts, I confess as I conceive that of all others, this is the least
error, yet it is an error, and mistake: for though it be true that spiritual
things are the maine, and other things are but little to be regarded in
comparrison, under the new Testament; yet I may say of outward things as far
as Christ has enjoined them, as Christ says of tything mint, and annise, when
he speaks of righteousness, These things ought ye to have one: but the other
you ought not to have left undone. So this is the maine work for a Christian
to do, and it is blessed to see a Saint make that his maine study. But if God
make laws, and give commands, about external things, outward things, I must
not neglect that neither. It is (as one observes) as with the Saints and the
world, they both see the misery: but the Saints begin to study the causes of
contention; and the old saying is, happy is he that knows the causes. One cause
of contention.
One maine cause of contention among us is, God comes now with more light than
we had before; we have more, and more; but this light is not a full light, I
mean thus, this light comes, and shines but in part of the will of God to us:
that is, we see part of the will of God, and part we see not, and while we
learn one part, we forget another part of the will of God. And this is
ordinary among Christians, while they learn faith and justification, they
forget purity, and holiness; while they learn Church Discipline, they forget
godliness; while they learn holiness within, they forget obedience without.

The knowledge of heavenly things comes into the souls of people now a days,
as the Sun shines on the earth; How is that? You know when the Sun shines in
our horizon, it does not shine to the other end of the world, it is night with
them when it is day with us; So, when the light shows one thing, another truth
is lost; And this is the reason of division, light is come, but it is not a
full light, it reveals not all the will of God, but teaches one, one thing,
and another, another. We see not all together. This is one thing wherein men
mistake; though I much commend them for their prizing of spiritual things, yet
if their be a real command of God in outward things I humbly beseech you that
you would not disdain, and despise it. That is all I have to say to them.

There are a second sort of people that mistake on the left hand, 2 Those that
abolish the morrall Law.
and make the rule wyder than it is; those that go farther than those; that
is, that do not only slight, external worship, and government etc. As far as
God has laid it down but break down the pales, even to the moral law of
God, and think that the way is now so wide that even the ten commandments,
that the moral law it self is done away; there are some conceive so. But
concerning that I think there is no subject that I could prove more fully, with
stronger arguments, yet I will not trouble you nor my self now; and I showed
before how Christ came not to destroy the moral law; neither for that use that
Paul makes of it, to reveal sin, to make us esteem of Christ, or to be a
light, the Spirit being within: for they are not contradictorie as some simply
think and speak; but the Spirit within, and the law without is a lantern.
Only the damnation is gone: but there are other motives to obey it; heaven and
earth shall pass, but the law of God shall not pass. So now you see two
sorts. And I hope, if there be any such here that they will also take their
shares: for if every one would here with humility and take his part I hope
there would soon be an end of most of our contentions.

The third sort go farther than those on the left hand, 3 Those that allow
outward profaneness, and only serve God in their spirits.
they make it so broad this all things are lawful. That not only in point of
government, or of the morrall law (for those that hold against the morrall law
they hold that we ought to do the things, but not upon the same motives; they
hold that we are not to be whoremongers, and drunkards, etc.) but the third
sort say, if we worship God in our spirits it is no matter what we do with our
bodies, we may worship God in our spirits, and go to mass, and do any thing,
the body is but as a tool in a carpenters hand.

It is not worth the while to confute those, I could give many reasons to the
contrary. Christ has redeemed soul, and body, therefore we must gloryfie God
in both. And you know the soul and body that go on in sin shall be damned
the one and the other: therefore the body has need to look to it as well as
the soul. And we are commanded to bear witness to the truth of God, how can we
do it if the body may do any thing? we need never suffer persecution, as all
that are in Christ must; if I will be content to serve Christ in my soul only,
I will not suffer persecution, I will go to mass, and swear, and be drunk
etc. Again, we are called to be like Christ and he was holy in soul, and
body; how can we be like him if we will be holy in our souls only and not in
our bodies? Nay it is impossible: for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks: that is, if the soul be holy, the body will be so too: if
there be wickedness in the heart there must be wickedness in the body, and if
there be holiness in the soul, there will be also in the body. If any hold an
opinion to make contention by it, let them take it as an admonition from the
Lord to consider what they do. Thus you se the errors on the lefthand. As I
desire power of the Lord to tell you what think, so I desire that you would
endeavor to understand.

The errors on the right hand are contrary to this, 2 Errors on the right
hand.
when as Paul says All things are lawful as the one makes it universal that
every thing is lawful, so the other makes nothing lawful almost. My meaning
is this; they on the right hand having an old Tastament spirit (mark that word,
for from thence is the contention) having a spirit not suitable to the new
Testament; though (mistake me not) they differ but in degrees chiefly, and
principally) they make laws and ties, and bonds, and knotts, and knacks and
many ridiculous things to tie, and bind themselves, where Christ Jesus in the
new testament has not bound them; and hence comes chiefly the contentions, and
controversies of these times between two sorts of people; you know who they
are. Though I constantly conceive that in the things themselves, the one may be
in when the other are out, and the other may be in when they are out; the one
party may be in in somethings, and the other may be in when they are wrong in
somethings: yet though they be never so violent, though they be ready to
devour one another, and ready to set the Kingdom, and nation on fire, and say,
we will have our way, and you shall not have yours: yet (mark it) they both
agree in this; all these contentions they come from the same principle. (I
speak not of every particular man, but of the generality of both ways) it
comes from an old Testament spirit in the one, and in the other. And though
they be contrary as light and darkness, point blank enemies, yet as I have
sometimes seen two rivers, run contrary ways that have sprung from the same
head, and hill: so the one and the other; (if I mistake not) of the great
controversies at this time, it comes from an old Testament spirit in the one as
well as in the other.

What is an old Testament spirit?

I speak not to make the breach wider; Old Testament spirit what.
but desire that it may be healed: therefore I say that you may take notice of
it, and take heed of it, an old Testament spirit is this, that there is in both
a disposition to make a curious external piece of government; as curious, nay
say they, why not more curious than Moses made in the Old? I say, in external
things. And out of this principle every one will have his brat, and strain and
squeeze the Scripture one this way, and another that, and make fine pieces that
will never stand.

Only with this difference, that the one side, (that in this are the honester
of the two) they endlessely make laws, and ties for their own consciences, and
the other party they make laws, and ties, upon the consciences of others.

The one party is always scrupulous; 1. Such as make laws to tie themselves.
And why should not the Lord be more honorable than the servant? and Moses
that was a servant was faithful in the house of God; and he made a curious
piece, even to a snuff, to aloope, to an ilet hole, and there must certainly be
a curious piece if we could see it: Not knowing that Gods purpose is to make
his worship glorious in spiritualls, and so they go on a long and search the
Scripture to every jot, and tittle, and squeese blood out of it, and so tie
knots, and will not stoop an ace to their brethren for a Kingdom; Thus they
bind themselves as the silk-worme, or the spider with their own web; And when
they have made laws, they lay such a stresse on them that if they miss in a
nick, they conclude there is no Church, nor no Commonwealth, etc. I could give
diverse instances, as in that of dipping over head and ears: because the word
bapto signifies over head and ears sometimes, and because the preposition em
signifies to go into, from that they bind all the Saints all the world over to
go into rivers; so that if a man be not dipped but only sprinkled, because of
the preposition em, that makes a nullitie of the Church, that it is no Church,
and so consequently there shall be no Church at all: so from prepositions and
particles, they make rules that Christ has not tied them to.

I speak not to disparage the least tittle of the Scripture: for Heaven and
earth shall pass, before one jot or tittle of it shall pass: But take this
too, it is not every tittle or affix, nor every preposition, nor every example,
nor every precept, that can make an absolute rule to bind all the Saints, all
the world over: therefore though there be no preposition, nor no tittle in the
word, but there is use for it, yet it is not to be put to that use, that every
thing there must bind all the Saints in all the world, that is a mistake.

The other sort of people have the same principle also, 2. Such as make laws to
bind others.
they would have a curious external piece in the new Testament: but with this
difference, that they would not be so scrupulous to themselves (for many of
them walk large and broad enough) but their fingers itch to make laws, and
ties to bind the consciences of others, and so they look upon the old
Testament, and see that a complete piece; how the Passover was prescribed, how
they must take the lamb, and at what age, and how long they must keep it, and
when they must kill it, and what posture they must use, and what sauce they
must have; they see it a curious piece, and they look on the new Testament
(though they speak not so) as if Christ had left it very dark, and short, and
brief. And indeed to speak the truth, if the design of Christ had been to
make a curious external piece under the new Testament as under the old, they
did think right, no man could disprove them: but Christ of purpose left things
brief, as I showed before; How moderately, and spairingly, and covertly the
Lord mentions Ordinances in the new Testament: now they concluding that the
worship of God in the new Testament must be more glorious than in the old, and
in outward things; there upon they make Canons, and eech it out; and in so
doing, they make such ties upon indifferent things, and things that Christ has
not determined to the Saints, that though the things be otherwise good in
themselves, yet they have this evil, one of the greatest in any Church in the
world; they bring the glorious sons of Sion under the New Testament back
again to the Old.

So it has been always from the beginning: Popes practice.
for we see the Popes heretofore, they always looked on the new Testament as a
lame thing, short, and dark; therefore they made Canon upon Canon, and Article
upon Article, every Pope made Canons, and laws, and decretalls till they were
endless, to determine things that are undetermined, that are left to the
wisdom of the Saints in their riper age, (all a long an old Testament spirit,)
that they might make a curious outward piece.

And so the Bishops, Bishops practice.
they looked on the new Testament as dark, and lame, and they would take it and
digest it into a method; and make other books instead of a new Testament, that
a man might be a protestant and never see the Bible, and a man might be a good
Catholic and never see the Bible; So they made the thirtie-nine Articles, and
decrees, and Canons to eech out the new Testament, and the minister must say
this with a loud voice, and that with a low voice; and now he must sit, and now
he must stand; and he must read one lesson here, and another there; and here
he must read the first, and there the second Service; and if he were rich he
must wear long clothes, and if he were poor he must wear short. What an
abominable thing is it to tie the sons of God that are not babies, now under
tutors, with paltrie things, when the Spirit of God in the least Saint is
better able to determine than all the Bishops.

Therefore this makes my heart to bleed; Presbytery and Independency.
I am not ashamed nor afraid to tell you my serious thoughts concerning these
two ways, (if you will, call them PRESBYTERY and INDEPENDENCY) For that of
Independency, as I never saw, nor was apprehensive what harm it could do to
overthrow the Parliament, or to destroy the Kingdom, as men say; We must have
but one Religion, and hang them, and draw them, and banish them: as I am not
sensible of these fears; so on the other side, if you call that Presbytery,
that godly men call so; when a godly Church appeals to godly Ministers, to
determine that which they cannot determine themselves; I cannot see but in some
cases, and some times, and some Churches, such a thing may be convenient and
expedient; and if that were all in Presbytery, I would never speak against it,
I say, take Presbytery as godly men express it, (not as ignorant men take it,
for they mean tyranny) I see no such great danger in that, that Presbytery will
be a thing to destroy us, but there may be some things in it convenient: but I
profess before God and the world, my greatest fear, and grief, and trouble
is that from Presbytery, and Independency, between the one, and the other, they
are both in a way to make the Saints under the new Testament, the glorious
sons of Sion all babies, and to tie little knots, and querks upon their own
souls, and the souls of others, to bring them to the old Testament again.
Where Christ has bound us let us be bound: but where he has made us free let
us do all to the glory of God, and for expediencie and edification.

Therefore strive not about strawes, whether we shall appeal to other people
when we cannot do things of our selves, A ridiculous thing to tie the Sts
where Christ has not tied them.
but go to the root, the principle of both in the generality tends as strongly
the one as the other, to make babies of the Saints. What a shameful, strange,
ridiculous thing would it be, if a Doctor, or Bachelor of Divinity should come
from Oxford with gray-haires and a learned man, and you should make him a
little coat, and put him on a sachell, and give him a Horne-book, or A B C,
and put a festraw in his hand and turn him to school; What a great
disparagement would it be? would it not be ridiculous, and intolerably foolish?
So God will be served in the new Testament, in Spirit: and Christ now has made
the Saints free in abundance of things, and for us to make little knick-knacks,
little laws to tie the Saints hand and foot, and to bind them faster than
ever they were under Moses; To tell the Saints in the new Testament, here you
must put out your hand, and here, that they cannot sanctify a Sabbath, or make
a Sermon, but they must be told when they must sit, and when they must stand,
and what they must do, this is the misery, this, this, this makes the hearts
of Christians to bleed. There is something in Presbytery that might be
expedient, and somewhat in Independency, and it would easily be decided; but
this is the plague, we would bring the sons of Sion in the new Testament to be
babies. I foresee this, and point it out for you, to take notice of that old
Testament spirit, that we may not make laws upon our selves, where God has
not made laws on us: therefore pray to the Lord to end that, and then neither
of the other will hurt you. That is the second Use.

Only there might be an objection, whether it be not lawful for the
Magistrates, or the Churches, or the Ministers to make laws to tie their
subjects, or members, in things that Christ has not absolutely determined? But
concerning that I mean to handle the objection more fully when I shall speak
concerning expediency; therefore I shall leave it till then. And to hasten over
this Doctrine briefly, I come to the last Use.

Exhortation to duties.
As the former Use was to point out the mistakes, so this points out the duties
to which I am to exhort you that this being so, that there is such a liberty,
and latitude (yet not a universal latitude) that therefore you would learn
these four things that I shall exhort you to.

First, that every one would endeavor to understand and be acquainted with your
Christian liberty, 1. To understand our Christian liberty.
under the new Testament, to study it. O! say not here is an example, or a
precept, or a command, and I know not what, as many are ready to say: beware
what you bind your conscience with: study your Christian liberty: be not as
the horse and mule, without understanding: labor to know what Christ commands
that if you do it not, you sin, and to know what Christ has left as expedient
for you to do, or not to do according to edification, that is the way to
peace.

But you will say, this is dangerous; libertines; it is dangerous for people to
know their liberty. For then they would be giddie and loose, and profane.

When I was a child I have many times heard that if a horse knew his strength
no body could rule him. Knowledge of Christian liberty not dangerous.
So if we were horses, and mules without understanding, if we were not men and
women in grown age under the new Testament having the Spirit of God, the
knowing of our liberty would do us hurt; but you shall see that Paul (and he
was wise) always, in all places, he was as careful to lay down their liberty,
as to reprove those that abuse their liberty: as in all those places in the
Corinthians; he tells them what was expedient, but if you marry you sin not;
and so for meat offered to Idols, though it might be inexpedient, yet an Idol
is nothing. So sensual men that have not the Spirit if they pervert and abuse
their liberty, yet we must not be wiser than the holy Ghost, and Paul, and
keep the liberty of the Saints from them, but acquaint them with it.

Besides, we must endeavor to understand our liberty in the new Testament;
because that for want of knowing their liberty under the new Testament, Not
knowing our Christian liberty keeps us under aspirit of bondage.
the generality of the Saints are kept under the spirit of bondage; there is a
spirit of bondage nourished inevitably, you cannot avoid it, as ^ong as you
are ignorant of your liberty under the new Testament.

As how?

I will tell you, there is a spirit of bondage, that is, continual guilt on
your consciences, continual fear in you.

How comes it?

Guilt in the the Sts whence.
Mark it, most of the guilt and fears of the Saints is, ordinarily not from
the doing of ill, but from the misdoing of good: that is, they apprehend
themselves bound to such a duty, and God calls them to another duty, and
there is guilt arises from that, they do one thing, when their consciences
tell them they are bound to do another; As for instance, it is your duty to
pray morning and evening in your families, it is so, and more, seven times a
day if you can: but you make all things lawful, you will do nothing upon
expediency, you make it so of necessity, that if you miss in the one, or the
other you sin. As for instance, you have taken apart your family to pray, and
you are called at that time to relieve a poor man, and though you have done a
better deed, yet because you bind your selves where God has not bound you,
there is guilt on your consciences. So, you make another law to read Chapters
twice a day, you have bound your selves, and you sin if you do it not; but a
greater duty comes that is worth the reading often Chapters, yet because you
neglect that you sin, and carry guilt on you: So three parts of four of your
guilt, it arises from ignorance, you know not which God will have: I pray when
I should read, or I preach when I should pray, or when I should do good to my
brother, it comes from ignorance. God has not tied us to the number of
Chapters, or these things: but as it may be for expediency, for the glory of
God, and the edification of our brethren; which if you did know, when a greater
duty comes you would take it in hand; So you make a law, you must begin
reading with Prayer, it is sin to read without praying. It is convenient to
pray at all times: but if you make it an absolute law, there will be guilt upon
your conscience when you omit it, though the occasion be never so great. Labor
to know your Christian liberty.

Shall I go a little further? Ignorance of Christian liberty hindere from
wining others.
For the want of knowing and understanding your Christian Liberty, there is
this misery, that you are not able to win the souls of others.

Why so?

Because you have tied your selves hand and foot that you cannot stoop to win
souls. Says Paul, 1 Cor. 9. To the Jew I became as a Jew, and to them without
law, as without law: I was weak to the weak, I was all things to all, that I
might win some. As if he should say, Christ has given me a great deal of
liberty to this end, that I might accommodate, and apply my self; (beware of
mistaking me) not to accommodate my self to my own ends, to please my lusts:
but he has given me a latitude to stoop to men's dispositions, and ways to win
their souls. Now, if Paul's religion had been as many now, that is, to be tied
hand and foot, that either all was lawful or unlawful, he would not have
bended an ace to win the world; therefore let us learn to know our liberty.

I could give many sad instances, how hence men tied knots, that it is not
lawful to come into such a house as this; it may be it may not be expedient,
but they make it absolutely unlawful. One man makes it unlawful to come into
a Pulpit; it may be it is inexpedient: but they will not have it lawful; and
so hundreds of souls are starved, they make ties where God has made none; and
so we cannot do good to others for want of knowing our liberty.

Lastly, let us study to know our liberty; for the want of knowing our
Christian liberty, Ignorance of Christian liberty the cause of contention.
is the maine cause of contention, of the contentions of these times I mean.

How is that?

I will tell you how, On the one side, the one party will do nothing through
the year, but look at all as absolutely lawful, or unlawful. We are come to
a fine pass, that you must pray before you read, or else you sin etc. And men
are so hide-bound, and tied, that they will not condescend to their brethren an
ace. We are bound to condescend to others, and to be of one mind, that we may
do good to such, as we were formerly: but says one, I will not forgo the
truth for a world; and one man calls this truth, and another that. Men are
bound head and heels, and will not condescend one jot to others, this is for
want of the knowledge of our liberty. Christ has given us such a latitude,
take heed of abusing it, of going beyond it, yet take heed to study it.

One the other side, it makes their fingers itch to set out laws for others,
to tell the Saints when they shall put out their hand, and when they shall pull
it in; as the Priests in the Law, when they shall speak with a loud voice, and
when with a low, when they shall be down, and when up. If men knew their
liberty it would save a world of labor. That is one duty, labor to know and
understand your liberty, you will be slaves and undo your selves else.

The second duty is, do not enfring your liberty, 2. Not to enfring our
liberty.
do not lessen it. As how? I would not have you make laws and ties upon your
selves for every little thing, where God has not made it.

You will say, it is true, where God has not made them, we would make none:
but God has given us examples; Is not that a law to us? and he has given us
precepts; Are not those laws?

Every example makes not a law.
It is not every example, nor every precept that makes a law to the Saints.

Not every example; if you look on the example of the Apostles, they did many
things that you are not to follow, they killed a man and his wife, Acts 5. they
cast out devils, they smote men with blindness, they anointed with oil; yet
presently they would not tie the Churches all the world over.

Look upon the Churches, they did sell their lands in the beginning of the
Acts, and they brought the money to the Apostles, and laid it at their feet;
this example was not a rule, for the Churches after did not so: but made
collections and contributions; therefore take heed of making examples rules.
Nay, the example of Christ Jesus himself in many things is not a rule, for he
walked on the Sea, and whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. What
Christ did, and did not command, we are not to follow; And why not the like of
the Apostles? what the Apostles did, and commanded we are to follow: but what
they did and is not commanded it may be, is not warrantable.

Besides, the Saints had feasts of love, as we see in Jude These are blots in
your feasts. Continually when they came to the Supper every one brought his
meat, as we see 1 Cor. 11. Where are those examples now? Be wary of examples.
Indeed examples with precepts make a rule, and it is very commendable to follow
them: but where it is without a precept take heed of making it a law.

And then for precepts, many precepts that bind not all the Sts
there are many in the Book of God that do not bind all the Saints
universally.

There are personal precepts, as for the Israelites to steal from, Several
sorts of precepts.
and cozen the Egyptians, and for Abraham to sacrifice his son, those are not
in force.

As there are personal, so there are carnal precepts, (I speak with
reverence) that is, commands where the holy Ghost speaks in the person of a
profane man, as in Ecclesiastes, Be not righteous over much. The holy Ghost
speaks in the language of profane men, and rather shows the nature of
profane men, than what men should do; and there are abundance of such in Job:
Take heed that we make not laws of these for all Saints, and all ages, to
bind their consciences.

And then their are temporal precepts, that were merely ceremonial in the old
Testament; and in the new Testament, as in Acts 15. the Apostles forbid things
strangled and blood, this was a temporal command, as I could show at large:
but this temporal did not bind all, in all things, because after there was a
precept to contradict it, as we see the holy Ghost bids to eat whatsoever is
set before us; and Every creature of God is good, if it be sanctified with the
word and prayer. There is nothing to be refused, it is an universal word, So,
what will you make of that, salute one another with an holy kiss? Why follow
you not that precept?

There are precepts of Indulgence that bind not, as in Genesis 3. Of every tree
in the garden thou shall eat: but of the tree in the midst of the garden eat
not. Now here was a command for Adam to eat of every other tree, as well as not
to eat of that: but the former is a precept of indulgence, and this precept did
not bind absolutely; so that if he had not eaten of every tree, he had not
sinned. And so in the matter of divorce, the man was to give his wife a bill of
divorce; this did not bind, if a man did take his wife in adultery, and would
live with her, he did not sin: but if he did turn her away he must give her a
bill of divorce. There are many others; you see every example, and every
precept binds not, To learn how much precept or example make an absolute rule.
therefore be wondrous wary how you make laws, and rules to bind you. Ask
godly men this question (for I am not able to answer it) what precept or
example, or how much precept, and example, does make an absolute rule for all
Churches in all ages? answer that question, and most of our contentions are
gone. It is not enough to say Sir, I go according to the Scripure, the word
says this; and this proposition says so: but ask godly men how much precept
and example goes to make an absolute necessary rule for all ages, answer that,
and then thou walk safely. But the want of knowing our Christian liberty
undoes thee.

You take the Book of God, as if it were all aphorisms and Theorems, and
Canons; No, the Book of God (to speak with reverence) is like the Common Law of
England, and there we know sometime what is right by the Judges opinion,
sometime by parallel cases, sometimes by expediency. Now you say, let such a
man bring me Scripture; what Scrirpture? any line whatsoever, and they (simple
people) bring a place or two, and make an absolute rule to bind you, and all
the world.

Remember, the greatest misery to an honest heart (next to an old Testament
spirit, that is the rise of all) is this, a misdrawing of rules out of the word
of God: you take a word and do not compare it with other Scriptures, and see
whether it be temporary and does absolutely bind: but you go with your book
under your arm, and think all wise men are out, and you have Scripture for it:
beware of that. Therefore (as I said) learn what precept or example, or how
much goes to make an absolute rule, to all the Saints in all ages, that they
must not break; when you understand that you may draw rules.

So, let me speak to the other party, Not to bind others with laws where
Christ has not bound them.
make not laws upon the Saints, where Christ has not made any: for the Saints
are noble spirited men, and a noble spirited man had rather do a hundred
things, then be bound to one; I would do a hundred things that Christ has not
commanded, and leave undone a hundred things that Christ has not forbidden,
rather than be tied to one thing by men that Christ has not commanded; I had
rather do a hundred things for edification that Christ has not determined. If
you bind the Saints, it will make them leave that undone that they should have
done.

The third duty is, abuse not your liberty, 3. Not to abuse Christian liberty.
you are called to liberty (says the Apostle) I cannot deny it, I must make it
known: but abuse it not for an occasion to the flesh, or as a cloak for
maliciousness. Abuse not your liberty, for your own ends to avoid persecution,
or to get wealth etc. Abuse it not by making it larger and broader than God
has made it; it is dangerous to add commandments to the law of God, that he
has not made, and so it is as dangerous to destroy that, that God has made:
therefore says David Psalm. 119. Lord, it is time for thee to put to thy hand:
Dangerous to take away any of Gods laws.
for men have destroyed thy law. It is safer, and better for a man to break the
Law of God five hundred times, than to take away one law that God has made, to
make the way larger, and wider than God has made it; As, because I said God
has not absolutely bound you to pray twice a day; some man may go home and
therefore he will not pray at all, thou art a wretched man, when lawfulness is
gone, thou will do nothing for edification, and expediency. Take heed, that
you may do that that is for the building up of your own souls, and for the
edification of your brethren.

To conclude, 4. To hold fast Christian liberty.
the fourth, and last thing is, hold fast your liberty; let not men take away
your liberty; be not servants to men. If I be the servant of men (says Paul) I
should not be the servant of Christ; and yet he says, I am your servant, that
is, do not tie me, and I will serve you and do any thing: but if you bind a
Saint, and make laws where Christ has not bound him, you shall never bring
him to it, a Christian had rather do a hundred things that God has not
commanded: he can do it, but he is loath to be bound absolutely to one; The
way to get the Saints to do any thing, is not to bind, and tie them hand and
foot, I mean in things that God has not determined. There was a stir in the
Church about Timothy, the Church then had but little knowledge, and they heard
that Paul conversed with the heathens, Paul advised with the Church, and he
circumcised him, and shaved his head, he does all this to get their love: but
afterward when they would have circumcised Titus by a law, he would not yield
a jot; though I did it in love concerning Timothy, yet I will not be bound by
any man to circumcise Titus: But held fast his liberty. So much for that
Doctrine.

1 CORINTHIANS 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient, etc.


YOu may remember, I observed three lessons from these words.

First, that

There are diverse things now lawful to the Saints under the new Testament,
that were not to the Saints under the Old.

Or

There is a greater latitude in external things (for so I opened it) for the
Saints in point of lawfulnes under the new Testament, than their was to the
Saints under the Old Testament. That Doctrine we have finished.

I come now to the second Doctrine, which is this, That

Though diverse things be LAWFUL to the Saints under the new Testament, Though
many things be now lawful: but few are expedient.
yet there are but a few things EXPEDIENT.

All lawful things are not expedient, nor fit for a Saint to do under the new
Testament; Though there be diverse things that are lawful, that God has not
commanded or forbidden, that God has not determined in his word; yet of those
things there are not many expedient for a Christian to do, that is, at all
times, in all places, etc. For our proceeding in this point I shall show you
two things:

First, open it a little to you, (for that is the chief.)

Secondly, we will prove it briefly for methods sake; And then by the help of
God bring in the third Doctrine fitly, I hope, as a Use, or Application.

All lawful things I say, are not expedient: For the opening of it I shall
show these two thing;

First, 1. Whatmea^t by lawful things.
what is meant by lawful things.

Secondly, what is here meant by expedient things.

I spoke somewhat of it before: but that you may understand me concerning the
first: there are three sorts of things according to the Scripture that may be
said to be inexpedient, or inconvenient for a Saint to do:

First, it is inconvenient, inexpedient for a Saint to do things that are
purely, Things that are simply evil
and simply evil, though it be not properly said to be inexpedient, as
unlawful, yet in a sort it is inexpedient always, to all people, in all
places, they are never sit to be done, they are both unlawful and inexpedient,
as it is in Ephesians. 5.3. Fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let
it not once be named among you, as becomes Saints: neither filthiness, nor
foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient. which are not
expedient, not seemly; Fornication, and whoredom, and filthiness, such things
are never expedient, or beseeming a Christian, to be a whoremonger, or a
drunkard, or a cheater, (as I fear too many are) it is never expedient. So in
Romans 1.28. The Apostle says that the people were Filled with all
unrighteousness, they changed the natural use to that which is against
nature; and the men leaving the natural use of the women, burned in their lust
one toward another, men with men working that which is UNSEEMLY. That is, they
committed Sodomie man with man, and all sorts of wickedness, and fornication,
and covetousness, and maliciousness; being full of envy, murder, debate,
deceit, etc. And what follows? The Lord gave them up to a reprobate mind, to
do things that are not CONVENIENT; which were not seemly. That I may trouble
you no farther with that; evil things, that are simply evil are never
convenient at any time, for any man to do.

Secondly, 2. Things that are simply good in three cases
a thing may be inexpedient sometimes that is simply good, hic et nunc at
sometime, in some place, and to some persons it may be inexpedient in these
three Cases.

First, when a greater good comes in, 1. When a greater good comes in.
a lesser good cease, it is inexpedient. As for example, to read a chapter
and expound to your families, it is expedient: but if my neighbors house be on
fire, and his wife and children in it, it is inexpedient for me to expound, I
am to leave that when a greater good comes in: as in Luke 13. to raise up a
beast, or to wait upon ones parents being sick on the Sabbath day; when a
greater good comes in, the lesser good is inexpedient.

Secondly, 2. When we cannot come at the good without doing of evil.
a thing simply good may be inexpedient, when I cannot come to the good unless
I will do that that is evil; As if a man cannot preach in public except he
will take the Caviliers oath, it is inexpedient, because I cannot come at the
good but by doing the evil.

Thirdly, 3. When a greater evil will follow the good.
a thing simply good may be sometime inexpedient, when necessarily, and
directly, and inevitably there will follow something that is grossly evil,
that is a greater evil than the good, we do, is good. I do not say that evil
by accident should terrify us from doing of good, for then we should never
do good. It may be you may stumble to hear me, and are the worse. And a
hundred things that fall by accident, these should not terrify me: but when
evil appears directly to follow, in some cases it is not expedient to do
good. We are commanded to reprove the works of darkness: but Mat. 6. if a man
be a dog or a swine, that is, in the height of darkness, and wickedness, a
man is not to reprove him, because he will fall upon him, and rent him: for
instance, I see a wicked man, and I have reproved him, and I am in danger of my
life if I tell him of his evils; I am at my liberty whether I will reprove him,
or no; So, God sent Paul to preach to all Nations, yet he preached only to them
of reputation, Gal. 2. That is, to wise understanding Christians, and kept it
from other people: he was bid to preach to all Nations; but because he saw he
should run invaine, and undo his ministry if he should do it at that time,
by reason of that he did not do that that was simply good in it self.

But thirdly, 3. Things indifferent
things may be said to be inexpedient, that are (as you call them) indifferent
things, and by those I mean, not only, nor chiefly, outward external things,
civil things, as eating, and drinking, and sitting, and walking, and the like:
but I mean in a general sense every thing; those things whatsoever they be
that God has not absolutely, and peremtorily determined in his will, and word
in the new Testament, whether in Doctrine or Discipline in his Worship, (if I
may so speak, though improperly,) or whatsoever he has not absolutely
determined; those things I call indifferent. And though there be abundance of
things that are not so determined that are lawful for Christians to do, yet
always those things are not expedient, and convenient for them to do.

And before I proceed farther to open this (which is the greatest thing) I
desire you to take two cautions. Cautions.


First, in opening to you this expediency that I am to speak of, and the rest,
I shall make use of many Scriptures, that sometimes mingle things simply evil
with things undetermined; now take it not, as though every thing that I shall
name in a text I call things indifferent.

Secondly, do not conceive by what I have said, 2. Nor to weaken things
determined.
or by what I mean to say, that I go about to innervate, or to weaken any
thing that God has determined in his word, God forbid: but my drift is to show
how you should walk in respect of those things (be they what they will) that
God has not determined: but left at liberty. So, observing that;

We come to the next thing, to show what is expediency.

All things are lawful: but all things are not EXPEDIENT.

That is, diverse things are lawful: for I speak not properly of the two other,
things simply good, and simply evil: but of things undetermined; and seeing
every thing is not expedient; What is the meaning of that? what is the
expediency of things?

By the word expedient in this text, Expediency what.
I suppose the Lord takes one word that comprehends all those rules that are to
order and guide us in our conversations, in the use of things that are not
absolutely commanded, or forbidden. It is a large word, ALL things are not
expedient; that is, all things are not fit, not meet, all things are not worthy
the Gospel, they are not decent, they are not comely, they do not edify, they
are not convenie^t, not lovely, not vee^rable, not of good report. I believe it
comprehends all, and implies all, though it signify some one thing more
especially in particular.

Now, because the words are many, and it would be tedious to show all the
rules, or expressions in Scripture, that teach us how to carry our selves in
these things, and finding the rules coinsidere, and many of the expressions to
signify the same thing: Therefore I will reduce all to four heads, or
general rules, or expressions, that the holy Ghost uses concerning things
undeterminea by the Lord in Scripture. reduced to 4 heads


expediency in its own native signification, and look what light we can get
there.

All things are not expedient.

The meaning of the word expediency.
The meaning of the word we shall see a little by that that follows, the
Apostle explaines himself, all things are lawful: but all things edefie not.
That is, that is not expedient, that does not edify, that does not add any
thing to one. The word sumperti signifies gain, or profit, or wealth, and that
in a compound manner, it signifies some commodity that one gets. Every thing
is not expedient, that is, it is not profitable, it does not bring gain, it
does not do good; as the Apostle says after, Let no man seek his own: but
another wealth. So it is translated in one place, profit 1 Cor. 12.7. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. And as one
observes it signifies not barely profit: but great gain, as Piscator says,
when men bring every one a stock of money to make a common bank, when one has
one gift, and another another, to make a common bank for the good of the
Church: it signifies profit in a compound manner.

Concurrence of things to profit or expediency.
But I think as properly, or rather more properly that the word may also
signify the respect of things, it signifies not only profit or commodity, but
a concurence of things to help on that profit, as thus. A thing is expedient
when it brings gain, and commodity to some person, this is expediencie. As
for instance, suppose a Collonell have a command to go to the Army, it is
lawful, but the question is whether it be expedient; now if he have order to
go and not money, or if he have a Commission, and money, and have not Arms, or
if he have Arms and not soldiers, it is not expedient for him to go, here is
not a concurrence of all circumstances to a profitable and good action: but
when all come together, as when he has instructions, and order, and arms, and
soldiers, and money, when all concur and come in, then it is wondrous expedient.

Neither mistake me, it is not necessary to make a thing expedient, either
civell, or spiritual circumstances concur, as the proverb is, there is no
commodity but there is a discomoditie, there is no such business, but some
thing may jarr: but a business is said to be expedient when the generallitie,
when the most, or the most material things concur, though some be a way, if
some meet it may be expedient. As if a Captain have soldiers, and money, and
arms, though he have not fair weather, or want a Coat or such a thing, yet
it may be expedient for him to go. So in spiritual things, a thing that is
undetermined is inexpedient when the circumstances are so thwart, and cross
that it is like to bring no good, but hurt: but when the circumstances or most
of them meet, that it is like to bring profit, then it is expedient: for
always circumstances do jumpe so, to make the business profitable or
gainefull, but hurtful, and unprofitable.

But you will say, gain or profit is that that you expect an action should
bring, before a christian be allowed to do it, and to determine on it?

Beloved, wealth, in the next verse after the text: for the word signifies
gain, or profit, or commodity, or wealth, or advantage, etc. I say it should
bring gain To God. Expedient actions must bring gain, or profit 4 ways.
To My brother. To Those without. To My own soul.


That action that is lawful, that is undetermined, if it do not profit these
four ways, or either of the four; If it do not bring advancement to the
glory of God, or something to the good of my brother, or something to win them
that are without, or something for the settling of the peace of my own
conscience, it is not for me to do it, never let me talk it is lawful, it is
not expedient.

1. To advance the glory of God.
First, for the glory of God, you shall see 1 Cor. 10. the same Chapter where
the text is, Every thing is lawful, but every thing is not expedient; What is
that expediency? Let no man seek his own, but another wealth. It is somewhat
that brings gain; what gain? If any of them that believe not bid you to a
feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you, that eat,
asking no question for conscience sake: but if any man say unto you, this is
offered in sacrifice unto Idols; eat not for his sake that showed it, and for
conscience sake, not thine own conscience, but his. You may understand that
when a Christian was invited to a feast, and meat that was offered to an Idol
was upon the Table, he might eat: but if an unbeliever did say, this was
offered to an Idol, and will you that are a professor eat of it? for conscience
sake eat not: not for thine; but his conscience that showed thee: but mark the
reason, for why is my liberty judged of another man's conscience? and he
expostulates, For if I by grace be a partaker; why am I evil spoken of for
that, for which I give thanks? He seems to bustle, never talk of it, is it not
lawful? And I give thanks, and it is sanctified by the word, and prayer, says
the Apostle, whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the
glory of God. You are so brisk, and it is lawful, and every creature is
sanctified, it is true: but take this rule, see the action conduce something to
the glory of God, or else leave it there; whether ye eat, or drink, or
whatsoever you do, let it be something whereby the name of God, and the ways
of God, and Religion may be honored by your doing of it. It is not for the
glory of God for thee to use meat offered to an Idol at an unbelievers Table,
he having told thee of it, for he will say, here is a sweet profession, this
is their religion, he cares not what he does. When a man does things
dishonorable to religion, or to God, (for otherwise we cannot glorify, or
unglorifie God, we cannot reach him,) but when we dishonor religion, or make
God evil spoken of, we do that which is inconvenient, and though the thing be
lawful, if it do not honor God, we must not do it; That is one thing.

The second thing is, 2. To the good of our brethren 3 ways.
you must see if it be an action that is expedient, as it must bring honor to
God; so it must bring gain and good to my brother also; next to God, I must
look to my brother, O! there is little looking to that: you must not only
look what is lawful or unlawful, but have a care what issue this has toward
thy brother; seek not every man his own: but one an others wealth; how is
that? The good of our brethren is laid down in scripture three ways.

Either that it increase love between you and your brethren,

Or else that it help on the edification of your brethren

Or increase and nourish peace between you and your brethren.

Either at least, or all these three must be in it, or else you must not
meddle with it.

For the first in 1 Cor. 8. when they proposed the question whether they might
eat meat offered to Idols: 1. To increase love between us and them.
says the Apostle; ye all have knowledge, you are brisk, and say, we know
what is lawful, and what is not, says he, but love edifieth. As if he should
say, you look not whether it tend to love or no, have a regard to that. So in
Romans 14.14.15. I know (says the Apostle,) and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus
that nothing is unclean of it self: but to him that esteems any thing
unclean, to him it is unclean. I know every thing is lawful to the saints;
but if thy brother be grived with thy meat, thou walk not charitably; that
is thou do not walk in love. I know it is lawful, but if it greive thy
brother, thou walk not in love, and thou should regard that, or else thou will not walk wisely. So in 1 Cor. 16.14. Let all your things be done in love;
whatsoever thou do see that it conduce to nourish, and increase love among
the people of God. If it be a thing that cooles the love of my brother to me,
and be a thing that is not commanded nor forbidden. I must not do it.

Then secondly, see whether it conduce to bring any thing to the peace of the
saints, and people of God; 2. To the peace of the Sts.
and if it bring love it will bring peace; for the fruit of the Spirit is,
love, joy, peace; peace always goes with love; and we are taught Philip. 2.3.
that we should do nothing with strife and contention; but though it be a
thing that is lawful, yet if I must strive, and breed contention, I must leave
that lawful thing out. In the commonwealth with us it is one of the greatest
things to keep the peace. As for instance, if a man be in debt, and owe a man
money etc. if the other break the peace and fight with him, the other shall
answer at the Court day for his debt, but the magistrate will clap him up
presently. And so to break the peace among the saints, it is not a little
thing; you may please your selves by it, but the Lord is wonderously offended
with those that break the peace.

We must fellow peace with all men, To avoid strife and contention.
prosecute it; that is get the same disposition to peace as men have to
persecute Religion. We must have peace with all men much more with the brethren.

This is a time that we live in, when men take toys in their heads right or
wrong, indifferent or unlawful, and they look not to the issue of those
toys: for ought thou know it may overthrow the Nation, and divide the
Churches, and rend the Saints, and thou carest not for peace. If I love Christ
I must keep his commandments. Even in things commanded we must respect peace
much more in things that are not absolutely commanded: therefore we see in 1.
Cor. 14.33. there was a great deal of stir and contention about prophesying
and praying, and speaking with strange tongues; mark the counsel that the
Apostle gives. The spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets: for God
is not the author of confusion, but of peace; as it is in all the Churches of
the saints, you shall find in the margin; God is not the author of tumults or
unquiet, but of peace. One would say, I have Gods will, and command, and I do
that which is right, says he that spoke in an unknown tongue, and another
prophesied, and another sang, and every one thought he did well, you are
mistaken says the Apostle God is not the author of unquiet, that is a
disposition that will hurrie you to the confusion of the Churches, therefore it
is not of God Compare it with 1. Cor. 11. where the Apostle speaks concerning
women being covered or uncovered, and he shows what he thought was fit in
those countries: but (says he) if any be contentious we have no such custom,
nor the Churches of God That is, if you wrangle, and strive, and keep a coile,
I will not bear you out, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, to
break the peace, and to make strife and contention. As in the outward
commonwealth, so in the spiritual commonwealth of Israel, let him look to it
that first breaks the peace. It must not be opinions and crotchets of
yesterdayes making, that must break the peace of the Churches day by day; it is
a dangerous thing: therefore in 2 These. 3.15. I beseech God by all means to
keep peace among you; the Lord of peace himself, give you peace always, by all
means. It is three times repeated; therefore surely you must eye that.

Thirdly, look whether it tend to edification: 3. To edification.
for all things edify not; That is, does this conduce to do my brother good,
will his soul be the better for it? As it must increase love between thee and
him, or else do it not, if it break love, or break peace. So see if it edify
him, whether it build up his soul, or no; will his soul be the better for it?
It may be thy brother is a weak Saint, and thou may hinder his soul from
growing in grace by doing a lawful thing; for says the Apostl, all things are
not expedient, and all things edify not; Therefore see that it tend to
edification: But here is your religion, what do I care let it trouble him or
no, or better him or no; Is it not lawful to do this? Is it not lawful to play
at cards, and dice, and such things? O, see if it edify, or else abhor it, as
if it were forbidden as the tree in Eden; avoid lawful things if they edify
not.

Thirdly, 3. To win those without.
see whether it conduce to the winning of the souls of others that are without.
The Lord has put us into the world, to win the Elect out of the world, and we
must have an eye to that; few Christians observe that (the more is the misery)
we only rail and speak evil of them: but we should walk as lights in the
midst of a crooked generation. As Paul says concerning marrying, and taking
money for his preaching, I could (says he) marry as well as Peter, and make
you pay for every Sermon I preach, for thou shall not muzzel the mouth of the
Ox that treads out the corn: but God forbid, though these things be lawful
I become all things to all men that I might win some, I caught you by guile
says he; What was Paul's guile? Not a sinful thing; it was no jesting with
them, nor it was not so much in necessary duties: but in lawful things, there
being a latitude in the Gospel; Paul did so walk and carry himself as that he
might win poor sinners to the Lord, Jews, or Gentiles. But you only look if
it be lawful; O, you should look whether you offend your brethren, whether you
break the peace, whether you do not harden others; you must walk decently to
them that are without. In our walking we must do nothing that may harden
others. There are a world more hardened by the indiscreet doing of good, and
the careless, indecent doing of lawful things, than by the sinful actions of
the Saints; as I shall show after.

Fourthly, and lastly, thou must look whether it bring any gain, 4. To our own
souls.
or advantage to thy own peace, to thy conscience, to thy self, for though it
be a lawful thing yet if it trouble, and gravel thy conscience, thou must not
do it, says Paul, I have endeavored to keep a good conscience toward God,
and toward men. And generally among the Saints they have more guilt in their
consciences, Why Christians are most troubled about the use of lawful things.
and more trouble in their souls about the use of lawful things, than about
sinful; it is partly from their ignorance not knowing their liberty, and
partly indiscretion, and the strength of their lusts, that many times they eat,
when they should not, or they eat more than they should, or they sleep when
they should not: therefore you shall have poor people complain, Sir, I am
ready to starve my self, I am such a glutton I eat so often, and I eat so many
bits, and of so many dishes, and I cannot eat but my conscience says, it is
too much whereas I should eat but one dish, and so many cuts; they make laws,
and they break them after, and make themselves guilty, and then conscience
checks them.

I confess there is much ignorance in weak Christians not knowing their
Christian liberty, in meats, and drinks: but much is for want of discretion,
and because there is a great deal of unsanctifiedness in the heart, in the
directing and managing of lawful things for the glory of God, and for their own
peace, and quiet: for they follow their lusts, and abuse lawful things that
another man might do without sin. Therefore whatsoever it is, say not, the
Minister says it is lawful, though it be, yet it may be poison to thee, for
it may be inexpedient; does it trouble thy conscience, get knowledge to see the
lawfulnes of it, or abstain from it; gall not thy conscience. So then to end
that, you see according to the signification of the word expedient, (taken in
the proper signification,) the first rule, that all lawful things are not
expedient. Though many things be allowed, that God has not restrained, nor
determined: they are neither commanded, nor forbidden by the word of God; yet
every thing is not expedient, that is, every thing does not advance the glory
of God, and love among the Saints, and peace, and edification. Every thing does
not conduce to win others out of the world, and every thing does not help the
peace of our own conscience.

Decency what.
1 COR. 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient,
etc.


I Have observed to you from these words three things.

The first was this, That

There are diverse things that are now lawful to the Saints under the new
Testament, that were not to the Saints under the Old.

I have finished that Doctrine.

The second is this,

Though diverse things be lawful to the Saints under the new Testament, yet but
a few of those things are expedient, and fit for a Saint to do.

For the opening of it I propounded two things;

First, what I mean by lawful things: I instanced in three sorts.

Secondly, what is meant by EXPEDIENT? The word comprehends all the rules that
are to order and guide us in the use of things that are not determined, that
are not commanded nor forbidden. It is a large word, All things are not
expedient. That is, all things are not fit, all things are not meet, not worthy
the Gospel, not decent, not comely; they do not edify, they are not
convenient, they are not lovely, they are not venerable, they are not of good
report. Now, because the words are many, and it would be tedious to go over
all, I reduced all to four heads, or expressions, that were as so many
general rules.

First, I showed you what was meant by the word expedient, in its own proper
native signification.

I shall now go forward to the second rule, 2. Con^veniency or decency.
or the second sort of expressions; which indeed are many, yet they come all
almost to the same. There is one word translated it is decent; another it is
comely; another it is fit; another it beseems; another it becomes; another
it is worthy: all these, though in the Scripture in the original several
words are used, yet because I will not trouble you, nor confound your memories
with them. For methods sake, and your plainer instruction, we may bring them
together to signify one, and the same thing, that is, convenience or decency.
So, All things are lawful: but all things are not expedient. That is, many
lawful things are not decent, they are not comely, not fit, not convenient,
not beseeming a Saint, a Christian to do. You shall have this word often in the
book of God, as in that place Ephesians. 5.4. (only remember the caution I gave
you; I do not say that all that are mentioned there are indifferent things:
but it is for my purpose to open the word, fornication, and uncleanness, and
foolish talking, and idle jesting, which are not CONVENIENT; which do not
become Saints. So in 2 Cor 14. after that great dispute concerning Prophecy,
and Tongues, etc. The Apostle ends all with this, Let every thing be done
DECENTLY, and in order. There is the same word, conveniently, and in order.

But you will say; decency or convenience what.
What is this decency, this convenience?

Beloved, if I should go no farther you understand this, that every lawful
thing does not become a Christian, you know what is the meaning of that; you
say, such a garment does not become such a man, and such apparel does not
become such a woman; What is that? A decent thing negatively is a thing that
does not any way disparage a man in any relation: for it may be decent in some
respects, and yet wonderously disparage him in another; as an old man, and a
rich man, as he is a rich man, he is able to buy little gaudie things as well
as children playing in the streets: but as he is an old man to buy a capp and a
feather he will not, because it would be a disparagement to him in that
relation. So a decent thing is a thing that so beseems a man that it does not
disparage him in any relation.

But you will say, what relation is that wherein a Christian needs to fear
disparagement by doing of lawful things? I will instance in some: for in these
things it is impossible to descend much in particulairs.

First, if you look upon the person of a Saint, In respect of his person.
What is he? He is the son of God an heir of heaven, a coheire with Christ,
they are Kings, and Queens in all countries. Saints, put them together they
are the new Jerusalem the spouse or bride of Christ; they are the Kindred of
Christ and diverse other relations they have. Now every thing is not decent for
a King; a hundred things there are that an ordinary man may do that do not
beseem a King. Everything does not beseem an heir: and there are a hundred
things that others may do that does not beseem a chaste bride: a chaste wife. So
there are many things (I may say in a sort) that would not be unseemly for a
carnal man, yet they are very inconvenient for a Saint to do: therefore says
the Apostle, foolish talking and idle jesting which do not become Saints; but
in a sort may become a carnal man; not but that that which is ill in a Saint
is ill in him, but it is not accounted so in a carnal man: he may sit at the
alehouse and drink half a dozen juggs, and be a good fellow: but if a
Christian drink but two, carnal men will be ready to say, there goes a
professor, I see him at alehouses etc. A carnal man may do it; though it be a
sin in him, yet in point of decency a carnal man may sit two hours at the
tavern better then a Christian may half an hour.

But thou will say, it is lawful I may do this, and that; I may wear, or I
may eat this and that.

I but is it decent? I have told you that story though it be a moral heathen
story: when the King was walking with his son, and saw children playing in the
dirt, says he why do not thou go, and play with them? saich he to his
father if I did see any Princes play, I would, but those are roguish boys; It
is not for a Prince to play with them: So, when you see men do filthy,
unclean soul things, say, if it did become a Saint I would do so; He is a
glorious creatue not only in respect of good and ill; but in lawful things:
you see the glory of a Saint, first in his person.

Secondly, look upon his relations, consider his place that God has put him
in, his calling, 2. In respect of his relation.
and condition. It may be God has made him a minister, it may be a magistrate,
every lawful thing that becomes an ordinary man, does not become a minister,
nor a magistrate. It may be he is a servant he must consider, (though it be
lawful) whether it become his condition. See one instance; servants are
commanded not to answer again Tit. 2.9. this becomes his place not to answer
again. Being a servant: but for another, if one neighbor should tell another
you have done me wrong, I would answer I have not, if I were innocent: but a
servant is forbid to answer again: so that it may become one man to do it,
but not another in another condition. There are diverse instances, but I give
you but one.

Then thirdly, 3. In respect of his Profession.
his relation is the profession of Religion, I spoke some what like it before
concerning his person: the holy Ghost gives that rule Ephesians. 4.1. I beseech you
brethren that you walk worthy of your calling. And so in Phil. 1.27. Only, let
your conversation be such, as becomes the Gospel of Christ. These are blessed
rules for a Saint to walk by; You know that when we turn to the Lord, our
persons are not so much eyed as our profession: therefore if there be any thing
amiss in our buying, or selling, or in our charity, profession smarts for it;
men are ready to say, there is the man that follows religion, there is the man
that prays in his family, there is the man that writes Sermons; there is the
Lady, or Gentlewoman that keeps days of humiliation; Profession suffers for
it: Therefore, I must eye what is seemly for one of such a profession as I am
of, to do.

Fourthly, 3. In regard of sex.
you must eye also your relation, for your sex that is to be eyed. Many lawful
things become a man that do not become a woman, and some become a woman that
do not become a man; Therefore consider, (which women seldom do, in regard
of sex.
they will speak first, and determine things, and order businesses, never
considering their sex,) consider if it be a decent thing, if you do that which
is convenient, if you do so as befits your sex, as well as other
circumstances, Col. 3.18. Wives submit your selves to your own husbands; why
should we do so? might they say, as it is fit in the Lord; that is, it is a
decent thing to do it: though in some things they might contest, and see as
much as their husbands, and have more reason in their precepts, yet (says he)
submit as it is FIT. It is not decent for a woman to rule, and to master, and
to speak all, and order all, and her husband to be but a drudg;

You will say, what evil is it, is it unlawful? O, it is undecent to come to
a house where the woman rules, it is as if people went with their heels
upward, it is uglie and undecent. So in 1 Timothy 2.9. In like manner also let the
women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastnes and sobriety, not
with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array. Why? is it not lawful
to wear gold, or silver? etc I cannot say but it is lawful, but mark what he
says next: but which becomes women professing godliness. There is their sex,
and there profession, it must become both. Therefore in 1 Pet. 3.3. he wishes
woman to teach their husbands by silence; if they be godly, and meek women,
that is the best lecture they can read to their husbands, that they may be wonn
by their chaste conversation, whose adorning (says he) let it not be that
outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing gold, or putting on of
apparel: but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight
of God is very precious. I will not say says Peter but it is lawful to wear
broided hair, and gold, and pearl: but it is not an ornament to a spiritual
eye, it is no ornament, no more than to see a Cart-horse dressed with a
leather. To see a woman spend her time vainly in trimming: but this is an
ornament, a meek spirit. An ornament; what is that? That that beseems and
becomes a woman; it becomes that sex, to see a modest meek spirit, therefore
eye the sex also.

Then if you will have things decent, 4. in regard of age
eye the age; In 2. Tit. 1.2.3 he that wishes them not to do things
inconvnient; he teaches old men, and young men, and old women, and young
women: so that that which is decent in old men is not decent in young; it is
decent for old men to rebuke the younger: but you must not rebuke an Elder: it
is not fit for a young man to rebuke an Elder. If it be a carnal child it is
fit for his father to rebuke him for his naughtines: but if he be a godly child
he must not go home and wrangle with his parents, you must look to the age.

Lastly, look to the season, every thing is beautiful in its season. 5. in
regard of the season.
And a word spoken in season is like apples of gold with picters of silver;
that is; very handsome. So your words and actions must be seasonable, or else
they will never be convenient, There is a time for all things, Therefore in Romans
13. The latter end; Apostle says, brethren, it is high time to make you
ready, our salvation is nearer than when we believed. The night is far spent,
the day is at hand, let us cast of the works of darkness and put on the armor
of light; let us walk decently. ((...) It is decently in the margin; it is
honestly in the book) as in the day time. As if he had said, heretofore it
was night, and darkness, there was little knowledge, and little preaching of the
Gospel: in the night men wear any foul clothes, but in the day it is not
decent for a man to walk with the clothes of the night: therefore put of your
night capps, and wear clean clothes, walk decently as in the day, look to
the time, frame your conversations according to that. And that I conceive the
Apostle drives at Ephesians. 5. Where he commands us to walk (...) strictly, I
rather like the translation we have Circumspectly, because it has better
coherence with the text, See that you walk circumspectly, not as fools: but as
wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil. I see nor how because the
days are evil, we should redeem the time by walking strictly: but walk
circumspectly, fit your opportunity and time, observe it, take nitice of it. As
indeed what bad times were there about half a score years ago: men were
feign to watch opportunities to pray, and to go to Sermons, or to fasts; So
walk decently, that is, serve the times, observe opportunities To. 12. take
notice of every opportunity, to do things fitly, and seasonably, I only give
a few instances. So you understand All things are lawful, but all things are
not expedient: that is, all lawful things are not convenient, they are not
decent, it may be they are not seasonable. It may be that fits an old man that
does not fit a young; It may be it is fit for the husband, that does not befit
the wife; it may be it is no harm in a carnal man, that does not beseem one
that is a professor of religion. Thus you must walk, thus it becomes Saints to
walk, you must look to decency, and convenience.

The third rule, Christian, must walk laudably.
or expressions to order things that are not determined, they are many, but
they all come to this, they imply a thing laudable, or commendable, that is a
degree higher: for decency is a thing that keeps us, that we do not disparage
our selves in our relations, and make us worse: but we are called upon to walk
laudably; not only, not to cast dirt on religion: but to bring honor, and to
add glory to it; not only, not to disgrace it; but so to walk that the eye that
sees us, and the ear that hears us may bless us. Let no rotten
communication proceed out of your mouths: but that that may minister grace.
Not grace to the soul: but that it may be gracious, and lovely, and amiable; I
will show you but one place, the glorious golden rule of the Saints walking in
the new Testament, Phil. 4.8. where the Apostle coming to speak of ordering
their conversation, says he, Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; If
there be any virtue, Things true what.
if there be any praise, think of these things. Do these things, meditate on
these things. Whatsoever things are true, I conceive that the meaning is this,
I look on these things, not as if the Apostle did give rules of good, and evil:
but sets down an excellent way for indifferent things, whatsoever things are
true; If there be any thing that carries no resemblance of deceit and falsehood,
take that: but if it be a business that you must say, and unsay, and do, and
undo, that you must be both an honest man, and a knave, meddle not with that,
though it be lawful, let it be for another. Things honest what.
And whatsoever things are honest, or whatsoever things are grave; as the
Original is, or venerable, as it is in your margin: for there is honesty
before, honestus is as much as honorabilis, whatsoever is grave, and venerable,
that do. A Saint should have such gravity in him, that he should avoid any
thing that is beneath him. A Saint is a glorious creature, he is an heir of
heaven, they are the sons and daughters of God; every little childish thing
becomes not him. Therefore gravity is opposed to lightness, and frothinesse.
He goes farther, If any thing be pure. Things pare what.
There are many things that you cannot say are unlawful, yet there are many
druggs among them that are like sin, I could give instances; there are many
nooks, and nicks, and carriages that are like sin, that are mingled. O, if a
thing be pure, take that; if it be honest, and just, and plain, and true,
Things lovely.
take that. Whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report,
If there be any virtue, or any praise do that. To speak briefly, and plainly,
there are many hundreds of lawful things that are not lovely for a Saint; I
could name diverse; Is it not lawful to do this, and that? it is lawful, but
it is not lovely; a Saint should do nothing but that which is lovely. And
whatsoever is of good report. Of good report.
A young man and a maid may be in an alehouse, or a Tavern, I do not say it
it unlawful, if they be honest there: but it is not lovely, it is not of good
report, people talk not well of such things. So you have twenty words in buying
and selling, and you will ask twenty shillings, and take half so much, and
say, is it not lawful? I say, it is not lovely; it is not lovely in the eye of
a Turk for a Professor to ask twenty for that for which he will take ten. The
Apostle goes on, if their be any virtue, or praise; that is, if there be any
thing that carries praise to religion, or that seems to have virtue, or
excellency, or worth in it, keep to those things, meditate upon them, go about
them; though not for the praise sake. Praise worthy.
We do not a thing that has praise in it to have the praise, but do the
thing that is commendable of it self, Praise only to God.
and let the praise be to God: As in that place, Mat. 6. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your father
which is in heaven. I must walk that my light may glorify my Father: but that
must not be the end of my walking, that men may see my good works, Christ
forbids that. So the end of my actions must not be to get praise, yet I must
choose (as becomes a Saint) to do those actions that have praise, and virtue
in them, the praise must be to God, and to religion, and it will be to the doer
also. Therefore, what is this now that all things are lawful, but all things
are not expedient? That is, all lawful things are not true, they are not pure,
they are not lovely, they are not of good report, all lawful things have not
virtue in them; many lawful things bring no praise: this is the meaning of the
Doctrine.

Lastly, there is one word more, Christians must walk orderly.
all lawful things are not expedient; that is, as they do not conduce to the
profit and good of others, they are not convenient, they are not laudable and
commendable: So lastly, it comprehends this, they are not orderly, that is the
last rule. Every lawful thing is not orderly: we break order many times in
doing of lawful things. The Apostle sums up all in this, Let every thing be
done decently, and in ORDER. I speak, not only that we are to do things
orderly that Christ has instituted, though that be true, yet that is not my
drift: but in things that are not determined, they must be done orderly, and
not confusedly. As the thief on the cross said concerning Christ, that he did
nothing out of its place; that is, he did not only not do evil: but he did
not do good in a disorderly way. So in Ephesians. 5. we are said to be washed by
Christ, and to be without, spot or wrinckle; every thing in the meet place of
it. So a Christian should walk orderly, not only in that which is good: but in
indifferent things.

But you will say, What is it to walk orderly?

Beloved, you cross order, and do lawful things disorderly, when you do
them either preposterously or confusedly.

But you will say, I understand not that. A thing done disorderly.


I will tell you more plainly; you do a thing disorderly two ways.

First when in the doing of an action you cast it so as that you miss of the
end of that action; 1. When the end is missed.
or do not attain to the end in the best way. As for instance, the word in the
original in the Thessallonians to walk orderly: it is taken from an Army; you
say an Army is orderly set in battalia in the field. When is an Army in order?
Then when it is set in such a posture as it may best attain to its end; what
is that? to defend themselves and overcome their enemies: a disorderly Army is
like to be undone, and routed, and to do noe good, so to do a thing orderly,
to pray and to read, and to hear, and all that belong to those when we so
pass them as we may best attain, the end of praying and hearing, and all
these things, then we do them orderly: for we cannot tie the saints to pray
this way, and to preach on that fashion: but we must do every thing in the
best order, as may conduce to the end of prayer, and preaching etc.

Secondly, people do thing; 2. When one duty justles out another.
disorderly when they make one thing to justle, and put out another, that is
disorder. 1. Cor 14. The Apostle bids them do all things decently and in
order. They had before in prophes^ing spoken three or four at once, so they
missed of the end; the Church was not edified. Secondly, they made the gifts of
some vain, they justled and put out one another. So when you, in the worship
of God, or any thing that God has not determined, do so as that you attain
the end; and when things suit, that one is not justled out and undervalued by
another then it is done orderly. So, this is the sense, there are many things
that are lawful, but are not expedient. That is many lawful things, if I do
them at such a time I shall do them disorderly; As, it is lawful for you to
speak, but if you speak while I am a preaching, it is disorderly for we shall
not attain the end of preaching, you will put me out, and make but a
squabling, so put these four general rules together, and you understand the
doctrine; that all things that are lawful are not expedient.

If I were not desirous to make an end of this I could prove the doctrine
(though it need not much proof) by scripture, and by parallelling it with
other things, with natural things. As in the Civil law, many things are
lawful that are not convenient; it is lawful for me to keep my child barer in
apparel than my servant; but it is not convenient. It is lawful to keep my
servant, better than my wife, but it is not convenient: It is lawful for a man
to sleep all day and to work all night, (I mean by the laws of England) but
it is not convenient. There are abundance of things that are lawful for the
saints that are no way expedient for them to do, But I pass that, and hasten
to the use and application, briefly a word at this time, To eye what is
expedient.
and leave the rest for another time.

From this that has been said, learn this use, which is the Third doctrine
but for brevitie I make it the use or the application Of all: that this being
so, that every thing that is lawful is not expedient; then it is the duty of
Christians to eye, and observe, not only (I had almost said not so much, but
certainly not only) to eye what is lawful, but in all their ways to look
what is, expedient; that is, to see that it be orderly, convenient, laudable,
lovely, and of good report, else, though it be lawful, meddle not with it.
Therefore you shall see that the Apostle in all these questions from the
seventh Chapter to the middle of the eleaventh as you have many questions, and
in all or most of those, the Apostle diverts the question. They ask him if it
were lawful to marry? and being married, if it were lawful to put away their
wives? and if it were lawful to eat meat offered to Idols? The Apostle does
not punctually answer to one of them, whether it were lawful or no, but shows
what was convenient. As if he should have said; in all these, and whatsoever
else, eye what is convenient, and expedient, as much, and sometimes more than
what is lawful. Reproof of those that only regard what is lawful.


Therefore this being so, this points out clearly a general fault among you.
That there are many professors among us, this is the rule of their walking,
they only eye what is lawful, and what is unlawful; they go about, and
trouble every minister, and make endless questions, Is this lawful and is
that? is it lawful to play at Tables, and at Cards and to wear long hair and
naked breasts? I will not dispute the lawfullnesse but I pray thee eye if it be
seemly, and of good report among the Saints, whether it be convenient, whether
it advance any bodies good, eye this. There is a profession among you, and a
multitude of professors, this is their religion, they put their ways under the
new Testament, in eye, only what is absolutely lawful or unlawful, good or
evil, and their questions are, is it lawful to do this and that Sir? They
will go as near hell (as one says) as the halter will reach; as far as they
have law, thy will go to the brink of the pit, as far as it is lawful; though
it may be they offend others, and harden others that they will not come into
God; and break the peace between them, and their brethren, and yet care not,
it is no matter, is it not lawful? O, wretched unhappie people, that eye only
the rule of lawfullnes, and unlawfullnes. What shall I say to them? I have
three words to say.

1. It is a sign of an hypocrite.
First, I say to such people, that usually, it is the sign of an hypocrit,
(though it be not a certain sign, it is a very shrewd one:) it is a sign of
a hollow heart that was never right to God, that eyes only what is lawful, to
do it, and unlawful to avoid it: it is a sign of a base heart that will do
no more than needs must. Why? It is a sign that there is no love to God, he
will do so much as God flatly commands, and avoid that that God forbids, or
else he knows he shall be damned: but a heart full of love will always be
asking, what is pleasing, and seemly. A drudg or servant in the house hates her
master, and had as live be hanged as to serve him, if she knew how, but she
must: but a wife that loves her husband dearly, will she do every thing that
she may? she may go to bed, and lie til noone if she will: he will not be
angry with her; and though her husband bid her do nothing, yet she will
study what is lovely, and decent, and comely, and pleasing, and will not he
take it kindly when he comes home? O, there is no love in thee, a thousand to
one but thou have an hypocritical heart: for if there were love to God, thou
would never stand so much upon lawful, and unlawful, as what is decent,
and comely etc. hypocrites will go as near hell as they can, that is their
design, and the ready way thither is to go to lawful things only, and not
things expedient.

Well Secondly, 2. It is a sign of an old Testament spirrit.
if it be not the sign of an hypocrit (for I cano^t say certainly it is) yet
it is a sign of an old Testament spirit; diverse of you rightly understand not
that word, it sounds harsh to you, and if you be strangers I wonder not at it:
but if you be those that continually hear me open the old Testament; and how
our fathers were saved by the same Christ, and by the same Covenant that we
are, etc. I wonder that you should stumble; for as you understand the book of
God, in reading it, you compare one thing with another: so you must understand
men's preaching, comparing one Sermon with another. Now when I say an old
Testament spirit, I mean not another kind of thing than is the spirit of the
new Testament: an old Testament spirit is the same, but only it is a low
spirit, a childish spirit; the difference is as between a child in his coats,
and a man of riper years, it is the same man still: but it was a lower spirit,
meaner principles, and they walked accordingly: so that for the generallity for
them (unless it were some choice spirits, that were the Penmen of the holy
Ghost;) they were children under tutors: so an old Testament spirit is a low
mean spirit, that walks as those godly people in their childhood in the
Old Testament, that is my meaning; therefore mistake me not. Now, when I say
thou art lead by an old Testament spirit, I mean, thou have a heart fitter to
live under the law (in the time of Moses, when they were punies, and babies,
and children, under tutors, than for the times of the Gospel; Such a heart does
every thing as far as it is lawful: So, many things are lawful, and he will
do them, or so many are unlawful, and he will avoid them: For under the Law
the Lord told them every thing, what was lawful and what was not, and he made
them little laws, as we do to our children for fear of cutting their
fingers, or for going over a bridge, etc. But it is not so now; remember the
rule Phil. 4.8. If there be any thing that is lovely, or of good report, 3. A
man may be damned for doing of lawful things.
or has praise, or virtue, do that.

Thirdly, and lastly, I say this to such (for thy comfort, if thou will have it
so) that thou may loose thy soul forever, and be damned in hell for doing
of lawful things: not for doing lawful things, but for doing them in a way,
thou may go and strive to avoid ill, and to do good, and in a way of doing
lawful things thou may go to hell, much more in unlawful; my meaning is,
when men eye only lawful things, and never look what is convenient, they may
go to hell in doing it. Have you not heard of a Proverb licitis perimus, etc.
Says the heathen, we perish in lawful things? I have known many professors
that have gone such ways that men might clearly say, yonder is an old
backsliding professor, that goes directly to hell; yet he will say, convince
me of evil. It may be I cannot in point of lawfulness; yet I know he walks not
honorably, he brings not glory to God as a Saint of the new Testament should,
he walks low, and carnally, and meanly, every day more and more. A man may
avoid the reproof of unlawfulnes, and yet go every day toward hell, it is
ordinary, and he is blind that sees it not. It is the case of some here I
fear that the people of God generally conceive they are in a backsliding
condition, and one says to such a one I fear you are going from the Lord, and
that you have another spirit than you had, and another gives him admonition,
and he falls upon them all, and says, convince me, and so waves all reproof,
and he may do so, and be damned when he has done. It follows not that thou
art in a happy condition, because thou art able to wave and to wind off
reproof, thou may keep off reproof, and yet be in a backsliding condition,
and going to the devil.

I have heard of a godly Minister that has another expression; a man may be
damned, and thrown to hell for doing of justice, for seeking of his own; As
there is a man Mat. 18. though it be but a Parable; his Lord forgives him his
debt; and he comes and takes another man by the throat, and casts him into
prison, he did him no wrong; Why should he cousen me of my money? But the Lord
comes and throws the man into the place of torment, not for doing unlawful
things properly: for he asked but his own; So, many times a rich man that is
worth tenthousand pound he takes a poor creature that is not able to pay any
thing, and throws him into Prison, and then says, he owes me so much; do I
do him any wrong? have I it not in black and white? shall I not ask for my
own; thou may do right, and seek thy due, and yet be damned; Is it not
lawful thou will say? I cannot say but it is lawful: but thou walk not as
a Saint, it is not lovely, it is not decent, it is not expedient. I fear there
are many such professors; think of this: Therefore now in the new Testament,
seek not what is lawful only, but what is venerable, and pure, and just, and
decent, and comely, for a Saint to do; That is one Use.

To conclude, the next Use, and the last that I shall make at this time, The
way of the Gospel a strict way.
is this, Learn hence what a strict way the way of the Gospel is; it is no way
of liberty, or loosnes you have bin thinking all this while that I have been
making of a way of loosnes or liscentiousnes ^ see hence it is a strict way:
for though there be very many things lawful, more than you imagine; yet there
are but a few that are expedient; and wheresoever the Gospel makes the way
broader in point of lawfulnes, it fetches it out again in point of
expediencie. Take two professors, the one of an old Testament spirit that
looks only to that which is lawful, and let him be as strict as he can for
his life in doing that which is lawful, and avoiding that which is unlawful
or else he shall be damned. Take another Christian that out of love to Christ
does eye that which is expedient as well as that which is lawful the latter
shall outstrip the other a hundred degrees, he shall be an Angel in comparison
in strictness. It is no such liscentious way as you conceive.

But you will say, wherein will he be strict, shall he do works of
supererogation? shall he make duties as the papists do? if God have not bound
and commanded him, what pleasure has God in that he does?

I answer, there are but a few things that God has commanded in the new
Testament; but there are some things that he has commanded that are absolutely
required in themselves, but when I say he is not bound, I mean, not to the
thing simply, to take that way, or to do that thing: but there is nothing in
the world, when it comes to be done, when it comes to action, and is covered
with all circumstances, but it is either expedient or not, and when a thing
becomes expedient; and is so presented to a Saint, then though he be not bound
to the thing simply, yet he is bound to it when it becomes expedient:
According to discourse, men say, by the rule of nature, much more by the law of
the Gospel, in two things that are both lawful, if one be more expedient than
the other we are bound to do that. Therefore it is no supererogation, or
following of his fancy, but that that is commanded of God, though he had not
determined it simply before, yet when it comes to action he is bound to do
it: for that very thing at another time may be cast so, that he sins absolutely
if he does it not. Here is the mystery, all expedient, decent things, I am not
loose to do them or not do them: but of all expedient things that that is
best at that time, hic et nunc, I am bound to do it: Therefore it is not a way
of loosenes nor of supererogation, but we are bound though not in a legal way
(to the thing simply in it self) as they were in the old Testament.

But where is the privilege, and spaciousness in the ways of Christ that you
spoke of? Liberty of the Gospel wherein it is.
Now you say, the Gospel by this becomes as strict, as they were before; Where
is the privilege?

Were thou so mad all this while, as to think that this liberty, was only a
greater liberty for thee to be wicked, and sinful, and for thy lusts? I hope
thou do not mean so; it is not so; liberty to sin is bondage: but it is a
liberty to good, in doing good; not a liberty properly for the ease of our
persons, (though that be somewhat) for there is many a Saint under the new
Testament in doing that that is expedient, works as hard as the Levites in
slaying of the cattle: but he works not task work, as they did. So the
liberty is not that thou may do less good, or more evil: but the liberty
is this, that now God allows thee to do good in a more honorable way to thy
self, and more advantageous to the honor of God; that is all: As for instance,
you know an apprentice that is with his master, he is bound, he is not a
freeman, he does the business of his master, and works hard too: now, when the
man comes to be a freeman, to be a house keeper, and set up his trade, this
freedom does not make him do less than he did before: for the Proverb is,
there is but one servant in a house, that is the master, he has more charge,
and care, but he does it in a more honorable way as a freeman, and not as a
drudg; So the Lord does with us, he has broken the little laws that bound us
as children; we must serve him as much and more than we did before, but in a
more honorable way, for our honor, and the advancement of his glory.

As for instance, if a man send a child or a fool to market to buy or sell
commodities, you must tell him the price of every thing, and charg him that he
shall not sell it under, and tell him when he shall come home, and who shall
help him; but send a wise man thither, and you bind him not with those laws,
but you say, thou know what it cost, make the best of thy market, and come
when thou can, he has his freedom, and yet he will do more than the other:
so there is advantage for the master and honor for the servant; and though the
servant does as much when he is a free man as he did before; yet we naturally
love not to be under childish discipline: therefore it is a great privilege
that we are freed in the Gospel, and such a privilege that it is a step to
perfection in heaven. In heaven we shall serve God as the Angels, and I think
not that the Angels are tied with little laws, endless, external laws, but it
is their nature, and disposition to serve God unweariedly world without end: so
that as we are astep to heaven above that that was under the law, so that those
bonds are broken, and there is a new Covenant in the stead of them: so when we
shall go up with Christ, many, Use of the Gospels easiness.
if not all these that we have now shall be broken, and shall be translated
into our nature. Therefore what I say concerning the easines of the way to
heaven, I mean not that thou should make that use of it, it is easy
therefore I may be careless, and do it when I will: but it is easy therefore
I will take more pains to do it. As I have seen when I was a boy at school,
two children take the same lesson, and both have said it was an easy lesson;
it is an easy lesson says the one, I will do this after dinner, when I have
played enough; says the other it is easy, therefore I will not be discouraged
but set upon it: they made a contrary use of it. So it is an easy; and sweet
way to heaven in the new Testament that Christ has made, be not so wicked to
say, therefore I will do it time enough: when I am ready to die, it will be
time enough, but as the other said, it is easy therefore I will not be
discouraged by the grace of God: it is a wide door therefore I wiil go in
presently, I will not be disheartened.

To be strict in point OF EXPEDIENCY.
1 CORINTHIANS 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient, etc.


WE proceed to another Use, that we should make of this Doctrine; that

Though many things be lawful to the Saints in the New Testament, yet there
are but a few that are expedient.

Two Uses I named before.

The next is a use of Exhortation to you all that fear God; Exhortation to be
strict in point of expediency.
this is the thing that I desire, and exhort you to, that as I would not have
you make laws, and little quirks that God has not made; do not strain the
Scriptures of the New Testament in making more laws than Christ has made, do
not bind your selves, or others more than God has bound you; yet
notwithstanding I exhort you, that in point of expediency, and convenience you
would endeavor to be strict: keep your selves as loose from the former as God
has left you, and strive as strictly as you can to observe the latter: for
then you will be excellent Christians most of you, if you would do less out
of lawfulness, and more out of expediency. Whereas now you cannot go about any
thing to do it, unless you have an absolute command; and when you have done
that task you never look farther; beware of that, in every action, though it
be lawful, do it not, till you can set about it decently, and orderly*
consider; is it convenient? is it expedient? does it adorn religion? eye that;
let nothing pass in your hearts or lives, till you eye the expediency, as well
as the lawfulness of it.

You may conceive that it is but a small thing, and a notion; yet I know, and
am able (I think) to make it good, that the want of this is one of the chiefest
miseries on your souls, especially in respect of your conversation each to
other; therefore to set on this duty upon mine own soul, and yours, I will
propose three or four weighty motives; It will be strange to many of you, and
it will be harsh to flesh and blood: nature will do something if it be bound,
but if it be let loose, if God have not absolutely bound it, it will do
nothing. Therefore;

Motive 1. It would end controversies among the Saints.
The first motive is this, that this I conceive if you apprehend it spiritually,
it would be the readiest way in the world to reconcile the Saints, and to end
many, if not most of those controversies that are at this day among good
people: And this was the chiefest end why I took this text in hand; therefore I
shall speak a little more largely of this: For now the godly go one against
another, and all Jure Divino; every one will have an absolute rule for all the
Saints, and every one will make the best of their game, and so screw and wrest
the Scriptures; and I think, all the people that strive in these days are
guilty of this.

How shall we do to have peace among the Saints?

Let us agree upon clear undoubted rules (that are not many) about the worship
of God, about doctrine, The way to peace.
and discipline, that we may be able to stop the mouths of men by Scripture:
let us agree, (as easily we might if this truth were written in our hearts) for
general rules that are plain and absolute: that I cannot only prove that it
was done by the Saints of old, and commanded: but so done and commanded, as
that it is an absolute rule for all Saints in all ages. And what shall we do
for the rest? Do as it is decent, and expedient, and as it may edify etc. And
all the strife would be over; if we did agree on that, and walk so far
together, we should easily judge after, what were expedient, and fit to be
done.

As for instance in two cases; There is now among good people a great deal of
strife about baptism, Baptism.
as for diverse things, so for the point of dipping (though in some places in
England, they dipp altogether;) How shall we end the controversy with those
godly people? (as many of them are) Look upon the Scriptures, and there you
shall find, that (...), to baptize, it is an Ordinance of God, and the use of
water, in way of washing for a spiritual end, to resemble some spiritual
thing: It is an Ordinance of God, but whether dipping or sprinkling, that we
must bring the party to a River, or draw the River to him, or use water at
home, whether he must be in head, and foot, or be under the water, or the
water under him; it is not proved that God has laid down an absolute rule for
it. Now, what shall we do? conclude on the absolute rule, that God has laid
down in Scripture, and judge of the rest according to expediency; Take the
maine rule, which is this, Baptism is an Ordinance of God, that is, the using
of water upon believers for a spiritual end; then comes in the case of
expediency, then let us judge whether sprinkling, or dipping, be more
expedient, and then there would be no strife: For there is scarce a man in this
place, that if he were persuaded that dipping were not an absolute rule; but it
were to be judged according to expediency, he would rather have in a modest way
the use of water, than to have men and women, and weak people (it may be) in
the winter time over head and ears into the River; he would rather make use
of water in a more civil, and safe, and less dangerous way. I give you but an
instance.

And so for that other great controversy that is amongst godly people; that
is, (as you call them) Independents, and Presbyterians, there is a great
controversy amongst these godly people.

I know also by the way that there are a company of people that would arrogate
the name of Presbytery though improperly, False Presbytery.
the name does not beseem them, that is, those that have been the Bishops
creatures, and are all for fire and faggot, there are some such among us and
they would arrogate the name of Presbytery, I would not have them do it, it
does not befit them. But it is a devise of the devil to put nicknames, upon
people and upon things in all ages. Nay, I will tell you a greater mystery, one
of the chiefest things I mourn for in England: The Devil puts contrary names
upon men etc. things
what is that? the devil does not only put soul names on things, but he calls
things not only by different, but by contrary names; he calls one thing by the
name of another, as to call a knife a spoone, and a spoone a knife, so he takes
good names, and puts them upon foul things, and puts foul names upon good
things; so he jumbles things, and drives all among the common people, so it may
be there are some that would take the name of presbytery; so, that if we look
upon the nature of the thing, as godly men, and as the word of god describes
it, it is far from it. But concerning these I have nothing to say, only I
seek peace with all: but I shall hope to reconcile the Saints, and these
people, when the seed of the serpent, and the seed of the woman are reconciled.

But the true presbytery, True Presbytery.
that take the name consciensciously, and rationally, they are godly people,
and I shall speak a word tending to peace between them, and the godly that are
called Independents. How shall I do that from this doctrine? The true
Presbytery (not as I conceit or according to men's fancy, but according to
their writing, and books, and profession of godly learned men) I find not that
in any thing almost they dissent from that that you call independency, till you
come to one thing; for they agree that the Church must be a company of Saints,
and that there is power in Chruch- Ordinances as long as they do it well: but
here is all the difference, that godly, rational, conscientious men lay down,
Difference between Presbytery and Independency.
between Presbytery and Independents, that the one, the Presbyterians they
say that when any Church does amiss, and cannot agree, and do things orderly,
they would appeal to godly Ministers, and they should judge the business, and
determine among them. No say the Independents, we will only go to them for
council and advise, but they shall have no power to determine the business.
This is the difference between the conscientious Independents and
Presbyterians: for others that persecute with fire and faggot, I account them
not the Presbytery.

What shall we do in this case?

I tell you, it is fit, as I conceive, that we should all walk together by the
same rule as far as we have warrant; To walk all by the same rule as far as
we have warrant.
we agree in all the maine things, let us walk so till we come to that one that
they differ in, and a hundred to one if ever we come to it; the strife among
Gods people of Presbytery and Independencie, would cease (take away those that
strive to make bate) It is as if you and I should strive who should go into
the gates of Venice first, and a hundred to one if any of us come there. Let us
go along in the substantial things wherein we agree. And what shall we do
then? I tell you as, for the matter of appeal, the Presbytery, truly called as
they cannot fully prove, that there is an absolute rule that they should do
so; so, the other cannot prove that they may not. What is to be done then?
This, that when all things come to that that they cannot agree in a Church, it
may be expedient, and convenient, that we appeal to others to end our business;
if this were done, down would go the difference between Presbytery, and
Independents. This is the way to peace, and union, and agreement among the
Saints.

But you will say, Sir, this is the way to confusion: for there being but a few
things lawful, and abundance of things that are not expedient, now who shall
judge what is expedient, and what is not? shall every particular man determine
of his own head? then there will be a confusion worse than ever: for so many
men, so many minds, therefore surely this is not the way to peace.

To answer that (to take in some objections as I pass) to clear the truth, I
must tell you four or five things.

The first is, 1. Take heed of vain fears in Gods ways.
that if this be the way of God (which I hope I have proved to you) then take
heed of your wisdom that runns, and sees inconveniences in Gods ways. Fear
it not, if it be Gods way God can perserve it, and bless it; fear not
inconveniences in your vain thoughts, leave the event to the Lord. As you know
that unhappie man Uzzah, when he saw the Arc shake, he must go and hold it.
When you are sure that this is the will of God, set not your wits on work as
people do, they reason from intricacies, and absurdities, and this and that
that may follow: It is good to be sober, and not to be curious when we see
clearly that this is the will of God, leave it to the Lord to direct them, and
guide them, and bless them as he pleases. That is one answer.

2. Christ has done the maine already concerning worship.
Secondly you say, it will be all confusion, who shall judge, shall every
particular man? This is the second answer, It is very probable, if every man
shall go and set up what government he will, and worship God as he pleases;
if all the worship of God were to be determined, according to every man's
humor, or every nation, and custom, and fashion, then it would breed
confusion, but Christ has done that for the maine; the substance is done, and
the matter, nay the manner and form in a great measure; nay, it may be some
circumstances. But if all were to be done again, that we were to shape, a
Religion, and customs and laws wholly, and as a Godly Ancient says, if we
were to frame the house to the curtain, and not the curtain to the house, If
we were to frame Religion to every country where we come, this would breed
confusion: But Christ has done the maine, only there are somethings that fall
out in Worship, and Doctrine, and Discipline, that must be managed by the
rules of expediency, that I gave you before.

I answer, 3. To study spiritual things.
it is probable, that in case we should go on thus, according to the rules,
agreeing in the clear general rules, and go accordingly in particulars, as
is expedient; yet it is to be doubted that according to the spirit we have now,
and our temper, we shall go to greater confusion; and so we shall as long as
we have carnal slight spirits, (as generally Christians have) they will lead
us to confusion.

What shall we do then?

Every one set his soul about the study of spiritual things, The more carnal
the more busy about outward things.
endeavor to see the beauty, and excellency of them, and to feed more upon
them, and that will avoid that stir, and contention, 1 Cor. 3. Are ye not
carnal? Why so? one said, I am for Paul, another, I am for Peter; I am for
Presbytery, and I am for Jndependency, are ye not carnal; as if he had said,
I warrant you spiritual things grow not in your souls. I never saw a
spiritual excellent Christian following curiosities about external things. I
will tell you a mystery from your experience: you observe sometimes your souls
are in better temper than at others; sometimes you see the things of the
Kingdom of God, the riches of Christ, and the opperations of the Holy Ghost
more clearly; and you shall find that according as your souls are screwed up
in the sweetness, and contemplation of spiritual things, so you are less and
less disposed to make chrotchets, and knots in outward things: therefore the
way is, labor to be spiritual. If we were full of faith, and peace, and joy,
in believing, and full of the Holy Ghost, there would be no confusion about
these things.

Especially, get love in your souls, 4. To get love.
for that is the reason we are in a lovelesse condition, therefore we run to
confusion; and so we shall (go which way we will) unless we get love in our
souls; John has a clear place for it, 1. Jo. 2.9. He that says he is in the
light, and hates his brother, he is in darkness until now; he that loves his
brother abides in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. A
man that loves his brother, and is full of love, there is no occasion of
stumbling in him. Mark those people, take a man that is full of love, he has
not crotchets and fancies to make bate, and strife between men, there is no
occasion of stumbling in him: But he that hates his brother is in darkness,
he walks in darkness, and knows not whether he goes, because the darkness
has blinded his eyes. When people hate their brethren, and do not love them
as they should, they are in darkness, and go they know not whether, and so
love grows less and less, and darkness more and more among us, and we are
groping daily, and going to confusion; Therefore the Saints and the Ministers
should join to get spiritual things, especially love; and then there would be
no such confusion, In 1 Cor. 13. Love does nothing unseemly: the word is
dirived from the Latin word (indecore) Love does nothing amiss, but does
every thing seemly; if we were full of love we should be able to answer a
hundred questions that now we are not able to do. But we want love to our
brethren, and therefore we are in darkness, and every one gropes, and goes he
knows not where.

Let me give you another answer, you say, this is the way to confusion; and who
shall judge of this? must every particular man?

Mistake me not wilfully; I do not say that every man is to determine all
indifferent things, Things are to be determined.
all things that are undetermined by the Lord: But I say, that Magistrates are,
and Churches, and Masters, of Familyes, and private persons, they are all to
determine these things respectively.

As thus, the Magistrate is to determine those things in particular persons, or
Churches that respect the Kingdom, that have relation to the State, and
Nation. Churches are to determine things that belong to them; Masters of
Familyes the things that belong to them, and particular persons those that
belong to them.

As for instance, 1. By Magistrates.
concerning Magistrates (I speak not at all, what his power is in lawful
things that God has commanded,) but in things undetermined by the word of God,
those things that relate really and truly to his State, and Nation he has
power to determine. As for instance, For the time of meeting to worship.
suppose in this City the Saints did use to meet at twelve or one of the clock
in the night generally, as we do in the day; and suppose that thereupon there
were diverse insurrections in the City, that did procure a great deal of
trouble, and danger to the City; suppose that this were real; (for people must
not talk, O, this will destroy the Kingdom, and the Parliament, when there is
no such thing) for ought I know the Magistrate may come and determine the case,
and make them meet at twelve of the clock in the day, and not in the night, if
it be prejudicial to his Kingdom; For, take this general rule, the way of
the Gospel in it self is not really prejudicial to Magistracy.

Or thus, suppose in this country, or in a colder that people did go and
baptize in Rivers; Manner of baptizing.
(whereas this is not an absolute command: but only the using of water, lay
down that) and by that means diverse subjects die, and lose their lives, suppose
this were real; herein for ought I know the Magistrate may determine a course,
and take another way, because herein is prejudice to his subjects.

Or in a plainer case, suppose in this City there be abundance of godly people,
Places of meeting.
and there are diverse Ministers to preach, and the Magistrate is ready to set
it up; the question is where we shall find places fit to distribute those
people, every one to hear the Word: Christ Jesus has not commanded this
house, or yonder, or any house more than another: but now there are houses
fitly seated, and large about the City; the Ministers, and Magistrates knowing
the indifferency of them, for ought I know the Magistrate may determine those
places for the hearing of the Word, and other exercises.

The reason is this, because in such multitudes as are in the City, if they
should meet confusedly, in this, and that, and the other house, there might be
abundance of sedition, and tumults under that pretense, that no Magistrate were
able to rule the City.

I speak it not, that you may persecute godly people, or that it is altogether
unlawful for the Saints to meet in another place: but he may do it in
relation to his Kingdom, and State; as thus, lest there be disturbance in my
City, you shall meet respectively in such places, and so he may distribute
them; such kind of circumstances they may determine.

So the Church: 2. By the Church.
those things that are among them that relate to the Church they may determine.
So Masters in Familyes may determine things there, as for instance, whether he
will repeat the Sermon, or read a Chapter at night, or in the morning; (God
has not determined the one, 3. Masters of Familyes
or the other) or whether he will expound a Chapter in the morning, or in the
evening, if he have not time for both. And so actions that concern a man's
own person, that relate not to the Church, or the Family, or State; 4.
Particular persons
the Saints by the Spirit of God may determine things personally to themselves:
you understand that.

Cautions for Magistrates and Churches in determining.
But to clear this a little, I say, that Magistrates may determine these
circumstances; There are these six cautions for Churches, and Magistrates in
determining of things that God has not determined; which they should do well
to observe.

As first, they may determine in necessary indefferent things: As thus, for
instance, 1. It must be in necessary indifferent things.
there was a great strife among us before about wearing of the Surplice, about
wearing of white, or black, here the Magistrate nor the Church cannot
determine, because it is not a necessary indifferent thing; for there are
colors enough besides between them: But if it were this, whether I should go
naked, or clothed; if it relate to the Kingdom the Magistrate may do it, if
to the Church the Ministers may determine it.

That is the reason that we blame the Bishops, they say, they are indifferent
things, the Surplice is indifferent, if it were a necessary indifferent thing
they might urge it, but there is no necessity of it; Therefore men must observe
that rule, or else they will run endlessely, and under the name of indifferent
do any thing.

2. It must relate to the Kingdom.
Secondly, observe this Caveat; see that it relate to the Kingdom; for, for
ought I know, a Magistrate is not a spiritual Officer, as a Magistrate: but a
thing made by the wisdom and providence of God, to rule over the outward
things of the world: So are Emperors, and Kings etc. And for a Magistrate to
intrude into the Church, that he will determine all business, what they shall
do, and what they shall pray, I think this is not right: But if there be any
thing that relates to his Kingdom, and Nation, therein he must look, and he
may determine over a Saint, and over a Church.

3. the Srs. must be dealt with as rational men.
Then thirdly, whether it be Magistrates, or Churches that go about to
determine such things, they must deal with the Saints as rational men, and
not make their will a law, and tell them, this we will have done and give no
reason, or rule; No, the Saints must be dealt with as men: therefore they must
give them some rules, and reasons for what they do; They do not by mere
power determine of things so properly, as being many, and wiser, they are put
to inform the people what is right. Therefore that Lordlinesse, and Tyranny,
and domineering over the faith of the Saints is not fit.

4. Take heed of making laws for the future
Then fourthly, Churches, and Saints, and Magistrates in determining of
indifferent things must be wary of making laws for hereafter; for there are
few things that are expedient, but may sometime or other be lawful; therefore,
what is expedient now to do, beware how you make it a standing law to bind
men to it. Nay, in Civil things, there is no law of the Land in an
extraordinary case: but if they make it an ordinary rule, a standing law it
will be inconvenient. So, in spiritual things, about six score years ago, in
the reformation, it was a great thing to come out so far as they did: but the
Surplice, and the Cross, and kneeling, at the Sacrament stayed still; and the
States men did well, it was good that they did so much; because they then could
not have them all off, meaning in the next age when things were settled to
remoove them: but they made a law, and it was a point of good policy; yet when
that law was made, there arose another King that knew not Joseph; another
Generation came, and made the Surplice, and the Cross, the ruin of good
people, to drive them to New England, and to imprison them. Therefore it is
good to be wary in making of standing laws.

5. To beware how they impose things on the consciences of the Saints
Fifthly, Magistrates, and Churches must be wary how they impose these things
upon the consciences of men as necessary things, they may decide them to be
expedient, and so persuade them to obey: but if they come to impose them as
necessary; as that the Surplice signifies innocence, and the Cross
mortification; when they impose them Jure Divino it is not right.

6. Not to use rigor in determining.
Lastly, beware of severity, and rigor in determining those things that God
has not determined; for in those things a poor Saint, though they determine
them, yet if he have no measure of light he cannot in conscience do it, but he
is condemned by his conscience. And if he use all his light, and reverence the
Magistrate, and use all the Ordinances of God, yet in some cases God gives him
not light to do it: Now to go with fire, and faggot, with banishment, and
imprisonment, as they did under Episcopacie, there was more rigor used for not
wearing the Surplice, than if a Minister had been drunk twenty times in a
year; they imposed these things with severity; yet come to them, and ask what
good was in them? the Bishops would say, they were but indifferent things, and
yet they would punish the want of them more than the breach of the Commandments
of God: therefore beware of that. So to that objection, that this would breed
confusion if every man should determine them, you have four answers.

I will add one more, and I shall go no farther at this time; and that is, if
you will avoid confusion herein, and follow this truth. You know I have showed
you certain rules by which you should go to avoid confusion, and they are as
Land marks, or as booyes in the water to guide you. As for instance, here is a
thing that God has not determined, then cast about; Is it decent, is it
convenient, is it expedient, does it do others or my self good? Or will it
trouble my conscience, and make Religion evil spoken of? Cast about by these
rules, and every one that has tried them shall walk safely without danger:
Therefore make use of those rules.

But it may be, you will say, those rules will not reach every case, therefore
I shall be at a stand.

Therefore to them I will add three or four more, and so conclude at this
time. You have had four already; Expediency that is one measure, then decency,
and convenience, then commendableness, or laudableness, lastly, Orderlinesse.

5. Rule. Examples of the old Saints.
And if those rules will not fit, look on the examples of the old Saints in the
book of God; and putting the case alike, (or else it is a dangerous rule, you
are not in all things to follow the example of Christ himself, he did many
things that are not for your example, though we may not make an absolute rule
of every example, yet they may be good patterns when the case is alike) if we
cannot judge whether this be expedient, do as the Saints of old did. As for
instance, Paul in Act. 20. when he was taking his leave of his friends he bowed
his knees, and prayed on the place, and called on the Lord as they parted; I
think not that this is an absolute rule, that the Saints in all places are tied
to; that they sin without they pray when they part: but if you have time, and
other circumstances, then it is commendable, and safe to follow his example. So
to gather money for the maintenance of the poor of the Church, it is a
necessary duty that God requires: but when to do it, or how, put the case the
same, according as you have opportunity you should do well to do it on the
First Day of the week: but it is not an absolute rule. So, if a stranger that
is a Christian come to travel through the country Paul bids, bring them on
their way: I think not that a man absolutely sins if he do not bring a
stranger on his way: but put the case alike, and it is safe, and commendable to
follow the Saints, and so in a hundred things. And this will help you out when
you have no other light.

6. To look to the custom of the Saints and Churches.
Secondly, let me add to this a strange rule (you will think it so, if I cannot
make it out) that is this, you must take notice of the customs of the Saints,
and of the Churches of God: If you cannot find by example and judge what is
convenient, and expedient, and honorable, in the old Saints; go to the
custom of the Churches, and the Saints that now are, look what is the practice
of the generation of the Saints; and when there is no other light, that will
help you.

Custom, in civil things, it is the strongest law of England, and in morrall
things it is strong; God says a blackmore may be washed white, sooner than
they that are accustomed to do evil will leave it: But in this, in spiritual
things, Custom the weakest rule in spiritual things.
custom is the weakest rule, the customs of the Churches, and of the Saints
is the dimmest light: yet in many cases we leave you to the customs of the
Churches, when there is no other light to go forward with; and a Saint, he may
guide, and steer his course well by it. Therefore you shall see in Psalm. 73.
David reasons the case, why am I whipped every morning? I have washed my hands
in vain, and it is in vain to be a Saint. He corrects himself, if I should
say so, besides my own foolishness, I should condemn the Generation of the
Saints, God deals so with them. So I remember a word between a Minister and a
Gentleman, the Minister disputing with the Gentleman, Of being covered, or
uncovered in hearing.
whether he might put on his Hat in the Sermon time; the Minister holding
strongly that he ought not, the other holding that he might, so when the
Gentleman could not answer the Minister, says he, Sir I will not dispute with
you: but I am very loath to do that, by doing whereof I must of necessity
condemn the Generation of the faithful, I will not stand against your
arguments: but I will not say, it is a sin for a man to put on his Hat, because
I should condemn the Generation of Saints, and godly people in England. Though
we see no command, nor know nothing offensive, yet let us beware how we do
that by our own practice, that will condemn the Saints. So in this case, the
saying holds, that when a man is at Rome, let him do as they do at Rome, that
is, in things that are not determined, when we have no other light, let us go
according to the custom of the Churches. In some Churches they use not to put
on their Hats, but to be bare in hearing the Word; while I am there I will even
do so; when I come there I will not put it on. God has not determined it, and
there it is the custom of the Saints, here to be singular is naught. The
Saints should be singular from wicked people, and from good people in evil
things, but in things that God has not determined, we should not be singular
from them.

As to instance, in one case, in singing of Psalms among us, that troubles
many of you. Of singing Psalms.
We know that God has commanded us to sing Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs; we all agree in that, that is plain in the Word: But he shows not there
whether they ought to be songs of our own composing, or the Psalms of David;
or in what tune we should sing, in this, or that tune; or whether we should
sing one, or two, or three, or more, this is not determined. Moreover I know
not which is more expedient, that twenty, or forty sing, or one alone. What
shall I do in this case? Look on the custom of the Churches of God, that has
been practiced by the Saints for time out of mind, and when God has not
determined it, and they have done so, therefore I will go along with them, if
it have been a general custom in the Church we ought not rashly to reject
it. I tell you for my own part, when I observe any custom in any Church, any
thing that is laudable, and comely, that God has not determined, there is a
kind of honor, and reverence that striks my heart, though God do not command
it, or forbid it, yet being the custom among the Saints, it works a reverence
in my heart; therefore he rein make use of this when all other lights are out.

Neither do I say this alone; does not the Scripture say the same? Of long
hair.
1 Cor. 11. there was a great dispute concerning long hair, and short hair;
whether women should cut their hair, and men should wear long hair, see how
the Apostle resolves the case verse 14. Does not even nature it self teach you,
that if a man have long hair it is a shame unto him. Why, how does nature
teach it? The word generally is taken for nature: but diverse godly wise men
conceive that by nature is meant the custom of the country that they lived
in; does not nature teach you? that is, is it not contrary to the general
custom of the country, (much more of the Saints) for a man to wear his hair
^^e a woman: But if a woman have long hair it is a glory; for it is given her
for a covering. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God. Whether you relate this custom to the beginning
of the ver. If any be contetious we have no such custom; we do not strive and
contend, or if you relate it to the other, if any man strive about long hair;
we and the Churches of God do not walk so, they do not wear long hair: but
which way soever you take it; therefore men should wear short hair to avoid
contention. Of preaching.


So in Acts 16. when Paul and the women met together by the waterside, verse.
13 it is said they came to a Rivers side, where prayer was wont to be MADE; and
there they sat down, and preached, and prayed: he does not say it was
supperstition to come on a green place by a River: but it was a custom, and
Paul goes thither, and teaches them, and opens the Word to them. So that in
those things that are not determined, custom is a great help to men in many
things.

Thirdly, I add a third rule, and that is, right reason, Right reason.
natural reason, or right reason. Think not evil of these that I name custom,
and reason; Reason of three sorts.
because they are taken in a bad sense sometimes. But to understand this, there
is three sorts of reason usual in Scripture.

Spiritual reason Romans 12. the Apostle bids us give our bodies, and souls to
the Lord, a reasonable sacrifice; 1. spiritual.
that is, in a spiritual way of argumentation, it is fit that I should give my
self to Christ; that I mean not here.

There is corrupt, carnal reason, 2. corrupt
this leads us out of the way, this is never good.

Thirdly, there is common reason, 3. common natural reason.
right natural reason in us, which many of the duties of the New Testament are
grounded on. If you say; what is that? It is a light in the soul, that is a
Relic of that light that was in Adam. When God made Adam, Right reason what.
and all other creatures, he made all good, there were good things, and every
thing in a good order; and he made Adam like himself, God looked, and he saw
everything that it was good: God put a light in him to judge of the Sun, Moon,
and Stares; Adam had this light in a sort, to judge of Heaven, and Earth, and
he saw that all was good. When Adam fell, he lost a great deal of this light,
and there came darkness, and confusion; Yet the light is not grown so dim,
as the other faculties are grown loose: for all carnal men (excepting none)
they have light to judge beyond their power to practice, that is the reason the
Heathen said, I see good, and better things, but do the worst. So the
carnallest man in the world has some light to judge good, and evil, more than
he has strength to do; whence is this? It is a stamp of that light, that in
Adam was complete at the first. Now this right reason, it often helps the
Saints when they have no other light; As in 2 Cor. 14.23. The Apostle reproves
them for speaking with strange tongues in the Church, that the people
understood not; what argument does he use? says he if an Idiot come in, and
hear you babble together, will he not say you are mad? that is, take a man
that has the least spark of reason, of natural light, and when he sees that
you go out of the order of the creation, he will think you are beside your
selves. Take a simple man bring him to Smithfeild, and let him see a goodly
horse, and though he never read in books to know the properties of a horse,
nor to hear him described, yet he can say, this is a hansome horse; whence is
this? he has the same spark of light, that was complete in Adam. Take a
woman that has a painted face, and naked breasts, and take another that goes
handsomely, and attires her self modestly, and put it to an Idiot, and let him
judge which is the hansomest, by the spark of right reason in him. Therefore in
1 Cor. 11. says the Apstole, if the woman be not covered, let her be shorn.
Is it COMELY, judge ye? that is, in the eye of reason; we know by the light
that we have from Adam, that it is an unseemly thing. And so in many other
cases: but I can not stand upon them; this will help you out when nothing else
will.

But to conclude all, you have had expediency, and decency, and
commendablnesse, and orderlinesse, and now the example of the Saints, the
custom of the Churches, and right reason, The law of nature.
and now lastly, the Law of nature, observe that; The Law of nature what is
that? There is in our nature that law that God once wrote in our hearts, and
some relics of that old edition; And that which we have by grace, is but a
new edition, and many times in a new Print the old copy does help: so, many
times we read the will of God by the old copy; by the law of nature. This is
the ground, there is no institution, or command, unless it be extraordinary,
that is contrary to the natural command of God written in the heart; I say
unless it be extraordinary: Gods ordinary commands agree with the law of
nature.
as for Abraham to offer Isaac. Therefore if I find any thing that I suppose
to be an institution, that is contrary to the law of nature, I may conclude
that it is not the will of God. As for instance, in two laws of nature.

1. Every man by the law of nature to love himself.
First, it is the law of nature, every man is to love himself, though not more
than Christ, or more than his neighbor, yet it is a good law that God has
made that he shall love his neighbor as himself: therefore it is the law of
nature, for a man to love himself. And modesty also is a law of nature;
Therefore Sem, 2. Modesty a law of nature.
and Japhet when their father was naked, out of modesty as well as honor, they
went backward and covered him. Now, if there come a case that God has not
absolutely determined, (as he has not determined any thing point blank
against the law of nature; for it is but another edition in a larger character)
if it be a case that we know not how to do; judge by this law. As suppose in
baptism; that we conclude it to be an Ordinance of God, to use water to a holy
end: But how we shall baptize, whether by sprinkling, or going into a River
(because it is probable some of them did) if we have no other light go to the
law of nature; for either men, and women must go in naked, or clothed, if they
go naked, it is point blank against the law of modesty, and so against the law
of nature: and if they go in clothed if no house be near, we know by
experience, and reason that it is enough to murder many a man, so he shall
destroy himself, therefore I conclude that God will not have me go that way.

But if it be the will of God, notwithstanding the inconveniency, we should do
it.

I reason thus against you, we know by reason, and experience that this may
destroy a man's life, and it is immodest; therefore I conclude it is not the
will of God, it is not sure, and safe to walk by it. Put these rules together,
and you see in all cases that God has not determined, you have a sure light to
go by. There are other motives, but I must leave them till the next time.

THE RIGHT WAY TO PEACE.
1 CORINTHIANS 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
exepdient, etc.


WE are come to the third Doctrine, which for brevities sake, I brought in as
the Use, and Application of the two former. That seeing many things are lawful
to the Saints under the New Testament, that were not to the Saints under the
old; and seeing that of those many things that are now lawful there are but a
few that are expedient. Therefore the Saints would be exhorted, in their
walking not only to eye that which is lawful, but also that which is expedient.

The last day I propounded one motive, which yet I have not finished, it was
this; That this is the readiest way to end the controversies, and to settle
peace among the Saints. I shall not repeat what was then delivered: but proceed
in this Use (because it is the chief of all) to answer an objection, or two.

The first is this, you will say Sir, you pretend to seek peace by this; is
this the way to peace? me thinks you seem to cross all people in your
discourse, you speak against Anabaptists, and Independents, and Presbyterians:
and is this the way to peace.

Beloved, to that briefly, I answer in general, it is the way to peace,
Motive 1. The right way to peace.
the right way. How? Thus, in all fallings out between man, and man in civil
things; what is the way to peace, and reconciliation? The ordinary way is to
divide stakes, to abate every one a little, every one to come to condescend
each to other, that is the way to peace. We should do with our brethren, just
as God does with us, or we with him, when we are fallen out; you know that sin
is enmity against God; how comes there to be peace, and reconciliation? you
know the way is, God comes, and meets us, and we are to meet him; Every one to
condescend a little.
as it is in Amos, Prepare to meet thy God O Israel. We meet the Lord, and he
meets us (as we see in the parable of the Prodigal and his father) and so
there is peace, So there will never be peace among the Saints, as long as every
one stands upon his points, and will not abate an ace: but he will go his way,
and do what he list. The Apostles rule Romans 12 is, brethren says he,
condescend to them of low degree: There is the way; Be of the same mind one
with another: verse 16. That is, away with jarrs, and discentions, I beseech
you be of the same mind in the Lord. If we were of the same mind we should
soon be at peace. Every one loves those that are of his mind: but which is the
way? The way is, mind not high things, go not so high as to mind high
things, and care not whether your brethren be edified, or whether they stumble:
but condescend to them that are low; come down a little, every one abate a
little, this is the way to peace. And so in Act. 15. when there was dissension
about circumcision, it is notably worth your observation; when they were come
to the Saints at Jerusalem, and the Apostles were about the controversy; they
answer not punctually, they do not blame the Gentiles, or the Jews; but they
divide stakes, and desire that the Jews would not force circumsion upon the
Gentiles, and they desire that the Gentiles would not stand on things
strangled, and blood, those things of all others did give most offense to the
Jews: for it was notorious infamous for them to do so; therefore they should
condescend to them so far, and the other should condescend to them again, and
so there was like to be peace, and the Churches had joy; the honest humble
hearted were glad. So, till people are willing to come down, and condescend to
their brethren there will never be peace.

Neither do not conceive that it is not possible in things spiritual, as well
as civil; It is not impossible, there is a way in spiritual things also: The
Lord has promised one heart, and one way; it is not impossible for us to be as
one man, to go in one way. Thus in general to answer the objection.

But in particular; you say, you cross Independents, and Presbyterians; and is
this the way to make peace?

Hear me with patience; Hurtful. principle among Independents.
Concerning Independents as you call them, (though they will not own the name,
but you fasten it on them) I must speak this, that concerning their practice,
and that that they do ordinarily; I cannot condemn them, neither do I know
any godly, judicious Presbyterian, that will be against most of their tenets:
But know concerning those that you call Independents, that they have diverse
principles that are destructive: among the rest, I warn you of one principle
that will be wholly destructive to your own peace, and the peace of others,
(though you see it not) The fancying, and conceiting of a curious piece of
discipline in the New Testament, in every tittle as it was in the old. It will
necessarily, and infallibly follow, that any man that holds that must come to
this, that we must have signs, and miracles, and Apostles again. Experience
shows that when men stand upon that, and cannot make it out, they conclude
that there must be Apostles, and miracles, as of old; because they conceit
that there must be a more curious piece in the new than in the Old Testament,
and they are not able to find it; As one that puzzeled himself, and doated on
such a thing, he cast his bible aside, and said we must of necessity have
miracles, and Apostles, as they had before. Therefore though for the generality
your practice be good, yet labor to get out of that principle, or else
remember it will be your ruin, and the ruin of all your Churches.

But then you say, you herein cross Presbyterians, too.

Presbyterians judgment.
In a word, let me tell you, that those that are now called Presbyterians, that
are pious, and godly, and precious men: as many of them as I knew under
Episcopacy were of this mind; they either held that there was no external way
of government at all, or else they held that there is a latitude that we are
not so absolutely, and punctually tied in every thing: And if half a score
years ago there was such a latitude, it were a strange thing if these
Presbyterians, should go now to frame such a curious piece in every point. So
I say, if those that are called Presbyterians agree with themselves, and their
own principles, and what they were ten years since, they agree with this
Doctrine, and therefore there is no cause of offense to them.

But I have not yet done; No reason of strife between Presbyterians and
Independents.
because I am willing that there should be peace; let me come a little home to
particulars. And I will show you this, that there is no true reason in the
world (but that the devil bewitcheth men) why there should be any contention,
and strife, between Presbyterians, (I mean godly, religious people) and those
that you call Independents. There is no true reason at all why there should be
this contention, and I will demonstrate it four ways.

1. Because there are godly on both sides.
The first is this; because they are on both sides godly, precious men. I do
not say that all are on either side, but the generallity of them. And you know
Abraham, and Lot, when there was like to be a falling out about a greater
thing, a matter of Land, says Abraham, let there be no strife between thee and
me, for we are brethren; If thou will take the one hand I will take the other.
So these are godly men, as I acknowledge both sides to be; why should people be
ready to nourish strife, and contention between them.

2. The business of difference is small.
But the second reason that there should be no strife and contention between
them, is because the business, the things that they differ in are very small, it
is a very small inconsiderable thing. I speak not of those (as Paul says of
oppositions of science falsely so called; So I speak not) or Presbytery fasly so
called; that is, Episcopal men, that I know no rule they go by: but of godly
men that out of judgment, and conscience hold Presbytery. As a reverend godly
man, writing of Presbytery, the case between us, and our brethren, says he, it
is not the rending of the garment, it is but the rufling of the fringe. It is
so far from being a fundamental difference, that it is scarce a material
difference, nay, it is not in the form; we agree both in the same form of
government. We (says he) agree in this that there shall be such a government,
and what this government shall be; only here is the difference, whose it shall
be to whom it shall belong; nor so much in that, as where it shall be; whether
in a Church, or in a Congregation of Ministers belonging to diverse Churches.
And so being but the rufling of the fringe, what mad men are we to set the
Kingdom on fire, and make our lives burdensome, and draw new, and heavier
miseries on our selves now, than ever we felt by our very enemies? Therefore
being between brethren, and for a thing so small, why should there be strife
among us?

3. It is about that that is never like to be.
Well, thirdly, (which to me is the maine, the chief) that this difference,
whcih is between brethren; and about that that never was, and it is a hundred
to one that it is a thing that never will be; we strive about a thing that is
a great way off, it is a hundred to one if any of us ever come to the practice
of that we strive for. We all agree there shall be a company of Saints, a
company of visible Believers; and that there shall be power in the Church to
order, and govern things; that the Church shall determine, as it did in
Jerusalem. Let us go so far, let us have Churches reformed, and set the power
in them, and let them rule, and then if there be occasion for people to
appeal, God will either open men's eyes, or else in expediency (as I shall show
by and by) they shall be directed: But we strive (as I told you,) as if you
and I should strive who should enter into the gates of Venice first, and we
know not whether either of us shall come there. We strive about to morrow; we
have present miseries enough, we need not strive about things that are to come
ten years hence; and it may be will never come. We are fools: are we sure
that the Kingdom will stand? or that we shall have our lives? and yet we go
and strive about a nick, that is, the farthest of all things. Whereas, as for
outward things sufficient for the day is the grief thereof. Go on in love,
and when it comes to that we shall see more light. This is the greatest
indiscretion in England, to strive about a thing that is never like to come to
pass.

4. Because neither side can prove what they would have.
Fourthly, and lastly, there should be no strife, because as the Presbyteriall
godly men they cannot, nor will prove such a thing to be an absolute rule for
all the Churches, and for all Saints. Say there were such a rule in Acts 15.
Does it follow that it is a rule for all Churches, and for all Saints? Why do
we not also sell our lands, and give to our brethren? Let them but show me a
ground why that example should be made an absolute rule. Therefore as a man
cannot show, nor never will, an absolute rule to bind all the Saints through
the world, to do so. So, on the other side, the Independents cannot prove but
it may be expedient in diverse cases: therefore the one seems to act
necessarily; the other probably, to be expedient by right reason, and the law
of nature. If a Church cannot agree among themselves; and what cause of strife
is there in this?

Suppose one should say to me, come out of that house, or else you will be
destroyed, the house will fall upon you; I believe not that there is a
necessity but I think it is expedient, because the house is old; he thinks it
is of necessity, and I think it expedient; is there any cause of strife in
this? So put these together and see how we are deluded by the Devil, and our
own hearts, to make strife about a thing that may never be; Therefore, there is
no reason for it.

But that I may satisfy you a little more, you will say; what, is there no
more difference between Presbyterians, and Independents? I have heard that
there is more difference between them, than between the Cavaleirs, and the
other party; that they are ready to cut one another throats. If there be no
more between them; how comes this contention among them.

I think, of all the contentions that ever were among the Saints from Christ's
time till now, there was never such a mystery in any contention as there is in
this. And (but that I would not take up so much time) I could go near to open
this mystery; how the devil and our own hearts, have got the strangest mystery
to set the Saints together by the ears, that ever was: but I cannot stay upon
that.

But if you ask me how it comes to pass? You know a little spark will bring a
great flame; a little contention is as the letting out of waters. It is no
wonder, it is the nature of contention to multiply, as it is the nature of fire
to grow bigger; it comes from the devil, and our own hearts.

The present contentions from.
If you ask me how it comes from men?

I say, it comes from five sorts of people, and it may be you, and I, and the
most of us, have a hand in blowing this fire: the Lord show it to us all, that
we may labor to be peace makers, and so be blessed.

Weak Christians
The first sort of people are weak, carnal Christians, there may be those that
are called Independents, that are carnal. I mean not carnal as though they
had no grace: but in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor 3. Are ye not carnal? that is,
those that have but a little grace, and have a great deal of rashness, and
peevishnes and giddiness, and pettishnesse, and censoriousnesse. They are
people that have a great deal of zeal many of them: but it is without
knowledge; without wisdom to manage it. They see part of the will of God, and
of the truth of God, but not all (as the Sun shines on one part of the earth,
and the other is dark) and in that part they see the substance, but eye not the
circumstance: they care not if all the world be against them, or whom they
edify, or whom they destroy, if they have the command of Christ they will do
it. And these people though they be godly, as a godly man says of them, there
is a new light coming into their souls: but they have not grace to manage it,
and so they go headlong; It is a good light: but they have not grace to
manage it, and that light by reason of their corruptions, and temptations
kindles contention in the Churches.

They must be sharply reproved.
Therefore if we would have peace (which is our great desire) we must
admonish, and rebuke them sharply; they are full of censoriousnesse, and
pettishnes, and have many harsh, and unseemly words. These must be reproved,
and there must be a course taken to bind up their spirits, or else it will be
hard to have peace.

Then secondly, there is another generation of people, that exceedingly blow up
the fire, Carnal Presbyterians.
that are contrary to those, that is, a generation of carnal men, that have
nothing of God in them; that usurp to themselves commonly the name of
Presbytery, they would be called (though falsely) Presbyterians. Though
Presbytery be an honorable word, and it is an honorable thing, and they be
honorable men that hold it, and godly men. But many that would be called
Presbyterians, taking a good name, and misapplying it to themselves, they are
wolves in sheeps clothing; they talk of reforming the Church, and yet they
would set the Saints as so many Tigers together by the ears. I mean not by
these, any godly men: But you may know them if you take notice of their
persons; usually they are the Prelaticall men; such as were surrogates to
Bishops before, double beneficed men, rich Parsons, Prebends, and Canons; These
men that know not the power of godliness, whose hearts were at Oxford, and
they would have been there too: but that they see more hope of preferment here;
there are none that talk so much of Presbytery as they; and in these hoods, and
vailes they study to devour the people of God; beware of them.

But you will say; why, may not a double beneficed man, and a surrogate be a
godly man?

He may be, Their principles
and be truly converted, I condemn not all, but it is very rare. Therefore go
farther, and you shall see the same principles in them that was in the Bishops,
pride, and cruelty, and rage, against the Saints, and fire, and faggot about
the surplice, and kneeling etc. worse than was in the Bishops; they have the
same principles, and breath out threatenings against the Saints, fire, and
bannishment, and yet they croak of reformation; they are wolves in sheeps
clothing.

So, Their ends
if you look on their ends, they are the same, they were rich men then, and so
they are now; they are covetous, and greedy, and sensual, and proud, griping
for livings, and means, and wealth; they chop, and change livings, and use
devises to get more means still; they are the same men still: And yet these
own the name of Presbytery, and every one that is against them, is against
Presbytery; (There is the mystery of iniquity) and shortly, if these get their
wills, The devil changes names with persons and things.
every godly man in England shall be accounted, either to be an Independent, or
an Annabaptist, or an Antinomian; or some other scandalous note, that do not
approve of their courses. And as they say, every man shall be a Roundhead that
is rich, that has somewhat to loose among the Cavaleers; So these men having a
mind to faction, meaning to rule the world, and to enjoy the sweet, and the
fat of it, they put foul names upon the Saints. And so, many godly men that
preach against Antinomians, and Anabaptists, they must be accounted
Antinomians, or Anabaptists; And this is ordinary among these men: therefore
wonder not at this, for be sure of it, that always there will be some to
persecute the people of God, and put foul names upon them to cover the
business. And observe from the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel, carnal
people have taken good names to themselves, and throw ill names upon godly
people. So you shall see in Popery; what were they? Catholics, a good word:
and what were true Christians? Lollards; Heretics, and Shismaticks. And so in
King James his time; what were the good fellows? Orthodox men; and what were
the Saints? Puritans; So now, what are the sides in the Armies? the one are
Cavaleers, a word of honor, and Knighthood; and what are the other?
Roundheads. So Episcopacy, it is a good word, and a thing that God in
Scripture commends: but by degrees carnal men they stole the name, Episcopacy,
and Bishops, and under that they persecuted the Saints. So the Saints have the
worst end of the staff still, the worst names. As for these men, there is
nothing to be done, but to discover them, and to pray for them that the Lord
would open their eyes; I mean not any godly man, Independent, or Presbyterian;
and therefore if thou be offended at this, thou show thy self to be a man
that fear not God.

The third sort are Malignants, a lower sort of people, 3. Malignants.
that are ill affected to the Parliament, and so out of a design, that they
see the Parliaments party, the godly Presbyterians, or Independents, they have
born the brunt, as they know; and if we could take away the godly party of
them (say they) we should do well enough; the rest would run to the King, and
do I know not what: And what course take these? They come to the Independents,
and present Presbytery to them, and say it is worse than Episcopacy, and it is
of Rome, and use obominable bitter words; and so fill poor souls, especially
the weak, with such conceits, as if Rome it self, and the Pope himself were
coming to rule all.

Then for the other side (though they care neither for Presbytery, nor
Independency: but are down right Athiests) they go to the Presbyterians, and
they say that the Independents are destructive to the Commonwealth, that they
have strange principles; that they will not fight in the wars, because they
may not have their liberty, they leave all to us, and they will be at no loss;
and if that party were rooted out, we should be stronger say they; and so they
make them as hideous as they can. Though it be untrue: for it is well known
that they ran not away, but fought as courageously as any: but they represent
them so; and when they have brought them both together by the ears, then they
laugh in their sleeves.

You will say, there are some you know that are great Independents, and they
are wonderously vexed because they have not their design.

But let me tell you, they grieve, and mourn bitterly, not because they could
not set up Independency: but this is their greatest grief, that the devil
drives such a design, and giddie people do not take notice that by the
divisions among us, the Malignant party drives on, and the Parliaments party
will be in danger to be broken: you see the Armies have been scattered, and
ready to go together by the ears by this means. Brethren, beware of these;
say to them as he did Exodus 2 You will come and kill me as you did the Egyptian
yesterday; take them up sharply and send them going, you are firebrarnds of
hell to set us together by the ears.

4. The godly moderate party.
Fourthly, there are another sort of people, that is, the godly party, that you
call the moderate party on both sides, those that are godly men: and there is
flesh, and spirit in these also, and they have a hand in it. As for the
Independents, those that are moderate, they hearken too much to the headie
people, I spoke of before, and are provoked: So, on the other side, the godly
men of the Presbytery, they adhere too much to those wolves, in sheeps
apparel, and the cruelty that they threaten against the Saints, they connive
at it too much; Hence the wonder is how so many that were moderate in the
Bishops time, would now be ready to become persecutors of others. Wonder not,
the reason is this, not because they are not godly, and gracious men: but
because there is some corruption in them, and they are drawn by carnal company
that have not the fear of God, and have not grace, and strength enough to
resist; Therefore if we will have peace on both sides, we must reprove those
people, and not talk as others talk, and do as others do. Those that you call
Independents must not hearken to people that talk without reason, in respect of
their brethren. And those that are godly of the Presbytery must reprove those
men that are full of fire, and faggot, and nothing else: rather reprove them,
then connive at them.

5. The common multitude
Fifthly, and lastly, (and so to end for this time) the last sort of people are
the common, superstitious multitude. They exceedingly blow up the fire: how?
They cry out of divisions, there are so many Religions amongst us; there is
this religion, and that; and they are all for conformity; and O that the Synod
would settle some government, they care not what, if it be Rome it self; and it
is dishonorable that we should have divisions, and stirs among us: Thus the
blind multitude cry; whereas it is better to have division, than an evil
uniformitie. It is true, the time will come that all shall be of one heart, and
one way, but it has never yet been. There were abundance of differences in the
Apostles times, in the first Churches between the Jews, and Gentiles, and they
were always wrangling about blood, and about the Law, and Geneallogies; yet they
were the Churches of God, and dear to the Lord. So I say, every little
difference, and descent makes not a new religion; No, opinions are profitable
(in a sort) in the Churches, that some should descent from others sometimes.

Therefore, for the multitude (to conclude this use) labor to appease the
multitude, the multitude are ignorant, labor to instruct, and teach them.
Presbytery, and Independency are not two religions: but one religion to a
godly, honest heart; it is only a little rufling of the fringe; therefore make
not the breach wider, and blow not the fire more. The Lord give you, and me,
every one of us, wherein by any of these sorts of people we find our selves
guilty, to endeavor to reform, and to follow the things that concern our
peace, that however our enemies will not receive terms of peace, yet we may be
at peace among our selves, which the Lord grant.

The way to peace in a man's self.
1 CORINTHIANS 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
exdient.


THe last lesson from these words was this, That a Christian under the
New Testament ought not only to eye, what is lawful, what is absolutely
commanded, or forbidden: but to eye also what is expedient, and what is
inexpedient; what is convenient, and what is inconvenient, what edifies, and
what edifies not. We opened this to you, and came to a Use, where we are at
this time to exhort you, that this may sink into your hearts, to wit, that you
would not make laws to your selves in the New Testament, where Christ has not
bound you; and where Christ has left you free, and has not determined things.

Secondly, I exhorted you, that you would be careful, and vigilant, and wise,
to take notice in all things what is expedient, and to do the same; and to
press it on you, we proposed one Motive to you, which was the maine drift of
all the discourse we intend upon this Scripture, to wit; that this is the ready
way of peace, and to end strife, and contention among the Saints. Now how that
is, I have opened to you as I was able, and so finished it this morning.

Now to set it on a little more upon your souls (not to repeat any thing)
there are two or three words more that might stir you up. Consider it, for I
know it is a harsh truth to many of your ears, I fear you have many
prejudices against it: but I beseech you consider it well, it is of great
consequence, it is one of the master stones in your foundation; I mean in your
walking, and conversation, toward men at least. I say, therefore I will add
certain motives more: and as the first was the way to peace among the Saints,
to end controversies that are among them;

Motive 2. The way to peace in a man's self
So secondly, it is a way to peace, a way to end the controversies of a
Christian with himself; For Beloved, I dare say, and I am able to make it good,
and have known it by experience in other Saints, that the most of your guilt,
and the most of your trouble that is within you, most of the guilt on
Christians.
it arises not from doing of things simply sinful, or neglecting things
simply commanded but from some disorderly doing of lawful things: and that is
two ways.

1. Doing lawful things with common hearts.
Either that you do lawful things; as eating, and drinking, and sleeping, (and
diverse other things) with common hearts, and eye not God in the doing of them;
you do them in a carnal fashion, without holiness: for we must be holy in all
manner of conversation. You are not holy when you are eating; you have not a
holy frame of soul when you are sleeping: therefore your sleep, and your meat,
and such like things, they produce a world of guilt, and trouble, you do them
with common hearts, as the Pharisees said, the Disciples eat with common hands.

2. Doing lawful things inexpediently.
Or else secondly, it is from doing lawful things inexpediently, you eye not
what is expedient. Meat, and drink, and sleep, and talking, and walking, and
clothes, and recreations, they are lawful: but in all these you look not what
is expedient. And I mean not only (Beloved) those civil things that I named to
you, but also in religious things, wherein God has not determined: you make
laws to your selves, and then you fail in keeping of those laws, as usually
when God sees men make laws to themselves, let them keep them themselves if
they will; it is just with God, not to give power to keep laws that are not of
his own making; God will not give strength to keep laws that he has not made.
God will not help you: you make laws I say, and you have no strength to keep
them, and then there arises a world of guilt, and trouble. As thus, God
commands us to pray always, to be earnest in prayer, to read the word, to teach
our children, to help our neighbors, to do good to their souls, and bodies.
Now you have made a law, that you will pray in your family so often, and pray
privately so often, and read so many Chapters a day, and keep so many days of
humiliation, once a week, or so; here is a law of your own making. I say not
but it is expedient to do so sometimes, and many times; but you make it an
absolute law, that when God comes and calls you to another thing contrary to
your law, Trouble of conscience in Christians whence.
then there is nothing but guilt, and horror, on your souls.

As for instance, you make a law that you will pray twice before you go forth
every morning; privately, and in your familyes, and it is a good course if
things be according, because you are bound to pray always: but you make an
absolute law, and there comes another business of greater weight, you have
prayed once, and you are going to the other, and it may be your neighbors
house is on fire, or a poor man is in want; you go, and you cannot choose, but
then there is gall, and guilt upon your souls, because you have neglected
prayer. Whereas God has not bound you to these things, but has left you to
do this, or that according as it may be most for the honor of God, and the
everlasting advantage of your own souls. Hence if you observe, and look upon
your own souls when you find your selves in trouble, you shall ordinarily see
the truth of this doctrine: Ask the question, whence is this trouble? why are
your souls so sad? you shall find six times for one that the trouble, and
guilt arises from these things, from making of laws, and we are not able to
keep them; whereas if we would make an absolute law of nothing, but what God
has made, and do the rest in expediency, we might be able to let go that,
and do this that is expedient, we should do abundance more good, and with
peace of conscience.

Christians full of questions why
And hence it is, that weak Christians, (good people) are so full of questions,
and cases, and trouble themselves, and Ministers endlessely. Why so? because
many professors walk only by rule, by law; this is their religion, they will
avoid that which is evil, and do that which is good: This is good, but this
is not all; and seldom in my experience have I seen a spiritual heart, that
is spiritual indeed, much troubled with those cases of conscience in outward
things

Spiritual Christians their carriage
The reason is this, because a spiritual Christian has two eyes, the other
has but one: that is, when a spiritual Christian falls on an action, he asks
first, is it lawful, or unlawful? he easily resolves that: but he goes
farther, is it convenient? does it tend to the glory of God? will any be better
for it? will my own soul be the better? is it decent? And it is six to one but
he finds it expedient, and he considers the lawfulness no farther, that is
gone, and an inexpedient action to a spiritual man it is as abominable as an
action altogether unlawful. Therefore we see Paul how resolutely he speaks of
eating of flesh, The earth is the Lords and the fulness thereof; and make no
conscience of what is before you, yet he says if eating of flesh offend my
brother; mark his high language, I will never eat flesh while the world
stands, rather than I will offend my brother; that is, I would soon answer
the case of conscience, I will not trouble ministers, or my self about that.
Weak Christians not minding this, they ask only, is it lawful? Is it lawful
to wear long hair? is it lawful to play at tables? etc. They go no farther,
and so there comes guilt upon their souls.

I heard once (I speak it not with prejudice) of some godly women, that were
godly persons, Baptism doubted of
they made great doubt of their baptism; and going by the rule that I told you
before, making a curious piece in the New Testament, and laying such stresse
upon every nick, that all was overthrown if that were wanting, they were
baptized the first, and the second, and the third time, and still they feared
there was a fault, that they could not sleep in their beds, for horror of
conscience least there should be a nick, or flaw in the least, in their
baptism, and so were still studying a way to do it better. So it will be in
all cases when men make laws where God has not made them, there will trouble
and guilt follow, in that they are not able to perform them.

I speak it not to weaken, or innervate any of the people of God, in absolute
commands: but where God has left a latitude (as I have proved) let us take
notice of it, and order all things for the glory of God, and the edification of
our selves, and others. And that is another motive.

Briefly, Mot. 3. He that eyes not expediency cannot do much for God.
the third is this, to persuade you to this (for I fear many do not
understand this, and you are hardly brought to it, because your hearts are
contrary to the real principles of the Gospel, whereof this is one) as it is
the way to end controversies among the brethren; and the way to keep peace
within our selves. So thirdly, unless you will receive this truth, and labor
to understand it, if you go by the other way, taking every thing jure divino,
to be an absolute rule to bind people in all the world, and then when you have
put stresse on them, and broken them, you conclude there is no Church, nor no
believers: such a soul will never be able to do much for God, he will never be
able to honor God much; he may please himself, as such do, and think that he
is grown in grace, and has out-stripped others and he may trouble the
Kingdom, and rend the Churches, and make debate among the Saints: but take
this for certain, he shall never be able to honor God much, he shall do
little in his generation. I mean (that I may come to particulars) he will
neither be able to do much in wining of sinners, nor in strengthening of weak
Saints: for in those two ways are the greatest opportunities we have of
honoring God; If ye love me feed my lambs, says Christ. He cannot do it;
why so?

1. They present religion to others as endless.
First, because such a man, or such a people that are set in such a way (as many
are in these days, and many godly people) they present Religion to others
always as an endless thing, as a thing that has no end. And therefore when
they persuade weak Christians to be religious, they look upon their religion as
a bottomless pit; as Solomon says, The lips of a whore is a deep pit. They
think here is a religion indeed, if we close with this people we shall not know
where to stay; the last month they were in one religion, and the last year in
another; and so they seek a knot in a bulrush, they seek for curiosity where
God has not laid it, and therefore they are ever wandering. They persuade us
to be of this Church, and of this religion, and we shall be safe, say carnal
men; how earnest are they to have us be with them, and two months ago they
were as earnest for another, and it may be two months hence they will be for
another; and so they run from them. Therefore in 2 Timothy 4. when there was a
great deal of stir among the Christians, about Genealogies, and old wives
tales, and vain stories; Paul bids Timothy take heed of them. Why? because
they were endless, that is, if a man go to them, they go from one fancy to
another, he knows not where to find them. When Paul would clear himself from
an ill report they had of him among the Corinthians 2 Cor. 1. he takes this for
one argument, our conversation was in simplicitia, we walked in the light of
the Sun before you, and he comes with another argument, our yea was yea, and
our nay was nay; He brings this as an argument to regaine their thoughts for
religion: for it was not for his own honor sake that he carried himself
stayedly among the Saints (which is lovely:) for weak Christians look on such
men, and on religion as a weak swimmer looks on the stream of waters, says
he, I will go in the shallow, for if I go in the stream, I shall not know
where to stay, I shall be carried down to the Sea. So, though men may think
that this is growth in grace, to grow from one fancy to another in external
things. As one that asked a woman, why she was not baptized again? says he,
you grow not in grace, as if he should say; there is no growing in grace
without these outward things. As I remember (without disparaging the person, he
is unknown to you) a man that was a member of a Church; and because he saw
infants baptized, and himself was not, he broke off from them and said there
was no Church, and all the stream did run for two months together on
baptism, there was nothing talked of but that, and concluded, the Anabaptists
and all were Antichristian, and there was no Church, nor any thing till we had
Apostles again; as I told you, that any that hold that principle and follow it
closely, and rationally, they will infalliably come to Apostles, and Miracles,
and Signs from heaven. And reason shows it; for they will frame such a
curious piece, like Moses, that shall be an absolute rule to bind every thing,
and nothing shall be expedient, or inexpedient: but all cammanded, or
forbidden, nuzzeling, and searching for this piece and cannot find it; they
will give over, and say, let us have Apostles, etc. And so how shall they win
poor sinners, when they see they whirle about? will they ever delight in your
religion, when it is thus presented to them? Carnal people, though they cannot
answer their objections, yet they will say, these people we know not where they
stand, therefore we will not meddle with them: Such people as study crotchets
and put such stresse on them, they can do little good; whereas if they would
walk by expediency, they would win people to the Lord. Therefore, suffer not
thy heart to be above the word of God to master it, but put thy heart under the
word of God, and let it square thee, try thy heart by the word of God; or else
I know who will have the worst of it.

2. They present religion as burdensome.
Another reason is, as they present religion as an endless thing; So as a
wondrous burdensome thing, as an intolerable task to them. And our nature,
flesh and blood is so averse to goodness, that it is loath to under go even
the sweet yoke of Christ. In the second Psalm there is a prophecy of the
people under Christ, Let us break their bands (say they) and cast away their
cords from us. Which is only meant of the law of Jesus Christ, which is an
easy yoke, and a light burden; now when people shall go, and add abundance
to this, and make as many more laws, and more grievous than Christ has made,
and shall present such a mass to the people, no wonder that they start off and
run from them: For present Christ as lovely, and amiable as you can, yet a
carnal heart accounts it a burden, and runs away. That is the reason (to my
knowledge) that in some countries people have labored much, and done little
good; Why? this was the greatest stumbling block, they made laws concerning
hair; it must be of such a color, the scarf, and the band, and the
handkercheife upon it, and so cast dams upon people; they law such laws that
they would not come near them, but railed against godliness, and some were
ready to hang, and drown themselves, and from thence it comes, they make
nicks and knacks where the scripture makes none. So that though all men do not
so, yet generally carnal men conceive some such thing. I remember a story of a
learned man, that there being a wild Gentleman of a great estate, set to him to
train him up, and bring him under a little: the young man hated and abhorred
him, and had as leiv be hanged as come near him: for he thought he should
loose all his liberty: but the old Gentleman would walk, and the young man with
him, and when the young man would bowl, he would bowl with him; and when he
saw it was not such a task, as he thought it had been, he proved a godly
zealous man; So this is a mighty hinderance of doing good to others, to make
religion to seem ghastly, by little inventions, and knacks that men make that
Christ has not bound them to; a carnal heart will not come into such a prison.

3. They present religion as rediculous.
Thirdly, they can do little good to others, because they present religion to
carnal men as a ridiculous thing to be laughed at. How so? I will tell you,
carnal men however you conceive of them, they have often a spirit of
illumination, common knowledge, and right reason: and by common knowledge, and
right reason, they may be able to judge farther than many Christians, what is
the will of God, and what is not, in external things, though they be strangers
from the power of those things. Therefore when you come to carnal men, and
scatter such laws, and commands, and rules among them, though they be
strangers from the power, yet they are able to judge as well as your selves,
whether they be the laws of God or no: for they have understanding, and
reason, they have Scripture, and they have common illumination: therefore when
people make such laws, (whereas they should respect what is expedient, and
take the laws that Christ has made) they expose themselves to be laughed at,
they are so far from gaining of souls.

But Fourthly, (because this is a great thing) for that reason we came into the
world to win souls, 4. By not eyeing what is expedient men deprive themselves
of opportunities of doing good.
and to feed the lambs of Christ; therefore I shall show you farther that by
so doing you deprive your selves of abundance of opportunities to do good, that
though they would never so feign do good as much as others, yet they are
deprived of the opportunity to do, or receive good. My meaning is not, that
any should do evil that good may come of it: neither do I mean that men
should do lawful things, if they be in a doubting condition: but my meaning
is, they should endeavor to remoove all prejudices, and misconceits of things,
whereby they lay blocks in their own way. As for instance, how many godly men
in this land, godly, and holy, and of great gifts, and that desire to do good,
and it may be out of a conceit, or rather (with reverence) out of conscience of
the Pulpit, or the places we preach in, have hid their tallents, and have laid
down their work, and kept in their gifts, and become unprofitable. And how
many hundred Christians are there that are godly, and holy people out of
conscience of the calling of the Ministers, or the house that they meet in,
have with the grief of their souls, and many a heavy heart, shut themselves
in a hole, four or five women together, and lost the use of those blessed
gifts. If they had studied whether it had been convenient, it had been worth
the while to dispute: but God has made no law for preaching in a pulpit, or in
a pew, or in a house of stone, or not of stone: but making an absolute law that
it must hold in all cases, they fall into these snares that are grievous.

I speak not this that you should persecute such, for they are godly people,
and it is a sign they have tender consciences. I mean not so; nor do I
persuade them to do things without some knowledge, that they should not do it
doubtingly: but I desire you to receive this truth, whereby the occasion of
such scruples may be remooved. There be four things;

The first thing is this, that clearly demonstrates that they cannot do much
for God, 5. If they do good it is by accident.
or the honor of God: because if they do any thing for God, for the winning
of others, it is, as I may say, by chance, by accident: for it is a thing
beside their intention. This is their religion; it is not to study how I may
honor God, and bring in sinners: this scarsly comes in their thoughts, but
what is truth, and what is false, what is lawful, and what is unlawful.
Therefore diverse that else are godly men, let them have a nick right, or wrong
they never consider the Congregation, how they may do most good: but they
think this is truth, and every truth must be preached in every place, at every
time, to every people, this is their religion; they never look if it may do
good. Whereas a Christian that makes no more laws than Christ has made, and
studies what is expedient, and would win souls, he must be wise, and
watchful, and circumspect, and able to see what may conduce to edification.
Therefore men in Scripture that were sent to win souls; they are called
fishermen; the Apostles were: and fishermen must be cunning, it is not every
bait, that will catch every fish, he must bait and wait, and be cunning, and
wise. Says Paul, I took you by guile; I had a way to win you, and insinuate
into you: men must make it their study if they will win souls to the Lord, to
look not only that they preach truth, but what truth, to what people, and what
way they do it. Therefore Paul Gal. 2. when he came among people that were
not able to receive the truth concerning justification, and concerning
ceremonies, he preached to them of good repute; that is, choice Christians that
were able to bear it, that they might communicate it to others, or else he
should loose his labor, and run in vain. So in Act. 19. where there was great
strife about the Temple of Diana, Paul when he came there, he knew that the
peoples hearts were set on their Temple, and the worshipping of their Idol,
therefore he does wisely to do their souls good, he might have said, I preach
the truth; and down with the image of Diana; but when the business was done,
bespake not a word against Diana, and the Temple; he hated the image, and the
Temple: but he went the wisest way to work to win them. That is another reason.

6. They intend good only to few.
A sixth reason is this, these people cannot do good for the winning of others,
and for the feeding of the poor lambs of Christ; why so? If they do any I
told you it is by accident, it is beside their intention, or if they intend
any, it is a few of their own mind and judgment, those that are in
fellowship with them only, and the rest they look on them as unbelievers,
though they be never so holy, and the Spirit of God have sealed to their
souls; yet they are unbelievers, and are in an Antichristian estate, and have
the mark of the Beast on them, and go from them as if they had the plague on
them. I say, thou may do good to those people that are of thy own mind:
thou can never do good to others with such language under such notions;
whereas others that walk according to the truth that I teach, they walk equally
to all Saints, and as Paul says, I became all things to all men, that I might
win some. He labors to win sinners, to nourish the weak, if they have any
thing of Christ he loves them, and if they have nothing he endeavors to work
it. Whereas the other looks on them as Turks and Infidels, and can do them no
good.

But you will say, though we look so on them we would do them good if they
would hearken to us.

It may be so, and it is probable you would do them good: but I tell you you
shall never be able to do it in that way; Why? because as Paul says, 1 Cor.
8. Knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth: If you love them not you can not
edify them. If I did know a man that should teach me, and loved me nor, I
cannot, I will not be edified. When good people that are sealed that they are
the Lords, and that Christ is in them; when people shall come and call them
Antichristians, and that they have the mark of the Beast on them, and that they
are unbelievers; are they like to do them good? they are not, because love
does not intervene.

7. They lead others to destruction.
Shall I add one word more, and end that? Lastly, they cannot win others, or do
good to others; why so? (It is a foreword, I am death to speak it, but I know
it is true) because they are so far from edifying, that those that go that
way, according to that principle, they lead many silly souls to their own
destruction; How? I will demonstrate it thus, the principle is this, that nick
that is new, they lay such stresse on it, that he that follows that is a
believer, and a Saint, though he be stark naught; now there is no poor carnal
man, there is no soul so wicked, and wretched but he would be willing to do
something for himself, and when he finds so easy a way to Heaven, that it is
but observing such an external thing, he will be of that way, though he be a
whoremonger, an adulterer. As it is in Popery (though I compare not the
persons, but there is the same principle in both) how comes their Church to be
so great? they come to poor people that know not what to do for salvation,
and they say, come, be of our Church and you shall be saved; take such a
Religion on you, confess your sins to the Priest, and do this, and that, and
then you shail be saved. It is the same principle; you place salvation, and
heaven in external things, and most of your own making, and then poor souls
that would go to heaven, and go the nearest way they could find, they come,
and they will observe those external things: and then what is the end of it?
After all this ado there will be a carnal profane heart, that was never
changed, that Christ was never in. I have seen more than one that have been
asked; what evidence have you that Christ is in you? I have walked in such a
way this twenty, or two and twenty years, or so long, and I am come out from
Antichrist. A man may do so, and be a damned creature when all is done; I have
seen some (though I think there be scarce any Christians in the world besides
that have done it) that have invented a world of tricks, and qu^rks out of the
Scripture, and have made them absolute laws, and none must be held but they;
and besides I have seen such boasting, and such blindness in spiritual
things, that with charity a man may say there is not grace in such souls.
Therefore poor carnal souls are gulled when such tricks are put on them;
carnal hearts run there, and think to be safe, and crow over others: and in
the end they prove carnal. This is not the way to win others, or do good to
others. So you have three motives.

The fourth Motive that should move you to hearken to this truth, Mot. 4.
Without looking to expediency a man cannot be an excellent Christian.
to labor to understand it, and receive it, and to walk by it, for otherwise
you will never be excellent Christians; remember that word: spiritual,
excellent Christians never make such tricks: you shall always observe that the
Eagle looks not after flies; I have never seen, and I have considered with my
self, I have scarsly ever, if ever seen a spiritual Christian go that way;
you shall observe in your selves (if I be not deceived) that when your souls
are in a spiritual temper, full of the love of God, and communion with Christ,
and in a holy spiritual frame, you shall not find such a disposition in you
to make such a glorious business of little external things, neither that God
has commanded, though we must not neglect that, much less those that God
never commanded: So the excellency in Christianity, or the beauty of holiness.
I would set it out (as a godly man in another case,) by the natural beauty of
a man or a woman; What makes a man or a woman beautiful. It is not only the
having of so many limbs; another man may have as many legs, and fingers, and
toes as a beautiful man has, and yet not be beautiful; but what is the
beauty of a man? a sumety, or harmony and proportion, between the humors of
the body with in, and the members without; as a man is not beautiful that has
a great head, and a little hand, that is no proportion; So a Christian that
walks by the rule of lawfulness, and unlawfulness only, by what is lawful,
and commanded, and what is forbidden, he will not be a beautiful Christian,
that is but a limb of Christianity: but excellent Christianity arises from
proportion between our actions, when an action is not only good, but it is done
expediently, it is done decently, and orderly; As a Lute, or a pair of
Virginals that have as many strings as they need, yet there may be no music:
So there is no beauty in a Christian that says, what is truth, and what is
falsehood, and what is lawful, and what unlawful; But the beauty is when a man
orders his ways, as that he does things for the honor of God, and for the
good of others, and of his own soul: this makes an excellent Christian, the
other cannot be excellent Christians. The reasons, and grounds of it (that I
may touch them briefly)

An excellent Christian has the mind of Christ.
The first is this, (I spoke a little before of it) because an excellent Saint,
or a happy Saint, he has the mind of Christ Jesus, we have the mind of
Christ says the Apostle; What is that? Thus, he has the law, and will of God
in the New Testament written in his heart, there is just the same finger as was
in penning this blessed book, with the same letters, and characters and the
same order: thence it comes to pass, as we see among lambs, and sheep, put a
lamb among a thousand he will go to his own dam: You are not able to give a
reason, much less the poor creature: so the will of God is written in the
heart of a Christian; one comes and tells him of a nick of outward sanctity;
though he be not able to give an answer against it, yet there is a kind of
sagacity in him, the law of God is written in his heart; and therefore he will
not obey that: he knows not why, but he cannot touch it; So though a Christian
have reason in most of his ways, yet the maine principle that leads him is
somewhat above that. Those Saints that have not their hearts touched with this
landstone will be carried about to any nick, till they be undone.

2. He is busied about high things.
Another ground is, because an excellent Saint is busy, and employed about
higher things, and therefore he cannot find time to take up all his thoughts
to study externalls. As some people all their preaching, and praying, and
discourse is about such things in externalls. A Saint may look upon it, and
talk respectively, but he is so taken up about knowing of Christ and his love,
and bringing his soul into communion with him, and conformity to him, that he
has not while to do it. That a man may say, and say truly, that there are
diverse people that trade in external things; as Pharaoh, the people are idle;
So it is a hundred to one but thou have an idle soul within, that is left at
random, thou know not what terms God and thy soul are in; And therefore
you shall find in several places in Timothy, there was a stir about
Genealogies, they might have said it is Scripture, and truth. Take heed of them
says Paul; How shall Timothy take heed of them? see the rule 1 Timothy 4.8. he
calls him to other business, he takes him and puts him upon another work, Bodily
exercise profits little; What shall he do then? exercise thy self to
godliness. Why, this is godliness, might they say: No; it is a hundred to one
says Paul, but they are people that are remiss in godliness, that are taken
up with fables. So in v. 12. Let no man despise thy youth: but be an example to
the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in
purity. That is, in these spiritual things. So in chap. 6. 11. there was a
great deal of stir about outward things; what must Timothy do? O man of God
fly these things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love,
patience, meekness. That is, take up thy soult, impoly it in spiritual
things, and I warrant thee thou shall not be so studious in making little
knots, and knicks, and laws.

3. He relisheth spiritual things.
Another thing why an excellent Christian cannot be so, is because the excellent
Christian finds such sweetness, having tasted how good God is in his love, in
his Son; there is such sweetness in spiritual things that you cannot feed
them with such husks. Bring a spiritual Saint, and tell him, here is a Church
and Congregation, there is none like it in the world, they are all
Antichristian but this: bring him there, and there all their prayers, and their
discourses, and sermons, it is only of Churches, and Officers, and I know not
what, and they are endless upon that, and AntiChrist is Babylon, and this is
Jerusalem, and Sion; a spiritual soul cannot feed on this, he cannot live
there, no more than a fish on the shore. As Job says, as the mouth judges of
tastes, so does the ear of words. We can give no reason of our tasting, why a
thing is sweet, or sour, and so of hearing: but there is a secret thing
within, that cannot savor those external things, and husks that feed not the
soul; and a Saint being a sheep of Christ he knows his voice.

Another reason is this, that an excellent Saint he has such a good stock, or
estate within, that he cannot but contemplate his enjoying of God, He has
stock enough within.
as much as may be, he needs not go abroad so far to those things. Whereas on
the other side, generally those people that take up all their time and
discourse in those ways, you shall find usually that they are banckrupts, The
course of backsliders.
or backsliders, they have crakt estates; for when men backslid from God, and
have lost their communion with Christ; what then? they will make it up in
outward things to the utmost, even to superarogation. As in Isaiah, when the
people had backslided, and revolted, they brought abundance of sacrifices, God
was weary of them; he complains not of the want of them: but he says, I will
have none of them, away with them; the kernel of the soul is gone. So in
Micah 6. those wicked people that did enjoy nothing of God in their souls, say
they; How shall I come before the Lord? shall I bring a thousand rams, or ten
thousand rivers of oil? shall I give the fruit of my body for the sin of my
soul? O no; the Lord will none of them. So, when souls are broken, and
banckrupt, generally those people for a while keep up a profession in external
knacks. Therefore backsliders that run from God, and are ashamed to be
profane, for a year or two, they take up an external Religion, and make
endless knacks, and will be brave people, and by and by down goes that too.
Usually when the devil draws people from God, he eats the kernel a year,
or two before, and then he knows they will throw away the shell.

Mot. 5. To look to our principles against suffering times.
Only, one thing more to move you to consider this truth, and to endeavor to
set your selves this way, is this, that all of you, or most of you I think,
look on these times, (especially that are coming) as suffering times, and you
do well so to do, and it may be there is more reason to look for it than
before, it is fafe to make that account, and if it prove otherwise it will be
the sweeter; you make account to suffer, many of you (it may be) on right
grounds fear sorer sufferings than foremrly, If you mean to suffer, consider
before hand, look to your principles, take heed that you suffer not as evil
doers; that is, take heed that you be not brought to the stake to suffer for
nicks, or conceits, or things of your own making: for however many of Gods own
people have often suffered for such nicks, and with comfort; it was the mercy
of God, because they had honest hearts; and many times carnal men, Scipio, and
Cato, and those suffered valliantly out of a natural resolution; yet you
cannot be sure that you shall have comfort in your suffering, without it be for
the truth of God, that God has laid down: Therefore as Jeremy says in the
Lamentations, so I say to you Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? man
suffers for his sins; And what follows? let us search and try our ways.
Beloved this is the benefit of affliction, nor only to make us search our
ways, and to reform what is amiss in that: But to make the wise to search
their principles, their belief, and their liberty, and their tenets, and to
hold only that, that they are with joy able to lay down their lives for. As in
a storm when the Seamen see it coming, they search the Ship, and see if
there be any superfluous goods, and they cast it overboard. When the Constable
comes if there be any stolen goods in the house, our with that; so if a storm
be coming, consider; here is a nick that I have made will it hold? shall I
burn for it? It will be fearful when you shall suffer, either to relinquish,
and so shame religion, or else to suffer for that that you know not whether it
is right, or wrong, therefore search your ways, and your tenets against
sufferings come, that you make no more laws than you may be able to die for.

Lastly, (to conclude at this time) this should move you to consider, Mot. 6.
It will offend God to make laws where he has not or abused liberty.
how much the Lord will be offended with you, and that justly, in case when you
come to judgment you be found to have either bound your selves where God has
made you free, or have used your liberty to his dishonor; for both these I
drive at. God has given us liberty in the New Testament, a great deal of
liberty; he has given us that honor as sons, he has not bound us with
little laws, as in the Old Testament, he did them as little children. Now if
we use this liberty to his dishonor, and not seek in every thing to advantage
our own souls, and to further his glory, there will be a fearful reckoning.

Let me tell you a word, that may seem strange to some of you; That the Lord
may be more offended with a Christian for doing an inexpedient thing, or for
not doing an expedient thing, than for forgoing a thing absolutely commanded;
As thus, God often gives us an absolute command, and he sends another duty in
that makes him suspend with the former (as I have showed) as a less duty is no
duty when a greater comes in place: but when it is expedient completely, God
never dispenses with such an action, but it is a sin not to do it. As for
instance, suppose you have a son that is at age; and you have an Apprentise
and you bid him do so much work, and you go home to your house, and bid your
son study to do that that may be for the honor of his father, but you tie
him to nothing. And when you are from home the son meets with an opportunity
that might have enriched his fathers house for ever, if he had taken it, but he
did it not, and the servant is negligent, and does not do his work in your
absence; When the father comes home, and the son shall say, I had an
advantage to have advanced you, and us all, but I did not take it, his father
did not command him to lay hold of the opportunity; but judge you, would you
be more angry with the son, or with the servant, that neglected only a few
trifling things. So you have opportunity to make God honorable (as I may with
reverence speak) in such a Court, in such a Committee, at such a time, in such
a thing that God has not absolutely commanded, or forbidden. This is the
reason if you compare Jude with 2 Pet. why there are such woes threatened
against those that turn the grace of God into wantones, they bring upon
themselves swift damnation. Why so? God bestows grace and has made them
free, and redeemed them, and they turn all to wantonness, and loosnesse.
Therefore I will conclude only with one instance, and that is thus, suppose you
had a servant in your house, the master workman of the shop, that you do not
use to tie to any thing, he is a good servant, and has wisdom to do himself
good, and to advance the family, and you have a little young Apprentise, and
you tie him to do so much work against you come home; and both neglect it, the
great man, and the boy, they have done nothing; What will you say? You will say
to the man, I thought you had had more wisdom, I thought you would have given
good example to the child, that you had been a man of wisdom, and would have
been trusty when I was gone from home, and for you to be idle, and to let go
such a market, and such customers; you would be a hundred fold more angry with
him than with the other. Thus the Jews were children, and were tied to an
ilet-hole, and to the snuff of a candle. Now the Lord has left us free for
his honor, and our advantage. Now, when we shall come to reckon before the
Lord, and God shall find carnal professors that never laid hold of an
opportunity to honor God; what will God say? I thought you would have honored
me, you have another Gospel for clearness, and glory, and you have more
wisdom, and the offer of my Spirit, and yet you were drunken, and carnal
professors, you had so many opportunities, and you let them go, and did me no
honor; but lived as droanes, and did go out as the snufe of a candle; I will
pay you for all. The sum is, not to neglect any known commandment, but to
make no more than God has made, and to make out the rest in expediencie; that
is the way to honor the Lord. Therefore to conclude, I wish, and exhort you,
as James says, So speak, and so do, as those that shall be jugded by the law
of liberty. O, the law of liberty will be a severe law one day. God has called
us to be sons, he has given us a great deal of liberty, whereby we may
serve him more to his glory, and with more honor to our selves, if we abuse
this, and walk carnally, and ill-favouredly, it will be a severe law to us, and
a severe day to such professors.

Stumbling Blocks REMOVEd.
1 CORINTHIANS 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient.


WE are come to the last Doctrine that we observed from these words, namely,

That a Christian in his walking should eye, not only what is lawful, and what
is unlawful, but also what is expedient, and what is inexpedient.

I have delivered to you almost all that I have to say to you concerning this
point also. Something there is to clear, or rather to fasten this upon you,
that so I may finish the point at this time.

But beloved, I see the devil seeks to hinder us, and to cast blocks in our
way, therefore before I go forward, I must speak two or three words to clear a
litt^^ of the way; For we that are Ministers are compan^ to Carpenters, in our
building the house of God, and when a Carpenter goes home at night, and leaves
his work, he finds rubbish in his way in the morning that must be removed;
Stumbling blocks removed.
and so it is in our Ministry. Now for the removing of this, consider, and
understand these three things, that so I may proceed.

First, that whereas we have spent four, or five Lords days in opening this
doctrine to you, aiming at peace among the Saints: (for, for the other the seed
of the Serpent they will never be reconciled) I would have you understand this,
that I have not all this while properly, and directly spoken against any man's
way whatsoever. It is true, I have had occasion to speak of those that you call
Familists, and Antinomians, and Independents, and Anabaptists, and
Presbyterians (though I be wary to use any of these words, because I desire
peace, but in all that I have said hitherto of any of these men's ways, I did
not properly speak against any of their ways; but what I spoke was by way of
illustration, The scope of the whole work.
only to illustrate, and clear the thing in hand; what is that? This, that I
profess my self an open adversary, and enemy to, of any thing in the world;
all my drift has been to illustrate, and clear out, that Old Testament
principle, that is the root of all mischeife almost. What is that? That
principle in you whereby you will go, and make laws in external things under
the Gospel, where Christ has not made them, and in the mean while neglect, or
destroy love, and peace, and edification. This principle is that that I have
followed, and if I have spoken of Anabaptists, or Presbyterians, or
Independents, it has been to ferret out this principle, that like leaven to my
understanding has soured us all; and if the Lord direct us that we may have
this out, that is my design, and endeavor.

There are two sorts of people among you; 2. Sorts of people.
which do somewhat discourage, and hinder us in the work.

The one is, diverse that are wondrous well pleased, I will not say, but some
are pleased to edification; 1. Some that are pleased with the doctrine for
faction
they are pleased because they be edified; I hope so. But I fear others are
exceedingly taken: because I have occasion to mention all these sorts of
people, therefore they are pleased, because every one hopes to get the other to
his faction. As if he be a Presbyterian, it is nutts to him to hear any thing
spoken against the Independents; and if he be an Independent, to hear the
Presbyterians spoken against: so I fear you are pleased, because you are in
faction; and every one is glad to have the Preacher side with his faction. This
pleases corruption, but does the soul no good.

Others, on the other side are offended exceedingly at what has been said, why
so? 2. Some offended because their party is spoken against.
because hearing any thing spoken of that patty they are of (whatsoever it is,
by way of illustration, to clear, and follow, and hunt out this principle,
they take it hainously; why so? because religion (I must tell you) is all in
faction, among us; therefore though you your selves acknowledge that there are
some godly men that are Independents, and some godly men that are
Presbyterians, yet it is so in faction, that if a Preacher rail against
Presbytery he is an excellent Preacher, and on the other side, if he be bitter
against Independents he is a rare man, and so you go along in faction, that no
man living is able to do your souls good.

I bewail it, and it will be your misery; you in this City, of all places in
Christendom, (excepting none) are miserable people. Here is a populous place,
and abundance of Preachers, and abundance of itching ears, and greasy hearts
as the Psalmist says, and you will not be tied by the Magistrates to your
Parishes, and I desire not that, but you will not be tied by the Ministers, to
suffer the word of exhortation, but you make a trade of wandering from Minister
to Minister to try their ears, and as soon as you have heard a word that
crosses your corruption, and your fancy you are gone. As if a poor soldier
should come with a wounded arm, or a broken leg, and desire a Surgeon to
put on a plaster, and when he feels it smart, away he goes from that
Surgeon to another, and so to a third, and. a fourth. So, you are miserable
souls, without Gods mercy like to perish for ever; you have hearts as fat as
brawne, as fat as grease, as some translate it. What is that? Our work is upon
your hearts, we are Gods hammers the word is called so by Jeremiah: Now take a
greasy thing and put it under a hammer, and it will slip on one side, and on
another, and you can never strike it justly: So you, if there be any thing that
crosses your humor; it is a hard saying, and away you go; and were it not for
your own meserie it were no great loss. Therefore let me tell you, it is a
principle that I am an enemy to wheresoever it is, and it is that I have bin
hunting out; and let every one take his share to open it, and labor to find
it out for his good; I would begine with my self, and I profess before you,
that there is no principle, that has mislead my soul, (to my grief) as this
principle. Let me take my share, and you yours, and suffer not your hearts to
be above the word of God, and to run wild when any thing comes to do you good,
but suffer the word of exhortation for your good; That is one thing.

Secondly, this is another thing, in all that I have said (and I have spoken
much concerning this) I have not in all this, (woe to me if I should) sought to
innervate, 2. nothing commanded by God weekned.
or weaken any jot, or tittle, of any absolute command of God, concerning any
good commanded, or any evil forbidden. Think not therefore (as I said before)
here is a latitude, Paul has broken down the hedge, and we may do what we
list; No, in all things that God has determined I have carried it so that I
would not have the good omitted that he has commanded, or the evil done that
he has forbidden. For I know what the Spirit faith in the close of the book
of the Revelations, He that adds to this book, God shall add to him all the
plagues that are written in this book, and he that puts to any thing, God
shall put his name out of the book of life, and I know that he that breaks the
least commandment, and teaches men so to do shall be least in the Kingdom of
heaven. Mat. 5. Therefore I have not in all this sought to weaken any one
tittle, or thing absolutely determined.

3. Not to abuse this doctrine to strife.
Thirdly, and lastly, the maine aim of all was peace; therefore I would
admonish you all of being like the Spider to draw poison out of the sweetest
flowers. If we study to make peace, and thou pickest occasion of more war,
to jangle, and wrangle more; woe to thee, for if Christ say Blessed are the
peace makers; than Cursed are the peace breakers; Those that any way give just
occasion to break the peace of Gods people. And I am affraide notwithstanding
all that has been said, there are some among us, that I may say of them as
David says of some in his time, when I speak of peace they prepare for war;
So, when we speak of peace, and use means to reconcile the Saints, they pick
occasion of jangling, and wrangling. This is but to clear the way;

So now, I proceed to that that remains which consists in two things.

The one is to point out briefly some hindrances in the way of the Saints that
must be remooved, or else we shall never walk according to this rule.

Seconly, to show some few means (as we call them) external means that God
has directed me to, how to come to square our hearts, and lives, according to
this rule.

But before I come to that there are two objections in the way, which I shall
answer briefly.

The first is this, peace, and you endeavor peace; yet notwithstanding me
thinks you seem to innervate the word of God, you seem to make a great deal of
the word of God unprofitable: for if we must not make an absolute rule of every
thing here; what do we with it? There will be a great deal void: for you told
us that every example, no, not every precept, does not make an absolute rule to
bind the Saints; so it seems there will be a great deal void; and what shall
we do with it?

To answer that briefly, I deny that there is any thing in this blessed book
that is unprofitable: Nothing in the Scripture but is of use.
but I deny this also that every thing in the New Testament is profitable to
make a rule of, I will show you two places of Scripture, the first is in Romans
15.4. Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our learning,
But not every thing a rule.
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. That
is, there are many things that are for comfort, there are many things that
teach men the mysteryes of faith, there are many ends to the word of God
besides making rules to bind us in our conversations. It is more fully in 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, and reproof, and correction, and instruction in righteousness. It
is profitable for doctrine, that is, to teach the mysteryes of heavenly things
to be believed. And for reproof; to show us where we sin against God, to help
to convince us, as the Greek word signifies. And for correction; to help to
heal our backsliding. And for instruction in righteousness; that is, to make
rules, and laws. So all the blessed book is profitable: but I deny that God
ever gave this book to that end, to make rules and canons of every thing.

Secondly, to answer that, 2. The Scripture not all delivered in Canons.
those things that are rules for us to walk by, you must understand that they
are not delivered to us in Theorems, or Thesis, they are not given in Canons,
or Aphorisms; the word of God is not given so: Or more plainly, not as the ten
Commandments were; where every thing was, thou shall do this, and thou shall
not do that; it is not given so: but as our Common Law, as a rule to walk by:
but we must be very wary of drawing rules. We draw it sometime from the
letter of the Statute, sometime from parallel cases; sometime from the case of
such a Judge upon such a party, sometime from right reason; sometime from
presidents. So, think not to find rules in Scripture all in Canons, to bind
all; No, there are few rules for conversation that are so. Indeed speculative
things, matters of faith, are laid down in Terminis, what to do* but in
matters of conversation it is not so. Therefore be wondrous wary how you draw a
rule to walk by. As for instance, in the book of. God we read that Abraham by
the command of God he must kill Isaac: you cannot draw this rule or Doctrine
thence that every man must go, and kill his child: but we may draw this
rule, that we must part with the dearest thing we have to obey God, So Paul
circumcised Timothy, we cannot draw this doctrine, or rule thence, that we must
go and cicumcise one another; but we may this, that in things that are
undetermined we should do things so as we may avoid offense; Paul wishes
Timothy to take care of his cloak; we cannot draw this rule, that we must
leave our cloaks behind us, and send our neighbors for them: but this we
may, that we ought to be careful of those earthly things that God has
bestowed upon us.

Beloved, it is not unwillingnesse in honest hearts to walk by the rules of God
that undoes their souls: for an honest heart will not balk the word of God, it
will go by that rule, misdrawing of rules from Scripture.
but it is the misdrawing of rules from the word of God. I pity to see with
what hearts, and conceits many draw rules from the word of God. As for
instance, taking that text of our Savior, some are made evnuches of men, they
have gone and dismembered themselves. And so the Papists, in that Parable of
Dives, and Lazarus, out of Abraham's bosom, they would prove purgatory. And so
the Userers, because God compares himself to one, they would prove it to be
lawful. And so Mat. 22. they were to compel men to come to the feast;
therefore men must compel others to be of what religion they please; Beware of
this, and remember these two things; that all in this blessed book is not for
conversation; they have their use besides that. And secondly, be wary how you
draw rules; Therefore weak Christians when they draw rules out of the book of
God; say not only Sir I walk by Scripture, here is my rule; but ask godly
people; do I draw this rule right? here is a text; is this a right
consequence? does this rise clearly from it? You should do so. But if you can
get a line of Scripture, they hale it by the end, and run headlong, and make a
rule of it: but beware of that.

To be wary of drawing rules from scripture.
Therefore let me call upon you again, I beseech you remember that request I
made to you, that you would learn how much precept, or example, or what kind
of precept, and what kind of example goes to make an absolute rule to all the
Saints in the New Testament, determine that, or you can do nothing. As in a
Court when a Delinquent comes to be tried, they ask him who he will be tried
by; some are tried by the Peers, others by the Country. So, lay down a
Standard out of the word by which you may judge: there are none that have taken
pains yet in it. It may be God may give some Christians opportunity to do a
little hereafter in that business. But otherwise, never say, I have Scripture
for it on my side, men make Scripture speak any thing. Therefore all the
misery of an honest hearted soul is, not that he walks not by rule: but that
he misdrawes his rules; he pulls them by head, and shoulders, and draws them
not right.

The second Ojection is this, but you will say, Moses by your confession should
make a curtous piece to an ilet hole, to the very burying of their excrements,
and that Moses was so faithful in his house, and that the Son of God should
not be so faithful in the new Testament; this is a common argument, it is
strange that the Son of God should not be so faithful in laying down every
tittle as Moses was who was but a servant.

But to answer that, it sounds to me like that reasoning that I hear among
simple people; when we say they must go to hell if they continue in their
sins; say they, is not God stronger than the devil? Therefore they must go to
heaven, though they continue unbelievers; does that follow?

So here, must it follow that Christ is not faithful as Moses, because he has
not made so curious a piece in external things in the New Testament? That is
not the thing. What was faithfulness in Moses? To declare and deliver to the
people all the Ordinances, and Statutes of God; though Moses did not deliver
all: for David delivered much concerning singing, and other things: But all
that God told him he delivered; and so he was faithful. So; what was
faithfulness in Christ? That all that he had seen, and heard of his father, he
told to his Disciples. Therefore, I retort the argument thus, and that truly,
and rightly; that Christ Jesus did not deliver any such curious piece in
external things in the New Testament, therefore Christ Jesus was faithful; he
being faithful there is no such thing to be found there: To make it a little
plainer by an illustration, suppose a Gentleman in the Country should have a
Son, and a servant, both faithful as he judges; and he should send his
servant into Cheap side, or some other Market, to buy a great deal of meat,
and spice, and sugar, and clothes, and the like; and he should send his son
with letters to the Parliament, with messages to the Committees of State; they
both go home, they have both done their errand; now should that Gentleman say
that his son was unfaithful, because he did not bring as much luggage home
as the servant? No; it was the message of the servant to fetch luggage: but it
was the message of the son to deliver his message. So, the message of Moses it
was luggage, to teach them endless, external laws, and things: but the
design of the Son of God, his message was to declare the sercret spiritual
mysteryes of his Father to the people of God in the New Testament; therefore it
is no sense, much less truth to say, that Christ was unfaithful, because he
has not as many curious ties in outward things as Moses. So I have done with
those objection..

Now briefly, to end all at this time, there are two things remain.

First, to point out the hindrances, that keep us from walking according to
this truth.

And secondly, to show you certain means that may further you in it.

Hindrances.
The hindrances are these four, or five.

The one that you must take heed of engaging your selves with any party in
Religion beyond your own principles. 1. Engagement in parties beyond men's
principles.
Religion is already in a faction among some Saints, men are ready to cry, I
am for Paul, and I am for Apollo, and I am for Cephas. Now I would not have you
persecute others by no means: but I would have you love all Saints, all that
call on the name of the Lord with a pure heart; and honor all Saints without
faction: but take heed of running into any of these parties whatsoever, beyond
your own principle, further than you have a clear light, that you can answer
comfortably for it, at the last day before the Lord.

Hence is this running into faction; that I believe there are thousands of men
and women, that profess themselves now Presbyterians, that know not, not
understand what Presbytery is; men scarsly know what they say, and yet I am a
Presbyterian, and run into faction. So, many in that way that you call
Independency, that out of some motive of truth that they see in it, and their
good neighbors, and friends that are of it; they run a long in it; and what
follows? When they come to suffer, in death, or the like case, they either go
back with shame, and greive their brethren, or else they go on uncomfortably,
for that that they have not a seal to their conscience. So now I may say in
some measure, that people generally believe as the Church believes, as the
faction that they join themselves to believe. Therefore beware of this, this
is not a time for men to see with other men's eyes; Try all things, and hold
fast that which is good. Let every man prove his own work. Love all Saints if
there be any thing of God in them: but walk not according to any man's rules, or
principles, farther than God cleares it to your souls.

2. Looking on things with prejudice.
The second t^ing is this, that if you would walk by rule, take heed of looking
upon any thing; truth, or error with the eye of prejudice. People look now a
days upon all things (that are controverted especially) every one has a
glass before his eyes, one blew, another red; one looks on a thing as it is
accompanied with shame, and persecution, as it has such nicknames on it.
Others look on other things, as they are approved by wise men, and followed by
the multitude, as they bring profit, and credit, remove all these things from
any thing that you would judge aright of, these are false glasses; therefore
truth or error, that that is most persecuted in the world, you must judge as if
it had all the preferment, and advancement in the world. This I have often
thought, those that shall come a hundred years hence that shall be godly, if
the world last so long, will wonder at our follies, and think us mad men in
most of our controversies, and wranglings, because that prejudice, and
peevishness and passion, and those mists and glasses shall not be before their
eyes, they will be able to judge of things as they are. As we have read of a
controversy many years between the Saints about keeping of Easter, in the
East, and Western Churches; some would keep it at one time, and some at
another; we think they were mad to strive about it, and it had been no matter
if it had never been kept. And so in the Convocation, for a quarter of a year
in the Synod, the Bishops of Canterbury, and York they strove who should sit
uppermost; we think they were mad; but they were great things in those days;
when they had no better light. So those that shall come after will wonder as
much at us. Therefore labor to be as wise as thy Child will be forty years
hence; look on things without prejudice and then thou shall see clearly.

3. A devout jealousy concerning truth and error.
Thirdly, take heed, if thou will walk by the rules of the Gospel (and by this
that I have laid down before thee) of a devout jealousy that is in you, of all
things that are upon the right hand; I shall endeavor to open it a little, I
know that generally men are jealous of those opinions that are on the left
hand. I mean thus, most men are very apt to believe that it is the truth of God
whatsoever it is; if it bring credit, and preferment, and profit, and the like;
Carnal men think that truth that goes with prosperity.
and they are easily convinced that error brings poverty, and shame. As the
people in Jer. 43. when the Prophet comes to teach them that they should not
go into Egypt, and they had a mind to go contrary to Gods word, verse 2.
Th^^ said the men, thou speak fasly, the Lord our God has not sent thee to
say, go not into Egypt to sojourne there. They were jealous that it was a
false message; that it was no truth, but error, to tell them a thing contrary
to their own lusts. So Ahab that had foure-hundred false Prophets; he thought
that Micajah did not speak truth; Why? because it was contrary to his
prosperity; he said not, go and prosper as the rest did. So, most men are apt
to do now; men are strangers to the life of God, and are blind, and they
think not that the way to heaven is through many persecutions: therefore any
Pamphlet, or any sermon, though from a carnal drunkard, it will easily
confirm them in the truth, (as they call it) that goes with prosperity: But
whatsoever is on the other side is error, if it bring not gain.

But these men I may say, they be friends to the world, and enemies to God, and
they are not worthy to be called Christ's Disciples; God will one day interpret
his own word.
And there will be a time when God will come to interpret, and expound his own
word. You shall all be judged by the word of God, and you shall be judged as
God interprets that word: therefore you that follow truth now on that fashion;
I say to you, as learned Mr Dyke said, it is an observable speech: when he was
speaking of non-residents, or pluralists, he brings him answering for himself
before the Lord, as it were at the last day: There God will tell thee, if thou
had loved me thou would have fed my flock; thou will say, I fed them by
my self, or by my Curate; but says he; What if that be not the meaning of
the place when thou come there? So, you take any thing for truth if it hold
with gain, and prosperity, you will wrest any Scripture: but when God shall
interpret his own Scriptures, and you shall be judged by them; what if that be
not the meaning of those Scriptures as your Pamphlets, and carnal Sermons say;
Look to it.

Godly men think that truth that goes with persecution.
But one the other side, there is a devout jealousy in a godly man, that he
thinks that that is always truth that goes with persecution, and that error
goes with peace; and herein the honest heart oftener misseth the will of God
than the other way, As honest Jehoshaphat, when foure-hundred Prophets bid them
go to Ramath Gilead, and prosper, he thought this too good to be true; he
suspected it was not the way of God it was so smooth, there was too much peace;
he would have Micajah tell them the truth. So when the Saints of God see
peace, and prosperity go along with a way, they are jealous that it is not the
way of God. As for instance, if you tell a man that the way to Canterbury, or
York, is a rough, and dirty way; if a man be going thither and find a piece of
fair way, he is jealous he is out of his way; because he was told it was a
rough, foul way. So Christ says, that we must suffer persecutions, and
through many tribulations we shall enter into heaven: now when a Saint finds a
little piece of fair way, he thinks he is out of the way, it cannot be peace
and prosperity; that is the portion of the wicked; herein an honest heart is
ofter deceived than in the other. Therefore to direct you, know, that peace,
and prosperity are not always companions of the truth; yet sometimes riches,
and honor, and prosperity are with the truth; Peace and prosperity sometimes
go with truth.
as I might prove out of the Proverbs; Riches and honor are in the right hand
of wisdom. Many times there is honor though not ordinarily, the ordinary way
is persecution, but sometimes there is honor and wealth with truth and
righteousness, when there is persecution and trouble to the wicked: therefore
though it be a good rule generally, yet it is not absolute. Therefore let me
speak to you poor lambs, and weak souls, that I am six times more jealous of
you that you should be out in this devotion, that you should be carried aside
to the right hand, or to the left. I fear not you that are drunkards, and
swearers, and cozeners, etc. But you poor creatures, you will find some
course that has more persecution, and that must be the truth, and so you run
and miss the will of God. In Exodus, 23.1. the Lord says Thou shall not follow
a multitude to do evil; And what follows in the next verse? thou shall not
favor a poor man in his cause. If he had said thou shall not favor a rich
man it had been no wonder; for men are apt to favor them: but he says favor
not a poor man; many times a man in judgment out of a kind of devotion, and
charity, and mercy may stick to a poor man against a rich man, and yet pervert
justice: therefore thou shall favor neither rich nor poor in justice: but as
Solomon says Pro. 4. Let thine eyes look straight before thee, and thine
eyelides right on; turn not to the right hand, nor to the left, remove thy
feet from evil. Look straight on says he; I know the ordinary way to heaven is
persecution, and afflictions: but sometimes it is otherwise; therefore let me
keep the way of God whether it bring peace or trouble.

4. Carnal wisdom.
The fourth thing that we must beware of is carnal wisdom; for by this that I
have said, those that are carnally wise will lay hold of this latitude that I
have spoken of, and be glad of the Doctrine, and think now I have found a way
to escape persecution. Take heed of carnal wisdom; wherein is it? In a word,
carnal wisdom will make things absolutely commanded, and forbidden to be
expedient, or inexpedient; or else it will call those things expedient that
make for a man's own lust, and not for the honor of God.

Fifthly, take heed of sel^, for thou will never be able to walk by this rule
till thou love thy brother as thy self. Therefore in the verse next after the
text, 5. Self
Let every man not look on his own good: but on his neighbors wealth; not to
please himself: but to please all men in all things. Take heed of self love;
for then you will judge all expedient that is for your own lust.

6. Hypocresie,
Lastly, beware of hypocresie, endeavor to be sincere. An Hypocrite will never
come to this mold while the world stands; beware of Hypocricie, that is, as a
godly man says; we should soon end the controversy if every one would labor
for an upright soul, and to honor Religion before the world; There be the
hindrances.

Helps to walk expediently.
Now I will name those few means to help us in our conversation, they are but
three, or four at the most that I would have you take notice of.

1. Spiritual wisdom.
The first is spiritual wisdom, endeavor after this to be filled with it: for
you may have zeal, and you may have no knowledge, and you may have knowledge
and zeal, and yet have no wisdom: therefore to some God has given knowledge
says the Apostle, and to some wisdom, Therefore labor for spiritual
wisdom. What is that? Wisdom, to be able to discern what is convenient, and
expedient, how to fit circumstances to make an honorable, and profitable
action: I mean not carnal wisdom, and discretion, but spiritual; For without
that, all your zeal will be as water out of the channel, as fire out of the
chimney, only to rent the Churches, and to trouble the Nation. That is one.

2. Sobriety
Secondly, beg of the Lord to give you sobriety of spirit, not to be wise
above what is written: it is pride in your hearts that makes you miss the will
of God; beg sobriety, and that in two things briefly;

First, I discern that you want this sobriety in that people generally will
bring their crotchets, ^. To subject our fancies to the word
and fancies that they have hatched themselves to the word of God to make the
word of God a cloak only; a thing to prove their own fancies; whereas you must
do the contrary, rail every lesson out of the word of God: Therefore as the
word is in Ephesians. 4. the Apostle bids us not to be carried with every slieght
of men; with dyce playing of men, as the Greek is; that is, men use the
Scripture as they use dice, they make it speak any thing, as a dice player that
is cunning he will throw aims ace, or sise sinck. So I have seen a man that
has alleged the example of Noah to defend his drunkenness, etc. O, it is an
abominable thing to make the word of God a bawd, (I speak with reverence) to
our wits, and fancies, as we too often make it.

I have seen a man once that kept half a dozen men about him to go to
assizes, and Courts to swear, and he would carry any business; only tell him
what they should swear, and he had half a dozen, or half a score that would
do it: you think this was an abominable thing. Beloved, you do a more cursed
thing when you make the Scripture to second your own fancies, you make the word
of God to speak what your fancy would have it.

2. To follow notions no further than they agree with the word
Secondly, sobriety in this; many of you raise a notion, and start it from the
word of God, but in the pursuit of it you go without it; then you go to
metaphisicalls, and so draw one conceit out of another; beware of this: as you
raise any thing out of the word; so follow it no farther than the light of the
word goes before you, and there lay it down.

Thirdly, pray, as for wisdom and sobriety, 3. Watchfulness
so for a watchful heart; you must be watchful Christians if you will walk by
this rule; Thereupon in the Gospel you are often called upon to be watchful:
you must be fervent in spirit serving the Lord, or as some will have it serving
the seasons, or opportunities,. If you will study what is expedient, you must
look to circumstances, time and manner etc. Or else you cannot walk by this
rule; Especially in this time, and age we live in, and in this City that we
dwell in: for I know not the man this day in the world that knows, (if he might
have his will how to order the Church affairs in this City, I know a hundred
that can order all the Kingdom besides, but not here. Therefore you have the
more need to walk warily, and circumspectly, to look round about to see what
may edify, and what may hinder our brethren, and what hinders most: you must
have your eyes in your head if you will live in London as a Saint. I pray the
Lord to give you circumspect hearts.

Last of all, pray to the Lord to fill you with more love, above all things put
on love, 4. Love
Col. 3. which is the bond of perfectness. If you do all the rest, if God do
not raise your hearts to more love of God and the brethren, you will not go
far enough; Love does nothing amiss, it does nothing unseemly. If you have
love you will find all ways, and opportunities to do things to the glory of
God, and the good of others. So I have briefly run over that that I intended
from these words. I have been the more brief in some things; because I would
not trouble you another time from this Scripture, I leave what has been said
with you, and desire the Lord to bless it to you.

GLAD TIDINGS from HEAVEN; TO The Worst of SINNERS on Earth.

BY WALTER CRADOCK

Late Preacher at Hallows Great in LONDON;

LUKE 2 10. Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy which
shall be to all people.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons 1648.

To the Christian Reader;
READER,
THe nature of man is prone to be inquisitive after news, especially in these
unsettled, distracted times amongst us, it is a great part of the imploiment of
people and takes up much of their time, as if London, were Athens, and the
people thereof Athenians, Act. 17.21.
(who spent their time in nothing else: but either to tell, or to hear some
news.) And yet the news we bear is sometimes bad, sometimes uncertain, and
many times false. Divert thy thoughts awhile from earthly things, and in this
ensuing Treatise thou shall hear, what news from heaven in the Gospel. The
Law indeed brings us tidings: but it is like the message of Ehud, to Eglon, it
brings a dagger with it that stabs mortally: Judge 3.21.
but the ridings of the Gospel is like that message of the young Prophet to
Jehu, 2. King. 9.6
to make him a King.

There is nothing truly terrible, but the Gospel brings tidings of our freedom
from it, (if we be believers) nor nothing truly amiable, but it tells us of our
interest in it. How welcome to a poor captive is news of deliverance from
slaverie? The Gospel brings us tidings of our deliverance from sin, Satan,
death, hell, from wrath, and damnation, it tells us of riches, and glory, and
Kingdoms, and Crowns, and whatsoever may satisfy the capacious soul of man.

God has appointed different conditions for men, and Angels, the Angels that
stood they are so confirmed that they cannot fall; the Angels that fell they
are determined under eternal wrath that they cannot rise, but God from
everlasting in his love, and mercy had appointed that fallen man should have a
way of recovery, as a board after shipwreck, whereby he might come safe to the
shore. And God in time was pleased to come out of his hidden eternity, and to
discover this love of his to the world, and has sent his Son to puhchase it,
and his Spirit to apply it, and his servants to tell (not this, or that
particular man) but all Nations, Mat 28.19 Luke 2.10 Joh. 3.16.
that whosoever believes in Jesus Christ shall have everlasting life this
blessed tidings is brought by the Gospel.

And let none say this news is to good to be true, for God who is truth it
self (as it were on purpose) to anticipate the infidelity of man, has said
it, and sworn it, and sealed it with the blood of his dear Son, that we might
have strong consolation; Heb. 6.8.
and has made this fabric of the world to be as a stage to act the redemption
of his people on, which being finished, it shall be no more.

It should stir us up to love, and bless the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ,
and the holy Spirit; and to embrace the Messengers that bring those glad
tidings, to account their very feet beautiful, the meanest part of the body,
and upon the moutaines, Isa. 52.7.
the barren places of the earth. And I doubt not but many poor souls can from
experience bless God for the worthy Author in those barren mountains, where
he converseth, and else where, and say of him as David of Ahimaaz, he is a good
man, and brings good tidings. 2 Samuel 18.27.
Though others being hardened spit at such lights, and labor to extinguish,
who God in just judgment will cause to stumble, and fall, and lie down in
eternal darkness. But I shall detain thee no longer from the the work; but
commend it, and thee in Gods blessing, and rest.

Thine in the Gospel of Christ.

GOOD NEWS To the Worst of SINNERS.
MARK 16.15. And he said unto them, go ye into all the world, and preach
the Gospel to every creature.


YOu may easily understand who spoke these words, and to whom they were spoken.
In these words, our Lord Jesus Christ after his resurrection, when he had all
power in Heaven, and Earth given to him, he sends forth his Apostles to Preach,
and he bids them Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature. This was their Commission they were to have now, to go preach the
Gospel; Indeed they had a Commission before, but it was only to the Jews; and
it was a little, but by spirts: but now Christ was risen from the dead, and had
received all power in Heaven and Earth, he sends them for good and all (as it
were) he gives them a full and complete Commission, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.

The words opened.
Before I come to the Lesson that I mean to insist upon, there are two things
here in the words that must be opened, that you may see the foundation, or
ground of this Lesson; And that is,

Gospel what meant by it.
First, what is meant by Gospel? Go, and preach the Gospel.

Then, what is meant by creature? Go preach the Gospel to every creature.

For the first, what is meant by Gospel? I will not stand upon the several
acceptations of it, only you may understand that both in the Scripture
language, and also among the Heathen, Gospel has been taken for Glad tidings,
good news in general; any Good news, or Glad tidings have been called
Gospel; So the Greek word signifies, so some conceive the English word Godspel,
being old English, signifies Gospel, that is, good speech, good news, good
hearing, good tidings: but in a peculiar sense in Scripture it is taken for
that Good tidings of grace, and salvation by Jesus Christ. And so in this sense
we read of it in the old Testament, and in the new. In the old Testament, you
shall read in Heb. 4.3. that our Fathers they had the Gospel as well as we: but
(Beloved) you are to take notice, that though our Fathers had the Gospel, that
is, the glad tidings of life and salvation by Jesus Christ, from Adam, from the
beginning of the world, yet they had it but dimly, and darkly; and they had it
mixed with a great deal of Law, a great deal of bad tidings (as I may speak)
they had a little good news with a great deal of bad. So Adam had a little
good tidings The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head; and there
was bad tidings also, there was the curse upon the Serpent, and upon the woman,
and the man; the woman should bring forth in pain, the man must eat his bread
in the sweat of his brows; And so in all the old Testament, there was a little
Gospel in the Prophecies, and Gospel in the sacrifices, and Gospel in the
visions, but abundance of law mingled with this Gospel; the one spoke sad
tidings, as well as the other did good; for you know the Law spoke curses and
damnation to those that in every point did not observe it: But in the new
Testament, especially after the resurrection of Jesus Christ, when he went up
to Heaven, we read that there was perfect Gospel, or only good news, and glad
tidings, for the bad news was now all gone. And so it is to be understood
here, Go preach the Gospel. As if he should say, I do not (my disciples) bid
you go and give them now good news, and then bad, to give them a little of
the Law, and a line of Gospel: but go preach the Gospel emphatically, that is,
merely, purely Gospel; for now Christ is risen from the dead, and now the
Gospel in the purity, and simplicity is erected, Go preach the Gospel.

Creature what meant by it
[To every creature] What should be the meaning of that? We know that in the
Scripture language, creature most usually signifies not men but beasts, and
things without life, as in Romans 8. you have it twice, or thrice The creature
groaneth; the beasts, and the woods, and every thing that God has made, as
being a name somewhat too low for men in the ordinary Scripture expression. Yet
so as it comprehends men: for men also are sometimes called creatures. Now,
what should the meaning of this be, that now the Gospel being to be purely, and
fully, and completely set up, whether the Lord Jesus would have them preach,
and make known glad tidings to all creatures, that is, that even the bruit
beasts, and these creatures without life, that they should have glad tidings,
and good news from the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. I will
not averr that it is so, that that is the meaning of it: but surely (beloved)
there is no creature under heaven, but has a great deal of glad tidings, and
good news from the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ: for we read Romans 8.
that the creature groans, and the creature exspects deliverance, and
redemption. All these creatures by sin are brought into slavery, and
certainly they shall partake of the liberty of the Sons of God: there is a
redemption for them out of slavery, as well as for men by the redemption of the
Lord Jesus Christ: But what that shall be, or in what sort I cannot determine.
Now whether you will understand it so, that our Lord Christ meant not men and
women only, but that by creature, the poor creatures that are without life,
and bruit beasts, and all might understand the precious worth of this Gospel.

Gentiles called creatures.
Or take it more restrained as generally the godly do, that by creature here is
meant the Gentiles, in opposition to the Jews, for they knew that they were to
preach the Gospel to the Jews, which they also did before the resurrection:
but now says Christ, Go preach the Gospel to every creature. That is, now I
will have no distinction of persons, I do not now say, take heed of the way of
the Samaritans: but go which way you will, go to the Gentiles, to Sinners, to
any men, or women that you can call creatures, Scithians, Barbaririan, bond or
free, go and preach the Gospel to them, bring them glad tidings, and news,
that Jesus Christ has brought life, and grace, and salvation freely for them.

That this is the meaning, compare it with Mat. 28.19. Go therefore, teach all
nations baptizing them in the name of the father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. Here it is, go preach to every creature, there it is go teach all
nations, I will have no partition, or distinction between them says Christ. I
gave you leave, and often bid you teach the Jews before: but now go teach the
Gentiles; for the world was then divided into those two parts, Jews, and
Gentiles, go teach the Gentiles, go teach every creature.

But some may say; Gentiles as well as the Jew? Why does he call them creatures?

I answer, Gentiles the worst of sinne^^.
But the reason (as I conceive) is this, because the Gentiles were great
sinners and the greatest of sinners. And that you shall see clearly in diverse
places, as in Mat. 5. where Christ forbids us to take care for to morrow, what
we shall eat, and what we shall drink; why? for (says he) after these things
the Gentiles seek; that is, the worst of sinners, and we must not be like them.
So in Ephs. 4. the Apostl would not have them darkened in their understandings,
and walk as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their minds. So in 1 Pet. 3.
It is an ordinary expression in Scripture, where great sinners are spoken of,
either they are called Gentiles, or else compared to Gentiles, Col. 2. Are we
not Jews, and not sinners of the Gentiles? that is, the Gentiles were the
greatest sinners that were; now they being the greatest sinners, the Lord calls
them creatures, and not men: because it is an ordinary expression in Scripture
to call wicked people beasts rather than men, Isaiah 11. they are called
Bears, and Wolves, and Tigers, and Foxes, and Dogs, and Bulls, etc. So in
Hos. 1. compared with 1 Pet. 3. You that were not a people says Peter, has
God made his people. They were not a people; God will not ordinarily vouchsafe
wicked men and women the name of people: but they were not a people. What were
they then? They were Dogs for filthiness, Foxes for cunning, Tigers for
cruelty, and Bears, and such kind of creatures. Therefore the Jews were called
the people of the Lord, not only to distinguish them from others: but they
were called the people of God, as we see in Exodus, it was a privilege to be
accounted a people first, and then the people of the Lord. Therefore the Lord
Jesus because he would not have his Disciples make any exception, he calls
them creatures; as if he should say my Disciples, though they be so sinful that
according to the ordinary Scripture language you cannot call them men, and
women, or people, yet they are creatures, and go preach the Gospel to every
creature, go to the Gentiles, the greatest sinners in the world, whom I will
not vouchsafe to call a people, yet they are creatures, go preach the Gospel
to them. So that now I am come to the lesson which we are to observe, and that
is this;

That the Ministry of the Gospel (especially after the resurrection of Jesus
Christ) Contains nothing but glad tidings, The Ministry of the Gospel
contains nothing but good news to the worst of sinners.
and good news even to the worst of sinners.

Creatures that were so bad that they could not be called men and women, yet
says Christ, go preach the Gospel, pure Gospel, glad tidings to them. I say
the Ministry of the Gospel if it be rightly dispensed does not contain a
tittle in it but perfect good news, and glad tidings to the heart of the worst
of sinners. For this is the proper difference between the Law and the Gospel.
The Law speaks good news but only to the righteous, Difference between the Law
and the Gospel
if thou do well thou shall be rewarded; if thou fulfill the Law thou shall
have life; the Law speaks well to a man quatinus as a righteous man: but the
Gospel quite contrary, the proper object of all the good that the Gospel
brings, it is to a man quatinus as a sinner, not as a regenerate man, and a
righteous man, and a humble man, but as a sinner. And here is the excellency of
the Gospel, the more sinful any man is, the more suitable this Gospel is to
him, the more sin abounds, grace abounds much more; therefore you shall read
Romans 4. they that had the benefit of the Gospel they are called ungodly, he
that justifies the ungodly. They are called aliens Ephesians. 2. they are called
strangers and enemies, and men without strength, Romans 5. they are called the
chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.9. So to enemies, aliens, strangers, lost people,
unrighteous, ungodly, and the like; the Gospel brings perfect good news, and
glad tidings of life, and grace, and salvation by Jesus Christ.

Now this in some measure you know, but this that I tell you I fear you do
not know, that the Ministry of the Gospel it is only good news, there is not
one word of bad news, not one line, not one syllable, Nothing but good news
now in the Gospel.
or tittle, but only glad tidings, sweet, and good news to the heart of the
worst of sinners. Therefore to show you this truth a little more fully; Before
our Lord Christ went to Heaven there was some Gospel, but there was much Law;
and as our Lord Christ was a Minister of the Gospel, so he was of the
circumcision, as the Apostle calls him, I mean before his resurrection; yet it
is said in Luke 4. he took the book of Isaiah (and some think this was the
first Sermon that ever he made) and he read this place and opened it to the
people. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to
preach the Gospel to the poor; he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to
preach deliverance to the Captives, to recover sight to the blind, to set at
liberty them that are bruised; to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, etc.
Beloved, there is nothing in all this but only good news, glad tidings; as
that the poor should have salvation by Christ, that the broken hearted should
be healed, that the Captives should be delivered, that the blind should
receive their sight, and that them that are bruised should be set at liberty,
and them that are slaves should have the year of Jubilee, the acceptable year
of the Lord; there is not a tittle in all this but only good news, and glad
tidings.

Take another place, Heb. 12.18.19. etc. opened.
and that is Heb. 12.18. there you shall have the difference between the old
Testament and the new, or between the Law and the Gospel (if I may so speak)
the Law; that is, the administration of the Gospel in the time of the Law,
where there was a little good news, but mingled with a world of bad, and
terrible news. Ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that
burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and the
sound of a Trumpet, and the voice of words, which they that heard entreated
that the word should not be spoken to them any more. For they could not endure
that which was commanded: And if so much as a beast touch the mountain it
shall be stoned or thrust through with a dart. Here is nothing but what is
terrible, and sad news: as a mountain that was so terrible that it might not
be touched; when God did give his Law upon mount Horeb, or mount Sinai; and
that mountain all burning with fire; If we see a house burning with fire it is
terrible: but to see a mountain all over burning with fire, and with
blackness, and darkness, and tempest too! A fire though it be terrible yet
there is somewhat comfortable, because there is light: but that fire was full
of blackness and darkness, and darkness is a sad thing. And there was
tempest, and lightning, and thunder, and a voice of words, a voice of terrible
words, that bid them do such and such things that they had no power to do,
and yet they must do them, or be damned. It was terrible, in so much that
Moses himself, that used to see God, face to face, said, I quake exceedingly:
and if a beast touch the hill he must be stoned to death, or thrust through
with a dart. Here was nothing but terrible objects in the administration of the
old Testament, in the giving of the Law upon mount Sinai: But come to the new
Testament, of the Gospel as it is set up since Christ went to the holy of
holies, after his resurrection. You are come now to mount Sion, and that was a
pleasant place, if you take it according to the letter it was the pleasantest
place about Jerusalem. And you are come to the City of the living God, to the
heavenly Jerusalem. And, what a beautiful thing that is, you may read in
Revel. 20. and 21. a City with 12 gates, and every gate a whole pearl. And to
innumerable companies of Angels. Whether that be meant, that now, in the times
of the Gospel, God sends out Angels to minister to the Saints more frequently,
or diligently than formerly; or as most men understand it, Ye are now come to a
myrd of Angels, or to an innumerable company of Angels, that is, ye are come to
an estate by Christ in the Gospel, wherein you are at least equal with Angels.
And you are come to the general assembly, and Church of the first borne; as if
he should say, you are come to a Church where all are Patriarchs, for the
Patriarchs were the first borne heretofore; Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and
they were honorable men. Every Saint in the time of the Gospel is in as
honorable, and glorious a condition as any Patriarch; you are not come to a
Church of ordinary Saints, but to the Church of the first borne, whose names
are written in heaven. And you are come to the judge of all. You will say that
is a terrible thing; No, it is a blessed thing to see God in the light of the
Gospel to be a judge: Therefore in 2 These. 1. and diverse other places, he
comforts the Saints in their persecutions, and sufferings with this, that God
will come to judgment, God is the Judge of all, it is a comfortable thing. And
then you are come to the spirits of just men made perfect, to such an assembly
of Saints, and Church of the first borne where the spirits of men are made
perfect, that is beyond my expression, and conception; there is a perfection of
the Saints in their love, and in their graces incomparably to that it was
before. And ye are come to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the
blood of sprinkling; You are come to such an estate, and to such a Testament
where Christ is the Intercessor, and his blood speaks not as the blood of Abel,
it does not cry for vengance, but always for grace, and mercy from his father to
you. You see in the administration of the New Testament, or of the Gospel,
there is not one syllable, or tittle, but what is amiable, and sweet, and
comfortable even to the worst of sinners. And therefore the Spouse in the
Canticles, speaking of Christ (as I suppose) she commends Jesus Christ from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot as all beautiful, and amiable, and
then she sums up all, Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.
Jesus Christ in the new Testament, or Ministry of the Gospel is all fair,
altogether amiable even to the worst of sinners, there is no spot in him. So
you have the Lesson briefly.

Every particular in the Gospel glad tidings.
Now that which with the help of God I will further do, is to give you a weiw
of the sum of the whole Gospel in particular, that so you may look upon every
piece of it, and you shall see that there is not a jot from the beginning to
the end, but it brings glad tidings to the worst of sinners.

The Gospel shows man's wretched condition
First of all you may take notice that the Gospel does hold forth to sinners
their lost wretched condition they are in; In the Gospel poor sinners come to
learn what a damnable wretched condition they are in whereas men without it
think they are well, they do no body hurt, they give to the poor, and lend,
and the like, and yet they are going the broad way to destruction. Now we see
not only by Scripture but by experience the Gospel tells them they are dead in
sin, that they are children of wrath, that they are under the curse of God
going the broad way to hell.

But you will say, is that good news for a man to hear the Preacher say he is
in a damned condition, and a child of wrath, etc.

Beloved, it is sweet and good news; if the Preacher should make thee a damned
creature, or dead in sin it were bad news: but when the Gospel brings thee a
light to see that thou art so whereas otherwise thou in thy blindness would
go down to hell in it, it is blessed, and good news; it is better to see it
here than for ever in hell where there is no remidie. And there is no man, or
woman in this place that belongs to God, but they can bless God, and his Son
Jesus Christ that by the Gospel the Lord has discovered to them their wretched
condition that they were naturally in. That is one thing.

2. The wrong ways and means that men use for salvation.
A second instance is this, that the Gospel holds forth to sinners, all the
wrong ways that they go, and all the wrong means that they use to save their
souls; this is by the light of the Gospel. Man naturally is either dead in
sin, or asleep; or if he be a little awaked, he takes a thousand ways to go
to heaven, and none of them Gods way, none of them the right way. Every carnal
man sometime or other, has some design in his head to save his soul: one man
thinks to do it by his equity, and justice in his dealing, and trading;
another by his hospitality, and charity to the poor; another by hearing of
Sermons, and performing of duties, as in the time of Popery how many years
did they spend, and spent their strength and time, and their money, and when
all came to all, all was lost; all their ways were the wrong way to Heaven.
Now, the light of the Gospel discovers all these false ways, and shows that
you will come short of the glory of God, and the salvation of your souls; and
will convince you that There is no Name under heaven by which you can be saved,
but only the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Consider, is not this good news
that God should come first by the Ministry of the Gospel, and show thee thy
wretched condition; and then when thou have spent thy time, and strength in
false ways to be reconciled to God, and to save thy soul, the Gospel comes
and discovers all these that thou may go seek the true way?

3. It holds forth Gods love to sinners.
Thridly, the Gospel holds forth to poor sinners that there is a love, an
eternal love, an infinite love in Gods breast to poor sinners before ever the
world was made. You know in reason a man would think that God should hate such
a one as I am, God foresaw what a creature I would be when I was borne, and how
I have lived; and reason would think that love should proceed from something
amiable in the object that should produce love, some beauty, or bounty, as
we say: but God sees me to be wicked, and sinful; and therefore reason would
think God must damn me world without end. Now the Gospel comes to such a
sinner, and tells him the case is otherwise, it is not so, poor sinful man or
woman, and though God hate sin above all things in heaven, or hell, yet God
loved thee knowing what thou would be; God knows the reason of it, we do
not; it is as it is said in Deutrenomie, I loved thee, because I loved thee.
God has an infinite, special love to thy poor soul, yet hates thy fin; from
before the world was made, and the Mountains were brought forth; So God loved
the world, that he gave his Son etc. There was a love in God, out of which he
gave his Son Jesus Christ to die for us. This the Gospel, and the Spirit of God
in it, reveals to the poor soul, that when I was an enemy to God, he was
my friend; when I hated him, he loved me; nay before I was, God had thoughts of
an infinite, eternal love to me

4. Gods love fruitful.
Then fourthly, the Gospel holds forth to a sinner, that as God had an infinite
love toward him, so it was not a cold love that ended in nothing: but out of
this love God would send his Son Jesus Christ into the world to save sinners;
This is one maine principle of the Gospel, that the Father out of his love sent
his own Son, that was the Image of his person, the Son of his love, and delight
into this world, to lay down his life, and to die for sinners. Were it not for
the Ministry of the Gospel we could never know this: how could we know but by
the Gospel that the Lord Jesus Christ did come to die to save sinners? So God
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that he that believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Fifthly, 5. Christ came to work redemption.
briefly (for I do but give you a few touches of instances.) it holds out to
us that as the Father out of his love seat his Son; so that Jesus Christ
actually, and really is come into the world, and took our nature upon him soul
and body, and the infirmities of both, and sanctified our nature that he took,
and in that nature became our Surety, a Public person for us; our Advocate, a
second Adam. That he was conceived, and born of the Virgen; and that he lived
here, and so did the will of God, and fulfilled his Law; and conversed many
years among men, and that therein while he did so, he gave us many blessed
experiments of his love, and mercy to poor sinners, in healing the sick, in
giving sight to the blind, in raising the dead. And while he conversed among
men, he taught, and discovered in a great measure the mysteryes of his Fathers
counsels to us, that else we could never have known, and gave us a holy
pattern, and example of life, in humility, and patience, and delligence, and
prayer, and thankfulness. All these things are good news, and glad tidings to
poor sinners, every part of them.

Then the Gospel tells us, that this Lord Jesus Christ after he had walked
among men for many years together, that then as a Public person, 6. Christ
died for us
and second Adam, and our Surety, he did lay down his life, and die for our
sins.

But you will say, Where is the good news from that? Hence it is that poor
sinners are reconciled to God, they are made friends with God. Hence it is that
poor sinners are redeemed from all their enemies, sin, and death, and wrath,
and curse, and hell; all these by the death of the Lord Jesus are removed.

Then the Gospel tells you that Jesus Christ, as he died for our sins, so he
rose again for our justification, he rose again from the dead the third day,
7. He roase from death
whereby poor sinners are assured that they are justified and freed from all
their sins, and whereby they shall rise to grace here, and their souls and
bodies shall rise to glory hereafter with Christ, and whereby they shall rise
out of all afflictions also in due time; For the resurrection of Christ is the
ground of our resurrection out of afflictions in this world; and every tittle
of this is glad tidings, and good news to poor sinners.

Then the Gospel tells you that after his resurrection he conversed with his
Disciples, 8. Conversed with his discipls
and not with the world, and that he met with his Disciples from one mountain
to another, from one Town to another, for a few days after, and there he made
many precious Prayers to his Father for them, and for all that should believe
in him; and there he gave them instructions, and directions how they should
order the Churches of God, and Preach the Gospel to the end of the world.

And then you know the Gospel tells us that he went up into heaven, 9. Ascended
into heaven.
and from heaven, as soon as he came there, he sent his holy Spirit to us to
unite us to Christ, to be our Intelligencer, to make known the heart of Christ
to us, to lead us into all truth, to comfort us in all distresses, and to make
intercession in us till we come to heaven, where he is.

And the Gospel tells us this good news that when he went to heaven he made
way for poor sinners to come there, 10. Intercedes for us.
and that there he intercedes for us, and there succors us, and pities us when
we are in the flesh as he was once.

Then the Gospel tells us that in due time he will come again from heaven as
he went, 11. shall come to judgment.
and bring a Crown with him, and actually subdue all his peoples enemies, and
give them the same glory that he has, and they shall be one with God for ever
as he is; he will come and take poor sinners to himself, that they shall be
where he is, and as he is, world without end.

The Gospel tells you moreover that all this love, 12. Gods Covenant.
and grace, and mercy, and salvation by Jesus Christ, here, and in Heaven, it
is all made sure to us by an everlasting Covenant, sure and perfect in every
point, as David says. And this Covenant is sealed with the blood of the
Testator, the Lord Jesus, that it might be sure: and he has also sent Pastors,
and Teachers to make known this Gospel; and he has given the seal of the
Lords Supper, and Baptism to confirm this Gospel. Put all together, and from
the first to the last, you shall not find in the Ministry of the Gospel (if
it be truly, and soundly opened) any syllable but what is wholesome, and
comfortable, and sweet and glad tidings to the worst sinners.

Only, to clear it more fully to you, there are some objections that you may
make: (for Beloved it were a happy thing if we did fully understand this
Lesson, and fully believe it) therefore that it may sink into your hearts, I
will tell you all that I know can be said against it.

One objection is, you will say, Concerning outward things.
the Ministry of the Gospel is not so very good, because we poor sinners do
not hear any thing in it for the body; we do not hear any thing in it of
honor, and wealth; we see people as poor after they receive Christ as ever
they were, and it may be poorer; and if God did mingle in the Gospel earthly
things with heavenly, than it were good news, worth the hearing.

Beloved, concerning that I answer but in two words.

All the happiness of this world consists either in honor, or wealth. As for
honor, if you believe in God, if you receive Jesus Christ, the Gospel brings
you tidings, that whereas now you are poor people that no body cares for, you
shall be Kings, and Queens, as Christ is a King, so you shall be Kings, and his
daughters shall be Queens. Psalm 45.
Nay you shall be Princes in all Lands. You know earthly Kings are but Princes
in their several Kingdoms, as the King of Spain, and the King of England,
etc. But the Saints, for honor are Princes in all Lands. Psalm. 149.
They shall bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in fetters of Iron; such honor
have all his Saints. You must look on it (beloved with a spiritual eye. And if
there be any reallitie in that that they call honor, this is not a notion, but
there is more reallitie in spiritual honor than in Carnal. Spiritual honor
real.
Take carnal men that call you honorable, and worshipful, and the like, you
know all these are but words, and a puff of wind, when they are present: but
they are hateful, and hate one another when they are gone, as the Apostle
says. But if a man receive Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel, there is
true honor; that is, such a man will be respected in the hearts of others; not
only in the eyes of God, and godly men, but in the hearts of the wicked: for in
their hearts they will say, such a man is an honorable man, such a woman is an
honorable woman, they will not do any thing against their consciences, and
disobey Christ, they had rather die. Beloved there is more realitie in this
honor; you shall be Princes, and Kings, and Queens.

Angels wait on the Saints
And then you shall have innumerable companies of Angels, you shall be in as
glorious a condition as they, and somewhat better, you shall have them to wait
on you. You consider not this, because you settle not your selves to search
spiritual privileges: you shall have an innumerable company of Angels to
wait on you; that is better than to be Lords, and Earls, that have an
innumerable company of Swearers, and drunkards, and whoremongers for their
serving men, that it were a great deal more ease if they could spare them, to
be without them: but you shall have a company of Saints, and Angels to wait on
you.

Saints right to outward things.
And though the Gospel tell you not of outward riches, for Christ himself,
says, The foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air have nests: but the Son
of Man has not whereon to lay his head. Yet the Gospel tells you that you have
so much title to wordly things, that Godliness has the promise of this life,
and of that which is to come. And that God will be a Sun, and a shield to those
that fear him, and he will withhold from them nothing that is good. Is not
that tidings enough of riches and wealth, when God will withhold nothing that
is good? God will give food, and raiment, they have it by promise; wicked men
have it by providence, as the dogs, and fowls, have it. Therefore, for all
that objection this truth runs clear.

The Gospel brings persecutions.
But secondly, another will say, the Gospel indeed brings tidings of Christ,
and salvation, but it brings tidings also of afflictions, and persecutions: the
Gospel says, Whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution. And Christ says, I come not to bring peace, but a sword; I come
to set the father against the son, and the son against the father and the
mother against the daughter, and the daughter against her mother. and says the
carnal heart I like not this news, I love to be at peace with God, and all
the world (as their phrase is.)

Concerning that, they are privileges.
though it be true that the Gospel brings afflictions, yet it is true the
Gospel tells you that these sufferings of yours. In the first place they are
privileges, the Gospel tells you it is a piece of your happiness to have
them, 1 Cor. 3. Whether it be Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or life, or death.
Death, what is death? Afflictions are called death, In death often, that is,
afflictions; they are but little deaths, and one great death ends all; the
greatest death is a privilege, your afflictions, and poverty, and reproaches,
will be a privilege. How is that? You have it in To. 8. They all work for good
to them that love God. For your good here, and your glory hereafter; for faith
the Apostle 2 Cor. 4. These light afflictions that are but for a moment, they
work for us, an exceeding, exceeding weight of glory. The English word cannot
express it; compare it with Romans 8. The afflictions that we suffer, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed. The Spirit of
glory rises on you. The Lord does you good by it for the present, and it works
for a Crown of glory hereafter; For this is a true saying, if we suffer with
Christ, we shall reign with him. Therefore though the Gospel bring sufferings
with it, yet take them as the Gospel expresses them, they are sweet, and good
tidings; they are privileges to you, and will turn for your good here, and
your glory hereafter.

2. They are moderated.
The Gospel moreover tells you for your fuller satisfaction that the Lord will
lay no more upon you than you are able to bear. And he will be in the
affliction with you, in the fire, and in the water; the Lord Jesus will be with
you there, and in due time he will make you a way to get out, Beloved, put all
together that the Gospel speaks of afflictions, and sufferings, construe them
together, and you shall see that there is nothing in all that, but glad
tidings, and good news.

I but says another, the Gospel, (if it be Gospel that we use to hear from
our Ministers) it is not good news, Drunkards, The Gospel requires men to
forsake sin.
and Swearers, and Whoremongers; and when I swear the Minister says I shall
never go to Heaven; And he says the Gospel will have a man forsake his sins,
and repent, and the like, this is not good news: it is good news that God
will save me, but it is not good news that I must leave my sins, and all my
ways of pleasure that I am in. It is good news that the Gospel will have me
saved but it is not good news that the Gospel will have me a Puritan, and be
purified, and purged from my sins.

Concerning that, it is very true that though the Gospel speak not properly
against drunkards, whoremongers, and Swearers; yet the Gospel says that
drunkards must leave their drunkenness, and Swearers, must leave their
swearing; and the Gospel calls every man to repentance, from every sin, yet
notwithstanding that it is no bad news.

First, take Christ's Argument Mat. 5. Does thy right eye offend thee? pull it
out and cast it from thee; 1. Leaving of sin profitable.
does thy right hand offend thee? cut it off, and cast it from thee. That is as
some interpret it, there are some sins that are as pleasant as the right eye,
and as profitable as the right hand, and thou were better to cut them off: why
so? It is better to go to heaven with one eye, than with two eyes to go to
hell; and it is better to go to heaven with one hand, than with two to go to
hell. Is it not good tidings when a man is taught to make a good bargain? is it
not good tidings when the Gospel tells a man he must throw away his sins, and
it is better to cross himself a little in his lusts and go to heaven, than to
go lusts, and soul, and body, and all to hell? Is it not good news, when a
man's house is on fire, if one come and show him how to save a piece? It is
better than to have all burned. Now the Gospel teaches you to leave sin, and
it is good news, Why? I will tell you, because when the Gospel bids thee leave
sin, it puts in thee a new nature that is contrary to sin to hate it more than
hell, and the Devil himself, and then if God bid thee leave thy sins, The
Gospel teaches to hate sin.
it is the best news in the world; as for instance, there are many men, and
weomen I believe here, that if the Lord should say to them, as he did to
Solomon, I will give thee whatsoever thou would have in heaven, or earth,
there are some in this place that would say, O Lord I would leave my pride, I
would have a humble heart, and a heart that should not love worldly things, and
a heart that should not be froward, and waspish. If the Gospel should leave the
heart as the Law did, and bid you throw away your sins, and give no strength
to do it, it were bad news: but if the Gospel give you a new nature, to hate
sin, and when it bids you leave, it gives you power to take it away; it is
sweet, and pleasant news.

Another objection that others may make is, The Gospel requires duty.
that the Gospel brings tidings, that when we receive Christ, as we must leave
sin, so we must set on the doing of good, I must not be my own Master, as the
Minister says, one while I must fast, and another while I must pray, and teach
my Children, and my Family, and this is a hard task, an endless work, I
cannot bear it, to pray every morning, and evening etc.

I answer, Not on pain of damnation
this is good news. Why? because in the first place, when the Gospel tells you
any such thing the Gospel does not bid you do them, or else you shall be
damned, as the Law did: but the Gospel says thus, thou poor drunkard, or thou
proud woman, here is a gracious God that has loved thee, and out of love has
sent Jesus Christ to die for thee, and has appointed his Ministers to make it
known to thee: and here is everlasting redemption, and salvation by him, only
because thou art a sinner, there is no other reason in the world; now thou art
safe, free from damnation, and hell, fear not that, that is gone, Christ has
died to reconcile thee to God, and Christ has loved thee, therefore obey him,
if not thou shall not be damned, that is done away already; Indeed the Law
says, thou shall be damned for not doing it: but says Christ, in the Gospel,
I have died, and have forgiven thee thy sins, and if thou will be a Villane,
and not respect my Father that has loved thee, and I that have died for thee,
so it is: but if thou will obey me, thou shall be a good child, Thus the
Gospel speaks; now there is no bad news, for me to hear of my duty, to hear
that the Lord Jesus, Christ commands me, when I see my salvation sure, I work
not for life, as those under the Law, for the Law is a voice of words, it bids
me do this, or that, or I shall be damned; and if I went a little awrie, I
should lose all my labor; no, I see my salvation is safe, hell, and damnation
are shut out of doors, God is my Father, and I am his child, I am in an
everlasting Covenant, there is nothing in Heaven, or Hell, shall be able to
separate me from the love of God. Now I am redeemed from my enemies, and
without fear, as the Scripture says, why should I not serve him, and study
to do what he commands me?

Besides, admit the Gospel bids thee do many things, the Gospel also gives
thee power to do them. 2. The Gospel gives power to do what it requires.
It is not a voice of words as that on Mount Sinai, Heb. 12. that is, words,
that had a voice, but no power; thou shall do this, and not that, but it gave
no strength, and the people were not able to bear the word. for they were bid,
not to commit adultery, not to swear, not to steal, and there was no
strength, but a voice: But the voice of the Gospel is a voice of power, it is
called The day of Gods power, the power of God to salvation; The Arm of God,
the strength of God. Therefore whatsoever the Gospel commands, it gives a sweet
power to the heart to do the same, and then it is no bad news. If a man bid
me pay a thousand pounds for my neighbor, and give me a thousand pounds in my
hand, it is easy to do it. The Gospel bids me deny myself, and subdue my
lusts, if it did give no power it were a terrible thing: but if withal the
Gospel carry the Spirit of Christ into the heart and kill sin, and make me able
to deny my self, then it is good news.

3. Gospel duties few and easy.
Besides, the duties that the Gospel bids me do, they are few for number, and
easy for nature; and for the end of them, it is not for life, and salvation,
that is safe, there is no danger of that; and there is a Spirit to them And
also there is a sweetness in Gospel obedience, that there is nothing on this
side glory, so Pleasing to the soul that has believed, as obeying of Jesus
Christ, To. 6. You have your reward in holiness. Godly men say that this is the
meaning of it, that holiness is a reward to it self; the doing of good things
is a reward to it self. To say nothing of the reward hereafter, that there is
a Crown of glory, 1. Cor. 15.
your labor is not in vain in the Lord. You that work for him: but the very
doing of Gospel duty, with a Gospel spirit, it is no other than meat, and
drink. Our Lord Christ Job. 4. when he was hungry, and thirsty, when he was
weary; one would have thought he might have done many things more pleasing,
than to be teaching a silly woman; when they came with meat, he would not
leave that that he was doing, I have meat (says he) that you know not off;
who gave it thee said they? Says he, It is my meat, and drink, to do the
will of him that sent me. So, when we have the heart, and the nature, and the
spirit, of Christ, it will be sweeter than meat, and drink, out of love, to do
any thing that Jesus Christ commands us.

Again, The Gospel requires Faith.
it may be, some man will say, the Gospel for the most part brings good news:
but there is one thing in the Gospel that me thinks is no good news to poor
sinners; says a poor soul, the Ministers use to preach, and to tell me, that
the Law says, do this, and live; and the Minister tells me, that the Gospel
says, believe, and live; he says that there shall be all happiness, and good
to me, if I believe; and says the poor soul, for my part it is as possible
for me to keep the ten Commandments, as to believe, and the Ministers say, that
there is no good thing in the Gospel that I can partake of except I believe; I
would like it well but for that one thing, I would, but I cannot believe.

To answer this, if the Gospel held forth Christ, The Gospel breeds faith.
and salvation, upon believing (as many often preach) it were little better
tidings than the Law: for it is as easy for a man of himself to keep the ten
Comandments, by obeying; as to believe of himself, to have faith to receive
Christ: Therefore, that is a misunderstanding of the Gospel, the Gospel says
not bring faith with thee, and then here is all grace, and salvation; No, for
whence should I have faith? Whatsoever is of the flesh, is flesh; and what is
of me is flesh, and abominable to God; therefore the Gospel expects not that
any sinner should bring faith, for he has it not; nay, it is a sin to
endeavor to have it of himself: But the Gospel as it brings salvation, so it
breeds faith in the heart of a sinner. The same word that makes known
salvation, the same word breeds, and begets faith in the heart to receive it.
That God that gives his alms to us, gives a purse to carry it: that God that
gives Physic to a poor soul, will give a hand to receive it. It were strange
if God should expect faith from a poor sinner, whereas, for ought I know, and
learned men hold, that Adam in innocence had not the faith that we are
justified by; and for ought I know the Angels in heaven have it not; and whence
should a poor sinner have it? It is God that gives repentance to Israel; and
God is the author, and finisher of our faith. Heb. 12. And in Philip. 1. It is
given to you to believe. Therefore, when I hear of grace, and glory, and
salvation by Jesus Christ, I must not consider where I shall have a vessel to
carry i^ home, where I shall have faith to receive it: but it carries the
vessel with it, and I go, and take the promise, and by the holy Spirit that
same Gospel that brought the grace will work faith, or else, it were as harsh
as the Law. Therefore never stand off about faith: for he that gives grace, and
salvation, will work faith.

Again, Discipline and government. in the Gospel.
it may be objected by some; we confess that the Gospel is good news, and
blessed be God it is performed also. But it seems that there is in the Gospel,
or annexed to it a discipline, or a government whereby we shall be ruled; thus
says one, thus says another; and if we receive the Gospel of Christ, we must
receive the Government of Christ say the Ministers, and we fear that will be
no good news to our poor souls.

Two wrong governments since Christ.
As for that, in few words as I am able, I confess (Beloved) that in, or with
the Gospel of Christ, there is a Government, or there is a discipline, that may
(in a sense) be called an external discipline over the Saints or people of
God. And it is true that all the governments that have hitherto been in the
world, since our Lord Christ went to heaven, men have called them the
Governments of the Gospel, and fathered them upon Christ, and the Gospel: and
truly if they had been so indeed as men pretended, that is, if those kind of
governments that we have had, had been part of the Gospel, surely than there
had been a great deal of bad news, and heavy tidings in the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. As for instance; There have been but two great governments, or
disciplines (if I may use that word) in the world since our Lord went to heaven,

The one was Papacy.

The other Episcopacy.

Papacy. Episcopacy.
We have been governed either by the Pope that styled himself, the Successor
of Peter, and the Romish Governor, or by Episcopacy in latter years, in many
parts; though Papistrie made the greater stir in the world. Now these two
differ in degrees, otherwise they are of the same kind. And if these were the
government of Christ, and the discipline of the Gospel, we may well say, there
has been sad tidings, and heavy news from the Gospel for many years. Evils
in both governments.
Give me leave to instance in a few substantial things in these two
Governments.

1. Concerning their power.
This was one thing that was in both these Governments; The Ministers, (such as
they were, by what titles soever they were styled; for they had many sorts)
they took all the power of governing, and government wholly, and solely into
their own hands; they called themselves the Church of God; we must look to
the Church, that is, the Bishops, to their laws, etc. They called themselves
the Clergy, that is, Gods inheritance, as the word in the Original signifies.
True it is, there is a power, a sweet Gospel power in the Ministers, that is
somewhat peculiar from the people: But to take all power into their own hands;
and to leave the people, and call them the laity, the dr^sse, the vulgar, to
leave them as vassalls, and slaves, and to call themselves, the Clergy, and
the Church, and the like: If this had been Christ's discipline, there had been
some hard, and heavy tidings in the Gospel of Christ.

Secondly, as they took this power into their hands, so they used this power as
Lords over Gods inheritance, contrary to the command of Jesus Christ 1 Pet.
5.4. 2. Their Lorldlines in two things.
You shall not Lord it over Gods inheritance. Now you know they were Lords,
that will appear in two things.

1. In imposing laws on men's consciences
First, they made Laws upon the consciences of men, besides the Laws that
Jesus Christ made; you know they had their Synods, and their Convocations, and
their great Councels, and the like, and there they would have Canons, or Laws
every time they met for the consciences of poor Saints; This was no good news.

2. In forcing men to obey those laws.
And then forcing men to aver those laws that they had made; as they had made a
law that people should not go out of their Parishes; they must every one hear
his own Minister, though it may be he was an Ignorant, drunken, dumb, profane
wretch, and if they did not, they were forced, and compelled to do it,
Beloved, this was not according to the Gospel of Jesus Christ: for if it had,
surely it had been no good news

3. Forcing Ministers and Officers on the people.
Thirdly, in the second Government that we have had hitherto, they imposed
Ministers, and Officers upon the people, the people never had yet liberty under
these two Governments, to choose men according to Gods own heart, that would
feed them with knowledge, and understanding: but such as the Bishops sent they
must receive, whether they were good or bad, they must take them as they found
them; and those usually were either Ignorant unlearned men; or profane
unsanctified men, and these were sent by them as Lords, and the people were
forced to receive them.

Then fourthly, in this government, all the power which they had (which they
took all to themselves) they exercised it only, 4. Their power excercised
against the Saints.
(almost) against the Saints and people of God either as Schismatics, or
Lol^ards, or Heretics, or Puritans, or the like; either for doing that that
was good, or for things that were trifles, according to their own judgment.
For doing that which was good, for fasting and praying, for meeting to teach
one another, and to seek the Lord, these were called Conventicles. Or for
trifles that they in their consciences held indifferent, as the wearing of the
Surplice, and the Cross in baptism; they themselves said they were
indifferent things, and trifles, and yet men must be silenced, and people
bannished beyond Sea for these things. This government we have had, and there
was little good news and glad tidings to the souls of the poor Saints from
all this.

5. Restraining the Spirit in preaching, and praying
Fifthly, they did restrain the Spirit of God in the Saints both in preaching,
and praying. In preaching, the Ministers were tied, they must preach such, and
not such things, and they must be in danger to be fined, if they did not keep
to the hour. And for Prayer, when it may be the poor Ministers soul was full
of groans, and sighs, and he would have rejoiced to have poured out his soul
to the Lord, he was tied to an old Service-Booke, and must read that till he
grieved the Spirit of God, and dried up his own spirit as a chip, that he
could not pray if he would; and he must read it for an hour together, and then
it may be come into the Pulpit: but his spirit was gone.

6. Their laws backed by secular power.
Again, they backed all their laws with the secular power, and punnishments;
they never rested till they had twisted their own laws, with the secular
laws the Civil laws of the Land. Every law of theirs was steeled, and backed
with some Civil severe law, to confiscation of goods, or imprisonment, or such
a fine, to the cuting off of ears, the slitting of noses, the burning of
cheeks, to banishment, yea to death it self; as you know how many precious
Saints of God (even by those that pretended the government of Christ, and his
discipline) were burned in Smithfeild; and how many suffered strange torments,
and punishments, yet their persecutors pretended the discipline, and government
of Christ. I give you but a few instances; These were the governments we have
had hitherto, for thirteen, or fourteen hundred years, either from the Pope,
or the Bishops, Papacy, or Episcopacie. And truly Beloved, there is not a
title of good news, or glad tidings to the hearts of holy Saints, and tender
consciences in all this, as your selves may judge.

Now what we shall have the Lord knows I know not, but only thus much I say,
that what ever it will be, if it be according to these strains that have been
heretofore, than I confess there will be a great deal of heavy tidings, and
hard news, even in the Gospel of Jesus Christ; if men call it Gospel, or any
thing belonging to it. For my part, as I am wholly ignorant what Government men
will set up and call it Christ's, right, or wrong; So I am not ignorant of the
fears, and jealousies that are in the hearts of godly people of this, and that
thing: but be sure, if it be the government of Jesus Christ, and his
discipline, there will be nothing but good news, and glad tidings to the
honestest heart, and tenderest conscience; and if it be not such a government,
it is not of God; for I have proved plainly, that there is nothing in the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, but good news, and glad tidings to the worst of
sinners. But if it be a government that I shall be compelled against
conscience, and my goods confiscated for this, or that trifle, this is not
according to the Gospel; for there are none of these terrible things in the
Gospel of Christ, it is all sweet.

The two worst things in the Gospel good news,
I will give you but one instance, and pass it over; In the government of
Christ according to the Scriptures, the two worst, and harshest things that you
shall find there, you shall see clearly that they are good things, and good
news for a poor Christian to have them set up over his soul.

As first of all, you know that in the Gospel, 1. Reproof
the government or discipline, call it which may you will. We find in some
cases that the Lord Jesus, will have us not only comfort, and exhort, and teach
one another: but in some cases he will have us reprove one another, Benefit of
Gospel reproof.
and have our Ministers reprove us also, but in love, and tenderness. This is
one of the harshest things; and this if you look right on it with a spiritual
eye, truly it is glad tidings for a poor Saint, when he has forgot himself,
by the violence of some lust; Then for a sincere hearted Brother, or Sister in
the spirit of meeknes, and love to reprove him, and set his bones in joint. You
have some of you found in experience that a sweet, and wise reproof has been
as pleasing to you as any Sermon of consolation that ever you heard. And
therefore you see in Scripture how the Lord sets down reproof, that you may
not be afraid of it Levit. 19.17. he tells you that reproof is an argument of
love, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but rather reprove him.
It is an argument of love. A man that reproves another wisely, and meekly he
loves him: for otherwise his poor soul is going in the way toward hell, from
God, and fellowship with God, going on in sin. Now a man that reproves him he
brings him back again from sin, and that strangnes from God that he was in a
course to run into; therefore I say, there is no such evil in reproof.

Besides, the Scripture says it is a precious thing Ps. 14^.5. David says Let
the righteous smite me, and it shall be as balm, it shall be a kindness; let
him reprove me, and it shall be an excellent oil, it shall not break my head.
It shall be as excellent oil, or balm to heal his soul. Reproof is called
a profitable thing also, 2 Timothy 3. The Scripture is profitable for instruction,
and reproof, etc. If reproof were an evil thing, one could not say that the
Scripture were profitable for such an end.

It is a great judgment of God, when God casts a man into such a condition that
no body will reprove him. It is a thing that I am many times afraid of, truly
almost to trembling, least a man should so carry himself to the Saints, and
so estrange himself that they will not reprove him; O, it is fearful when a
man stands on his own bottom, and on his own legs, that men shall say,
there is a Professor, he is so proud, and so foolish that none will reprove
him. Says God to Ezkiel, Thou shall not be a reprover to this peaple; and in
Hosea 3. Let no man strive, or reprove another. Why so? says the Lord in the
end of the Chapter, Let him be as a backsliding heifer, Ephraim is joined to
Idols, let him alone. It is a pitiful thing when God shall leave a man as a
heifer, that is turned into the meddow to grass, let him alone. They used to
plow with heifers in those days as we do with horses and Oxen, and the
horses, and Oxen are called from the house to the Plow, and are driven and
beaten: but when the Ox is turned to grass to be fatted, let him alone, he
lies down, and rises when he will; so these people were so wicked, that no
man should reprove his brother, but he should be as a lamb in a fat Pasture.
So that reproof, that is one of the harshest things in the government of
Christ in the Gospel, it is a good, a precious, and profitable thing. It is a
great judgment to be without it: therefore though that be used, the doctrine
holds true, that there is nothing but good news, glad tidings in the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

There is another thing, that is, Excommunication, 2 Excomunication.
cutting a man off from the people of God, or delivering him up to Satan. A man
may say that is a terrible thing; It is terrible as I said before, when there
is secular punishment with it, confiscation of goods, and loss of estate, and
freedom: but according to the Gospel of Christ you shall see, that even the
delivering men up to Satan, Christ Jesus intends it in love, for the good, and
salvation of their souls; It is harsh, but it is good news, 2 Cor. 5. says
the Apostle, In the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ when ye are gathered
together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver
such a one unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; speaking of the incestuous person. If men
will be so wretched as to sin grossly, the Lord Jesus has ordered that such a
man shall be delivered to Satan; for what? that he may be damned, and to bring
him to hell? No, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus. And truly Beloved, I have seen, more than one
that have blessed God for that Ordinance, that have been brought to humble
their souls, and sweetly, and closely to walk with God again, by the blessing
of God on that Ordinance. Now I have told you the worst in the Gospel, either
reproof, and that but upon great occasion; or else delivering to Satan, and
that must be upon extraordinary occasion; yet both are sweet, and profitable,
and precious for the good of the soul; Therefore the truth of the Doctrine
holds clear to you, that there is nothing in the Gospel, look which way you
will, but good news, and glad tidings to the worst of sinners.

No peace to the wicked.
There is one objection more, and so I proceeed to the Uses. Some body may say
out of the Prophet Isaiah, There is no peace to the wicked says my God. Isa.
57. ult. And Isa. 48.12. The wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot
rest, whose watters cast out mire, and dirt. The Prophet seems to comfort the
godly, but wicked men have no peace: then a man may say; how does this stand
with your Doctrine? you say that the Gospel holds forth peace, and glad
tidings, and good news to wicked men, even to the worst of sinners.

three Ways. 1. It is rather Law than Gospel.
The are three ways to answer it, in few words.

The first is, that however Isaiah was in a sort an Evangelicall Prophet, and
spoke many things of Gospel by way of Prophecy; he saw things for us, and not
for himself, as Peter says; yet these kind of expressions are more properly
Law, than Gospel; for it is certain there is no other language in the Law but
that, there is no peace to the wicked; Transgress once and be damned for ever:
but the language of the Gospel is contrary, it comes and gives peace to the
wicked, and justifies the ungodly, he preaches peace to them that are near,
and to them that are affar off; And who were they? The Gentiles that were
emphatically sinners: are we not Jews (says the Apostle) and not sinners of
the Gentiles? Therefore this was rather Law, than Gospel.

2. God will not make peace with sin, though he does with sinners.
Secondly, there is no peace to the wicked, or to sinners, says my God. You may
understand it also in this sense, that the Lord will not make any peace with
sin, though he send messages of peace, and reconciliation to sinners; though
God be reconciled to a sinner, he will never be reconciled to sin.

3. No peace to men that continue in sin under the Gospel.
But the third, and last, and most proper as I take it is this, There is no
peace to the wicked, says my God; that is, there is no peace to men that
continue in sin after Jesus Christ has been offered them, and they have
refused him, then there is no peace to them. Observe for it is a thing of great
concernment: it becomes not a Minister of the Gospel by any means to
pronounce, wrath, and curse, or damnation to a sinner, qua a sinner, as a
sinner, he is not a Minister of the Gospel, if he do, he is a Minister of the
old Testament, that says, here comes a drunkard, eo nomnie, because he is a
drunkard God will plague him, and damn him; this is the language of the old
Testament.

But you will say; will you speak peace to drunkards, sinners?

How judgments are pronounced against sinners.
We speak judgment, and curses, and damnation to them, when once we have first
offered Christ, and they refuse him. And for this reason, and no other
according to the Ministry of the Gospel, I am to pronounce, damnation, and
curse, to wicked men, because they refuse Jesus Christ: because they do not
believe in Jesus Christ.

You will say, evil for a Minister to speak against drunkards, and Swearers,
and whoremongers, and to say the curse of God will fall on them, etc.

Continuance in sin a sign of unbelief.
No; Why? because I speak against a drunkard, not properly because he is a
drunkard, but his drunkeness is a sign that he continues in unbelief, and so
has not received Jesus Christ: So we are to understand the Scriptures. There
is a drunkard, a Sot, a jearer of godliness, I say the curse of God will come
upon him, and the damnation of hell is ready to overtake him; why? not because
he is properly such a one, but because those are signs that he is an
unbeliever. When God shall come to judge the world; There are people that he
will judge eo nomine because they are drunkards he will throw them to hell, as
those in the Mountains of Wales, etc. Because they have but a little light,
and they did not follow that, they shall be condemned, and the heathens shall
be condemned for their ignorance, etc. But under the Gospel all are wrapped up
in unbelief: So that this is the pin of Heaven, or Hell, the very wards that
opens, or shuts, that you be believers, or unbelievers. But I will not stand
longer on that.

Now I proceed to show what profit we may have by this Doctrine, by way of
Application.

To learn that in the Gospel salvation (...) offered (...) sinner, (...)
sinners.
There be diverse special Lessons that I would have you learn hence.

The first is this, that this truth that I have now taught you, it is the door
of the Gospel, the very entrance into Christian Religion; the first stone as it
were in the Christian building in the Profession of Religion, in Gospel
Profession. There is a kind of devotion and Profession, but it is not built
according to the Gospel: but if you would walk according to the Gospel learn
this lesson first, that is, that God gives life, and salvation through Christ
to sinners, as sinners though they be hard hearted, backsliding, and the chief
of sinners, yet as long as they be sinners, and but sinners they may always
look upon Jesus Christ, and salvation in his hand to bestowed on them. This is
a truth that thou must learn, and be taught it of God, or else thou can not
go one step into the Profession of the Gospel; for (beloved) till you know and
learn this, you will be like men in the dark, you will be groping for Christ
Jesus, but you will never be graffed into him, you will never be knit to
Christ. I say this is the first step to Religion to understand this truth
aright, that the Gospel brings glad tidings of salvation to be given to the
worst of sinners: therefore though I see no good in me at all whereby I might
receive good news from the Law, and though I do not see that I am a humbled
sinner as such a Preacher teaches, or a believing sinner, or a broken hearted
sinner, as another Preacher says, yet I say I am a sinner, and a sinner quasi,
Unsetlednesse in religion whence.
a sinner is the proper object of the Gospel. You will be off, and on, and
never be knit to Christ, but will be as a bone in and out till you come to
that; for if you go and lay hold on Christ any other way, in any other
consideration, that you are humbled sinners, or broken hearted sinners, or
mortified sinners, as soon as ever temptation tells you that you are not
humbled enough, you will be gone again, the bone will be out of joint again,
and so you will be as a reed tossed of the wind, you will never be fastened to
Christ; whosoever holds Christ upon any qualifications on his side, must let
him go one time, or other. As for instance, if he think the Gospel be
directed to broken heartednes, and he can weep at a sermon, to morrow his heart
may be hard, and then he thinks, he is a devil that was but now a Saint.
Therefore many Christians after many years Profession of Religion never felt
their souls knit, till God rightly, and truly taught them this lesson: but then
they were knit to Christ, and their souls were never in and out, they were
never loose more; because they were able in all temptations to retreat to this
truth as a refuge. For let the devil tell a man he is no Saint, the soul can
say, I am a sinner; if the devil say, thou art an hypocrite, I, but an
hypocrite is but a sinner, I am a sinner still, though I be not a broken
hearted sinner; so let the devil, and hell say what they will, they shall
never beat him from that refuge; And says the soul being a sinner I am the
proper object of grace and life, and salvation in the Gospel, and though I have
no comfort as a Saint that I am in the Kingdom of Heaven, yet at least I have
comfort that I am a sinner, and I may be there: though I have no comfort that I
am in, yet I have comfort that I am near, and the door is open; though I be
not a Siant I am a sinner, and if I have no real interest in Christ as a
Saint, yet I have interest in the promises of Christ as a sinner; and though I
cannot serve God cheerfully as a Saint, yet I will serve God as comfortably as
I can, as one that may be a Saint. In Matthew. 13. It is said of the Merchant
man, he found the field wherein was the treasure, he rejoiced. I remember a
worthy man of this country, he says, he rejoiced not that he had found the
pearl the treasure: but he rejoiced that he was come near a good bargain, he
was come to the field where it was; so though I be not assured that I am a
Saint, yet a sinner may rightly receive this truth with joy as a sinner,
because he is near a good bargain.

Many do little for God, why.
This is the reason that you have many Professors that mislearne the first
principles of religion of which this is the greatest, they will never do any
thing for God but when they are assured of their salvation, if there be the
least doubt that the work of grace is not right, they mope, and will do
nothing for God, but vex, and fret, and tug, and when their qualifications are
gone that they builded on, then they think they are hypocrites, and damned
creatures, and God shall have no service from them; when other people that it
may be have not fully assurance they are Saints, not one day of three in the
whole year, yet there is a current, and stream of obedience, and love, and
delight in God in some measure, and they go on constantly, though not so
strongly, doing and suffering his holy will; Why? because they have learned the
Gospel aright, they obey God in the notion of sinners; says the soul, I see a
great deal of love in God to poor sinners, and the Gospel contains nothing
but glad tidings to sinners, and though I have nothing in me that may make me
the child of Christ, yet the way is open, therefore I will go on with the
work, let him do what he will. Thus the soul is knit to Christ that come what
will, it will never be beaten off from Christ I never knew my own soul knit
to Christ till God had taught me this, but it was off, and on, as a bone in and
out, a Saint to day, and an Hypocrite to morrow, to call God Father to day, and
Enemy to morrow. The Gospel is directed to a sinner, quasi a sinner, not as
this, or that sinner, but as a sinner; there is the object of salvation. This
makes a Saint I say go with constancy, if I cannot go to Christ as a Saint,
yet I can as a sinner; so he has something that k^epes him that he is not as
many Professors, that are ready to kill, and hang, and drown themselves,
because they see the Gospel is made to Saints, and they see they are not
Saints, then they are in a worse condition than sinners. Learn this you that
are Professors of Religion, that are in and out, that have spent ten, or
twenty, or thirty years, and your souls are not knit to Christ, beg of the
Lord to teach you this lesson.

The next Lesson that I would teach you from the Lord is, To labor for a
perfect spirit of adoption.
that this being so, that in the administration of the New Testament, or the
Ministry of the Gospel, there is nothing but glad tidings no object but what
is amiable and good; then all you that have received Jesus Christ, let me
exhort you to this, labor to get up in you a perfect spirit of adoption, my
meaning is this, you know there is a spirit of adoption, and a spirit of
bondage, the spirit of adoption is a frame of heart, a temper of spirit like
that of a child to his father. And you know it is ordinary with the Saints,
that they have a little adoption, they can cry Abba father, a little, and low,
and at sometimes: but there is a great deal of the spirit of bondage mingled
with it, there are sometimes fears, secret whisperings in the heart, O, thou
art not right, Christ is not in thee; if he were, it is impossible thou
should be so weak, and so easily overcome, and there will be some flaw in
the heart, and soakings in of guilt, that w^ eat out a man's peace, that
sometimes he shall call God father, another while he will look strangely upon
God, and be afraid to come to God, and be loath to go upon his knees before
him, and be glad when he is got out of his presence; there is a spirit of
bondage mingled with the spirit of adoption. Now in the New Testament we
should labor for a full spirit of adoption. Full spirit of adoption what.
What is that? that is, that there may be nothing in my heart toward God, but
pure love, because in his dealing to me there is not a syllable but love, and
grace, and glad tidings to me, and my heart and life should be answerable.
Fears, and horrors, whence.
For the reason of all the horror that you find in your hearts, and all your
fears and troubles that arise there, they are from this error in your minds,
this opinion that is not quite rooted out, that there is in the Gospel
administration some ill, and bad tidings, there is some love, and some hatred;
some mercy, and some wrath; you think that it may be God is your father, and it
may be he is your enemy, and that because you have sinned he will damn you to
hell. This is natural, and ordinary. Now if you were convinced that there were
nothing in the Gospel since our Lord Jesus is gone to heaven, and is at the
right hand of his Father, there is nothing in his dispensation but love, and
mercy, and no wrath; hell, and damnation, and sin, etc. are all thrown away,
and if I be perfectly righteous, and perfectly justified from all my sins; if I
have the spirit of Christ given me, and am one with God for ever, by an
everlasting Covenant, and shall have life, and a Crown of glory for ever, and
my sins shall not be laid to my charge; O, what a clear, and sweet spirit
should I have in Gods service! and not a muddie, and dogged, and froward spirit
that arises from guilt soaking into the soul. When I view this truth over,
and pull it by peice-meale, and see that there is no gall, nothing in the
Gospel, first, or last, but what is amiable, and beautiful, and blessed news
to sinners; then there should follow this consideration, why should there be
any thing in my heart, and spirit toward God, but amiable thoughts, and love,
etc? why should there be any of those coares of unbelief, and distruct, and
fear, and horror? Those mixtures of adoption, and bondage? Why should there
be hellish fears, or guilt in me, since there is no wrath, not anger at all in
God? Why should not the carriage of my heart be clear toward him, as his is in
his Son, by the administration of the Gospel toward me?

Labor for a perfect spirit of adoption, that you may not have any of those
bublings of bondage in your spirits that now over take you, and are twisted,
and woven with that little adoption that you have. For, who is there among us
to this hour, but when he comes before the Lord, and has a little smiling in
his soul to see his favor, and a little joy, and delight to come at him; and
yet there is some fear, and trembling, as Peter when he was on the waves, and
what if God will not receive me? etc. Therefore study to keep up the spirit of
adoption. It is a hard thing to keep up the temper of a child in the soul,
especially, when God lets a man fall into temptations, and folly, and
weakness, etc. But though it be hard labor to keep up that temper, at least
thus much, that thou never come to so low a condition (which was the prayer of
one that was a good man) wherein thou can not with a full mouth, and with a
clear heart call God father, and thee his child, though the unhappiest, and
unworthiest child. If thou come below this, if thou call on God with fear;
and can not cry abba, abba, that is as much as daddie, daddie, as our babes
use to say, if thou do not come so high, thou art spoiled, and undone, desire
God to teach you this Lesson also.

The damnation of them that refuse the Gospel just.
Thirdly, if this be so that the Ministry of the Gospel is all glad tidings to
the worst of sinners; then I appeal to you all, and let every man put his hand
upon his own breast, and if this be a truth (as I hope it has been cleared)
you shall all be your own judges; how just will the damnation of that sinner be
that will not receive the Gospel. If there were in the Gospel ridged tidings,
sad news, (as people are apt to fancy to themselves) then it were no wonder
if one persecuted it, and another despised it, and another neglected it, and
another turned it into wantoness: But when it comes in such a ^reame that there
is nothing but love, and light, and salvation, and grace, and all freely laid
down at the feet of a sinner for his receiving; nay, he shall have power, and
grace to receive it, he shall have salvation, and a vessel to carry it in;
judge how justly thy damnation will be in the last day, man, or woman,
whosoever thou art that set thy self against the Gospel, and wilt not
receive salvation.

Damnation mentioned frequently in the New Testament why.
This is the reason why damnation comes out so rife in the new Testament, it is
scars ever mentioned in the old Testament, that I know of damnation is not
mentioned in the old Testament, nor hell, but as it is taken for the grave,
etc. But when grace, and the Gospel, and life comes, damnation comes at the
heels of it; How can ye escape the damnation of hell? Then comes the worm
that never dies, and the fire that never goes out. The reason is, because
then damnation is proper; Then when a man will not receive salvation, not
because he cannot, no man is damned because he cannot receive Christ: but
because he will not receive this salvation, and grace. Therefore says Christ,
Mat. 28. Go preach the Gospel, he that believes shall be saved, he that
believes not shall be damned. That is, says that godly Dr Preston, go tell
every wicked man this good news, that Christ has brought salvation: But it
may be they will not believe what we say to them, there is no more in the long
and short, but in a word tell them they shall be damned. That is the reason in
Mat. 22. where the Ministry of the Gospel is compared to a feast of dainties,
and one slights it, and another despises it, and another rejects it; and
when the Master of the feast came it is said, he found one without a wedding
garment, and that the man was speechless; he was as a man says Beza with a
halter about his neck, says he go, Bind him hand, and foot, and cast him
into utter darkness, there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth. He was speechless, he had nothing to say. and truly, I have had more
experience lately, than ever I had in my life, I saw a man that was accounted
all his life a professed Athiest, and I was with him in the room when one in
the company opened the Gospel from one end to the other (as I have endeavored
in my poor ability to do now) and all the riches, and the salvation of it,
how free it is, how there is no core, nor nothing but what is amiable; Says
the man when he had done, judge ye, will ye not think it just if ye be
damned, if ye will not receive, and obey this? Says he it is so, I deserve to
be damned without mercy. Consider this, you will say so too, you will be made
to confess how just your damnation will be for refusing it. If there were any
thing in all this that were harsh, and cruel, and rough, and ridged it were
somewhat: but when God has cast the Gospel into such a mold, and way that
every thing smiles, and all is roses; and yet a wretch shall go and persecute
it, and slight it, and neglect, and despise it, I leave such a man, let him
judge himself at the last day worthy of damnation: for he shall have judgment
without mercy, that rejects this mercy; When men have this mercy without
mixture of judgment, it is fit that those men should have pure judgment without
mixture of mercy.

Whose destruction God laughs at.
This is the reason that the Lord laughs at men's destruction, Pro. 1. when it
comes as a whirlwinde. Now we must understand that God does not laugh at any
man's destruction, as a transgressor of the Law, for he has cast himself into a
necessity of sininng, and has damned himself, and he cannot help it. And God
will not laugh at the destruction of the Gentiles, and heathens that have not
heard of the Gospel: but when God comes by his Ministers, and opens, and
unbowels all the mysteries of the Gospel to people, and has laid all before
them clearly, yet then for people to love darkness rather than light, and to
continue drunkards and whoremongers, and swearers, and villanes, and jearers of
Gods people, and laugh at his Ordinances, this makes the Lord laugh at their
destruction. I beseech you therefore, all you that yet never received the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, Gospel Ministers to be embraced.
consider what I have said.

In the fourth place, if the Gospel, and the Ministry of it be good tidings,
and glad news to the worst of sinners; Then Beloved you should me thinks
embrace with all affection the true, and sincere Ministers of this Gospel,
these Messengers that bring you these glad tidings we. are (as the Apostle
says) the offscouring of the world, a spectacle to men, and Angels. Truly,
there are no Ministers in the world that are more persecuted, and hated, and
despised, than the humble, sincere Ministers of the new Testament, of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, nor never were; This is a sore, and a strange thing, if
we did bring one word that were sad, and grievous, and harsh to you, it were no
wonder, but if all that we speak be the voice of the dove, doves language,
all sweet; come to the Gospel Ministry, if there come a poor man full of
sadness, the Ministry of the Gospel speaks a word of comfort to him, if he be
in darkness, and he knows not which way to go, waiting on a Gospel Ministry
there is light to find his way. If he be in fear, and know not his estate
what he is, a Gospel Ministry will give him assurance of Gods love; so it
brings glad tidings to some souls every hour. Is not this than madness in men
that of all creatures in the world they hate that man, and those Messengers
that bring these blessed glad tidings. There is a Prophecy in Isaiah 52.7. How
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good tidings,
that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good things, that
publishes salvation; that says to the righteous, thy God reigns. How
beautiful are their feet? much more their lips; you do not in this as you do
in natural things, if a man come, and bring glad tidings of taking of such a
Town, or of such a victory, though it may be there is loss, and little good
in it, we all welcome it, and he is rewarded presently, and has all ways of
encouragment, and yet when people shall come, and by the Spirit of God make
known all the love of God in Jesus Christ, and all the riches of the Gospel in
Jesus Christ, that your hearts should so rise against it, that you should
receive and entertain so many prejudices against it, it is a strange, and
wondrous thing. Therefore you should do well me thinks, as you read in the
book of God, 2 Samuel 18.27. of two men that did bring tidings to David of the
wars, and the watchman said Me thinks the running of the foremost is like the
running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok; and the King said, he is a good man, and
comes with good tidings. He would have the watchman open the eat quickly; why,
because he was a good man, and did bring good tidings. So we should,
especially if men be good, and holy, and humble, and feel the power of that
they speak, and express it in their lives, say as David, that is a good man,
and brings good tidings; he will teach me if I be ignorant, he will comfort
me if I be sad, he will direct me if I have lost my way; he will build me up
if I thrive not in grace. The consideration of this truth me thinks should
bannish all those strange thoughts, and prejudices that we have against the
Ministers of the Gospel.

In the first place another lesson is this, To hearken to, and inquire after
the Gospel.
if the Gospel be such good news, such glad tidings, then you should hearken
much after it, and inquire much into it. We all (you know) are naturally
greedy to hear news, and we know how much time is spent (here in the City
especially) in reading Diurnalls, inquiring after tidings, and how much money
is cast away that way. We should do so much more about these glorious tidings
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It is not enough to hear a Sermon, or to read a
Chapter once, or twice a day, as it is the manner of some, that will not bring
us to know the mysteryes of the Gospel, but we must search the Scripture, and
compare spiritual things, with spiritual things. As in earthly tidings, if a
man tell of such a victory one way, and another after him another way, and a
third a third way, you compare what they say, and their letters, and news, to
find out the truth. So you should be earnest in seeking God, and beg his
Spirit, compare Scriptures together, see what the Scripture says in such a
place, and how in another place, and this is the way to find out the mystery of
the Gospel.

Gospel tidings great and true.
These tidings are great, therefore inquire into them, and they are true
tidings, they are not fables, and tidings of common concernment to every Saint;
therefore let this be the use that thou and I should make of it, to desire the
Lord to lead us into the depth of those mysteryes, and to set our selves to
study it more, and more; for the further we go the more we shall find, as
in a mine; It is not as in your news, many times you have a great deal of
good news, and in a day, or two it vanishes to nothing: But here you shall
find, first the field, and then the pearl. Professors are grown careless,
they were wont to read Chapters morning, and evening, that was ordinary, but
thou must do more if thou will understand the mysteryes of the Gospel, compare
one Chapter, and one Scripture with another, search the Scriptures, and go to
God to open the meaning of it.

Sixthly, ^ Use 6. To spread these glad tidings to others.
spread these glad tidings as much as you can to others. You know when people
receive good news they run and tell it to others. The poor shepherds Luke 2.
when they heard the news of the Messiah, they left their sheep, and ran to the
Towns to tell it. So, when Christ was risen Mary runs to tell the news to the
Disciples. Beloved, when we understand this good news we should endeavor to
spread it. People buy Diurnalls for their friends, and fold them in their
Letters, and send them about the Kingdom; let us do so with these spiritual
tidings, that we may send them forth. O, I would to God that we did see how
the poor Countries in the North, and West of England, in many places, in
Towns, they have not so much as a Service-booke, not so much as reading; if
God settle, and compose these times the Lord give you hearts to join together
to find out a course, to send the Ministers of the Gospel to bring the glad
tidings to poor people, that lie in the Mountains of darkness, and in the
shadow of death.

Gospel-preaching not to be hindered.
And let us not be so curious, or scrupulous, as to hinder people that they
should not preach the Gospel. Suppose people have no degrees in the University,
or it may be have not the knowledge of the tongues, (though that were to be
wished) let us not pick quarrels with them to stop their mouths, and to hinder
the preaching of the Gospel. And let us not think so hardly in these days, of
those men that God has raised to preach the Gospel. It is strange you shall
have your Pulpits ring, calling them Tub-preachers, and Tinkers, and Cobblers.
We should think better of them; Why? they are filled with good news, and they
go and tell it to others. We do so usually in other things, when we have good
news, we run to our friends, and neighbors, and comrades, and make it known.

New light discovered in these days.
This is an age wherein God comes and fills his people, with the glorious light
of the Gospel, and poor wretches, they cannot choose but speak what they have
seen, and heard; therefore be not so captious, and furious. The Lord has
spoken, who can but prophecy? Amos 3.8. When God fills peoples souls with the
knowledge of Christ; who can keep it in? It is as the new wine spoken of in
Job, it cannot be kept in. And surely the time is coming that young men shall
see visions, and old men shall dream dreams, and God will pour out his
Spirit upon all flesh, and they shall prophecy; It is prophesied in Joel, and
this is to be made good in the new Testament. And therefore if we see that the
Lord fills young men, or tradesmen, etc. and gives them hearts to go, and tell
the good news to others; why should you be so extremely troubled, and spend
your spirits in rage at it?

I use not to tell stories, but let me tell you this one thing; since I have
been from you of late, I have observed, and seen, in the Mountains of Wales,
the most glorious work that ever I saw in England, unless it were in London;
the Gospel is run over the Mountains between Brecknockshire, and
Monmouthshire, as the fire in the thatch; and who should do this? They have no
Ministers: but some of the wisest say, there are about 800 godly people, and
they go from one to another. They have no Ministers, it is true, if they had,
rhey would honor them, and bless God for them; and shall we rail at such,
and say they are Tub-Preachers, and they were never at the University? Let us
fall down, and honor God; what if God will honor himself that way? They are
filled with good news, and they tell it to others; and therefore vex not at
them, and say, O, what times are these! and what will become of us? Why, what
is the business? O, such a man he was never Master of Arts, he was never at
the University, and he takes upon him to preach; when it may be he has more of
God in him than I, and a hundred that have all this.

Only take two Cautions. Cautions


Learning not to be disparaged
First, I speak not to disparage learning, or learned men, it were to be wished
that there were more godly, and learned men also in England, and Wales.

Men not run before they be sent.
Secondly, take this Caution, that because God fills many with the Gospel, and
they do a great deal of good, take heed least any of you run before you be
sent, that is, that a man go not rashly, and believe his own judgment rather
than the judgment of the Saints; as diverse in this City they think they are
fit to preach, and other people of God that are better able to judge of their
gifts think not so, and yet they will run presently. Take heed of pride, and
rashness, but if God fill a man with the tidings of the Gospel, and others of
the people of God see it sparkle out as a vessel full of new wine, who am I
that I should resist, if with humility he make known this tidings to others?

If the Gospel be such a thing (as I desire you to spend some thoughts in
considering of this truth) then this should comfort us, Comfort against present
troubles.
and help our patience a little in these trouble some times; that though all be
out of order, and we suffer such losses, yet blessed be God we have the voice
of the turtle still in the Land; thou may say, though I have hard news at
home; trading is low, and my stock is small, yet blessed be God I have the
Gospel, that is, I have abundance of glad tidings made known to my ears, and
to my soul every day. This is some comfort, you have less of outward things,
but more of inward (I suppose) then ever.

Another thing is this, 1 Not to corrupt the Gospel.
they must take heed of two things.

First, take heed of currupting, and adulterating this blessed Gospel, and glad
tidings with their own wisdom, it is glorious enough of it self, every
addition of humane wisdom makes it worse; take heed of sophisticating the word
of God, of playing the hucksters, as the Apostle says 2. Cor. 3. we are not
those that play the hucksters, hucksters mingle apples and pears: they mingle
their commodities, take heed of that.

And then take heed of mingling the Law, 2. Not to mingle Law and Gospel.
and the Gospel together. It is true the Law is necessary, and is added to the
Gospel; but God intends not in the new testament that it should be mixed and
mingled with the Gospel. As to instance in a few; many ministers undo the
souls of people, I know this by experience that a Gospel-heart, that is but
weak in Gospel light, and grace, had rather lie a year in close prison than
to be a year under a ministry, jumbling old and new together the Law and the
Gospel, for it routs, and onfounds a poor soul. As to preach terror and
damnation to a sinner qua a sinner, properly as a sinner; though we be called
ministers of the Gospel, yet this is a part of the ministry of the Law: for
the Law brings curses for a sinner, and blessings for him that does well; now
when we quatinus as a sinner damme him, 2. It is legal to do good or abstain
from evil for fear of judgment.
and curse him, we harden him, and make him run further from God then before.

Secondly, when men have drawn men to good, or driven men from evil with
judgments, either spiritual, or temporal: this was the way of the ministry
of the old testament. When people shall take all the judgments of the old
testament, and persuade a man to do this or to take heed of that, or else thou
shall have judgment fall upon thee, and thou will bring judgment, upon the
Land. Beloved, this was the way of God certainly and the way of the ministry
of the old testament; but I never knew a saint a void evil, or do good for
fear of such judgments. Therefore look to thy own experience; men may play at
dice with the word of God that way; if a man's ways like them not, they may say
they will bring judgment upon the Land, as Independants, or as such, and such
men; but these are but bugbeares, why? because in the Gospel, the saints are
dilivered from the hands of their enemies that they may serve God with out
fear: they know that in God there is no cloud, God may chasten, and correct
them out of love but there is no danger otherwise. And then again they are
delivered from men, they are not the servants of men.

Cause of divisions.
I do think for my part constantly, that the main cause of all the divisions,
and stirrs, and contentions among us is because there is so much of the old
testament in our ministry especially, and our profession must be accordingly;
for our strength will be according to our meat. And truly a man may be a Godly
man, and yet may be a minister of the old testament; and if you take a man, let
him be a Godly man, if his grace be bred in him by the ministry of the old
testament, and nourished in him by that: and take another saint that has grace
planted, and bred by the ministry of the Gospel, and nourished by that, the
former man though he be godly, must of necesity persecute the latter. I pity
them when ministers rale against this man, and against that, and they know not
why, yet they may be Godly men. Ishmael might be a Godly man for ought I know;
he was a type, not of wicked men, but of men under the old Covenant, If ever
you will have peace and comfort, in the Land, beg of God to remove an old
testament spirit from our preachers, from our prayers, and our principals, and
to set up the new testament, Jesus Christ in the Gospel, and then certainly the
promise shall be fulfilled, we shall be all of one heart and one way, and one
mind, but it will never be otherwise as long as some reach to the ministry of
the new testament and others go in the old, as Ishmael, and Isaak could not be
reconciled, no more will these.

I will conclude all only with this last word, To receive the Gospel.
seeing it is clear out of the word (and so truly I hope you apprehend it
through Gods grace that the whole Gospel is Good, it is nothing but sweet and
glad tidings to the worst of sinners, much more to saints; then I exhort you in
the name of Jesus Christ that you receive this Gospel. O there is no reason why
thou should be so shie of Christ when we speak fair, and offer fair to
your souls, and beseech you earnestly, and give you reasons why you should
receive Christ, you harken but a little, and you go away so shy, there are
some sinners still: beloved there is no reason for it, God deads plainly; there
is no tittle in the Gospel but it is really good and glad tidings to the worst
of sinners; therefore receive it. What is that? Endeavor to believe it, 1. To
beleve it.
for the Lord Jesus that is the faithful witness has said it: and children
heretofore used to say, it is as true as Gospel; and though it be Gospel, and
truth yet you will not believe it.

Then endeavor to embrace it with joy, 2. Embrace (...) with joy
and affection as in 1 Thessalonians. 1. see how they received the Gospel in joy with
much affliction. What if it bring a little affliction with it, that thou be
jeared; receive it with joy, it is joyful, and glad tidings.

And then resign thy self give thy self wholly up to walk according to this
blessed Gospel, 3. To give up our selves to it
and not to turn it into wantonness, or abuse it, but that thou may give thy
self body and soul as a living sacrifice to Jesus Christ, that since he died
for thee, and has given thee abundant righteousness, and everlasting
salvation, and all blessed, and glad tidings in it, that thou may give thy
self, and all that thou have, and art freely to live to that Jesus Christ, and
to obey his blessed commands. These are the uses that you and I should
endeavor to make, that this truth may remain, and abide with us, that there
is nothing in the whole ministry of the new testament but good tidings, and
glad news to the worst of sinners.

FINIS.
An alphabeticall Table of the principal Heads contained in the foregoing
SERMONS.
A
ABuse, see Liberty Accident Part. Page How men come to do good by accident
Part. 1. Page 148 Adoption Spirit of adoption to be labored for Part. 2. Page
40 Full spirit of adoption wha Part. 2. Page 41 Affliction see moderated Age
Decency in regard of age Part. 1. Page 82 All what meant by it Part. 1. Page 4.
Angels. Angels wait on the Saints Part. 2. Page 18 Ascended Christ ascended
into heaven Part. 2. Page 16
B
Backsliders Backsliders their course Part. 1. Page 156 Baptism Baptism, how
appointed Part. 1. Page 1^ Baptism, the substance of it only set down Part.
1. Page 23 Baptism, the way to peace about it Part. 1. Page 100 Manner of
baptism determined by the Magistrate Part. 1. Page 108 Baptism doubted of by
some Part. 1. Page 141 Believed, Believing Believing in Christ what Part. 1.
Page 36 Gospel to be believed Part. 2. Page 54 Bind Not to bind others where
Christ has nor bound them Part. 1. Page 59 Bishops Bishops their practice
Part. 1. Page 48 Bondage Spirit of bondage whence Part. 1. Page 52. Brethren
Expedient actions bring good to our brethren Part. 1. Page 70 Burden Religion
presented by some as a burden Part. 1. Page 145
C
Scripture not all delivered in Canons Part. 1. Page 167 Carnal, see outward
Freedom from Ceremonies Part. 1. Page 14. Why men run from Christ Part. 1.
Page 26 See sinners, Spouse, mind Christian, see spiritual, Question,
excellent The Church may determine concerning Gods worship how Part. 1. Page
1^^ Cautions for Churches in determining Ibid The ten Commandments of force in
the new Testament Part. 1. Page 13 Upon what ground Saints obey the
Commandments Part. 1. Ibid See weakened Coming to Christ what Part. 1. Page 36
Common see heart Paul's Compliance with men Part. 1. Page 12 Concurrence of
things to expediency Part. 1. Page 67 Condition of men by nature, showed by the
Gospel Part. 2. Page 11 Conscience of Saints to be warily dealt with in
imposing laws on them Part. 1. Page 111 Contention one cause of it Part. 1.
Page 41 Ignorance of Christian liberty causes Contention Part. 1. Page 54
Contentions to be avoided Part. 1. Page 71 Contentions among Saints how to end
them Part. 1. Page 99 No reason of the present Contentions Part. 1. Page 125
Contentions whence they are Part. 1. Page 128 Gospel not to be Corrupted Part.
2. Page 52 Gods Covenant in the Gospel Part. 2. Page 16 Of being Covered, or
uncovered in heating the word Part. 1. Page 114 Creature what meant by it Part.
2. Page 3 Gentiles called creatures, why Part. 2. Page 4 Credit to be given to
what Christ teaches Part. 1. Page 36 Custom hardly broken Part. 1. Page 21
Custom of Churches, and Saints to be looked to Part. 1. Page 113 Custom the
weakest rule in spiritual things Part. 1. Page 114
D
Damned, Damnation A man may be damned for doing lawful things Part. 1. Page
93 Damnation of Gospel refusers just Part. 2. Page 43 Decency what Part. 1.
Page 78 see person, relation profession, sex, age, season Those that eyenot
expediency lead others to destruction Part. 1. Page 150 Things that God has
determined not to be weakened, Part. 1. Page 65 Things concerning worship to be
determined how Part. 1. Page 170 Service of the Devil hard Part. ^. Page 33 see
sweetness Christ died for us Part. 2. Page 15 Sweetness in sin from
distemper Part. 1. Page 34 Division, the cause of it Part. 2. Page 53 Christ a
door, how Part. 1. Page 29 Duties means of salvation how Part. 1. Page 31
Duties not to justle out ore another Part. 1. Page 78 Duties how required in
the Gospel Part. 2. Page 22
E
THE ways of Christ easy Part. 1. Page 29 Things left for us to do easy
Part. 1. Page 32 Christ's ways easy how Ibid What use to be made of Gospel
easiness Part. 1. Page 97 Gospel duties few, and easy Part. 2. Page 24
Expedient actions tend to edification Part. 1. Page 73 Disorderly actions miss
their end Part. 1. Page 87 Religion presented by some as endless Part. 1. Page
143 Enfringe, see liberty, Engagement to parties inexpedient Part. 1. Page 171
Encouragement see Sinners, Things simply evil inexpedient Part. 1. Page 62
Good to be ommitted when their comes a greater evil Part. 1. Page 63 Every
example makes not a law Part. 1. Page 55 Example of old Saints to be looked to
Part. 1. Page 112 See rule Benefit of Gospel excommunication Part. 2. Page 33
What makes an excellent Christian Part. 1. Page 152 Expediency what Part. 1.7.
Page 66 Expediency to be looked to as well as lawfulness Part. 1. Page 11 Few
things expedient Part. 1. Page 61 Meaning of the word expedient Part. 1. Page
88 Helps to expedient walking Part. 1. Page 177 See strict Externalls how far
to be looked to Part. 1. Page 22 See Worship
F
Some men pleased with doctrine out of faction Part. 1. Page 163 Faith
required, and bred by the Gospel Part. 2. Page 25 Sinners invited to a feast
Part. 1. Page 28 Vain fears in Gods ways to be avoided Part. 1. Page 104
Fears, and horrors whence Part. 2. Page 41 Things left for us to do, few
Part. 1. Page 32 Few turn from Christ to serve Satan Part. 1. Page 35 Who they
be that intend good but to a few Part. 1. Page 140 Gods love fruitful Part. 2.
Page 13 Danger in making laws for the future Part. 1. Page 110
G
Gentiles the worst of sinners Part. 2. Page 5 see creature Expedient actions
advance Gods glory. Part. 1. Page 69 Who they be that do little for God. Part.
1. Page 143 Why men do little for God. Part. 2. Page 29 Godly men how a cause
of the present distractions. Part. 1. Page 133 see judgment. Things simply
good may be unexpedient. Part. 1. Page 63 A less good must give way to a
greater. Ibid Good when to be refrained Ibid see evil, easiness. To preach
the Gospel, what. Part. 1. Page 37 Liberty in the Gospel, what. Part. 1. Page
95 Gospel, what meant by it. Part. 2. Page 2 Difference between the Law and
Gospel. Part. 2. Page 7 Gospel, to be enquired after. Part. 2. Page 47 To give
up our selves to the gospel. Part. 2. Page 55 see strict, new, Ministers,
corruption. Two wrong governments. Part. 2. Page 27 Grace more in the new
Testament than in the Old, Part. 1. Page 10 Guilt in the Saints, whence. Part.
1.52. Page 138
H Hair.
Of wearing long hair. Part. 1. Page 116 see Papists, natural, Devil. Doing
lawful things with common hearts brings guilt Part. 1. Page 138 Excellent
Christians busied about high things. Part. 1. Page 154 Hindrances to
expediency. Part. 11. Page 171 Gospel tidings not to be hindered. Part. 2. Page
49 A sign of an hypocrite to regard only lawful things. Part. 1. Page 90
Hypocrisy hinders expedient walking. Part. 1. Page 177 Hold, see Liberty.
Things honest, what. Part. 1. Page 84 Spiritual honor real. Part. 2. Page 17
I Jealousy.
DEvout jealousy touching truth and error. Part. 1. Page 173 The service of
the Jews in the old Testament Part. 1. Page 32 Lawful things done
inexpediently bring guilt Part. 1. Page 139 Ignorance, set contentions others
Independency Part. 1. Page 49 Hurtful principles of Independents Part. 1. Page
123 see Presbytery, contention Indifferent things what Part. 1. Page 64
Interpret see word Christ's intercession for us Part. 2. Page 16 Gospel to be
embraced with joy Part. 2 Page 54 Godly men differ in judgment Part. 1. Page
125 Christ shall come to judgment Part. 2. Page 16 Judgments how denounced
Part. 2. Page 35
K
Magistrates may determine in things that relate to their Kingdom Part. 1. Page
110 Knowledge see outward liberty
L
Christians must walk laudably Part. 1. Page 83 Why God laughs at men's
destruction. Part. 2. Page 45 Of those that abolesh the morrall Law Part. 1.
Page 42 Those that make laws to tie themselves Part. 1. Page 46 Those that
make laws to bind others Part. 1. Page 47 Danger to take away any of Gods
laws Part. 1. Page 59 Not to make laws where God has not Part. 1. Page 158
Men's laws forced on people Part. 2. Page 28 Law and Gospel not to be mingled
Part. 2. Page 52 see example, Gospel Things lawful now that were not of old
Part. 1. Page 5 Lawful, what meant by it Part. 1. 6. Page ^2 Sin in doing
lawful things Ibid Saints now their liberty in point of lawfulness Part. 1.
Page 8 Christians troubled in the use of lawful things Part. 1. Page 74 Men
reproved that regard only lawful things Part. 1. Page 89 see expedient, rule,
submit heart Learning not to be disparaged Part. 2. Page 51 Errors on the left
hand Part. 1. Page 40 Liberty of Saints in the New Testament Part. 1. Page 14
Why Christ has left that liberty Part. 1. Page 17 To understand our Christian
liberty Part. 1. Page 51 Knowledge of Christian liberty safe Ibid Christian
liberty not to be infringed Part. 1. Page 55 Christian liberty not to be abused
Part. 1. Page 59 Christian liberty to be held fast Part. 1. Page 160 see
others, contention, Gospel Life see salvation New light discovered Part. 2.
Page 49 Expedient actions increase love Part. 1. Page 70 Love to be practiced
by Saints Part. 1. Page 106 Love to a man's self natures law Part. 1. Page 119
Love a help to expedient walking Part. 1. Page 179 Gods love in the Gospel to
sinners Part. 2. Page 13 Things lovely what Part. 1. Page 85
M
MAgistrates how far they may determine concerning Worship Part. 1. Page 107
Cautions for Magistrates in determining Part. 1. Page 109 see, time, place,
Malignants cause of the present contentions Part. 1. Page 132 Many see all,
Masters of families how they may determine concerning worship Part. 1. Page 109
Means, see duty Members of Christ who Part. 1. Page 35 Saints in the new
Testament grown men Part. 1. Page 18 Excellent Christians have Christ's mind
Part. 1. Page 153 Ministers forced on people Part. 2. Page 28 Gospel Ministers
to be embraced Part. 2. Page 45 see stumbling blocks Afflictions moderated to
the Saints Part. 2. Page 20 Modesty a law of nature Part. 1. Page 119 Common
multitude cause of the present contentions Part. 1. Page 134
N Nature.
THe law of nature to be looked too. Part. 1. Page 118 Gods ordinary commands
agree with the law of nature. Part. 1. Page 119 Contrary names put upon men and
things. Part. 1. Page 101 Names of persons and things changed by the Devil.
Part. 1. Page 131 Service of natural men hard. Part. 1. Page 33 Magistrates
may determine in necessary indifferent things. Part. 1. Page 109 The Ministry
of the Gospel nothing but good news. Part. 2. Page 6 Latitude of Saints in the
new Testament. Part. 1. Page 12 see grace, liberty.
O Offended, see law.
OFfices and officers in the new Testament. Part. 1. Page 17. Saints tied more
strictly of old. Part. 1. Page 8 see lawful, grace. Punctual laws in the old
Testament. Part. 1. Page 15. Old Testament spirit, what. Part. 1. Page 45 Sign
of an old testament-spirit. Part. 1. Page 91 How men deprive themselves of
opportunities. Part. 1. Page 147 Christians must walk orderly. Part. 1, Page 86
Things done disorderly, how. Part. 1. Page 87 What hinders men from winning
others. Part. 1. Page 53 see law.
P Papists.
Hardness of Papists service. Part. 1. Page 33 Men offended that their party
is spoken against. Part. 1. Page 163. see engagement. Posseover strictly
observed. Part. 1. Page 16 What actiins tend to Peace. Part. 1. Page 71 The way
to peace. Part. 1. Page 100.122 No peace to the wicked, how. Part. 2. Page 34.
see self, prosperity. Some men think truth always goes with persecution Part.
1. Page 175 Persecution of Saints a previledge Part. 2. Page 19 Decency in
respect of a Christians person Part. 1. Page 78 Place of meeting to worship how
to be determined Part. 1. Page 108 Pope, his practice Part. 1. Page 48 Power
given in the Gospel to do what is required Part. 2. Page 23 Practice, see
Pope, Bishops Things worthy praise what Part. 1. Page 85 Praise only to God
Part. 1. Page 86 Of preaching Part. 1. Page 116 Precepts of several sorts
Part. 1. Page 56 see rule Prejudice inconvenient Part. 1. Page 172 Of
Presbytery Part. 1. Page 49 False Presbytery Part. 1. Page 101 True Presbytery
Part. 1. Page 102 Presbytery, and Independents wherein they differ Ibid
Presbyterians judgments Part. 1. Page 124 Contention from carnal Presbyterians
Part. 1. Page 129 Principles and ends of carnal Presbyterians Part. 1. Page
136 see contention Principles see Presbytery Privilege, see persecution
Outward profaneness by whom allowed Part. 1. Page 43 Decency in respect of
profession Part. 1. Page 80 Profit meant by expediency Part. 1. Page 66 Profit
how brought by actions expedient Part. 1. Page 68 profitable see sin Truth goes
not always with prosperity Part. 1. Page 173 Prosperity sometimes goes with
truth Part. 1. Page 75 Of singing Psalms Part. 1. Page 115 Things pure what
Part. 1. Page 85
Q
Christians full of Questions why Part. 1. Page 140
R
THe Saints must be dealt with rationally Part. 1. Page 110 Reason of three
sorts Part. 1. Page 117 Right reason, what Ibid Rediculous to tie the Saints
where Christ has not Part. 1. Page 50 Religion presented by some as rediculous
Part. 1. Page 146 Christ come to work redemption Part. 2. Page 14 Decency in
regard of a Christians relation Part. 1. Page 79 Religion, see endless,
burden Things of good report what Part. 1. Page 85. Benefit by Gospel reproof
Part. 2. Page 31 Right hand errors Part. 1. Page 44 Rigor not to be used in
determining things Part. 1. Page 111 The Law the outward, and the Spirit the
inward rule Part. 1. Page 13 What precepts or examples make a rule Part. 1.
Page 58 To walk all by the same rule Part. 1. Page 103 Every thing in
Scripture not a rule Part. 1. Page 166 see Scripture
S
SAlvation to be accepted of from Christ Part. 1. Page 37 Wrong ways to
salvation Part. 2. Page 12 Rules mis-drawen from Scripture Part. 1. Page 168
Heed in drawing rules from Scripture Part. 1. Page 169 see Canon, Rule, Decency
in regard of season Part. 1. Page 82 The way to peace in a man's self Part. 1.
Page 138 Self a hindrance to expedient walking Part. 1. Page 177 Ministers not
to run before they be sent Part. 2. Page 51 The Saints under the old Testament
servants Part. 1. Page 17 Decency in regard of sex Part. 1. Page 80 Engagement
to sinners to come to Christ Part. 1. Page 26 Leaving of sin profitable Part.
2. Page 21 God makes no peace with sin Part. 2. Page 35 Salvation offered to
sinners as sinners Part. 2. Page 36 see lawful singing, see Psalms Difference
small between Indedependents, and Presbyterians Part. 1. Page 125 Sobriety a
help to expedient walking Part. 1. Page 177 Saints in the new Testament sons
Part. 1. Page 17 Expedient actions for the good of the soul Part. 1. Page 74
The service of the devil will one day be sour Part. 1. Page 34 Saints in the
new Testament have more of the Spirit Part. 1. Page 19 Christ's Kingdom
spiritual Part. 1. Page 20 The Spirit enables to do what is required Part. 1.
Page 35 Spiritual things to be studied Part. 1. Page 105 Spiritual Christians
their carriage Part. 1. Page 141 Spiritual things by whom relished Part. 1.
Page 155 Spirit by whom restrained Part. 2. Page 29 see rule Ministers to woe
men as spouses for Christ Part. 1. Page 28 Strength not given to keep laws of
our own making Part. 1. Page 139 Men strive about unlikely things Part. 1.
Page 126 Men strive about that they cannot prove Part. 1. Page 127 Doctrine not
to be abused to strife Part. 1. Page 165 Gospel way a strict way Part. 1. Page
94 To be strict in point of expediency Part. 1. Page 98 Stumbling Blocks keep
men from Christ Part. 1. Page 27 Stumbling Blocks removed Part. 1. Page 162
Saints now tied chiefly to the substance of things Part. 1. Page 23 see supper
To submit to Christ's laws Part. 1. Page 38 To look to our principles against
times of suffering Part. 1. Page 176 Supper of the Lord how ordained Part. 1.
Page 16 Substance of the Lords Supper set down Part. 1. Page 24 Sweetness in
the Devils service whence it is Part. 1. Page 34 Sweetness in Christ's service
not tasted Ibid
T
EVery thing in the Gospel glad tidings Part. 2. Page 11 Gospel tidings great,
and true Part. 2. Page 48 Gospel tidings to be spread abroad Ibid Tie, see
ridiculous Time of public worship by whom to be determined Part. 1. Page 107
Comforts against troubles Part. 2. Page 51 Things true what Part. 1. Page 84
Saints of old as children under tutours Part. 1. Page 18
V
Sign of unbelief Part. 2. Page 36 understand, see liberty Unsetlednesse in
Religion whence Part. 2. Page 57
W
VVatchfulnesse a help to expedient walking Part. 1. Page 179 Weak Christians
cause contentions Part. 1. Page 129 Nothing commanded by God to be weakened
Part. 1. Page 165 Some make the way wider than Christ has made it Part. 1.
Page 40 Expedient actions tend to the winning of others Part. 1. Page 73 see
others Carnal wisdom a hindrance Part. 1. Page 176 Spiritual wisdom a help
to expedient walking Part. 1. Page 177 God will interpret his own word Part. 1.
Page 174 Fancy to be subjected to the word Part. 1. Page 178 Notions to be
followed as they agree with the word The maine work of salvation done already
Part. 1. Page 29 Liberty in the externalls of Gods worship Part. 1. Page 15 No
liberty in the substance of Gods worship Ibid The maine work done concerning
worship Part. 1. Page 104
Y
Yoke of Christ, what Part. 1. Page 9.
READER,
THe number of the Pages in the latter three Sermons, beginning with 1, 2, 3,
etc. For thy ease in the use of the Table I have set down what is contained in
the nine former Sermons, as Part 1. In the three latter as Part 2. Whereby with
ease may be found any head in either.

T. S.


