A PROCLAMATION, to all, of all sorts, high and low, rich and poor, wherein is
Proclaimed the Law-Royall, which in keeping thereof is true Liberty: Given
forth by force and Power for every one to observe, upon pain of death.
AS there was, is, and always shall be an Omnipotent, Eternal, Infinite
Essence, and Being, GOD, which created and fashioned the Earth and all that
therein is, by which, whom, and none other, all things and appearances (light
and darkness) were created and made: (and by which and whom they shall be ended,
and by none other.) In which Creation of Light, he placed Man chief King,
Ruler, Father and Governor, to Rule, and Govern himself first: then all other
Creatures upon the Earth, according to their several natures: And gave unto him
Laws, as adherent and inherent to his perfection, profession, office, and
nature: in, and according to which, he was, and is to walk, rule, and govern
himself, and all others under him in the universe: which Laws were actually
observed, performed, and kept, by our Forefathers inviolable, and steadfastly
maintained to be the fundamentals, foundations, pillars, and props of
Government, by which they enjoyed lise and light, and were free: holding it
better the Fabric to break in sunder, then the Law to be violated or broken.

Hearken therefore, O People, learn to know your Laws which make you free,
(they are short and easy) Make good all your conclusions with your mouths and
hearts, and kindle your benumbed senses with a constant zealous obedience to
your greatest Lawgiver, greatest King and Father JEHOVAH* (the only end,
center, and foundation of your understanding, judgment, peace, and rest,) not
regarding pleasure, profit, honor, popularity, and the like glittering
interest: but stand steadfast and close in, and to his honor, worship,
goodness, naked truth, and obedience, as it is prescribed in the Law of our
Forefathers, abridged in two sentences, Love God withal thy heart, thy
Neighbor as thy self.

Every man is a King, Priest, and Governor in, to, and over himself: Every one
in his family is himself, and every thing in that family is for good in that
family to every particular person. And none has any thing to do with him, but
by his assent, (except in a public necessity) if any one takes any thing from
him (otherwise) without his consent, it is no less then Theft and Robbery, and
absolutely against the Law of our Forefathers, the Law of Nature, and against
the liberty and freedom of the People and Nation: But if any one rules not
well, let his judgment come from the Neighborhood, the people who best know
him, yet gradually from the Peoples Trustees or Officers.) For judgment
centers at every man's door.

Man of himself is absolutely free, so long as he keeps himself from
Contract: but in case he enters into Contract with another, he is no longer
free, but bound: therefore that he is in bondage, it proceeds from himself,
and thereby destruction is of himself, and there lies his bondage* for having
once contracted, he and they ought to keep faith, etc.

No man would make a Contract, if he were not thereunto compelled by some
exigence; for Contract: leads to be performed in time and place; but no Man can
command time, place, ability, or power. Surely he is only free, happy man,
which keeps himself from any Contract, but what God in Nature has enjoined
him. God in Nature has made men Kings and Governors (as I said before) to
govern well themselves; now see wherein he is bounded by God in Nature, Do as
thou would be done unto, and no otherwise: for therein lies the foundation
of the Law, which shall judge every particular person; for in every particular
person is the Judge placed which shall either justify or condemn.

Follow not the opinions of others, which (rightly considered) are mere
fancies, and depend more upon your concession, then truth. But (study the Law
of God in Nature) look into thy self; remember thou art a Stem proceeding from
the Stock of the greatest King, Father, Priest, and Prophet, JEHOVAH: that thou
art King, Father, Priest, Prophet, and Governor over thy self, and all that he
has given unto thee. Rule Well, and thou art well, for he that Rules must be
just, Ruling in the fear of the Lord: if thou Rule not well, thou art not
well, and disquieted in thy self: there is thy liberty and thy bondage.

Return first into thy self, do thou Rule well thy mind, thy thoughts, thy
words, thy hands, thy feet, nay, even all thy action? (then to others as to thy
self) if so, then thou art well, and happy shall thou be, for He that Rules
well is worthy of double honor. To Rule your selves well is the high way to be
chosen to Rule them which cannot rule themselves well. Remember unruly Cain who
murdered his brother Abel; the Scripture is full of them, as rebellious
Absalom, covetous Ahab, proud Haman, lascivious Jezabel, and others; did they
Rule well?

Wherefore were Rulers and Governors chosen, but to Rule those well that would
not rule themselves well? which Rulers, and Governors, as elected and chosen by
the people, are as servants to the people: and in Ruling well, immediate
Officers and Servants to JEHOVAH: for they in their administration, instruct
and admonish those which Rule not well: and from hence springs the Magistracy,
and Ministerial function, Aarons Rod, and Pot of Manna; Civil and
Ecclesiastical proceedings. Here you may see the beginning of Writings, how
Moses began, the rest followed him: here O Men may you discern the end of all.

Now let us bear our shame: we have lost our knowledge, we have perished: has
not Covetousness, Pride, and Hypocrisy been a continual stumbling block? the
Judges of the Land have judged unjustly, and administered false judgment for
bribes, and have led the people in ignorance.

The Preachers (called the Clergy) have preached false Doctrine, venting those
things which accrued to their profit and advantage, practicing covetousness,
pride, oppression, lasciviousness, superstition, Idolatry, and hypocrisy:
Indeed preaching and practicing any thing, for base lucre, profit, and gain.
Thou have nothing to do but thy Fathers will: what is that will? ask the Law
inherent in thy Nature.

Where a chief Ruler is chosen, his Office and duty is, to defend and preserve
those that Rule well: from the pride, couetousness, and oppression of those
that Rule ill, and to remove, take away, and destroy the cause of Ruling ill,
and to support and cherish those that Rule well.

Perhaps you will say, you have chose none to Rule over you: indeed every one
is not fit to choose, because they have lost their understanding; how can he
which Rules ill himself, choose well? his eyes are dim, and his understanding
clouded? is the blind fit to lead the blind? (no) yet it is the indubitable
right of the People to choose.

Now that the Government is not understood, you that have had the Ruling, and
Teaching Powers, are to be blamed and fhamed, for you have lead the People in
ignorance, and only Ruled, taught, and Lorded for your selves.

If you challenge a right of governing, as being chosen; then as Governors and
Rulers you ought to have the Laws of our Forefathers planted in your hearts:
which you are to observe and practice: for if you challenge our Forefathers
Powers in ruling over the People; then is it but just, that the People
challenge, you Rule in our Forefathers ways and Laws, and therein be
limited and bounded; for therein lies the liberty and freedom of the People,
and your safety.

Therefore they which choose, ought to have skill in Ruling well, in regard
those Officers, and Governors are to be chosen, who have skill in Ruling well:
which Officers, and Governors, are no other then Servants, or Trustees to, and
for the People: and ought not to make any Bylaws, but such as center upon the
fundamentals, which before they be confirmed and enacted, ought of right to be
presented to the People by the Sheriff of every County, at their County Courts:
as also by the Stewards of every Hundred and Liberty at their Courts (which
Steward ought to be sworn for the execution of his Office, which is altogether
neglected) to be approved and allowed of by the People: And in case the People
find them not good as to the Public, they may refuse obedience to that Law,
and that Law ought to lie dormant until the People have chosen wiser and more
faithful Trustees, for the altering, or rectifying of such Law: For all by
Laws are alterable, but the fundamental Law is unalterable: Is not the People
greater then their Trustees, and Officers? The Master is more worthy then the
Servant.

You Powers, you Kings in power that give Power, Offices, and places of Trust
(by the Peoples power) are empowered to call them to an account: Therefore look
to it, for the People the Kings eyes are upon you. Did the by-Law-makers Rule
well in running ad infinitum with by-Lawes Sans number, till they run
themselves out of doors, and left an odium behind them? do not you overrun
your selves, the Royal Law, the Peoples Right; it is better to stand still,
lest you run into confusion.

As the People have right to choose their own Officers, it being their
Liberty, an Appendix to their Birthright and Freedom which does gradually
ascend from the People to their chiefest Officers: So are they to let justice
gradually descend and center to, and in the People again.

Did those Rulers Rule well, when their benumbed Senses preferred their own
pleasure, profit, honor, and the like, not regarding the honor, worship, and
obedience to JEHOVAH, when they flighted the Stock (from whence they proceeded)
JEHOVAH the greatest King, the Laws of God in Nature, the Laws of our
Forefathers, the good and welfare of the People. Nay, suffering the pure and
perfect Law of God to be Monopolized into a Trade, permitting the inventions of
men to be preached to the ignorant (for gain) which the wisest could neither
understand nor know how to reform, so that the People perished in want of
knowledge, keeping the People in subjection, only Ruling and Lording it for
themselves.

Did they Rule well, when they converted the Public Treasure to their own
Interest? contracted themselves into a smaller number, that the Divident might
be the greater to them that were left: conniving at each others ill ruling:
gratifying one another (as they termed it) with thousands, (when the
Commonwealth wanted money to perfect their great affairs) fully intending never
to give an account thereof; they endeavored to perpetuate themselves in their
unlimited power; laying yoaks upon the Peoples necks, which makes them complain
and groan under the burden of them: denying the People to choose other
Trustees (in their places who were secluded) whereby their actions might have
been discovered, and the People eased.

Did they Rule well, when there was not an oppression in the Nation, but (if
not contrived and acted by them) was solicited by some of their Clerks, or
Favorites, and connived at by them, whereby justice was perverted, and Bribery
and oppression practiced by Authority, (forgetting to be just, Ruling in the
fear of the Lord) forcing many to travel after them and their Laws, till they
have worn out their Petitions at the door: denying assistance to just
requests, when by a little lip labor they might have made those happy, who
have been compelled by excessive expense, (the Mother of want) to leave the
prosecution of a just Cause, to the ruin and destruction of them and theirs.

Did they Rule well, in making so many Laws the People can neither number, nor
understand them; (if they keep them from their shoulders:) for in reading them,
no man knows where to center; by which and their own wills (being their
reasons) they made double, and treble consequences, of men's words, according to
their own constructions, whereby to accuse, imprison, and afflict them. (By the
like practice Christ suffered as a Blasphemer) Men's Words are their own, and
the interpretation of them.

Did they Rule well, when they suffered the poor, blind, and lame to perish in
the streets, and highways, (permitting them to want work, and their children
bread,) setting up the Metal Money (which he that hoords it deserves to eat
and drink nothing else until the poor be satisfied:) above the whole
Creation: Monopolizing the Earth, which if (by the project of a Kilvertist)
they could have Monopolized totally to themselves, (by their own Laws) they
might have ejected the people (their Masters) out of the Land: and it is
thought they would have Monopolized the Sun, Moon, and Stars, if it had been
possible; nay, God himself, if they could have known where to have found him.

Did they Rule well, when they were ten Months of twelve in the Country;
WAITEing to catch necessitated men in Bargains, (extorting and oppressing the
People) for themselves and others? what excused them in their absence; who when
they were in Town, could make their appearance in the morning, and all the day
after sit drinking in Taverns, Bowling Alleys, or -- making the members of
their bodies (the Temples of the Holy Ghost) to be the members of Harlots?
Particular failings produce inevitable destruction: were they not all breakers
of the Royal Law of God planted in Nature?

A word to those that Rule not well: Do thou say, do not murder, and will thou murder? Do thou say, do not commit Adultery, and will thou commit
Adultery? Do thou say, do not steal, and will thou steal? Do thou say, do
not covet, and will thou covet? Do thou say, be not drunk, and will thou be
drunk? Do thou say, be not envious or malicious, and will thou be envious
and malicious? Do thou say, do not oppress thy neighbor, and will thou
oppress thy neighbor? Do thou say, do not swear, cheat, and lie, and will thou swear, cheat, and lie? Do so still: he that is filthy let him be filthy
still: you are the causes of confusions: There would be no need of Stocks,
Houses of Correction, Whips, Prisons, nor Gallows, but for you, whosoever thou
art; Governors, Rulers, and Councels, (yea, and Parliaments too) might meet and
have nothing to do, were it not for you unruly Members; but go your ways,
you have lost your Kingly Government, your Priestly Government, and
Prophetical Office; and so are laid aside, as useless: Will you overrun God
in Nature, the Royal Law inherent in you? O the darkness within, which makes
the confusion without!

A word to all Rulers, and to all of all sorts: The greatest King with the
greatest Powers is at your heels; he comes with such force and Powers, that
neither Crowns nor Castles, walled Cities, nor your weapons of war shall
prevail: he will put an end to your Tumults, and evil doings by the brightness
of his coming; then shall you come, and give an account of your Kingship and
Governments: have you Ruled well, or not well? hearken! what means the noise
from the North, from the South; nay from all quarters? some crying out of
Prisons, some in Prisons, some in the Streets and Highways; the Creation
groans, and their cries are gone up to the greatest King JEHOVAH: if you will
not amend, and help, and plead the cause of the poor, and oppressed; and set
open the Prison doors, the greatest King comes with salvation and deliverance;
and you shall stand by as Ciphers, and be ashamed.

Here I have set down your work, you need not trouble your selves, except to do
well be a trouble to you; (if you please) understand the excellent foundations
of God, his Laws planted in Nature, which will instruct you to the
understanding of his Prophets, Apostles, the Scriptures; yea, things to come:
Wherefore if you covet any thing, let it be Love and Meekness, toward all; Man
being indeed limited, and bounded within that excellent Law of God in Nature:
which is for the ordering of every particular Member, in every particular Man
in good and for good; and if he steps out of that bound to govern another, it
must be by contract; for otherwise it begets enmity; from hence springs
the great confusions in the world: If we see one that Rules not well, it is
our duty to advise him in love and meekness, that he Rule well.

Your Well-Wisher, William Covell.


