PAPERS OF THE TREATY, AT A great Meeting of the General Officers of the
Army, at the Headquarters at Putney, in behalf of the whole Kingdom of
England, and concerning the Kings most excellent Majesty. With the several
speeches at the Councell-Table, and His Majesty's Resolution concerning the
Protestant Profession, and Liberty of Conscience.

depiction of a male figure with long hair and armor (or Thomas Fairfax?)

Die 20. September. 1647. Printed for R. V. and are to be sold near Temple Bar,
1647.

THE KINGS MAJESTY'S RESOLUTION Concerning the Army under command of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and how far He decIares himself for them.
Sent from Hampton Court, September. 18. 1647. Worthy Sir,
THe Kings Majesty does very much approve of the proceedings and actions of the
Army, and does confide and adhere to their Proposals, thinking them to be the
readiest way (in order to Peace) for settling of this poor languishing Kingdom,
and has also declared his gracious will and pleasure concerning the said
Proposals, expressing his Resolution concerning the same, and his earnest
desire to give full satisfaction unto all his Loyal Subjects, throughout his
Majesty's Realms and Dominions, both concerning the settling of the Protestant
Profession, and liberty to tender Consciences; as appears more fully by the
ensuing Proposals, viz.

His Majesty's last Proposals, intimatting his resolution and desires touching
the Army.
His Majesty propounds (as the best way in His judgment in order to Peace) that
his two Houses would instantly take into consideration those Proposals upon
which there may be a personal treaty with his Majesty, and upon such other
Proposalls as his Majesty shall make, hoping that the said Proposals may be so
moderated in the said treaty, as to render them the more capable of his
Majesty's full concessions, wherein he resolves to give full satisfaction to
his People for whatsoever shall concern the settling of the Protestant
Profession, with liberty to tender Consciences, and the securing of the Laws,
Liberties, and properties of all his Subjects, and the just privileges of
Parliament for the future.

The Proposals of the Army have given great satisfaction to his Majesty;
insomuch, that he has declared, that he conceives, they much more conduce to
the satisfaction of all interests, and may be a fitter foundation for a lasting
peace, then the Propositions, sent from both Houses of Parliament, to his
Majesty. Therefore his Majesty desires, that the said Proposals may be
forthwith treated upon, etc.

We desire much to hear of the coming down of the Commissioners, that so the
Treaty may go on more effectually, and all differences brought to a speedy
composure.

Nevertheless, the General, and the Officers of the Army, leaves no means
unattempted for the effect of the great work of the Kingdom, viz. to settle
peace, but embraces all opportunities, as is evidently manifested by the
enclosed paper. For his Excellency gave order, that notice should be given to
the Officers of each respective Regiment in these parts, to give their
attendance, and be ready at the Headquarters, upon Thursday last, being the
16. of this instant, there to consult, treat, and debate, upon the speedy
settlement of the affairs of this Kingdom, and better regulating and ordering
of such things which are destructive to this Nation, at which summons, most of
the Officers in general met at the place appointed, where they began to treat
upon the things before specified; the result of some particulars, I shall here
insert, as appears mere fully by the enclosed papers.

The proceedings of the General Officers of the Army at the treaty at Putney,
touching the settling of a firm peace, within his Majesty's Realms and
Dominions.
UPon Thursday last, being the 16. of this instant, his Exccllency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the general Officers of the army, had a great meeting at Putney,
where they spent much time, in debating upon the present affairs of the
Kingdom, and upon many great and weighty matters, exceedingly material toward
the settling of a firm peace and union. During which time of consultation, in
debate thereof, many worthy and excellent speeches were made at the Council
table, in the presence of the General, Lieutenant General, and the rest of
the Officers assembled together, by certain Colonels of the Army, which was to
this effect, viz.

That they desired nothing so much, in respect of their own particulars, as to
see this languishing and tottering Kingdom, restored to a happy and
flourishing condition, that so the pure light of the Gospel may shine forth in
abundance, and appear in its full luster throughout all dark and obscure
corners of the Kingdom, and that the joyful news of Peace may have its full
Echo and tryumphant sound througbout all his Majesty's Realms and Dominions,
and that the hearts both of King and People may be firmly knit and united
together, etc. With many other worthy expressions and protestations, touching
the settling of a firm peace.

Much time were spent, touching diverse weighty businesses in behalf of the
whole Kingdom, concerning the peace, and future safety; as also some things
debated upon in reference to the Proposalls, that after the Rights, Liberties,
Peace and safety of the Kingdom being provided for, the Kings Majesty's Royal
person, his Gonsort the Queena, their Highnesses, Charles Prince of Wales,
James Duke of York, and the rest of the Royal Issue, may be restored to a
condition of safety, honor, and freedom in this Nation, without diminution to
their personal Rights, or further limitation to the exercise of the Regal
power, etc.

No ways are left unassayed, for the obtaining of a speedy settlement of the
Kingdom, and establishing of his Majesty and his Royal posterity in their
full Rights and Freedoms, so that there is great hopes of a happy and mutual
concurrence, betwixt the King and his great Council. The General Council
goes on unanimously in all their Undertakings, and not so much as one
dissenting Member amongst them; and that they may still prosper in all their
Debates and oonsultations, is the prayers, of

Your devoted servant, Peter Cradock,
Dated at Hampton Court the 18. of this instant, 1647.
FINIS.

