THE REFUTER REFUTED.

OR Doctor HAMMOND'S (...) DEFENDED, Against the impertinent Cavils of Mr.
HENRY JEANES, Minister of Gods Word at Chedzoy in Somersetshire.

BY WILLIAM CREED B. D. and Rector of East-Codford in Wiltshire.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, and are to be sold at the Angel in Ivy-lane.
1660.

Mr ROYSTON,
I Have received four of the Refuter Refuted, which I have spent some time in;
and by all that I have read, find it excellently well done; and doubt not but
it will find Readers of all into whose hands you can put it. I wish the
success of this may encourage him to make himself known on other occasions and
subjects, for surely he is a man of excellent learning and parts. I judge much
better of it now then I did by the little I read at your house. I am

Your true friend, H. H.
Westwood, November. 29. 1659.
To the Learned Doctor H. HAMMOND, Health.
SIR, whosoever I am, is not much material to know. I humbly beg your Pardon
for intermedling with your Quarrel, without your Privity and Knowledge, which
you, of all men, are best able to maintain without Abettors or Assistants. And
I hope you will look upon it only as an Error of Love, that I should presume
to answer that Pamphlet, which your self had so severely condemned to Neglect,
and resolved to confute only by your learned Silence. For all the world knows
how speedily you could, if you pleased in so just a Cause as this, have set
forth a Rejoinder, because you have already so soon answered far abler
Adversaries then this Refuter, whatsoever Opinion himself and his Friends have
of his Scholasticall Abilities.

Indeed it was my desire, and in my own Judgment it would have been more for
my interest and quiet, if I had been silent, or at most served only as an
under-workman to have fitted and prepared Materials for an abler Artist to
have raised a more lasting Monument and Obelisck to your Name and Memory. And
so conscious I am to mine own Weakness and inabilities to endure the Wind and
Sun, and so little thoughts I had, when I first set upon this Business, of
doing any thing for the Public, that now all is finished and exposed to the
world, I cannot but wonder that it could be drawn from my Retirement, to run so
hazardous a Course. And howsoever I may be concealed, yet I cannot but
frequently blush at the many Censures that will pass upon the Unknown Author,
though no man speaks, or thinks of me.

But now such as it is, I humbly throw it at your feet, not for approbation and
applause, but for pardon and patronage. It has nothing to commend it but the
cheerfulness of the Oblation. It is no ambitious nor covetous Exhalation, but a
perfect Nidabah and Free will offering of Love. And such I doubt not will be
acceptable. It was this alone that made the poor Widows two mites a richer
present to the Corban then the Gold and Silver talents of the more wealthy but
less willing Votaries: and the very Heathens could smell, that one grain of
this Incense made a sweeter Perfume in the nostrills of their gods, then the
greatest clouds of smoke that arose from other Hecatombs.

But you well may wonder how a Defense of two sheets should swell into such a
Volume, and what strange overruling Influence should raise a Cloud of a
hand-breadth to fill and overspread the whole face of Heaven.

And the very truth is, Sir, I my self am much astonished at the Bulk, now all
is finished. But I shall give you my Reasons, that made the work to enlarge
thus insensibly under my hands.

Sir, you have an Adversary more Confident then strong; one that (as I could
tell you from credible information) does not only Publicly brag that he has
made you a Dunce, but in every Sermon almost of note that he makes has one Use
of Confutation against the learned D. Hammond: Nay that his ordinary Country
Lectures, and Homilies to the People are full of such Ovations, and not the
meanest Pulpit round about him, but has been turned into a Divinity Chair,
where Professor-like, he has disciplined, and arraigned, and condemned you in a
Scholasticall way.

But I insist not on Report, it is his Pamphlet I fix on. That you, and the
world may see, I do not wrong him (especially because he It is my desire and
purpose, to have fair wars with you, and my Pen shall not drop a disrespective
syllable of you. page 17. I hope it may contend with your reply for Civility
and fairness in carriage of the Controversy between us, page 39.
professes Respect) I shall here, with your Patience, give you in a short List
of his Fair and Civil usage.

First then, in a Sarcasticall Irony and Jeer, he calls you great Critic, that
is in plain Terms, an empty whiffling Grammarian, and says, he is Page 10.
loath to enter into a Contest with so great a Critic, as your self, touching
the meaning of a word. And what is it? The poor English Monosyllable, Mince.

Then in the very same Section he ranks you among the number of those Page 10.
erroneous Persons (no less then Heretics without doubt) that in the first
broaching of their Errors Mince the matter and speak more Cautelously, then
afterward, when they are fleshed, and encouraged with success.

Next he tells you (and in the very same breath where he professes Respect)
that he is page 17.
resolved to swallow none of your Proofless dictates; and that page 15.
you must pardon him if he entertain not your vehement Asseverations, as solid
Arguments, as if they were Propositiones per se notae.

But he has hitherto used you kindly. For in another place in plain terms he
challenges you page 19.
to show any thing for the justification of your Tenent from any Schoolman to
be had in Pauls-Churchyard, or at least in the Library at Oxford, the great
Bodleys Library.

And as if this had been too little, again he tells the world, that he is page
37.
confident that no learned man, either Protestant, or Papist did ever ascribe
such growth to the Ardency of Christ as (you) this Replyer does.

Then almost in every Section he slyly questions Page 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 24, 34, 37, 38,
your Philosophy, and Logic, and skill in the Art of Reasoning, and Syllogism,
or says Page 6, 9, 11, 12, 16, 18, 21.
you are impertinent, and speak little sense or Page 3, 13, 14, 19, 21, 22, 25,
26, 27, 30, 31, 34, 35, 38, 39.
scornfully puts you to learn, what you are yet ignorant of, from such a place
in Scheibler, and Suarez, in Thomas, or Scotus, in Petrus Hurtado de Mendoza,
Capreolus, Albertinus, Raunandus, and Collegium Complutense, (hard names, and
that make a deep and reverend sound in our English ears, not acquainted with
such charms,) and this with such slighting behavior, as if you were some
Novice or Fresh-man in the Schools, and knew not how to speak, but in a
Critical way.

But, what is worst of all, he craftily accuses you as a Factor for Popery and
broaching such doctrines, that ^a. ^9, 30, 31.
the Protestants generally oppose in Bellarmine and his Accomplices.

Nay he is not ashamed to charge your Doctrine, as if it were little less then
Page 27.
Heretical, and speaks in plain terms that your Assertion is Nay not only
Aquinas, but generally all the Schoolmen and Civilians too, are so precise in
this Particular, as that among the Degrees of Damnable Propositions are ranked
by them, not only Propositions downrightly Heretical, but also, Propositio
sapiens Haeresin, Propositio male sonans, every Proposition that does but
smell, that has but a smack of Heresy, that sounds but ill and suspiciously
etc. Mr. H. Jeanes of Abstinence from all Appearance of Evil. 8o. Oxon. 1640.
p. 34, 35. and for this he quotes Albertinus, and Alphonsus a Castro. vid. loc.
Propositio male sonans, harshly sounding in the ears of Christians, that are
jealous of their Masters honor, and that now (since his Resutation is
published) he hopes it will be ingeniously confessed by your self upon a review
of it.

And then (for a close) he declares in his very Title Page that he has proved
it to be utterly irreconcilable with the 1. Fullness of Christ's Habitual
Grace. 2. The Perpetual Happiness, and 3. the Impeccability of his Soul.

I confess at first reading I was troubled at this usage: but since I see it is
the Mode of confuting D. Hammond. And therefore finding the Adversary Confident
and Scornful but withal very weak, I resolved to display both his Ignorance
and Folly to the view of all, even the meanest spectators. Nor could I in
Justice do less to one, that had so unworthily handled you, without any
Provocation.

Indeed what course was else to be taken to answer such severe, but uningenuous
Criminations? Should I only have tamely replied, that I had well weighed your
Reasons and considered his Replies, and carefully consulted the Authors he
referrs to, and had found he was mistaken, and so left him to a further Proof
and Confirmation of his Objections? I confess that this had been a very short
way, and satisfactory enough. For by the Laws and Rules of Disputation, nothing
more is required of the Respondent but to deny, or distinguish, where he sees
cause, or else plainly to grant the Argument: and the Opponent (whose place
your Refuter evidently sustains) is bound to prosecute his Objection, till he
make the Defendent to yield to the force of his Reason, or by Distinction to
show that it concerns not the Question. But then withal I considered, that if
I should have taken this course, I should have said little, to the greatest
part of Readers in your Apology and Defense.

For first, I saw that his Reply was Printed (I suppose with License and
Approbation of the present University) at Oxford. And then secondly, I
understood that he had many Admirers, especially among Country Divines, and
young Students, for his skill in Schoole-learning now a stranger among us. And
thirdly I considered, that he being a writer of tall Name, and strong repute
among many, I should have gained nothing but contempt among them, for such
Answers; and that the Denial of a Nameless Author, without Credit, and without
Fame, would not at all have Balanced against the weight of so valued a
Schoolman. But lastly, which most moved me, I was not ignorant, that as the
Books he referrs to, were very rarely to be had, especially in Private Studies,
so even those, that had them, would rather have believed his suggestions,
against mine, then put themselves to the Trouble and Expense of consulting and
perusal of Authors, to umpire the difference. And therefore I judged it
necessary for the Readers satisfaction, and the full defense of that Truth you
maintain, to lay down the Authors words at large, and clearly thence prove
either his prevaricating or mistakes.

And this is one main Reason of the increase of the Bulk.

A second Motive that drew me to this length, was my unwillingness altogether
to spend time in the unprofitable discoveries of an other man's errors, but I
rather desired to be didacticall and instructive. And therefore where I saw
reason, and the argument was profitable and material, I let my pen run beyond
the ordinary limits of an elenchticall discourse. And because I saw little or
nothing as yet said on either side, to explain the nature of that ardency and
love, which was the subject matter of the Dispute, I resolved, as occasion
offered, to state it as clearly, as I could, and to my poor abilities open the
true nature of it, that so the Reader might be satisfied in the business of the
Controversy, and not altogether lose his prospect after the substance, amidst
the clouds and smoke of contention, but as well discover the full lineaments and
pourtraicture of that truth, you maintain, as the mistakes of your adversary,
and his false shapes and phantasms of it.

A third Reason was because I found your Refuter, having upon the matter done
with your (...), fall to oppose your Doctrine in gross, by Arguments drawn from
the fullness and perfection of Christ's habitual grace, his perpetual
uninterrupted happiness and impeccability, and from thence had largely
digressed to censure a passage in your Treatise of Will Worship, about the
sense of the first and great Commandment of Love, and this I must confess made
me willing to amplify and digress, as well as he. Nor have I only contented
my self to answer his Arguments, and acquit and vindicate your Doctrine from
the coarse aspersions thrown upon it of Popishly affected, but in a
Scholasticall way have treated of the Themes themselves, as well as discovered
the gross ignorance of your Adversary. And because his discourse lead me to
consider those high and noble Themes of the Love of God, and perfection both
Legal and Evangelicall, as also Christ's two fold state of Comprehensor and
Viator, I was willing to treat of them with that Industry and care, as so
weighty Arguments deserved, and have as well Didactically as Eristically
considered them. And withal upon occasion where M. Jeanes and M. Cawdrey did
agree upon the same common principles of opposition to you, I have (though
contrary to my first design and aim) fallen upon a vindication of some passages
in your Tract of Will Worship, which M. Cawdrey and he had censured, and upon
that occasion also I have cleared and confirmed diverse passages in your
Account to the Triplex Diatribe.

And then, which is the last great Reason of the bulk of this Discourse, I have
taken occasion to prove the Invariability, of Gods love, and to demonstrate
that it is no changeable transcendent quality, but one immutable and
substantial act against Crellius and the Socinians, and yet withal declare
how God notwithstanding this, is, and may be said to love some more, and some
less. I have spoken also of the nature of Acts and Habits, in order to that
habitual and actual love of Christ the main business of the Controversy; I
have proved and confirmed the fullness of Christ's habitual grace; I have
treated of his merits, and the nature of his sufferings, and the greatness of
them in his bloody agony; of his twofold will; and how as God-man he was in
capacity to pray; of his ardency in prayer, and how he might earnestly desire a
removal of that cup, which yet he came to drink off. I have treated also of
the several kinds of love agreeing to him, as viator and comprehensor; of his
zeal and hope, and trust in God, and showed what love of concupiscence and
complacency in him was capable of increase, and how all these are different
from ardency in Prayer. I have also taken occasion in order to M. Cawdrey but
with some reflections on M. Jeanes to treat of counsels Evangelicall, and
Gospel-freewill-offerings, of perfection of life and perfection of state, of
works of supererogation, to speak of original sin, and the opinion of S.
Austin in it; of Man's threefold state; of growth in grace; of different
degrees in glory; of the inequality of the Saints and Angels love of God in
heaven; and of Adam's possibility of proficiency in grace in the state of
Innocence; of lukewarmness and sincerity; of justification, and of the
difference of the two Covenants, and Man's several obligation under them, with
other points of this nature, together with some Metaphysicall and
Philosophical notions interspersed. All which as they are themes of high
nature, and would not admit of a running discourse, so they are not altogether
digressions from the main Argument, especially in order to the Refuters manner
of reasoning, that in many parts required it. And becausethe Reader will not
ordinarily meet with such arguments treated on in our language, especially in a
Scholastical way, I was willing to gratify him in them, to the utmost of my
power. And if he be offended with this my labor of love, and too officious
desire to please him, I here promise before you, that if he pardon me this
once, he shall not have occasion to blame me for a second-such-offence.

And now having given you the true Reasons of the length of this Discourse, it
will be fit I also make you some account of my style, and my manner of handling
it.

As then your Refuter every where pretends to Philosophy and the Schools, so
fit it was I should treat him in a Scholasticall way and in writings of this
kind: The best ornament arises from the strength and reason of the discourse,
and he is most eloquent, that can express his matter clearest, and make such
knotty stuff plain. I have seen the statue of a Roman Gladiator pourtrayed
naked, and as combating his enemy in the midst of the Amphitheater. And it was
a piece of high worth, and curious art, and more rich in the lively
representation of the wrathfulness of the look, the stretched and well set
muscles, the strong and brawny parts, and the vigor and agility of the limbs,
then if he had been carved in the robes of a Senator.

And therefore since my work was for argument and defense, I chose to build my
Fabric not curious, but strong, and because much of my materials were of
marble, I labored only to polish, not to paint it. And this is the genuine
true beauty, that springs from the natural compactedness, and solidity of the
stone; and he that strives to trim it with painting, though of gold and
vermilion, does but hide, not adorn it. Such embellishments are only fit for
less solid materials. And therefore, Sir, as I cannot tempt my Reader, or
beguile his patience to the end of the discourse, with artificial expressions,
and curious conceits, and lively flashes of wit: so I must tell him that if he
look for colors, and varnish and eloquence, he must not seek after Architects
and Schoolmen, but Limners and Romances. For though Embroderies and lace, rich
jewels, and curled tresses, are the usual ornaments of brides, yet they are as
unhandsome, and commonly suspected as meretricious in matrons.

I care not then for neatness, if you, that are best able, judge me solid and
strong. And I doubt not but the knowing Reader will be better contented with
the plain demonstration and proof of a conclusion, then if I had written in a
strain of the declamations of Quintilian and Seneca's controversies.

But yet Sir, because the age is more for fancy then reason, and better
pleased with fine and aerie discourses, then with solid and plain, and because I
have known some exquisite Architects that have been curious Painters too, I was
willing, where the matter would bear, and needed rather illustration then
proof, to let my fancy take wing, and to range and sore about like a haggard
Hawke, that in a Sunshine day more minds her weathering then her prey. And
willing I was, though in the midst of the Schools not to be always severe,
but amidst business and reason to yield a little to the garb and mode of the
age, and to gratify the Printer so far, as to let the world see, that where my
expressions are plain, and after the manner of the Schools, it arose not
altogether from barrenness of wit, and a lowness of expression, but election
and choice.

And for this as I have the authority of a great Master of wit and method at
Rome: so I have seen in noble buildings, where the foundation has been of rough
and solid stone, and the pillars of marble, and the walls of plain Ashler, yet
the Pillasters and Capitalls, and the Architraves and Freezes, that bear no
stress in the building, have been artificially carved.

And now having said this, Sir, I have but only told you my design and
platform, I speak not of my performance. That were a piece of vanity
unpardonable. This was only in Idea, in my prospect and aim, and what I
desired to accomplish and perfect, when I undertook your defense. For I thought
you deserved the best Apology could be writ, which (pardon me your modesty, if
I say) none can make but Doctor Hammond.

If I have done any thing in order to the vindication of the truth and you, I
have then my ambition, and all the reward that I desire is, that you will not
enquire after me, nor ask after my name. But if you and the Reader shall find
nothing in me to content you, then inflict upon me the worst censure, that can
befall a bad Author, and enquire not at all after me, but let me be forgotten,
and thought unworthy of a name. Whether then you approve or condemn, I have my
sole aim, if I continue unknown.

THE ADVERTISEMENT to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou art to be advertised of three things. The first is, that though the
Author be assured, that things once well done, are always done soon, and that
the Hemerocallis though a very fair flower, is as born, so also dead and faded
the same day, and therefore cannot presume to any applause or commendations for
the quickness of his dispatch, yet lest M. Jeanes or his admirers should think
his reply to Doctor Hammond a strong and stiff work that requires so large and
studied an answer, and such delay in the publication, I am to acquaint thee,
that this work was begun, except the first essay, about Whitsontide 1657, and
finished as it is (some few quotations and small alterations and additions
excepted) and brought up to the Printer that Michaelmas term following, and
that it had been committed to the Press very shortly after, but that the first
and only draught was through the haste of the Author, and the badness of his
quick and running hand in many places so obscure, and illegible, that it was
justly conceived the Compositor would be very much mistaken in the setting,
which faults by the Ordinary Overseer of the Press could not easily and to the
sense of the Author be amended. And therefore by reason of the Authors great
distance from London and the difficulty of returns upon the consulting doubts
and amendments, it was desired that the copy might be fair written before it
was attempted. This so reasonable a request, could not but be very easily
assented to, and though it was speedily intended, yet a fit Amanuensis, of
whose fidelity the Author could be confident, was not presently thought on. And
when that was done, by reason of the Authors distance from him, and his many
necessary employments, the transcription went on so slowly, that a great deal
more time was spent in the new writing, then was in the first draught. So that
in the mean while, the Stationer being engaged in other businesses, not very
suddenly to be dispatched, this was forced to stay its turn. For it is with
Writers for the Press, as with Watermen at the Thames, both must stay till
their course, unless the Author be well known, and the world has experience of
his worth to encourage the Marchand-Libraires to an extraordinary undertaking,
which could not here be expected, where the Author for reasons best known to
himself, was so resolved on his concealment, that neither the Doctor nor the
Printer himself should easily come to know him. And this is the true cause that
it comes out so late, and when the Controversy is almost forgotten, although
it was done so soon, and in so seasonable a time.

The second concerns not the Learned, but the common English Reader. And that
is to let him know, that he need not much be troubled at the long quotations in
Latin not rendered into English. For such a work was conceaved altogether
needless for him, because as they are produced only in order to M. Jeanes, and
the Readers, that could easily understand them, so the full sense and meaning
of them was every where given in short. And therefore the translation of them
would very needlessly have swelled the work to a greater Bulk, that was too
unweildy already.

The third concerns M. Cawdrey. And for this know you must, that the Author,
when he first undertook Master Jeanes had no design or thoughts at all of him.
But in the process of the work being forced to have frequent recourse to the
Doctors Account he could not in justice but compare M. Cawdreys work with it.
Hereupon finding a great agreement between them, especially in the latter and
most plausible part of M. Jeanes his rejoinder, he found it necessary for the
Doctors fuller defense, as they say, to white and plaster two walls with the
same mortar and brush. And he was the more easily induced to this course for
several Reasons. First because M. Jeanes his use of confutation, and this
reply were but Apologies of M. Cawdrey and designed for his defense in that
part, on which the cause seemed most to lie. Secondly, because at that time
there was a confident report that M. Cawdrey was dead, which was the rather
believed, because he had so long been silent without any reply to the Doctor.
And therefore M. Jeanes being thus by a kind of jus leviratus next of kin to
the dead, was now bound to marry the cause and raise up seed to his brother.
And then thirdly, as many passages, for this end, were enlarged against M.
Cawdrey, to give M. Jeanes occasion to undertake the cause in gross, so the
Author conceived it very necessary for the Doctors vindication, which in some
places in the Account seemed (to him at least) to need further proof or
explication.

But how reasonable soever this course did then seem to the Author, yet now he
sees it is likely to create him more trouble, then at first he expected. For he
finds the report false, and that M. Cawdrey yet lives (and may he long live
till he find either reason to recant, and own the Doctrines, he formerly
subscribed to, but now decryes in D. Hammond, or else by better reasons then
yet he has urged, make the Author his Proselyte) and that he has lately
published an Answer shall I call it, or rather sharp Invective? to the Doctors
Account. A piece I may justly say as defective of true reason and argument as
it is stuffed with calumny and reproach. And strange it is that M. Cawdrey, who
in his Triplex Diatribe was formerly so respectfull, should now to the great
disparagement of his cause be as infamously virulent in opposing D. Hammonds
Defense of the Rites and Ceremonies established among us, which himself had
subscribed to, as S. W. or William Sergeant an eminent Proselyte of Rome and a
great Factor for that persuasion in his several Treatises of Schism against
the Doctors vindication of the substance it self, and very being of the Church
of England. But I have read of the Snake in the Fable, that when sound in the
Wood amidst winter frosts and snow, was a very innocent thing, and might be
handled without danger, was no sooner warm in the Chimney corner, and
refreshed, and thawed by the fire, but it presently began to hiss, and show
that it had a sting both in the head and the tail, and boldly and menacingly to
stare in the face of its Patron. And I hope I may without offense make this
impartial observation from the story of the Times; that it was just as low
with Presbytery as now, when the Triplex Diatribe was writ, and we were then
under the same Masters, as we are again at this day ( -- sic me servavit
Apollo) but it was afterward taken under the wings of a P. and it was no
sooner warm but it bristled, and began to appear in its formidable likeness and
durst to look upon its master. But -- Cynthius aurem vellit -- I shall only
tell M. Cawdrey that though he style his last work The Account Audited and
Discounted, yet the way that he there takes, is a very strange kind of
Reckoning and Auditing of Accounts. And mind him I must that it is the usual
custom of bad debtors, and stewards, where they cannot satisfy their
Creditors, to rail at their demands, and when their purses and bills are short,
to make payment and discount in bad language, that so at least they may shame,
where they find they cannot satisfy, and tire and weary where they cannot pay.
Indeed for an Adversary politickly to rail where he cannot conquer, and
confidently to undervalue the force of that reason which he is unable to resist
or answer, is a very easy way of consutation I confess, but it is by libell,
not by book. And such pitiful advocates, that can only calumniate and scold
in behalf of a client without any solid plea, make a bad cause far worse by
such manner of defense.

Now as the Author does not envy this happiness of M. Cawdrey in his auditing
of accounts, so he is persuaded that if this reply to M. Jeanes could have been
published as soon as it was designed for the Press, he himself might also have
received such an answer as the Doctor has done, and been paid in the same
coin, and so at least had had a more special call, then now he has, to take
notice of M. Cawdreys new manner of reckoning, and stating of accounts. But
being not at all concerned in that Treatise, he was very willing, as yet, not
to take any notice of it. And it was for these Reasons.

First because he saw, that what he had already written against M. Cawd. needed
not any further confirmation, there being nothing at all said in this new
Rejoinder to impair any thing here delivered. Secondly, because if he should
have said any thing more to this Reply of M. Cawdrey, the work already grown
too unweildy, would have swelled to too large a bulk. And thirdly, because it
could not well be done without making too large digressions from M. Jeanes to
follow a new adversary, which would have made the discourse too obscure and
intricate by such unnecessary diversions. And fourthly, because the Author was
willing to try, how the Doctor, and the world would like his present
undertakings, before he further intermedled with the Doctors business, who as
he is most immediately concerned, so of all men he is fittest to undertake, and
best able to perform it.

Howsoever that our Author might not be wanting to the cause, he had thus
already undertaken (though contrary to his first intention) during the time
that this was under the Press, he cast an eye upon M. Cawdreys Audit, and by
way of Essay, to satisfy the Reader of the strength of that discourse, drew up
an answer to one chapter that he conceived of most strength in the whole book,
and which had a great influence on all the rest. But seeing that this work was
big enough already, and could not with convenience admit of this Appendix, he
thought fit to suppress it, rather then at first be too troublesome to the
Reader, especially because he doubts not, but that the Doctor himself, if there
shall be found cause, will not be wanting to gratify the Reader far better,
then himself could with this, which he had already provided.

Howsoever if the Doctor shall think fit to decline this task, and the world
shall judge M. Cawdreys Audit to deserve a review, this, which he intended to
have added here by way of appendix, may in due time see light, with some
additions and strictures on the rest, and M. Cawdrey may find a Person, far
inferior to the Doctor, that may call him to a new reckoning, before he
receives his quietus est or Acquittance.

The CONTENTS.
SECTION I.
THe Refuters ominous changing the Doctors Title Page, and the state of the
Question. His advantage by it over four sorts of Readers. How easily the Doctor
concluded against by it. Love of God, what it commonly signifies to English
ears. How difficult to defend the Doctor in that sense. Not so in the Doctors
wary state. The Refuters Reply foreseen: Answered. The phrase, The love of God
variously taken in Scripture. How understood by the Doctor. In what sense
Prayer an Act of holy Charity. Page 1.

SECT. II.
Doctor Hammonds renouncing the Error charged upon him. His civil address
unjustly taxed by the Refuter. The Defenders Resolution hereupon. His reason
for it. Scurrility not maintained. Seasonable Reproof lawful. The Defenders no
regret to the Refuters person and Performances. His undertakings against the
Refuter. This Course unpleasing to him. But necessary. The Doctor not guilty of
high Complements and scoffs. The Refuters Friends the only Authors of them.
The Defenders hopes. The Refuters promise. The Defenders Engagement. p. 7

SECT. III.
The Refuter acknowledges the Doctor to assert the fullness of Christ's Habitual
Grace. His Use of Confutation and after undertakings groundless hereupon. The
terms of the Question much altered by the Refuter in his Rejoinder. p. 15

SECT. IV.
The Refuters Argument no ground of the Use of Confutation, unless he writes by
inspiration. He confounds the Immanent Acts of Love with the Action of Loving.
His Argument concerns not the Doctors Assertion. The Acts of Divine Charity in
Christ may gradually differ, where the Habit is the same. His frequent begging
the Question and impertinence. Scheibler vainly quoted. What in that Author
seemingly favorable to the Refuters pretenses, censured. Immanent Acts truly
Qualities. Proved. Not to be excluded out of the number of Entities. Belong to
the first species of Quality; why. Dispositions when imperfect things. The Acts
of divine Love in Christ supernatural. Not ordained to further Habits-Grace
the sole effect of God. Why these Acts called Dispositions. The Doctor a
Metaphysician. The Refuters (...). His irrefragable Argument broken. More
ridiculous for the Refuters Confidence. p. 19

SECT. V.
The Doctor innocent of the former Crimination. The Refuters new Endictment
proved vain by a clear instance. His Argument a Parologism of four terms. The
Doctor affirms the direct contrary to the Refuters Charge. Humane lapses;
doubtful speeches. Three rules of the Civil Law to interpret them. All
writings subject to obscurity. How the Doctor to be understood in the passage
arraigned. He demonstrates by it the fullness of Christ's Grace a posteriori. The
only rational way of proving it. Christ's Love more intense in his agony then
in his suffering hunger. Asserted by S. Paul. Christ's habitual grace always
perfect. Always. Christ against the Sociniant. Christ's habitual grace not to
be augmented: Whence. The Refuters boldness. His adding the word before to the
Doctors discourse, and second misadventure in this kind. His proof foreseen;
answered. Difference in the actings of voluntary and natural agents. Acts of
love in Christ, howsoever heightened, can never intend the habit. Proved. The
Refuters major opposite to Scripture as well as the Doctor. The habit of grace
in Christ not determined to one uniform manner of acting. Saints and Angels
love God necessarily and freely. So Christ as Comprehensor. This not to the
purpose. The Refuters charitable additions. The acts of holy charity of two
sorts: of which the Doctor to be understood. The Doctors censure of the
Refuters additions just. 42

SECT. VI.
The Refuter acknowledges his own ignorance of a generally received opinion.
Love a genus to the habit and the act. Proved for the Refuters instruction. His
charging* his ignorance on Aristotle. Aristotle his Master, why? vainly quoted.
He speaks not to the present controversy. The assumption only denied. 72

SECT. VII.
The Refuters reply impertinent. The Doctors distinction of love into the habit
and the act found in the tract of Will Worship, and the answer to M. Cawdrey.
Outward sensible expressions referr first and immediately to the inward acts of
love. The Refuters digression to a matter never doubted. The Doctor never
asserts that love was univocally predicated of the habit and outward sensible
expressions. The Refuters four reasons against no body. His unhappiness in
proving a clear truth. His third most false. In univocal productions the cause
and effect still comprehended under the same genus, sometimes also in
equivocall. His assumption of his first reason infirm. His second and fourth
reasons coincident. Raynaudus seasonable assistance. The Refuter misunderstands
him. Love not univocally predicated of the habit and outward sensible
expressions, proved: not concerns the Doctor. 78

SECT. VIII.
The Refuters tongue-combat. He a man of business. The pertinency of the
Doctors first papers to explain the meaning of the latter. Unjustly censured
for speaking cautelously. The Refuters understanding the Doctor for a critic,
and a dunce. Erasmus's sat the same with the Doctors. Critic, an honorable
title. The best Scholars critics, and who. The true critic an universal
Scholar. Sextus Empericus and Crates character of a critic. Quintilianus
character of the true Grammarian. Aristotle the first author of criticisme and
grammar. Necessary to complete the Divine. The best way to advance learning, to
unite criticisme and school-learning. Pity the Refuter had not been a critic.
His mistake of the word Salvo; what it signifies. The method of the Schools in
polemicall discourses observed by the Doctor. The Refuter saying and unsaying.
91

SECT. IX.
The Refuters impertinent referring to former performances. His vain pretenses
of proof. The Refuters reasonings with himself inconsequent: proved. The
intention of the act proportioned to the intension of the habit, so as not to
exceed it, unless by accident; but not always to equal it. Proved by instance
of the Lutenist, and Painter, and Preacher. Habits not necessary, but voluntary
causes, unless ab extrinseco determined. 104

SECT. X.
The Refuters saying is the only proof that actual love is in the predicament
of action. The contrary proved by Suarez, Smiglecius, Scheibler. In actual
love the action and the terminus of it considerable. The Refuters remarques in
Scheibler impertinent His oracles nothing to the purpose. The propositions to
be proved Immanent acts in what sense qualities. Scheibler not slighted.
Aristotle his character of Eudoxus agreeable to the Refuter. His words not home
to the Refuters purpose, proved from reason and Suarez. Habitual and actual
love both qualities and species of the same genus: proved from sundry places in
Suarez. The Refuters further impertinencies. Immanent acts of love in what
sense dispositions, in what not, from Smiglecius, Aquinas. Acts of two sorts.
112

SECT. XI.
The Doctors explication from the Refuters concessions. The Refuters reply and
valiant resolution. His first charge answered. His second charge answered in
three distinct propositions 1. Expressions gradually different may, and in
Christ always did, flow from a love equally intense in the habit. This not the
question. 2. Nothing naturally hinders but that expressions gradually different
may flow from acts of love gradually the same. Proved. Gods outward favors and
expressions different. The inward act of his love still one and invariable.
Proved against the Socinian. Gods love* one infinite and substantial act,
against Crellius. In what sense God in Scripture said to love some more, some
less. The doctrine of the Schools safer then that of the Socinian. God by one
immutable act dispenses all the variety of his favors. Illustrated. The
variety in Gods outward favors: whence it arises. Confirmed from Lombard,
Aquinas, Scotus. Applied to the Refuter. 3. In men the outward expressions
ordinarily vary according to the graduall difference in the inward acts of
love. Proved by reason, and the authority of Gregory, Durand, Aquinas, Estius.
The Doctors assertion hence proved as fully as the thing requires. The Doctor
not engaged to prove, that expressions gradually different could not proceed
from a love equally intense. The third charge answered. No mystery in the word
proportionably The correspondence between the inward acts of love and the
outward expressions to be understood, not according to Arithmetical, but
Geometrical, proportion. 131

SECT. XII.
The Doctors proof of the vanity of the Refuters use of confutation: made good
from the Refuters mixture. The Refuters reply and endeavor to make good his
charge by consequences,; impertinent. The Refuters momentous objection strikes
as well against himself and other his friends, as the Doctor. The weakness of
it. The intention of Christ's actual grace so proportioned to that of his
habitual grace, as not to exceed it; but not so, still as to equal it.
Illustrated by a clear instance. The Schoolmen no where say, that the Intension
of Christ's actual grace is exactly equal to that of his habitual. Aquinas of
the Refuters, not the Doctors ciration, He speaks fully to the Doctors purpose.
What meant by works and the effects of wisdom and grace in Aquinas. An
intensive growth in the inward acts of wisdom and grace argues not an
intensive increase in the habits. Asserted also by the Refuter. Cleared by a
distinction. The Chedzoy challenge. The vanity of it. Christ did gradually
increase in the acts of wisdom and grace as he did in stature, Proved from the
Refuters mixture: from Ames, Vorstius, Grotius, Hooker, Field, Suarez, Estius,
others, both Fathers and Schoolmen, and reformed Divines. The Defenders advice
to the Refuter to be more wary in his challenges 171

SECT. XIII.
The Refuters melancholy fancy: his acknowledging the Doctors innocence. The
Doctor constantly speaks of the gradual difference in some acts of charity,
never of the habit. The Refuters consequence hereupon. His monstrous Syllogism
examined. The acts of Christ's love were primario and perse, and not only
secundario and per accidens, capable of degrees: demonstrated. Actions and
passions intended and remitted only in regard of their terms. The habits and
acts of charity in Christ gradually only, and not specifically different from
those in all other men. God in his extraordinary power may create something
greater and better then the habitual grace of Christ. Asserted by Aquinas,
Suarez, and many other Schoolmen, and the Refuter himself. The acts of the
habit of grace in Christ de facto gradually diflerent in themselves, and from
the habit. The phrase, The love of God, variously taken in Scripture: proved.
In what sense the Doctor constantly takes it. Demonstrated. The greater good to
be more intensely beloved. There is an order in the acts and degrees of love.
Asserted by the Schools. Of the order in the love of Christ. The habit of love
to God and our neighbors one and the same quality: proved. God and our
neighbors not to be loved with the same equality and degree of affection.
Actus efficaces and inefficaces what they are. That they were in Christ. Of the
gradual difference between them. Hence demonstratively proved, that the first
great law of charity, Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart, etc. does
not always oblige us pro hic and nunc to the highest degree and noblest act of
Divine love. Of the gradual difference between the free and necessary acts of
Christ's love. Phrase actual love distinguished. The acts and operations of
grace in Christ were neither intensively nor extensively still commensurate
with the habit. Proved. In what sense Aquinas's rule urged by the Refuter
holds. 205

SECT. XIV.
The Doctors discourse here only ad hominem. The Refuters reply grants all
that the Doctors argument aims at. Where the degrees of any Quality
particularly the love of Christ, are for number multiplied in the same subject,
there the quality, particularly the love, is more intense. Proved. This inferrs
not Intension to be a mere coacervation of homogeneous degrees. The Refuter
reaches not the Doctors meaning. The Doctor argues from the effect to the
cause. The reasonableness of the proof. The only way to conclude the servour
of the inward devotion by the outward performance. Length and continuance in
prayer an argument of high zeal. Suarez and Hurtado's discourse concerns not
the Doctor. The Refuters ignorance notwithstanding his confidence. Quantitas
virtutis, molis. No absurdity in the Doctors discourse, if (as the Refuter
falsely charges him) he had concluded a greater ardency in Christ's devotion,
from the multiplying of the several acts of prayer. Continuance in prayer a
demonstration of fervor. Frequent repetitions of the same words in prayer an
argument of an heightened fervor of Spirit. 251

SECT. XV.
The pertinency of the Doctors Argument, and impertinence of the Refuters
charge. The Doctors argument a posteriori from the necessary relation between
the work and the reward. Not understood by the Refuter. The outward work more
valuable in Gods sight, for the inward fervor and devotion. The Refuters
petitio principii. Works in a Physical sense what, and what in a Moral. The
Refuters discourse of the infinite value of Christ's merit arising from the
dignity of his person. Nothing to the purpose. The dignity of a moral action,
according to the physical entity of the act, or according to the dignity of
the person performing it. The actions of Christ in regard of his person
infinite in value. Not so in regard of their substantial moral goodness.
Proved: and acknowledged by our Refuters own Suarez. Consequently in this
regard they might exceed one another in moral perfection. The Doctors argument
that it was so in Christ. The appositeness of the proof. The Scriptures say the
same. 265

SECT. XVI.
The second part of the Refuters second answer. The distinct confession of all
the Doctor pretends to. The English translation of (...) (more earnestly)
justified. The Refuter's nonsense. What ardency in Christ it was that was
heightened Luk 22. 43. Comprehensor, Viator what. In what state, whether of
Comprehensor or Viator, Christ was in a capacity to pray, as that signifies
either petition, deprecation or thanksgiving: and this whether only for
others, or also for himself. Of prayer, and the several kinds. Whether though
Christ were in a capacity thus to pray, yet being God, that was able of himself
to accomplish whatsoever he might desire as man, it was expedient for him to do
so: and whether God had so determined. What things Christ might and did pray
for, both for himself and others. M. Hooker commended. Whether Christ did in
truth and reality, or only in show, pray for a removal of that cup which he
came on purpose to drink. Whether these prayers and desires were not repugnant
to Gods decree, and the end of his coming into the world, and his own
peremptory resolution to drink it. How those desires for a removal of this Cup
might be advanced, notwithstanding his readiness and resolution to drink it.
How Christ's ardency in prayer for a removal of this cup might be increased
above what it either was, or there was occasion for, at other times. Of the
greatness of his agony and bloody sweat. How his zeal in prayer at this time
might be advanced, without derogation from the fullness of his habitual grace,
the impeccability of his soul, and the uninterrupted happiness of it, and
perfect love as he was Comprehensor. Strictures on the former part of the
Refuters second answer. 276

SECT. XVII.
The Refuters three arguments to prove the act of Christ's love always equally
intense, impertinent to the present question. His confident proposal of them to
be examined as rigidly as the Doctor pleases, and his vain ostentation in
placing them in his Title Page censured. The ambiguity of the phrase, Christ's
love of God, distinguished from Crellius, Estius, Aquinas, and others. In what
sense still used by the Doctor. 333

SECT. XVIII.
The Refuters first argument contradicts his second, and proves not his
conclusion. Reduced to form. The Sequel denied. The reason. His authorities
concern not the question. His citing Aquinas from Capreolus censured. The
conclusion to be proved. Hurtado's, and Aquinas first saying from Capreolus
true, with the reason of it from Suarez; but not pertinent. A view of the place
in Aquinas. He speaks of the habit, etc. not the act. The different workings of
necessary and voluntary causes. The Refuters argument guilty of a double
fallacy. His next place of Aquinas from Capreolus impertinent. His gross
ignorance, or prevaricating in his third place of Aquinas. Scotus testimony
impertinent. Aquinas and Scotus maintain that proposition which he would
confute in the Doctor by their testimonies. 337

SECT. XIX.
The Refuters second argument, Christ on earth Comprehensor, true: but Viator
also. Proved from Scripture, Aquinas, Scotus, in the places referred to by the
Refuter. From Suarez also. None but the Socinians deny Christ to be thus
Comprehensor. His beatifick love as Comprehensor an uniform, because necessary,
act. Fruitless here to enquire wherein the essence of happiness consists
according to the Thomists or Scotists. It follows not, because Christ's love as
Viator was more intense at one time in some acts, then at another in other
acts, that therefore his happiness as Comprehensor was at that time diminished.
Proved, The Doctor never denies the fullness of Christ's happiness as
Comprehensor. The Refuters grave propositio male sonans. His argument a fallacy
a dicto secundum quid. Christ's twofold state. Though the infused habit of grace
in him always full, yet not so the acts. The reason. M. Jeanes and others
guilty of this propositio male sonans as well as the Doctor. The piou^^y
credible proposition of the Schoolmen, as the Refuter calls it, much prejudices
an assertion of his own in his mixture, but no whit the Doctor. 345

SECT. XX.
The Refuters third argument reduced to form. The major denied. His sophistical
homonymy discovered. His confounding the different acts of Christ's love as
Viator, and Comprehensor. The true assertions in his discourse severed from the
false inferences. Christ impeccable. Thence i^ follows not, that the acts of
his love are all equal, but the contrary. The great commandment of love
enjoins the most ardent love that we are able to reach to, Thence it follows
not, that the acts of this love ought always to be equal. Christ as
Comprehensor had on earth greater abilities to love God then Adam in paradise
or the Saints and Angels in heaven. Thence it follows not that the acts of his
love as Viator were to be equal, or if they increased successively that he
sinned. This discourse cleared and confirmed from Suarez. The several acts of
charity by which Christ merited. Hence the inequality of intension in these
acts demonstrated. Further proved from the Refuters mixture. The Viator differs
in abilities from the Comprehensor. Proved from Scripture and reason, Cajetan
Scotus. The Refuters following digression impertinent; his design in it to
amuse the Reader, and to bring the Doctor into an unjust suspicion. 365

SECT. XXI.
As the Doctor needs not, so is it not his custom to make use of former
expositions. This practice in the Refuter censured. This digression not an
answer to the Ectenesteron, but a fling at the treatise of Will Worship. His
brief transcribing the Doctors exposition, and large examining of it censured.
M. Cawdrey grants all in controversy between the Doctor and Refuter, but
contradicts himself. The Refuters prevaricating and false suggestions to his
Reader- His first reason for this suggestion reduced to form. Destructive to
all religion. Biddle, Hobbes Leviathan. Whatsoever answer he shall make for
himself against a Socinian, Anabaptist, Quaker, etc. will secure the Doctor.
His five very false and proofless criminatious in his next reason mustered up.
His hasty oversight in citing Chamier. 374

SECT. XXII.
The occasion of the Doctors exposition of the first great commandment of love.
The reasons of his fundamental position in short. If any one of them
demonstrative, as M. Cawdrey grants one is, then all not bound to it, to every
act acceptable to God, nor to perform it to a degree, even then when they are
obliged ad speciem. This the utmost the Doctor undertook either against M.
Cawdrey or the Refuter Reasonable the Refuter should answer these, before he
suggested to the Reader a need of further proof. 383

SECT. XXIII.
The Refuters two first charges, Bellarmines explication at large. The Doctors.
The defenders challenge hereupon. The difference between Bellarmine and the
Doctor examined. What good in Bellarmine approved by the Doctor. What
erroneous, not found in the Doctor, or else declared against. Bellarmine and
the Doctor, speak not of the same thing, Chamier assents to the Doctors
position. The sixth Corollary of Bellarmine, if found in the Doctor, yet
otherwise understood: not censured by Chamier, Ames, Vorstius. Two men may love
God with all their hearts, and yet one love him more then the other. The
Doctors exposition not borrowed from Bellarmine, nor yet popishly affected, 386

SECT. XXIV.
The Refuters third and fourth charges. The Doctors exposition parallel to that
of Bishop Andrewss, Davenant, Downham, White* Hocker, Field, Grotius, Ainsworth
praised. Assembly Annotations, Vrsin, Calvin, Victor Antiochenus. Imperfect
work on Matthew, Theophylact, Theodoret, Zacharias, Austin, Chamier. The
objections from Calvin, Vrsin, answered. Chamiers conclusion against Bellarmine
examined; concerns not the Doctor; advantages not the Refuter. State of
innocence a state of proficiency. Proved from M. Cawdrey. Saints and Angels
love not God all to the same indivisible height. Saints differ in glory. The
Doctor of the first and second covenant. Perfection Legal, Evangelicall.
Learned Protestants agree with him against Chamier. The falsehood of Chamier's
inference as understood by the Refuter and M. Cawdrey demonstrated. How to be
understood. Heresy of the Perfectists, How not favored by Chamier. Thus more
agreeable to himself. Recapitulated in five positions. Chamier and the Doctor
agreed. The Doctor justified from M. Cawdrey's concessions. M. Cawdrey's
contradictions in the point of perfection In what sense free will-offerings and
uncommanded degrees and acts of piety and charity. The question stated.
Davenant, Montague, White, Hooker, and generally the Fathers and diverse
Protestants agreeing with the Doctor in this point of perfection and counsel,
and doing more then is commanded. This proves not the Popish doctrine of
Supererogation. 440

SECT. XXV.
Heads of the reasons for the Doctors exposition and assertion of degrees in
love and freewill offerings. Refuters fifth charge examined. Falsehood of it.
Challenged to make reparations. Calumny of Popishly affected, how easily and
unhappily retorted 433

SECT. XXVI.
Artifice in refuting the Doctor in Ames words; answering by halves. Doctor
asserts not lukewarmness. How differs from sincerity. What. Christianity a
state of proficiency. Growing grace true* acceptable. How differs from
lukewarmness. Bellarmine and Ames dispute concerns not the Doctor. Artifice in
citing Bishop White. Doctor asserts sincerity as opposed to partial, divided
love. What. Bishop Whites words not to the purpose. Love of God above all
things objective, appretiative, intensive, what. Doctor maintains all. Most
intense love required, yet not so much as is possible to the humane nature.
Perfection of charity: how required of Christians, how not. 438

SECT. XXVII.
His first reason proves not. Intension and degrees of what love fall not under
the commandment. Modus of a virtuous act how under precept. Aquinas how to be
understood, Opposes not the Doctor. No one precise degree of love commanded.
First inference denied. Lukewarmness and first degree of love differ. Second
and third inferences denied. Vanity of his argument demonstrated. Natural,
spiritual qualities how differ. His conclusion granted. Love the highest, 1,
in respect of the thing beloved. 2, The person loving (according to man's
threefold state. In innocence obliged to sinless perfection, Condition of the
first covenant. How urged by Protestants, and S. Paul. Condition of the second
covenant. How the Doctor denies legal perfection obligatory to Christians. How
bound to love God now. Their love still growing. Acknowledged by M. Cawdrey.
Opposed to lukewarmness. Our loves future, how the highest, how not. Degrees of
this love proportioned to degrees of glory. This the Saints crown not race.) 3,
Love the highest in regard of the form. No one precise degree highest in love,
as in natural qualities. May be increased in infinitum. How a set number of
degrees in love. His argument retorted. Doctors assertion proved by it. Gods
righteousness infinite, immutable. Inchoate sanctification a fruit of the
Spirit. Whole recapitulated. No prejudice to the Doctor if all granted. 450

SECT. XXVIII.
His second reason proves not, yet granted. God by more obligations, then he
expresses, to be loved. Acknowledged by the Doctor. This love infinite. Not
positively and Categorematice, but negatively and Syncategorematice,
acknowledged by Bellarmine and others. Hinders not freewill-offerings of love.
These asserted by Bishop White. Doctor not confuted, though Bellarmine may.
Bellarmine and Ames at no great odds here. Concerns not the Doctor. Refuters
artifice censured. Doctors comfort and precedent in this persecution of the
tongue. 473

SECT. XXIX.
His authorities oppose not the Doctor, why urged by Protestants. Bellarmine
acknowledges the places and inference. But such love simply impossible even in
Paradise. How Austin, Bernard hold it obligatory, how not; Bellarmine the
Refuters adversary, His authorities from Aquinas, Scotus, his charity to his
Reader. First, from Aquinas, answered. His meaning. Bellarmine and he agreed.
Doctor and all Protestants will subscribe to this of Aquinas. His second from
Aquinas, answered. Perfection of life, state, according to Aquinas, not
pertinent. Aquinas opinion summed up. Scotus, his manner of writing. How God
may be loved above all things according to Scotus. Henriquez opposed by him.
Love melting, strong. This genuine, that a passion sensitive. Scotus, love of
God above all things intensive, extensive agreeable to Chamier. He rejects the
reason grounded on Austin, Bernard. His authority pruned. At large. Contrary to
the Refuters inference from him. His sense cleared from D' Ordellis, Cavellus.
The sense of the old Schoolmen from Durand, Austin, and Bernard's opinion, the
same with Durands and the Doctors, proved. How urged by Chamier. These Fathers
opinion summed up. What perfection required of Christians according to them.
What proposed, Refuters discourse impertinent. Distinction, Quatenus indicat
finem, non quatenus praecipit medium not invented by Bellarmine. Taken from
Aquinas. By whom used to expound S. Austin. Agreeable to Austin, Cajetan, for
freewill offerings. 480

SECT. XXX.
The Refuters return. His proof impertinent; weakens a known truth. Christ's
agony a fit season for heightning ardency in prayer. As Comprehensor he enjoyed
an intuitive knowledge of the Divine Essence. Hence a love necessary. Love as
Viator. Beatifick love hindered not the free exercise of this love, and graces:
nor his happiness his grief in the sensitive appetite. Suarez. Hence a gradual
difference in the acts of love as Viator. Particularly in prayer. Fallacy a
dicto secundum quid. His confounding of terms. Grounds, Motives, Occasion.
What. Christ as Comprehensor still had cause to love God, but no grounds,
motives, nor occasions. As Viator he had. Refuters contradictions. Tautologies.
Love of desire complacency, distinguished, not divided. One often begins the
other. Bishop Andrews. Natural love of desire in Christ. What hope in Christ.
Love of concupiscence, though first in men, yet otherwise in Christ. Threefold
love of complacency in Christ. Experimental love of desire and complacence in
him capable of increase. Both heightened at his passion. Ardency of these and of
prayer different. Of which the Doctor. Vanity of the Refuters Title Page. 520

SECT. XXXI.
Poor Refutor. Doctor digresses not. Affliction a fit season to heighten
devotion. Christ's ardency our instruction. The Doctor heightning Christ's actual
love derogates not from his habitualfulness. Charitas quamdiu augeri potest,
etc. variously cited. The Doctors mistake. The words not Jeromes, but Austins.
This lapse how possible. Venial. Occasion of Austins writing to Jerome. His
several proposals of solving the doubt. His own upon the distinction of
righteousness Legal, Evangelical. Place in Austin at large. How applied against
Papists. How not. M. Baxters censure of our differences in point of
justification. Place impertinent to the Refuters conclusion. Ex vitio est how
here understood against M. Cawdrey, and the Refuter and the Doctor. Denotes
original corruption. This how called by Austin. Signally vitium in opposition
to a saying of Pelagius. Parallel places for this meaning. Pelagius objection:
Answered. Austin and the Doctor accord, but not the Refuter. Doctors exposition
of Austin. Corrected. Dilemma's. Confidence springs from ignorance.
Chedzoy-confidence. Learned Protestants and Papists, and himself assert, what
he says, all else deny, but the Doctor. A new Jury of them against him for the
Doctor, Erasinus, Cajetan, Tolet. (Outward works of wisdom and grace in Tolet
what) Estius Jansenius, L. Brugensis, Beza, Piscator, Deodate, Assembly notes,
Cameron, Raynolds. How Christ grew in actual grace, the habitual still
invariable. Illustrated by two instances. Erasmus and Doctor Eckhard assert
Christ's growth in habitual perfection. This charged on Luther, Calvin, etc. by
Bellarmine with probability on Calvin. How they acquitted. Refuters conclusion
complyes with the sowrest of Jesuits. Maldonates censure of the Lutherans and
Calvinists. Answered. Stapletons like censure. Answered. They and Bellarmine,
if they speak consequently, must mean the same with us. Whole recapitulated.
Refuters unhappiness. Doctors safety. 540

SECT. XXXII.
Zeal and loud noise different. M. Cawdrey grants all in controversy.
Heightning outward expressions a posteriori conclude the increase of the inward
acts. Outward and inward acts, both complete the moral action. How
proportioned. Difference of Christ's obligation to purity and ours. All born in
sin. First covenant how in force, how not. Cannot oblige to sinless Perfection.
Man reprieved from the final execution of its curse by Christ. Objections.
Answered. New covenant how aggravates damnation. What required by it. Law holy.
How a rule. The subject matter as well of the second as the first covenant.
Difference of obligation to its purity under the first and second covenant. Law
abrogated not as a rule, but as a covenant. Second covenant allows growth
toward perfection, which the first did not. What the Doctor speaks of. Refuters
first reason. Terms of the first part of his assumption distinguished. Applied.
Second part of his assumption. Answered. Aquinas serves not the Refuters
interest. Exterior acts of charity here signify not outward sensible
expressions, but moral duties. Proved from Aquinas, Cajetan, Suarez. His
second reason. His ignorance and confusion in it. Necessity, Liberty of three
kinds. What. He denies Christ to be the meritorious cause of our salvation. He
confounds Christ's natural liberty of will with the moral liberty of the
action. Contradicts Scripture. Christ how no more free to the outward
expression, then the inward act. How indifferent actions determined. Christ how
free to the use of outward expressions, how not. Proof from Suarez examined.
Grossly understood. What Suarez intends. Defenders advise to the Refuter. 595

SECT. the Last.
The close. Refuters deliberate answer abortive. His civility. His appeal to
the Readers judgment. His stiling himself the Doctors Refuter. His challenge
of the Doctor to a rejoinder. Clearness in dispute approved by the Defender.
Why the Refuter plainly dealt with. The Libeller his own executioner. Defenders
proposal and promise. The Refuter may take his leave for the present, and if he
please rest for ever. Refuters strange complement at parting. Why the Defender,
as the Refuter, subscribes not his name, but keeps unknown, 638

Names of AUTHORS Cited, Examined and Illustrated in this TREATISE.
A
Aelianus. Aelius Lampridius. Ainsworth. Alphonsus a Castro. Ambrosius.
Amesius. Andrews B. Aquinas. Argentinus. Aristoteles. Assembly-notes.
Athanasius. Augustinus. Author imperf. Op.
B
Bartolus. Basilius M. Baxter. Beda. Bellarminus. Bernardus. Beza. Biddle.
Biel. Bonaventura. Boys El. Brugensis Luc. Burgersdicius. Buxtorfius.
C
Cajetanus. Calvinus. Cameron. Capreolus. Catechismus Racoviens. Cavellus.
Chamier. Chrysostomus. Collegium Complutense. Crellius. Cyprianus. Cyrillus
Alex.
D
Dailler. Damascenus. Danaeus. Davenant B. Deodate. Digest. Diodorus Siculus.
Dion. Dionysius. Downham B. Drusius. Durandus.
E
Eckhardus. Epiphanius. Erasmus. Estius. Eusebius. Euthymius.
F
Fagius Paulus. Field. Forbesius. Fulgentius,
G
Gregorius M. Gregorius Naz. Grotius.
H
Halensis. Heinsius. Henriquez. Hieronymus. Hilarious. Hobbs. Hooker. Horatius.
Hugo de S. Victore. Hurtado de Mendoza. Hyperius.
I
Jansenius. Javellus. Juvenalis.
K
Keckermannus.
L
Lanfrancus. Leo M. Liturgia Grae. Lombardus. Lucianus. Lutherus.
M
Maldonatus. Maresius. Martialis. Martyr P. Medina. Morton B. Mountague B.
Musculus W.
N
Navarrus Pet. Neopolitanus. Nierembergius.
O
Occham. Optatus. Orbellis D. Origenes. Ovidius.
P
Paulinus. Paulus Jur. Piscator. Plato. Platus. Plinius Sen.
Q
Quintilianus.
R
Robuffus. Reynolds Ed. Richardus Armachanus. Riverius. Ruerius. Ruvio.
S
Sales Fr. Salmasius. Scaliger Ju. Scaliger Jos. Scheiblerus. Schenchius.
Scnedewinus. Scotus. Scultetus. Selneccerus. Sennertus. Sextus Empiricus. S.
Joseph. Smiglecius. Soto. Stupleton. Strabo. Strada.
T
Tertullianus. Theodoretus. Theophylactus. Toletus. Tridentinum Conc.
V
D. Valentia Greg. Valerius Max. Victor Antioch. Vincentius Lir. Virgilius.
Volkelius. Vorstius. Vossius J. G^r. Vrsinus.
W
White B. Windelinus. Wingate. Wotton.
Doctor HAMMONDS (...) Defended, etc.
SECT. 1.
The Refuters ominous changing the Doctors Title Page, and the state of the
Question. His advantage by it over four sorts of Readers. How easily the Doctor
concluded against by it. Love of God, what it commonly signifies to English
Ears. How difficult to defend the Doctor in that sense. Not so in the Doctors
wary state. The Refuters Reply foreseen: Answered. The phrase The love of God
variously taken in Scripture. How understood by the Doctor. In what sense
Prayer an Act of holy Charity.

. 1. MAlum omen in limine! The Romans counted it Ominous, if they stumbled at
the threshold, when they first set forth on any business. Though I am far from
approving any such ridiculous superstitions, and fond idle conceits, yet I
cannot behold it as any prosperous Symptom of this Refuter's fair carriage in
the Managing this controversy, that he should thus palpably prevaricate in the
very Frontispiece of his Pamphlet.

. 2. For whereas Doctor Hammond had thus styled his Reply ((...), Or, The
degrees of Ardency in Christ's Prayer Reconciled with his fullness of habitual
Grace,) This Refuter has thus advantagiously changed it, (Doctor Hammond his
(...), Or, A greater Ardency in Christ's love of God at one time than another,
proved to be utterly irreconcilable, 1. With his fullness of habitual Grace, 2.
The perpetual happiness, and 3. The impeccability of his Soul.) It is true
indeed, this alteration serves little to the real confutation of his Adversary,
yet in the issue and recess it will be very prejudicial to Doctor Hammond, and
the truth maintained by him.

. 3. For how many be there in the world, whose business will not suffer them,
or whose curiosity will not carry them on, to read further than the very Titles
of Books? And yet these from this Lantschap-Discovery can talk as confidently,
and censure as severely, as if they had thoroughly read and weighed every line
and Period in the whole Discourse. How many are there that read Books out of
Interest and faction, that are passionately desirous that every one should be
in the wrong, and confuted, that is not of their party? These weigh not reasons
but names, and put not judgment into the balance, but prejudice and
advantage. They had rather truth should suffer, than the cause they are engaged
in, and are abundantly satisfied to see an Adversary answered, whatsoever Arts
or Means are made use of to blow up a Refutation. How many also are there in
the world, that are not able to distinguish truth from Pretenses, and shapes
and Pictures from solid bodies? that think all is right that is vehemently
pretended, and every Apparition real, that presents it self to their deluded
sense and Imagination? Nay how few are there even of those who have the skill
and abilities to judge, that either have the patience, or the leisure, in
controversies of this nature, to compare Author with Author, and Reply and
Rejoinder together?

. 4. And yet who sees not, but every one of those (which together make up the
only considerable number of Readers) are likely to be imposed on by this
Change, and Doctor Hammond be concluded guilty in their Judgments of a gross
and palpable mistake?

. 5. For who is there almost so green a Catechumen and Neophyte in the
Christian faith, that knows God to be the only good, and the last end of Man,
but will be ready to reply against the Doctor, that we cannot love God
sufficiently, and that we must therefore love him to the utmost height we can;
that he who loves not God with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all
his might, does not love him as much as God deserves, or as much as man ought;
and therefore to maintain a greater Ardency in Christ's love of God at one time
than another, must be a dangerous Error, and bordering on that Heresy that
denies the Godhead of our Savior; an Error that pulls the Crown of innocence
and happiness and perfection from his head? Doctor Hammond, right or wrong, is
now abundantly confuted in the Judgment of the Many, and it will be almost an
impossible Task, and an unpardonable crime to undertake his defense. So great a
School-man as Mr. Henry Jeanes of Chedzey has lost his labor in this
rejoinder, and has been only too courteous in honoring Doctor Hammonds gross
Error, with a Scholastical Refutation. His Arguments and Pains might have been
spared in opposing that so palpable mistake, which at first-sight discovers it
self in the naked proposal of it.

. 6. Indeed this Phrase, The love of God, to English ears carries with it
nothing less than that high and transcendent Act of the Soul, that immediately
fixes on God as it is proper Object. And therefore if the Doctor had undertaken
to maintain, that this Act of Divine Love had not always been at the full
height in Christ, who by virtue of the Hypostatical Union so clearly always
knew God, and so perfectly enjoyed him, his learning and parts would in the
Judgment of most, have only served him to parget over an Error, too gross and
palpable to be defended by any man that owns and glories in the name of a
Christian, and a Preacher of the Gospel, and his work would be justly accounted
fit to be joined to the monstrous Paradoxes of the age; and the Panegyricks of
Nero and the Altar of Busiris would have been reputed as true, though to carry
infinite less danger in them, than this Assertion. So successful has this
alteration been to our Refuters Advantage!

. 7. But then if the Doctors Position had been faithfully represented, and the
Question laid down in these precise Terms, wherein he had so warily stated it,
not one of a thousand Readers could have found any fault with it. And if so
great a School-man as Mr. Henry Jeanes of Chedzey pretends himself to be,
could, with all his skill and advantage in that curious and subtle learning,
have discovered in it a mistake, the Error would in the Judgment of the most
have been accounted venial, and such, which the most profound and knowing might
be subject to. For even Saint Luke 22. 44.
Luke himself does positively declare, that our Savior being in an Agony,
(...), prayed more earnestly; which is the very thing that the Doctor asserts
in his Title Page: and all the business of his reply is to prove, how this
plain Assertion of the Evangelist may be reconciled with his fullness of
habitual grace. And therefore when our great Schoolman had done the utmost here
he could, the sum total of his performance would, in most men's opinion, have
been only this, That he had showed a better way of reconciling this Text of
Saint Luke with the fullness of Habitual Grace in Christ, than Doctor Hammond
had yet met with.

. 8. If now our Refuter shall here return, that he undertook not to oppose
Doctor Hammonds Title, but his Book, and that in diverse places of his Reply he
positively maintains, that the Acts of Christ's love of God were capable of
degrees, more Ardent at some time than others, which was the dangerous Error he
was willing to Reprieve and secure the Reader from, and therefore he has done
the Doctor no wrong, if in those terms he proposed to Refute it in the
Frontispiece of his Rejoinder, which being his own Child, he might name as he
pleased, without any man's just offense;

. 9. To this I Answer.

That true it is that this Phrase, The Love of God, is variously taken in
Scripture, as shall in due place be largely demonstrated.

First generally for the habit, or any Act or Acts of holy Charity, as it
conteins the whole duty of man toward God and our Neighbors.

Secondly, in a more restrained sense, for the Habit, or any Acts of Piety, or
Holiness, or devotion toward God.

Thirdly, most strictly and properly, for that high and transcendent Act of
divine love, whereby the soul is immediately fixed and knit to God as the only
Good.

In the two first acceptations the Denomination is only Figurative and Causal,
because the Acts, so called, are the Effects and issues of the love of God. In
the third and last, the Denomination is Formal and Proper, and signifies
nothing else but that Love from whence those other Acts do flow.

. 10. If therefore Doctor Hammond, speaking of the degrees of Ardency in
Christ's Prayer, and the gradual heightning of other Acts of like nature in
him, according to the variety of times and occasions, does sometimes by a
Metonymy of the effect, or Synecdoche generis, say, that these Acts of Christ's
love of God, or holy Charity, are capable of degrees, and sometimes more
heightened, more ardent and intense than at other times, or in other Acts, this
will therefore be no excuse to our Refuter for charging Doctor Hammond in his
Frontispiece, for asserting a greater Ardency in Christ's Love of God (properly
and formally taken) at one time than another, and notwithstanding any such plea
or defense he must, Vid. Digest. l. 48. tit. 10. De lege Cornel. de falsis, and
de Senatus-consulto Liboniano. Tria in Falso jura requirunt, primo dolum. l. 1.
in princ. ff. ad legem Corncl. de Fall.: Item lex Cornel. inst. de publi. judic.
gl. in c. ad falsariorum. de cri. fall. c. homines, and seq. 22. q. 2. Secundo
mutationem veritatis. text. in auth. de instr. cautela and fide in prin. and l.
quid si falsum ff. de fall. -- Tertio requirunt, ut falsum alteri noceat. gl.
sing. in l. damus, and ibi addidi C. de le. Cornel. de fall. decis. Neopolit. q.
ult. Lanfranc. in rep. c. quoniam. in verb. testium depositiones. Col. 6. in
magno vol. de prob. and sic patet quid sit falsum, nam est immutatio veritatis
dolo facta, etc. Rebuff. prax. beneficiorum. in Bull. Coenae Dom: art. 4.
(mihi) p. 311:

Falsum est quod animo corrumpendae. veritatis in alterius fraudem dolo malo
fit. l. nec exemplum* 20. C. eod. l. quid sit falsum* 23. ubi Bartol. ff. eod
-- materia sunt falsa testamenta. l. 1. 6. l. divus 15. l. uxori. 18. ff. eod.
l. Paulus 221. ff. de Verborum significat. Instrumenta. l. instrumentorum 16.
ff. eod. Scripturae publicae d. l. 16. l. siquis instrumentorum. 21. verb.
publicis. C. eod. etc. Denique quaevis res in qua veritas depravari, falsum
insinuari cum alterius injuria potest. d, l. 1. Ioh. Schneidewin. Commentar. in
lib. institut. lib. 4to tit. 18.. Item lex Cornelia, de falsis. 2. and 6. etc.
p. 2141, 2142, etc.


Lege falsarii, be condemned.

. 11. The truth is, Oration est actus inferioris deprecantis superiorem ut se
adjuvet, unde est actus indigentis open alterius cui cultum and reverentiam
exhibet, and ideo ad religionem pertinet, Suarez, in tert. part. Thom. q. 21.
art. 1. in Commentar: tom. 1. p. 588. Dicendum quod sicut supra dictum est, q.
81. art. 2. and 4. ad religionem proprie pertinet reverentiam and honorem Deo
exhibere. and ideo omnia illa per quae Deo reverentia exhibetur, pertinent ad
Religionem. Per Orationem autem homo Deo reverentiam exhibet, in quantum sc. ei
subjicit and profitetur orando se eo indigere, sicut authore suorum bonorum:
unde manifestum est, quod oration est proprie Religionis actus. Aquin. 2. 2. q.
83. art. 3. in corp. Vide Cajetan: alios in loc. Vide infra de hoc latius suo
loco.
Prayer is properly an Act of Religion, and devotion toward God, and
improperly and figuratively only an Act of holy Charity, or divine love. And
therefore, though our blessed Saviors love of God properly and formally taken,
be supposed to be always uniform, always the same, still advanced to the
utmost height of Ardency and fervor, that the humane nature in the days of
his flesh was possibly capable of; yet this nothing hinders, but his devotion
in some Acts of Prayer at some times might be more advanced, his zeal here
might be more fervent and intense than at other times, according to the variety
of occasions, and the difference of the blessing or favor prayed for, or evil
and danger deprecated.

. 12. And as this was all that Doctor Hammond undertook to maintain in his
Reply; (as appears from his very Title Page) so it is so highly rational in it
self, that I wonder what Temptation could fall upon our Refuter, that calls
himself a Schoolman, a Divine, and a Minister of Gods word, that he should
undertake, in any shape or dress whatsoever, to oppose it.

. 13. I shall not labor to infuse Jealousies and umbrages into the Reader
against this Refuters discourse, but shall leave his Judgment free and entire
to the Merit of the Cause depending between us. I shall only assure him, that I
conceived it necessary to premise this that has been spoken, to dispossess him
of that prejudice, which this Refuters changing of the terms of the Question
might unobservedly have impressed upon him. And so I pass to the business of
the Discourse.

SECT. 2:
Doctor Hammonds renouncing the Error charged upon him. His civil address
unjustly taxed by the Refuter. The Defenders Resolution hereupon. His reason
for it. Scurrility not maintained. Seasonable Reproof lawful. The Defenders no
regret to the Refuters person and Performances. His undertakings against the
Refuter. This Course unpleasing to him. But necessary. The Doctor not guilty of
high Complements and scoffs. The Refuters Friends the only Authors of them.
The Defenders hopes. The Refuters promise. The Defenders Engagement.

Doctor HAMMOND.
. 1. I Was very willing to hearken to the seasonable advise of many, and wholly
to withdraw my self a foro contentioso, to some more pleasing and profitable
employment, but discerning it to be the desire of the Author of the Book
entitled, A Mixture of Scholastical and Practical Divinity, that I should
reply to his examination of one passage of mine against Mr. Cawdrey, I shall
make no scruple immediately to obey him, not only because it may be done in
very few words, but especially because the Doctrine which he affixeth to me,
seems (and not without some reason) to be contrary to the truth of Scripture,
which I am to look on with all reverent submission, and acquiesce in with
captivation of understanding, and so not assert any thing from mine own
conceptions, which is but seemingly contrary to it.

. 2. The Proposition which he affixes to me is this, That Christ's Love of God
was capable of further degrees: and that he refutes as a thing contrary to that
point (a truth of Scripture) which he had in hand, viz. The dwelling of all
fullness of habitual Grace in Christ.

3. By this I suppose I may conclude his meaning to be, that I have affirmed
Christ's Love of God (meaning thereby the habitual Grace of divine Charity) to
have been capable of further degrees, so as that Capacity of further degrees is
the denial of all fullness of that habitual Grace already in him.

4. And truly had I thus expressed my self, or let fall any words which might
have been thus interpreted, I acknowledge I had been very injurious, not only
to the verity of God, but also to mine own conceptions, and even to the cause
which I had in hand, which had not been supported, but betrayed, by any such
apprehensions of the imperfection of Christ's habitual Grace.

5. This I could easily show, and withal how cautiously and expressly it was
forestalled by me. But to the matter in hand, it is sufficient that I profess I
never thought it, but deemed it a contrariety to express words of Scripture in
any man who shall think it, and in short, that I never gave occasion to any man
to believe it my opinion, having never said it in those words which he sets up
to refute in me, never in any other that may be reasonably interpretable to
this sense.

Thus the Doctor.

. 1. TO this so ingenuous and civil address, and clear acknowledgement of the
danger of that Error which the Author of the Mixture undertook to refute,
though causelessly, in Doctor Hammond, this Refuter in very much anger replies,
and with pride and scorn sufficient to oppose a thousand Heretics. And though
this renouncing and detestation of the Error, undeservedly, and through an
overhasty mistake, and too prejudicate a zeal, laid to the Doctors charge, had
been sufficient to any Son of Peace, on whom the Spirit of Peace did truly
rest, to have made an end of this unnecessary contention between the Professors
of the same Faith; yet this Mr. Henry Jeanes of Chedzoy will not rest contented
with it. Because he has once unhappily accused the Doctor of an Error which he
is no way guilty of, which he never gave occasion to any man to believe his
opinion, having never said it in those words which he sets up to refute in him,
and never in any other that may reasonably be interpreted to that dangerous
sense, he will still perversely continue to affix it on him.

. 2. And this is all the thanks that the Doctor has gained by this his fair
condescension, and laboring to undeceive this mistaken Author, and those that
possibly might be deceived by him. His recompense is only the disturbing of his
peace, the blasting of his name, and a provocation to a very impertinent and
unnecessary debate in any times, but now highly dishonorable to the Glory of
God, and the Protestant Religion, which is so every where assaulted, both by
enemies from without, and unruly Professors and Pretenders to it within.

. 3. And though as the case now stands with our sad and very much afflicted
Mother the Church, this contention might have been pardonable, if it had been
carried with that innocence and candor as becomes Professors of Gospel Truths,
though differing in Judgment in some petite and inconsiderable debates; yet to
the great contentment of the Jesuit abroad, and the Quaker and Anabaptist at
home, it is managed with such vehemence, and scorn, and Passion, as if the
whole Honor and safety of Christian Religion did depend upon it.

4. And now, though his Opinion and Judgment is Orthodox, and altogether the
same with that which the Author of the Mixture of Scholastical Divinity with
practical undertook to maintain; yet his innocent language shall be arraigned
of Ironies and scorn, and hypocritical high complements, and his Tongue and Pen
shall be concluded guilty, where his Heart and Tenants cannot. For thus he
bespeaks the Doctor;

JEANES.
Whereas you term your Compliance with my desires, that you should Reply unto
me, Obedience, I look upon it as a very high Co^plement (for what am I that my
desires should have with you the Authority of a Command?) and shall not be so
uncharitable as to think it a Scoff, though some of my friends have represented
it to me under that notion. But suppose it were meant in way of derision: yet
this shall abate nothing of my gratitude for your Reply, which is a favor and
honor of which I willingly confess my self to be unworthy.

. 5. In good time, Sr. And therefore since you are a Person of so tender sense
and apprehension, that even Balsams and Perfumes offend you, I am now resolved
to change the Method, and take another course in this Rejoinder than the Doctor
has done. Nor shall I be troubled, if either your self or nicer Friends shall
account me sharp and Sarcastical, or tending to that which you interpret as
scoff and derision.

. 6. If a Ruffling Gallant on the highways shall assault me or my friend, to
take away our Purse, I shall not fear his accusations or threats of an Action
of Defamation, if in an Hue and Cry, or Endictment, I call him Thief in the
face of the Country.

. 7. I am not altogether unacquainted with the writings and practice of
Physicians and Surgeons, and know by experience that Centaury and Wormwood,
and Medicines of Rhubarb, are more pleasing and profitable to some Choleric
distempers, than the choycest Confections Art can make of Honey and Sugar. I
have seen Aegyptiacum and Cauteries have mundified putrid Ulcers, and cured
that proud and spongy flesh that Oils and Lenitives had raised. And therefore
I shall not complement you into the suspicion of an Irony; and when I find you
grossly ignorant, I shall in plain English tell you so; nor shall I be afraid
to call you Sophister, where you endeavor to abuse your Reader by a
prevaricating Elench.

. 8. I see you arrogate to your self the glorious Attribute of a School-man,
and every where pride your self in your Scholastical discourse. The Logician
still disputes or fights (as they speak) pugno contracto. His fist is always
clutched, to show the power and the strength of his discourse. And therefore I
care not, if you are offended that I do not stroke you on the cheek with the
soft extended palm of a charming Rhetorician. I shall use the plain and rough
Language of the Schools, with which you would be thought to be very well
acquainted.

. 9. In Sparta, Story tells us, that plain, but warlike Nation, were wont to
call Ligonem, Ligonem, or as we say in our Language, a Spade, a Spade. And
therefore in a contest with a Lacedaemonian, I shall not fear the imputation of
rude and unmannerly, if, even the Areopagites being Judges, I should not court
him with the smoothness and soft expressions of Athens.

. 10. I speak not this to justify Scurrility, or maintain reproachful
Language. I know that Jude v. 9
Michael disputing even with the Devil himself about the body of Moses, durst
not bring against him any railing accusation. I acknowledge it to be most
Christian advice of the Apostle, and worthy all acceptance, when he says,
Gal. 6. 1.
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such a man in the spirit of Meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be
tempted.

. 11. Yet when I find such gentle courses serve only to inflame an Adversary
with pride and disdain, I must remember his counsel to Timothy, and Reprove
such an one openly, that others 1 Timothy 5. 20.
also may fear.

. 12. I confess, I have no regret at all to your Person, nor do I envy you the
Acquests you have gotten in School-Learning, too much a stranger now-a-dayes.
No such unchristian Temptation has drawn me from my obscure private shade into
the Sunshine. It is only love of truth, and the vindicating a Learned Man's
name, who was resolved to confute you by his neglect, and pursue nobler
thoughts than such poor and trivial controversies, has brought me into the
Theater.

. 13. And now, if I prove you not extremely ignorant of the first Principles,
and very Elements of Logic and Philosophy; if I do not demonstrate that you
quote School-Authors at random, which you never read; if I make it not evident,
that you have either ignorantly, or, which is worse, most wilfully mistook the
Doctors meaning, and imposed an Assertion on him which he never meant, and will
as readily dis-own as you your self (which yet, for all that, you have no where
confuted, at least to any purpose;) if I make it not clear as the Sun at Noon,
that you have not urged one Author to purpose; nay, that all the Authors almost
you have cited, do directly make against you; let me then be decryed for the
most monstrous Rayler and Sycophant, or any worse thing, that Christianity
abominates.

14. This course I confess is no ways pleasing to me, and I had rather use (as
he counseled) soft words and hard Arguments, because I find by experience that
Truth is never at a greater loss, than in a Personal Dispute, and the discovery
of the Error and mistakes of an Adversary that are nothing to the Cause.

. 15. But let the world be Judge, what other course should be taken with such a
touchy Opposite, that is offended with the Doctor for saying, He should make no
scruple to obey his desires, and has vouchsafed him that Reply, which he
confesses he is unworthy of. I have found by experience, that if you softly
handle the Nettle, it will sting you for your Courtesy: but if you roughly
crush it, you shall find it a very innocent Plant, and not able to offend you.
Since therefore I perceive this Refuter has somewhat of this angry Herb in him,
it will be necessary for my own defense that I handle him accordingly.

. 16. But let me tell you, Sir, the Doctor is too much a Christian to be guilty
of high Complements in Theological discourses; and he is too Charitable and
humble to scoff and deride an Adversary, though never so weak and unworthy. All
the world sees, that though his Ink be black and lasting, yet he has no
Copperas and Gall in it; nor could the intemperate Language of any Scurrilous
Opposite yet tempt him to forgo his settled Meekness and Patience. Your Friends
then that represented to you that fair and civil expression of the Doctors
under the notion of a Scoff, were the only Authors of it, and you must accuse
them of the Derision that feigned it, where it was not at all intended.

. 17. And now if what you add in this Paragraph, has in sincerity fallen from
your Pen; and if also, though it had been intended by the Doctor not only as an
high complement, but a scoff (as you and your Friends do vainly fancy) yet it
shall abate nothing of your gratitude to him for his Reply (which is a favor
and honor you justly confess your self unworthy of, unless you had made better
use of it;) I shall not despair, but that my plain and downright managing this
Controversy against you may be acceptable, and that you will yet thank me for
my severest reproofs, which, if I be not very much mistaken, will show you more
ignorant than either your self or Admirers imagine. And I have good hopes yet,
that you may prove Senex bonae indolis, and acknowledge your mistakes in a
public Recantation: which will be as great an Honor to your self, as a
Repairing the Doctors Credit, which you have to the great disservice of the
Church so unworthily blasted, whose Labors in Gods Vineyard are made by it
unfruitful to many that might otherwise have profited by them. For you
immediately add;

JEANES.
The best testimony I can give you of my thankfulness is, to assure you, that
if in the Exceptions which you shall condescend to return to this Paper, you
can prove that I have done you any Injury, you shall find me very ready to make
you satisfaction. But if, on the contrary, you shall fail in such proof, I hope
you will be so much a friend to the Truth, as to retract your mistake.

. 18. Say and hold, Sir, in the first, and then never doubt the latter.
Remember the wholesome advice of Saint James, Jam. 5. 12.
And let your yea, be yea. Quod verbo promittitis id facto implete, sive id in
agendo, sive in non agendo consistat. (...), and promissum significat, and
promissi implementum, ut videre est 2 Cor. 1. 18, 19, 21. Est igitur hic (...),
ut insimili dicto Judaeorum. Justi. (...) est (...) and Non est Non. Illud
(...) est promittentis, ut (...) vel (...) Graecis. H. Grot. in Loc.
Be not only a Minister of Gods word, but a Christian, and make good your
promise. And if I do not demonstrate, that you have every where done very much
wrong to the Truth, and great Injury to the Doctor, its defendor, I my self
shall more readily make you satisfaction than you can desire it, and shall
publicly retract whatsoever is here written. And the Doctor, I doubt not, will
be more a friend to the Truth than his own reputation. And as I believe he is a
great admirer of the Wit, and Parts, and Learning, and Piety of S. Austin; so I
question not but he will be ready to show, that he no where more applauds him,
and thinks him fitter to be followed, than in his Retractations.

And now we are fallen upon the Business and matter of the Controversy.

SECT. 3.
The Refuter acknowledges the Doctor to assert the fullness of Christ's Habitual
Grace. His Use of Confutation and after undertakings groundless hereupon. The
terms of the Question much altered by the Refuter in his Rejoinder.

This Refuter goes on and says,

JEANES.
You acknowledge that to affirm that Christ's Habitual Love of God was capable
of further degrees, is a Contrariety to express words of Scripture. Now the
Proposition which you thus disclaim, is the natural and unavoydable sequel of
that you in this your Reply,. 21. confess to be your Opinion; to wit, That the
inward acts of Christ's Love were more intense at one time than another: and
this I will make good by an Argument which I shall submit unto your severest
examination.

. 1. BUt Sir, by the favor of this your irrefragable Argument, which you think
will endure the Hammer and the Touch, the Fire and the Water of Separation, It
is confessed then on all hands, and so by you acknowledged, that the Doctor
plainly asserts, That to affirm That Christ's Habitual Love of God was capable
of further Degrees, is a contrariety to express words of Scripture. What then,
I pray Sir, is become of your Use of Confutation in your Mixture of
Scholastical and Practical Divinity? Why then as conquered Ensigns must Doctor
Hammond's innocent name serve to adorn the Index and several Pages of your
Book? Will you by Hallifax-Law first execute, and then proceed to Judgment and
enquiry? To what purpose else do you labor to conclude him guilty of that
Error, which here he publicly disclaims, and proves could not possibly be his
Opinion in that place you labored in your Use of Confutation to oppose, by a
Passage drawn from his (...),. 21. that was written long time after that your
Use of Confutation was Penned and Published to the world?

. 2. When at Secondly, this Point (of the dwelling of all fullness of Habitual
Grace in Christ) may serve for confutation of a Passage in the Learned Doctor
Hammond against Mr. Cawdrey, to wit, that Christ's Love of God was capable of
further degrees. That I do not fasten this Tenet wrongfully upon him, will
appear unto any rational man by his own words, which I will therefore
transcribe. Doctor Hammond, p. 222. In the next place, etc. Jeanes Mixture of
Scholastical Divinity with Pract. p. 258.
first in your Mixture of Scholastical Divinity with Practical, you publicly
did attacque the Doctor, you did confidently ground your Charge upon a Passage
taken from his Account of Mr. Cawdreys Triplex Diatribe. There you undertook to
make it appear to any rational man, from his own words taken from that
Treatise, that you did not fasten this Tenet of the denial of all fullness of
Habitual Grace in Christ wrongfully upon him. There, there you expressly say,
you will therefore transcribe his words, from that very Treatise. And have you
not quoted the very Page, and taken the Passage thence at large, against which
your Use of Confutation purposely was addressed, and all to show the Doctors
guilt, and your own fair innocence?

. 3. And is now that Task declined, since the Doctors Public Vindication of
his injured Fame? Is now that Passage, upon which your Use of Confutation was
so expressly grounded, proved to be so clearly innocent, and so palpably
misunderstood, that now of necessity you must have recourse to his (...), that
was signally addressed against your Use of Confutation, to prove the Justice of
it, and that ex consequenti only, by consequence, and not directly?

. 4. I appeal, Sir, to your self, whether this be not an Injury to the Doctors
innocent Name and writings, to charge them with dangerous Errors, which you
cannot prove, and which you do acknowledge that the Doctor does as publicly
renounce as you your self. If the Passage upon which at first you built your
charge be guilty, to what purpose is this Tergiversation? why do you not
prosecute, and make it good? why must his one and twentieth Paragraph in his
(...) be now arraigned, to prove him by deductions and by sequeles guilty? If
the Passage quoted by you from the Account be innocent, I hope you cannot so
soon forget your promise, and we shall find you ready, Sir, to make the Doctor
satisfaction, and let those words at least, you have so solemnly accused, be
acquitted by you.

. 5. Howsoever, Sir, if you should not be so honest as to make good your
public Promise, so ingenuous as to retract a causeless injury, done to an
innocent, learned, highly-deserving Person (as indeed I look for little from
you) yet I must desire the Reader to take notice that the Terms of the Question
are much altered now, in this Rejoinder, from what they were at first. At first
this Refuter charged the Doctor with a direct and flat denial of the
All-fulness of Habitual Grace in Christ, and for proof of this his Accusation,
he quoted a Passage taken from the two hundredth twenty second Page of his
Account of Mr. Cawdrey's triplex Diatribe, where, in the fourth and fifth
Paragraphs of that Page, the words are truly found.

. 6. But since the Doctor in his (...) has so fully cleared himself from that
Crimination, since there he has so publicly declared his Opinion of the
All-fulness of Habitual Grace in Christ, and there professed (who best of all
men knew his own opinions) that he never did think otherwise, but deemed it a
contrariety to express words of Scripture in any man who should be of that
Judgment, and, in short, having declared that he never gave occasion to any
man to believe it his opinion, having never said it in those words which this
Author sets up to refute in him, nor ever in any other that may be reasonably
interpretable to that sense; Now this Refuter, in his Rejoinder to the (...),
in pursuance, at least in Countenance, of his Use of Confutation, puts the
Question thus;

Whether this Assertion of the Doctors (in this his Reply or (...). 21.) That
the inward acts of Christ's Love were more intense at one time than another,
does by natural and unavoidable sequel infer the intensive growth of Christ's
habitual Love, which is always acknowledged all-full, and incapable of
increase? But, as he said,

Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? And yet I despair not, that though he
never so often shift and change his shape, I shall halter him fast enough, and
in a Line of his own twisting.

The Question then being, not (as at the first) whether Doctor Hammond be
guilty of a direct denial of the All-fulness of habitual Grace in Christ; (an
Error pretended to be broached in his Account of Mr. Cawdrey's triplex
Diatribe) but whether he may be proved to be thus guilty by consequence, drawn
from a Passage. 21. of his (...); the Replyer affirms it, and thinks he proves
it by this Argument.

And fit it is that we hasten to the consideration of it: for he faith, he
shall submit it to the Doctors severest examination. And now can the world
judge, that it should be less evident than a Mathematical Demonstration, of
which so acute and profound a School-man is so confident? Thus then it follows.

SECT. 4.
The Refuters Argument no ground of the Use of Confutation, unless he writes by
inspiration. He confounds the Immanent Acts of Love with the Action of Loving.
His Argument concerns not the Doctors Assertion. The Acts of Divine Charity in
Christ may gradually differ, where the Habit is the same. His frequent begging
the Question and impertinence. Scheibler vainly quoted. What in that Author
seemingly favorable to the Refuters pretenses, censured. Immanent Acts truly
Qualities. Proved. Not to be excluded out of the number of Entityes. Belong to
the first species of Quality; why. Dispositions when imperfect things. The Acts
of divine Love in Christ supernatural. Not ordained to further Habits. Grace
the sole effect of God. Why these Acts called Dispositions. The Doctor a
Metaphysician. The Refuters (...). His irrefragable Argument broken. More
ridiculous for the Refuters Confidence.

JEANES.
Intension and Remission are primarily and per se only of Qualities: so that an
Action is not capable of Degrees of Intension and Remission, but secondarilie
and mediante Qualitate, which it produces, or from which it proceeds
Collegium Complutens. de generatione and corrupt. did. 4. q. 5.. 11. 47. n:
Scheibl. Metaph. l. 2. c. 12. number. 35, 36.
ratione termini or ratione principii. The Intension and Remission of Actions
therefore must be proportioned unto that of the qualities which they regard,
either as their terms or principles. Now you acknowledge in terminis, that the
inward Acts of Christ's Love were more intense at one time than at another: and
hereupon it undenyably and unavoidably follows, that either the Terminus,
some Quality that was the product of these inward Acts of Love, or else the
Principium, some Quality that was the Principle of them, was more intense at
one time than at another.

If you say that the Terminus, some Quality that was the Product of these
inward Acts, was more intense at one time than another: why then, first you
must tell us what this Quality is, and in what Species of quality it is placed.
It cannot with any color of probability be ranked under any other of the four
Species of quality than the first; and if it be put there, it must be either
dispositio or habitus. Now dispositio is such an imperfect inchoate thing, as
that I am very loath to think so dishonourably of my Savior, as to ascribe it
to him. If you make it an Habit, then you will run upon the Opinion which you
disown, for it can be no other than a Moral Habit, and therefore in Christ it
must be a virtuous and gracious Habit. To affirm therefore that this quality
was more intense at one time than at another, will be by just consequence to
affirm that a gracious habit in Christ was more intense at one time than
another. 2. Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate, and therefore I
shall reject this Quality e Numero Entium; unless you can by convincing
Arguments prove a necessity of asserting of it. I am not ignorant that it is a
common opinion that Omnis Actio habet terminum. But how it fails in Immane^t
actions, you may see (if you will vouchsafe to stoop so low) in Scheiblers
Metaphysics. 2. c. 10. t. 3. ar. 3. punct. 1.

If you take the other way, and say that the Principle, Quality producing these
inward Acts of Christ's Love of God, was more intense at one time than at
another; why then you grant that which you seem to deny. For the Principle of
them is nothing else but the habitual Grace of Divine Love, and therefore you
aver that the habitual Grace of Christ was capable of farther intension. And
thus you see what the reason was that induced me to charge you with this
Opinion.

. 1. ANd are you sure, Sir, that thus we see what the reason was that induced
you to charge the Doctor with this Opinion? Will you then be thought not only a
School-man, but a Prophet too? Is your Study at Chedzoy like the * Sibylls
Virg. Aeneid. lib. 6. circa init.
Cave, where you are no sooner entered, but you are possessed with a Spirit of
Divination, and write by Rapture and Enthusiasmes? How else could a Passage
drawn from the (...), written and published half a year after that your Use of
Confutation had been printed, be a ground and reason to persuade you to affix
that Error on him in your Mixture? Unless you had the Spirit of Prophecy, when
you penned that use, and foresaw the Passage that the Doctor afterward would
publish, this could not be the Motive that induced you thus to charge him.

. 2. But this is one of the smallest misadventures our Refuter will appear
guilty of: and therefore I shall not fix upon it, especially since it matters
not much, if the Doctor be proved obnoxious to the Error charged upon him, what
the Reason was that first did move him to confute it.

. 3. Yet for his comfort I must tell him, that as his first undertaking was
altogether groundless, so this whole Process is ridiculous, and only a great
heap of Errors and mistakes.

. 4. For first, he very ignorantly or wilfully confounds the Immanent Acts of
Love with the Action of Loving, things that are toto genere different. For this
is a Praedicamental Action, and the other are Qualities specifically distinct
from the habit of Love, as shall in due place be demonstrated. And he could not
but know that the Doctor positively does maintain it in the (...); and
therefore must not by the Rules of Art be supposed to be otherwise, without a
Pitiful begging of the Question, till the contrary has been proved against
him. This Argument then of which he is so confident, that he shall submit it to
the Doctors most severe examination, at the very first glance appears an empty
Paralogism, that cannot conclude any thing against the Doctor. For the
Syllogism, let it be put into whatsoever form this Refuter can devise, will
consist of four terms (the Doctor by the Acts of Love, in the Conclusion, to be
brought against him, meaning the Quality of Actual Love, and the Refuter in one
of the Premises by the Acts of Love understanding the Predicamental Action of
Loving) and consequently there can be no opposition, because it cannot be ad
idem.

. 5. But then secondly, suppose we his Discourse were artificial, yet it will
not at all concern the Assertion of the Doctor. For Intension and Remission is
properly a gradual heightning or abatement of the same Numerical Form, as we
shall hereafter prove. But the Doctor never affirms, as I can find, that the
self-same Numerical Act of Holy Love in Christ was more intense at one time
than at another, which this Argument supposes. He only affirms that Christ in
one Act of Divine Love, or holy Charity, (for this alone the Doctor means, as
shall in due place be evidenced, though this Refuter either ignorantly or
wilfully mistakes it, for that high and most transcendent Act of Love that was
immediately fixed on God as its proper Object) was more ardent than in another,
as, in his dying for us, than in his suffering Hunger, Poverty, Nakedness for
our sakes: or that this inward Act of divine Charity in Christ was more ardent
and intense than those other were.

Now this Assertion, as it is a Truth clearly demonstrable (and shall in due
place be made good) so it is not any ways concerned in this Argument of the
Refuter.

. 6. For though true it is, that Actions are not intended, but by reason of
Qualities; yet this nothing hinders, but that one individual Action may
Comparatively and Respectively be more intense than another, even where the
gradual height of both is supposed to be still Simply and Absolutely
invariable, still the same. For instance; Illumination is a proper
Praedicamental Action; and yet Sense and experience tells us, that the
illumination of the Sun, and the illumination of any one of the fixed Stars,
are gradually different, and yet the illumination of both is still the same in
it self, and never varies, but by accident, in respect of the variety of the
Medium, or distance: because the Original light of the Sun and Stars is still
invariable. Aristot. li. 2. de Generat. and corrupt. c. 10. text. 56.
(...), says the great Philosopher, (...). Causa necessaria ad aliquod agendum
determinata est, agitque quando and quantum potest. Burgersdic. Log. li. 1. c:
17. theor. 13. Vid. commentar. Agentia pure naturalia recte se habentia, ad
unum natura sunt determinata, ut sublatis impedimentis externis, non possunt
non id producere; ut patet exemplo corporum coelestium, etc. Wendelin. Contemp.
Physic. Sect. 1. Part. 1. c. 4. p. ^00. So also Scheibler. Metaphys. l. 1. c.
22. tit. 8. art. 2. n. 96.
For all natural Causes continuing still the same, do always work alike,
because they work by a necessity of nature, and to the utmost of their strength
and might.

. 7. And therefore notwithstanding this Refuters Argument, I see no reason why
also it may not be so in respect of the several individual Acts of Christ's
Love, and that, though they in themselves be supposed to continue still
invariable, of one equal intension in themselves, they may not yet, in
comparison and respect of one another, be said to be more or less ardent and
intense.

. 8. For thirdly (to show this Refuters Discourse yet more impertinent) though
most certain it is (as the Doctor clearly grants and maintains) that the Habit
of Divine Charity in Christ was de facto always at the height, and in its
utmost fullness that a finite Nature was capable of; yet it is not therefore
necessary that every Act of holy Charity should be always in its (...) and
full height: nor will it thence follow, that every Act of this Habit should be
equally intense with the Cause from whence it flows; but may differ in degrees
not only from the Habit, but also from all other Acts springing from it; unless
this Refuter can by other Arguments than this prove a necessity of the gradual
determination and equality of intensness of the several Acts with the Habit.

. 9. Now all things that are any ways determined, must of necessity be
determined either ab intrinseco, or ab extrinseco; from some internal cause,
and necessity of nature, or from some outward bounds and limitations.

. 10. Ab intra there can be imagined no determination possible, as his Master
Scheibler may teach him. For the Habit or Principle of these Immanent Acts is
not necessary and determined in its Operations, but an absolute Of the
difference between Natural and Voluntary Agents, Vid. Scheibler. Metaphys. li.
1. c. 22. tit. 8. art. 2. n. 96. De actibus liberis censeo etiam certum, nec de
potentia absoluta posse liberos esse, nisi effective fiant a potentia libera
cujus sunt Actiones, ut in superioribus tactum est. Suarez. Metaphys. disp. 47.
Sect. 2.. 9. p. 557.
free Cause, as the Will it self is, wherein it is subjected, with which it
coeffectively still concurres to the Production of the Acts, because (as it is
confessed by this Refuter in this very Argument) it is a Moral Habit, that is
only seated in the Will.

. 11. Ab extra the Habit cannot be supposed to be determined in its Operations
to one absolute height and degree of intensness, without a manifest Petitio
Principii, till it be proved against the Doctor. For the (...) and Quaesitum
between the Doctor and Refuter (occasioned by a Passage in Mr. Cawdrey against
the Treatise of Will Worship) is, Whether the actual Grace of Divine Love or
holy Charity, commanded by God, does consist in a latitude, and that, though
the sincerity of that Grace be always necessary, by reason of Gods command,
yet the full height and perfection in the utmost degree of intension possible,
in every Act is not; so that though the more intense be the more perfect, and,
Morally in it self and by it self considered, more valuable, yet the less
intense is not sinful, and therefore may upon occasion be lawfully and
commendably made use of, and chosen.

. 12. This the Refuter knows that the Doctor affirms, and undertakes to mantain
as well against himself as Mr. Cawdrey. And therefore to suppose the contrary
without proof, and to argue against his Adversary upon such a supposition, what
is it but (...), to beg the Question in the very entry of the Discourse? A
Quality very commendable in a writer of Scholastical and Practical Divinity.

. 13. But I shall wave all these misadventures also. And now having in general
showed the weakness and impertinence of his Discourse, I shall gratify him so
far, as to consider punctually that part wherein the only seeming strength lies.

. 14. It is this. If these Acts are Qualities ranked under the first Species,
they must be either Dispositions or Habits: but you cannot say they are
Dispositions: and therefore you must affirm them to be Habits, which is to
assert by consequence that which you just now denied. He proves the Assumption
by three Reasons. First, because Disposition is such an imperfect and inchoate
thing, that he is loath to think so dishonourably of our Savior as to ascribe
it to him. Secondly, because Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate: and
therefore he shall reject this Quality e numero Entium, unless the Doctor can
by convincing Arguments prove a necessity of asserting it. And thirdly, because
he is not ignorant that it is a common Opinion, that Omnis Actio habet
terminum; but how it fails in immanent Actions, the Doctor may see (if he will
vouchsafe to stoop so low) in Scheiblers Metaphysics.

. 15. And these are the three proofs upon which the whole strength of his
Argument, and his Book too, does depend. But this threefold Cord is very easily
broken. And for our more orderly proceeding, I shall answer it ordine
Retrogrado, beginning with the last first.

. 16. To that then I answer, That,

Though I conceive it too low for the Doctor to consult such vulgar Authors, in
a question of this importance, yet I will see whether I can learn it from him.
For I am sure Tertia sententia est, De ratione Actionis, ut sic, esse, quod
habeat Terminum quem intrinsece respiciat, idque proinde commune esse omni
Actioni quae a vera causa efficiente proficiseatur. Haec communior Sententia
Theologorum in 1. did. 27. praesertim Durandi and Gabriel. 9. q. 2. sumiturque
ex Scoto, q. 3. and quodlib. 8. and ex Bonaventura in 1. did. 3. art. 1. q. 1.
and ult. and ex Antonio Andred 9. Metaphys. q. 4. and aliis circa citatum
textum Aristotelis. Et hanc Sententiam existimo omnino veram. Ex quoniam, ut
dixi, de Action transeunte nulla est controversia, declaranda prius est
veritas hujus sententiae in Action immanente, and deinde confirmabitur
absolute de Action ut sic. Suarez. Metaphys. did. 48. sect. 2. n. 7. page 556.
I have been taught the contrary by very able Philosophers, and to me they seem
to have great reason on their sides.

What then says Scheibler to this purpose in the place quoted by our Refuter?
and let us duly consider it.

The question indeed is, An omnis Actio habeat Terminum? Concerning which he
reckons up first three Opinions, and then he adds his own, Ego quod mihi
videatur hac in re per distinct as propositiones propono.

Now the first is, 1. Dico, Actiones immanentes revera sum Actiones.

Be it granted; for I know no able Philosopher, especially of late, that denies
it, and the contrary Arguments have sufficiently been answered by Suarez and
others.

The second is, 2. Dico, Actiones immanentes aliquae non habent terminum,
aliquae eosdem habent.

The third, which follows by way of Corollary from the former, 3. Dico, Actio
ut sic non dicit respectum ad terminum.

And this is all that Scheibler undertakes to maintain in the place quoted by
the Refuter. Vide Scheib. Metaphys. l. 2. c. 10. tit. 3. art. 3. punct. 1. n.
26. ad 36.

. 17. But now how these Assertions, if all were granted, can any ways
advantage the Refuters present Argument, I leave any man to judge. For
Scheibler expressly asserts, That as some immanent Actions have no Terms, so
others of them have; and he proves it by an Instance borrowed from Julius
Scaliger against Cardan, Exercit. 307. Sect. 28. and Exercit. 1. Sect. 3.

. 18. Now to prove that nulla Actio immanens habet terminum (which must be the
Refuters Proposition, if he speak any thing to the purpose; for how else will
he prove that the immanent Acts of Love have no Terms by this Medium?) by this
assertion of Scheibler, that speaks only of some such, and proves the contrary
of others, will be impossible, till he can show us a new Mood and Figure to
prove an Universal by a Particular.

. 19. Indeed it might have been somewhat to the purpose, if that Author had
undertaken to prove that either the Operations of Infused Habits, or
particularly the Operations of the Divine Habit of Charity, had no Terminus.
But this as it is most false in it self (as shall in due place be evinced) so
that Author undertakes not to maintain.

. 20. All that seems to look that way is this,. 29, 30. in the proof of the
second Proposition. Patet autem utrumque. Nam inprimis datur aliquis Actus
immanens (...) sive effectivus, quo agens aliquid facit in seipso, veluti est
operatio qua facimus Syllogismum in mente, etc. -- Secundo, quod non omnes
Actus immanentes habeant Terminos, patet, quia secus omnes Actus immanentes
essent (...), sive effectivi. Per terminum enim nunc ille intelligitur qui per
Actionem producitur. At Actio post quam aliud relinquitur (...) est, sive
effectrix. Absurdum autem est omnes Actiones esse (...), ut saltem patet ex
discrimine Artis and Prudentiae apud Aristot. l. 6. Eth. quae per Agere and
Facere distinguuntur: et confirmatur, quod null us possit dari terminus qui
producatur per actiones aliquas immanentes. Quid enim producit v^g intellectio
vel visio? Nihil hic dici specio sius potest, quam quod per istos actus
producatur Notitia habitualis. Sed haec inprimis per acoidens est ad actus
illos, ut hic etiam fatetur Suarez. d. l. aliique. But now how far short this
is of Proof, will appear to any man that considers either the nature of the
things themselves, or what Suarez has delivered in this Argument in the place
quoted by this Author.

. 21. The whole strength of the Argument is built upon the force of this
Consequence, Si omnes Actus immanentes habeant terminum, Ergo omnes actus
immanentes sunt (...), sive effectivi. Now this Sequel is very infirm, nor
has he brought any thing material to countenance it. (...), etc. -- (...),
Arist. l. 6. Eth. c. 4.. 2.

(...). Arist. ib.. 1.


For if he take the word (...) sive effectivi properly, as Effection is
distinguished from Action, as he seems to do by his quotation from Aristotle,
as also by his Ad primum respondeo, omnem actionem esse causalitatem; sed non
omnis causalitas est per modum productionis proprie and rigorese, pet quam sc.
producatur aliquid post actionem remanens, etc. Scheibler. ibid.. 82.
answer to the first reason of Suarez, it is most evidently false.

. 22. For first, it is not true of all transient Actions, that are acknowledged
to be terminated in Qualities, ut res producatur permanens transacto actu,
which is proper to Manual effections, and the like Artificial Productions. For
Illumination is properly a Praedicamental transient Action Suarez. Metaphys.
disp. 48. sect. 2.. 17. p. 558.
productiva proprii termini, scil. Luminis, quod tamen ita ab illuminatione
dependet, ut illuminatione cessante seu transacta non manet, an Action this
that so depends upon the constant influx of the Sun, that it no sooner sets or
is eclipsed, but it instantly vanishes: unless (which yet is nothing to the
present Argument) we may give credit to what Galileus does somewhere relate,
That there are a sort of stones found in Italy (as I take it) that are of a
spongy and pumiceous substance, that will imbibe and fix the Rays of the Sun,
and retain the Light in them for four or five days together. And therefore it
follows not, that if Actions immanent be Praedicamental Actions, and have their
Terminos, that therefore their terms must remain, as in Artificial productions
and operations most commonly they do. For though it be affirmed to be essential
to every Praedicamental Action to have its term, yet it is accidental to a
Praedicamental Action, ut sic, to have its term, produced by that Action,
permanent and lasting after the Action is ended. For even that Author in this
very discourse Scheibler. Metaphys. l. 2. c. 10. tit. 3. art. 3. punct. 1. n.
36.
acknowledges that Quod convenit alicui quatenus ipsum, convenit omni sub illo
comprehenso.

. 23. Nor, secondly, is it true of all Actions that are Artificial, and,
according to Aristotle's (...). Arist. Eth. l. 6. c. 4.. 1.
determination in the place quoted by that Author, confessedly (...), that
their terms and work does remain after the Action is past: as appears in the
Artificial actions of singing, and playing on the Lute and other Musical
Instruments. And this is sufficient to prove the inconsequence of his Argument,
and the weakness of whatsoever Proof the Refuter shall draw from it.

. 24. But then it was a plain (...) in that Author, to prove that some immanent
Actions have no terms, because nothing produced by them remains. For one thing
it is for an Action to be productive of a Quality, another thing to produce a
Quality that is permanent after the Action is finished. And even Dico de
intrinseca ratione Actionis ut sic, et omnis Actionis esse, ut habeat terminum
ad quem tendit ut producendum per ipsam, and consequenter in essentiali and
completo conceptu Actionis includi transcendentalem respectum ad hujusmodi
terminum. Prior pars probatur etc. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 48. text. 2.. 16. page
558.
Suarez, (as good a Metaphysician sure as Scheibler) that undertakes to
demonstrate (and in my Judgment has done it) that it is essential to every
Action, ut sic, to have its term, does make this to be a difference between
Immanent and Transient Actions, that in these the terms are still permanent,
unless by accident, in the other they are not, but are still dependent upon the
Actions by which they are produced. His words are these:

Differentia ergo consistit in hoc, quod Actio Immanens non habet unquam
terminum permanentem post ipsam: Actio vero Transeuns regulariter illam habet,
quanquam interdum ac raro aliter evenit. In quo etiam est differentia, nam
quando id quod fit per actionem transcuntem non permanet, solum est ob
imperfectionem, vel imperfectam participationem, ratione cujus non potest
permanere, nisi actu conservetur: sic Sonus, qui est terminus factus per
actionem cytharizandi aut cantandi, non permanet ob imperfectionem suam, and
Lumen, and similia. At vero in Actionibus immanentibus and vitalibus id
provenit ex peculiari quadam natura pertinente ad Perfectionem, sunt enim
ultimi actus vitae, and ideo permanere non possunt sine actuali influxu
Principii vitalis. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 48. sect. 2.. 21. pa. 559.

. 25. And now if our Refuter shall think fit to lodge any strength upon
Scheiblers Confirmation, I shall refer him for an answer to Scotus, l. 1.
Sentent. d. 3. q. 6. where he shall find this largly discussed, that though
Habitual knowledge be not the intrinsic term of these Operations, sed quasi
consequens and extrinsecus, and that Operationes hujusmodi possunt intelligi
and esse sine habitu, ut patet in habentibus habitum intentissimum, ut in
Beatis, and in Christ in respect of habitual Grace, which was always in him in
its utmost height possible; yet they cannot possibly be or conceived to be
without Actual knowledge, the Quality that terminates them. To this purpose
also may the same Scotus be seen, l. 1. Sent. d. 3. q. ult. s. 130. et 1. Sent.
d. 27. q. 3. p. 347. ad 3. ex edit. Cavelli.

. 26. But this is plainly a Metaphysical Parergon, and no way subservient to
the design of the Refuter. And therefore to return;

. 27. Though it were granted to his great Master Scheibler, that some immanent
Actions have no Terms (which yet at first sight seems very absurd;) yet plain
it is that the Acts of this divine habitual Grace of holy Charity are
terminated in the Quality of actual holy Love. And for his learning in this
point (of which he professes himself so totally ignorant) I should think fit to
referr him to Ruvio's Logica Mexicana, as grave an Author as his Scheibler, or
the Author of the Collegium Complutense.

. 28. His words most pertinent to this purpose are these; -- Cum omnis motus
vel actio sit via in terminum per ipsum productum, quaelibet harum actionum
(sc. appetitus sensitivi) proprium habet terminum, and quidem terminus
transmutationis corporalis sensu percipitur -- Terminus vero actionis appetitus
non percipitur sensu, quemadmodum neque actio ipsa: Iram enim, nisi aliqua
alteratione Corporis ostendatur, vel certe verbis aut signis, non agnoscimus;
sed cum sit Actio corporea, absque dubio habet proprium terminum, nomine
ejusdem actionis significatum, ut ostendunt Operationes Voluntatis and similes.
Dum enim Voluntas rem aliquam Amore prosequitur, Actio ipsa Amandi suum habet
terminum in eadem voluntate productum, nempe Amorem actualem, quemadmodum actio
Intellectus verbum mentale; sed eodem nomine significamus Actionem and
Terminum, nempe Amoris Actualis. Ita ergo de Actibus appetitus intelligendum
est, Amorem sensitivum, Irae and Gaudii motus, suos habere Terminos
inneminatos, quos iisdem nominibus ac actus ipsos nominamus, nempe actualem
Amorem, actualem Iram and Gaudium. Et rursus, quemadmodum Amor actualis per
Actum Voluntatis productus, and Verbum mentale per Actum Intellectus, sunt
Qualitates, cum tamen Dilectio and Intellectio sunt Actiones; pari ratione de
Actibus Appetitus sentiendum est, etc. Ruv. Log. Mexicana, lib. Praedicam. c.
8. q. 4. in solut. dubii 2. p. 1184, 1185.

. 29. But yet if this Author should seem too obscure and mean for a writer of
Scholastical and Practical Divinities perusal, I shall refer him to that very
Suarez, whom he himself recommends to the Doctors inspection, and yet not so
much to his Authority as his Reason; though yet oportet discentes credere,
among whom in this point he confesses himself to be. His words are these, Vide
Suarez. Metaph. disp. 48. sect. 2.
Prima erat instantia de Actibus immanentibus, quam multi expediunt negantes
illas esse Qualitates, sed Actiones tantum, quae inter Thomistas videtur esse
valde recepta opinio, ut infra videbimus tractando de Praedicamentis Actionis,
ut ibi ostendemus; tamen negari non potest, quin illa actio aliquem habeat
terminum intrinsecum qui per eam fiat, ut ibidem ostendemus: ille autem
terminus non potest esse nisi Qualitas, ut facile patebit discurrendo per
caetera Praedicamenta. Item secundum hos Actus vere dicimur Quales, nempe boni
aut mali, scientes, Amantes, irati, etc. Item hi actus sunt formae ultimo
actuantes ac perficientes ipsas substantias quibus insunt; ergo convenit illis
communis ratio Qualitatis supra assignata. Atque haec sententia est communis
inter authors: came tenet D. Thomas opusc. 48. and Soncinas 5. Metaphys. q. 36.
and Latius l. 9. q. 21. Ferrariensis 2. contra Gentes, c. 82. and 2. de Anima,
q. 12. Hervaeus quodlib. 9. q. 8. Aegid. tract. de Mensur. Angel. q. 10. Et in
eadem sententia est Scotus, 1 Sent. d. 3. q. 6.. Hic sunt, and Quodlib. 12.. Ad
tertium Principale: quem sequuntur Scotistae, praesertim Antonius Andreas 9.
Metaphys. q. 4. and idem sentiunt Durand. Gabriel. 1 Sent. d. 27. q. 2. Thus
Suarez. Metaphys. disp. 42. sect. 5.. 13.

. 30. Howsoever, though he thinks fit to referr the Doctor, because he is a
Critic, to learn some Metaphysics from Scheibler; yet I will be so civil to
him, because he is a Schoolman, to referr him for his learning in this point to
one of the subtlest of those Doctors. And let Scotus be the man: it is l. 1.
Sent. d. 27. q. 3.. 19. ad tertium. The place is short, but full, and not taken
notice of by Suarez. And the words are these: Ad Tertium, concedo quod Notitia
est proles and vere genita, sed productio illa non est actualis intellectio,
quia, ut dictum est supra, actualis intellectio non est Actio de genere
Actionis, sed est Qualitas nata terminare talem actionem, quae significatur per
hoc quod est dicere, vel in communi per hoc quod est elicere; non igitur Verbum
est aliquid productum action, quae est intellectio, quia ipsa intellectio non
est productiva alicujus, sed ipsa est producta action quae est de genere
actionis, sicut dictum est supra. He here referrs to the place quoted by
Suarez, 1. Sent. d. 3. q. 6. p. 110. col. 2. n. 31. and ib. q. ult. p. 130. ex
edit. Cavell. where he has very solidly proved it.

. 31. And thus we have Reason and Authority sufficient to clear this point,
That Actual Love is a Quality flowing from the Habit of Divine Love, that
terminates the immanent Action of Loving, which, for want of sufficient words,
are both comprehended under the same common name of the Immanent Acts of
Charity or Divine Love. And therefore to come to his second Argument.

. 32. Though, as he truly says, Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate;
yet these Qualities that terminate immanent Acts, and are produced by them,
particularly the Quality of Actual Love, that proceeds from the energetical
operation and working of the divine Grace of holy Charity (of which the
Scriptures and Fathers and all Divines are so full) must not be excluded out of
the number of Entities for this Refuters Grave saying, till he can more solidly
prove that all immanent Acts, and particularly this of Divine Love, are purely
Actions not terminated in Qualities of the same name with the immanent Acts or
Actions themselves. And so I come to his first Argument, the Forlorn hope of
the Cause.

. 33. If they be Qualities, they must most probably be ranked under the first
of the four Species, etc.

. 34. To this let the same Suarez, to make it more authentic, give answer.
Metaph. tom. 2. did. 42. sect. 5.. 15. Supposito ergo, says he, quod hi Actus
sint Qualitates, videri potest alicui esse collocandas in tertia specie, tum
quia sunt termini suarum Actionum, tum etiam quia Aristoteles Passiones Animae
in illa specie collocat, ut Iram, Gaudium, etc. quae tamen Actus immanentes
sunt: sed hae rations non urgent, jam enim diximus, esse terminum Actionis,
non esse adaequatam vel essentialem rationem illius tertiae speciei. Passiones
autem animae per se ipsae ut sunt actus immanentes, non pertinent ad tertiam
speciem, sed secundum id a quo accipiunt nomen Passionis, nimirum ex
alteratione quam in corpore efficient, and ex termino ejus. Dicendum ergoest
hos Actus aut Qualitates primae speciei and propriissime sub nomine and ratione
Dispositionis comprehendi. Ita sentiunt frequentius Authors citati, qui hos
Actus Qualitates esse docent, and juxta omnes rations sufficientiae supra
adduct as id ostendi potest. Nam hi Actus secundum se internae Qualitates sunt,
atque adventitiae, non enim suntinnatae: ergo juxta sententiam Simplicii in
prima specie collocandi sunt. Rursus, hae Qualitates sunt maxim convenientes
vel disconvenientes secundum naturam, and per eam efficimur boni vel mali: ergo
pertinent ad primam speciem, juxta secundam illam sententiam, ut notavit
Fonseca lib. 5. c. 14. q. 1. sect. 3. quia neque sunt objecta sensuum, nec
termini motus seu Passionis proprie sumptae. Juxta ultimam vero rationem
sufficientiae a nobis datam, res est manifesta; quia hi Actus sunt Perfectiones
ultimae Potentiarum: sed in prima specie collocantur omnes Qualitates quae ad
actuandas and determinandas Potentias institutae sunt: ergo ad illam pertinent
hujusmodi Actus.

Thus Suarez.

. 35. But let the bold Jesuit think what he please, yet our modest, humble
Refuter dares not think so dishonourably of our Blessed Savior, as to
attribute such imperfect inchoate things as Dispositions unto him: and the
Doctor cannot say they are Habits, without contradicting himself, and embracing
the Error he would seem to renounce.

. 36. But here our Refuter, though he pretend to be a Schoolman, betrays his
gross Ignorance, and is abundantly mistaken. For though Dispositions, which are
in order to Acquisite Habits, are inchoate and imperfect things, and to
attribute such to our Blessed Savior might be justly deemed to derogate from
the fullness of his supernaturally infused habit of Divine Grace; yet the
Qualities that terminate Immanent Acts issuing from that Divine Habit, are not
in themselves inchoate and imperfect, and ordained to further Habits, but are
all perfect in their kinds, or may be even as intensively perfect as the Habit
from whence they proceed. Such were those Acts of divine Love in our Blessed
Savior, that had God himself for their immediate Object.

. 37. Now this distinction of Acts in order to Habits he might have been
pleased to have learned from his own Master Scheibler, that learned it from
Scaliger: Actiones sunt duplices in respectu ad Habitum. Aliae sunt
antecedentes eum, aliae consequentes: istae igitur sunt causae habituum, hae
vero sunt effecta. Vtrumque eleganter expressit Scaliger Exer. 307. sect. 4. p.
Mihi p. 884.
925. Affectus, inquit, est motus animi nondum exiens in actum, veluti
misericordia, aut ira. Ex his educitur Actio vel ad sublevandum inopem, vel ad
opprimendum authorem offensionis, ita sane, si prius appetivero sublevationem
aut oppressionem. Is igitur est ordo; (...), affectus, misericordia; (...),
appetitus, cui non est hic nomen positum; (...), incitatio motus illius interni
ad actionem; (...), actio, quae est sublevatio. Cujus multiplici repetitione
quasi fabricatur habitus qui ejusdem nominis cum affectu est, quo rite dicor et
ero misericors. Actiones igitur quae hactenus fuerunt sunt antecedentes, quae
per modum causae comparantur ad habitus. Iam vero subjicit Scaliger, A quo
deinde habitu certae and imprepeditae fluunt actiones, non autem incertae,
quales ante ipsum fiebant, bonae quidem, sed non been. Atque hae actiones sunt
consequentes, and sic effecta habituum. Scheibler. l. 2. Metaph. c. 8. n. 104.

. 38. Now plain it is that all Est enim Habitus Acquisitus, qui per proprios
actus hominis operantis efficitur -- Infusus autem habitus, qui per influxum
solius Dei obtinetur -- Addendum est, duobus modis posse habitum infundi a Deo:
uno modo, quia ex natura sua non est aliter producibilis, nec per actus, nec
per aliam causam creatam; alio modo, ex sola voluntate and Potentia Dei Ita
distinguunt Theologi duplicem habitum infusum. Priorem vocant infusum per se,
and natura sua postulat ita, and non aliter, fieri: Posteriorem vocant infusum
per accidens; non quia, quando infunditur a Deo, non per se ac proprie fiat per
infusionem tanquam per actionem per se terminatam ad illum; sed quia talis
habitus per se non postulat illum modum productionis, acciditque illi ex
voluntate and potentia extrinsecae causae ut ita fiat. Suarez. Metaph. disp.
44. sect. 13. n. 5, 6. pa. 461.
infused Habits, that are peculiarly such, (of which kind are the three
Theological Graces, and in particular the All-full, All-perfect habit of Divine
Grace in Christ) as they are in themselves things purely supernatural, the sole
effects of Gods Goodness, and Mercy, and Power, so, because they are such, they
are not Habitus Acquisiti causantur ex actibus nostris; Infusi autem non, sed
tantum a Deo: propter quod actus nostri se habent ad habitus acquisitos
aliqualiter effective; ad Charitatem autem and ad habitus infusos non, sed
tantum dispositive, and per modum meriti. Et hoc tam respectu infusionis, quant
respectu augmenti: quia ex eisdem fit acquisitio and ejus augmentum. Durand. l.
1. Sent. d. 17. q. 8.. quantum ad primum L. p. 46. col. 1. vide Suarez. Metaph.
disp. 44. sect. 11.. 43. -- Ab eodem generatur habitus and augmentatur, ex 2.
Ethic. generatur autem habitus hujus charitatis a Deo, igitur and augmentatur
ab ipso: hoc autem -- quia Deus augendo addit aliam realitatem praecedenti --
Dico ergo -- quod est ibi nova realitas addit^ praeexistenti, sicut parts vel
gradus, non quidditativi, sed individuales and existentiae. Scotus l. 1. Sent.
d. 17. q. 6. n. 3, 4.

Duplici ratione aliqui habitus homini a Deo infunduntur. Prima ratio est, quia
aliqui habitus sunt quibus homo been disponitur ad finem excedentem facultatem
humanae natura, quae est ultima and perfecta hominis Beatitudo, ut supra dictum
est. Et quia habitus oportet esse proportionatos ei ad quod homo disponitur
secundum ipsos, ideo necesse est quod etiam habitus ad hujusmodi finem
disponentes excedant facultatem humanae naturae: unde tales habitus nunquam
possunt homini inesse nisi ex infusione divina. Alia ratio est, quia Deus
potest producere effectus causarum secundarum absque ipsis causis secundis,
etc. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 51. art. 4. in corp.

Dicendum quod virtus illorum Principiorum naturaliter inditorum non se
extendit ultra proportionem naturae: and ideo in ordine ad finem supernaturalem
indiget homo perfici per alia Principia superaddita. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 63. art.
3. ad 3. Vide etiam Aquin. 1. 2. q. 51. art. 4. ad 3m. infra citat. and confer
Pet. S. Joseph. I Would. Theol. moral. l. 3. c. 3. Resol. 5. page 252, 253.


Physically and effectively Perfectible by any acts or humane endeavors, but
only in some (as in the Saints in via) they may dispositively be augmented by
them, as the Schools determine. For as Water naturally ascends not higher than
the springhead from whence it flows, because it being now come to a Level,
the parts and weight are equally poysed, and therefore new force must be added
ab extrinseco to make it mount higher: so the Principles of Reason and
Morality, naturally implanted in us, may mount and rise to a strange height,
yet they can never exceed the proportion of Nature. Every good gift and every
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, with
whom i^ no variableness neither shadow of change: of his own will begat he us
with the word of truth, etc. James. 1. 17:
Grace is a gift that purely descends from the Father of lights. And as the
light of the Sun proceeds only from the Sun, and all that Art can do here, is
to contract it into a fire by a Burning-glass, or multiply it, by reflection of
it self upon it self; it cannot possibly make the least Ray, or increase the
meanest Sunbeam by the addition of any thing but it self: So the Habit of
Grace and holy Charity, as it comes down from Heaven, so is it not by any
humane endeavors or Acts possibly to be augmented. God only, that is the first
Author, must be the sole finisher of it: and all that we can do here is, not to
shut it out, or cloud it, but to suffer it to shine upon us, and dispose it to
an increase, by reflection of it self upon it self, or uniting the Rays and
fervor of it, in a due use and exercise.

. 39. And consequently the Qualities that terminate the Acts or Actions
proceeding from these infused Habits, cannot possibly be accounted Habits or
Dispositions, as that signifies an inchoate and imperfect Quality produced by
Acts in order to an Acquisite Habit. And therefore when it had been objected,
Aquin. 1. 2. q. 51. art. 1. in 3. and respons. ad 3m.
Si quis habitus a Deo infunditur, per illum habitum homo potest multos Actus
producere: sed ex illis Actibus causatur similis habitus, ut in 2. Eth. c. 1.
and 2. dicitur. Sequitur ergo duos habitus ejusdem speciei esse in eodem, unum
acquisitum, alterum infusum, etc. To this Aquinas makes answer in the place
already quoted. Ad Tertium dicendum, quod Actus qui producuntur ex habitu
infuso non causant aliquem habitum, sed confirmant praeexistentem; sicut
medicinalia remedia adhibita homini sano per naturam, non causant aliquam
Sanitatem, sed Sanitatem prius habitam corroborant. Cajetan. in locum.
Et in promptu causa est, says Cajetan in his Commentary on the same place, de
per se infusis quidem, quia improducibiles sunt nisi per infusionem, ac per hoc
ex Actibus nostris.

. 40. But then, because they are Qualities, and in the first Species ranked, as
we have proved, for other reasons they may and are also called Dispositions.

. 41. And let Suarez tell you what they are. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 42. sect. 6.
n. 15. page 402.
Suppono ex dictis, says he, in hac specie habitus and dispositionis solum
comprehendi Qualitates perficientes Potentias animae, etc. Rursus in Potentiis
animae distinguere possumus actus ultimos seu secundos a primis, qui sunt
Principia secundorum cum ipsis Potentiis. Ex quibus Actus secundi vocari
possunt Dispositiones, primi vero propria and peculiari ratione vocantur
Habitus. -- Et utrumque constat ex communi modo loquendi omnium. Et ratio est
-- quia Actus secundus ex suo genere, quia pendet ex actuali influxu and
attentione potentiae vitalis, non habet esse omnino fixum and permanens, sed
facile transmutatur; at vero Actus primus de se and natura sua habet esse
permanens: nam etiamsi Potentia cesset ab operando, potest in ea conservari,
nisi aliunde pendeat ab extrinseco agente, etc. So Suarez.

. 42. Hence plain it is, why these Acts of Divine Love, even in our Blessed
Savior, are called Dispositions: not because they were inchoate and imperfect
things, at least in their kind, and so ordained to further Acquisite Habits;
but because, by reason of their dependence on the Actual influx of the vital
Power of his Will, perfected by the Habit, they had not an absolute fixed
permanency, as the Divine Habit of Charity in him had, but were moveable from
him, at least when * he slept. Now facile and difficile mobile are the two
differences Mat. 8. 24. ^ark 4. 38. Luke 8. 23.
of Habits and Dispositions, Suarez. ibid. n. 13. p. 402.
quae, as the same Suarez, non significant diversos status ejusdem rei secundum
esse perfectum and imperfectum, sed indicant differentias essentiales per
ordinem ad diversas causas quas diversae qualitates postulant.

. 43. And then, for the Refuters further learning, he after adds, Ibid. n. 16.
p. 403.
In hoc ergo sensu utendo illis vocibus, verissimum est, Habitum and
Dispositionem specie ac essentialiter differ. Nam Habitus and Actus communi
consensu omnium, (Let our Refuter mark the words,) differunt specie, ut patet
ex modo attingendi objectum. Actus enim per se and immediate illud attingit,
and est quasi formalis and proxima unio ad objectum: Habitus vero solum
attingit mediante Actu; and ideo dicitur esse propter Actum, and est tantum
radicalis unio ad objectum post ipsam Potentiam tanquam principium Actus.
Potest etiam haec essentialis diversitas declarari per illas differentias:
Facile and difficile mobile ex natura sua, and ex propriis causis. Nam Qualitas
quae natura sua pendet ex actuali influxu Potentiae, and inde habet quod sit
facile transmutabilis, essentialiter differt a Qualitate quae a natura sua non
habet talem dependentiam, and ideo quantum est ex se habet esse permanens and
durabile. Sed hoc modo differunt Habitus and Dispositio juxta praedictam
interpretationem. Ergo. Minor constat ex dictis; and Major est per se nota,
quia uniuscujusque rei natura non potest melius dijudicari quam ex habitudine
ad suas causas. Et juxta hanc etiam interpretationem verissime dicitur nomen
seu conceptum Dispositionis generice and specifice sumi posse. Nam priori modo
idem est quod Actus perficiens and actuans potentiam operativam, ut abstrahit
ab actu primo and secundo, and sic constituit hanc primam speciem Qualitatis,
quatenus est simplex quaedam species subalterna, quae ulterius dividitur in
actum primum and secundum, tanquam in Habitum, and Dispositionem stricte and
specifice sumptam.

. 44. And therefore -- Ringantur ut ilia Codro -- I must tell our Refuter, that
though he count the Doctor but a Critic, yet he has showed himself a true
Philosopher, and an acute Metaphysician, and a solid Divine, when he asserted
that Love was truly a Quality of the first Species, which as a Genus proximum
was predicated of Habitual and Actual Love; and therefore more truly deserves
the Title of a School-man then our writer of Scholastical and Practical
Divinity, that confesses himself to be ignorant of such vulgar common Truths,
which it is impossible a true Schoolman and Philosopher should not perfectly
know.

. 45. And now for a close, I shall add that the (...), the first ground of
this Refuters mistake all along in this Discourse, arises from his
misunderstanding of the nature of Immanent Acts, which by a mistake, and too
hasty running over a Passage in Scheibler formerly quoted, he makes to be
simply Praedicamental Actions, toto genere different from Habits, and not at
all Qualities; either not distinguishing, or not apprehending how in Immanent
Acts, the formal operation (which is acknowledged to be a Praedicamental
Action) could be distinguished from the Quality that terminates, and is still
produced by that Action (which as it is the first causa procreans, so it is the
constant causa conservans of it too. For it is with these Qualities as it is
with Light; the Quality of actual Love, that terminates the Action of Loving,
does still constantly depend on that Action in its being and preservation, as
Light does on Illumination.) The vanity and falsehood of which Assertion of this
Refuter as it has already appeared, so he will instantly give us further
occasion to demonstrate.

. 46. And now for a breathing bait, I shall be bold to ask our Refuter, what he
thinks of this his irrefragable Demonstration, which at the beginning he so
confidently submits to the Doctors severest examination. Let him tell me,
whether it appear not to himself now as ridiculous as 1 Kings 12. 11, 25.
Zedekiahs iron Horns, when he fled at the news of the King of Isreal's rout and
destruction. Let him tell me, whether his boasting and confidence of Success
before an Enemy appeared, make not his flight and overthrow more worthy to be
scorned and laughed at then otherwise it would have been. Let him tell me, how
it is possible the first horn of his Dilemma or Captious Argument (wherein all
the strength and terror lay) being broken and destroyed, that the Doctor should
be in any the least danger of the other. What necessity now is there, and let
our Refuter himself judge, that the Doctor must be forced to say that this
Quality is a Habit? and consequently what will become of his Inference, That
the Doctor must by consequence affirm what he seems to deny? Indeed if the
Doctor had asserted that the Habit, the Principle of these Acts, had been
intended, he had formally contradicted himself; or if he had said that some
Habit, the terminus of those Acts, and produced and acquired by them, had been
intended, he had spoken and affirmed a kind of contradiction in adjecto: for
then he had affirmed that a pure supernatural Grace, that solely depends upon
the gift and infusion of God, had been acquired by humane Acts and endeavors.
But then if he had so said, this had not been to have contradicted himself. He
had spoken nonsense indeed, but not a Contradiction to himself, because he had
not said that the all-full supernatural infused Habit had been increased, but
either a new Habit acquired, or augmented by those Acts. And therefore our
Refuter was as much mistaken in this attempt as in any of the rest.

. 47. But let me tell him, that as the Doctor had no necessity to lay down such
an Assertion, so he was too sound and solid a Philosopher and Divine to do it;
though yet this Refuter does every where decry him for a Dunce, and brag he
has so made him. And therefore I shall only say, that since the Doctor had so
often and so early, and withal so clearly, disclaimed this Opinion, in regard
of the intensive growth of our Blessed Saviors Habitual Grace of Divine Love,
the Refuter in my Judgment could have no other aim in the re-doubling this
charge in the close of his Argument, but only to fill up his Paper; and swell
it into a volume. He was, sure, at his -- Martial.
aliter non fit, Avite, Liber; or else he was willing to amuse the eyes of weak
Readers, and fill their heads with vain jealousies.

. 48. And thus we see

Horat.
Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit.

Though the Romans counted their City immortal, and dedicated to it Temples and
Altars with this Inscription, Vrbi Aeternae; yet Time and Roma Sotterranea has
showed, that their Poet was the better Prophet. And though our Refuter were so
confident of this Argument, that he proudly submits it to the Doctors severest
examination; yet, as overladen with its own greatness, it sinks into an empty
and very impertinent Sophism. If he had not put so much trust in it, and
swelled it with heterogeneous matter to this Bulk, the Fall had not been so
great. But now, as he said of Pompeys overthrow, -- Martial.
jacere

Vno non poterat tanta ruina loco;

so, as if it were not sufficient to have showed the vanity of it once, we
shall be forced to hear of it again in very many places of his Pamphlet: for
there is scarce a Section to be met with, where he grounds not his Reply upon
this his first great, but very unfortunate, performance. And therefore his
Foundation being thus destroyed, and not one stone left unremoved, I shall with
the greater security proceed to the examination of the rest. They say of
Mahomets Tomb (though the more sober reports of later Travailers contradict
it) that, being an Iron Chest, it hangs in the Air in the Temple at Mecha,
drawn up and suspended by the Magnetical force of a Lodestone roof that does
cover it. And such methinks is this following Discourse of our Refuter, an
empty Castle in the Air, that has nothing to support it but the Magnetical
chains of his own deluded Imagination. And so we are come to a more solid
building of the Doctors erection. For thus he goes on;

SECT. 5.
The Doctor innocent of the former Crimination. The Refuters new Endictment
proved vain by a clear instance. His Argument a Paralogism of four terms. The
Doct. affirms the direct contrary to the Refuters Charge. Humane lapses;
doubtful speeches. Three rules of the Civil Law to interpret them. All writings
subject to obscurity. How the Doctor to be understood in the passage arraigned.
He demonstrates by it the fullness of Christ's habitual Grace a Posteriori. The
only rational way of proving it. Christ's Love more intense in his Agony than in
his suffering Hunger. Asserted by S. Paul. Christ's habitual Grace always
perfect. Always. Christ against the Socinians. Christ's habitual Grace not to
be augmented: whence. The Refuters boldness. His adding the word Before to the
Doctors Discourse, and second misadventure in this kind. His proof foreseen;
answered. Difference in the actings of Voluntary and Natural Agents. Acts of
Love in Christ, howsoever heightened, can never intend the Habit. Proved. The
Refuters Major opposite to Scripture as well as the Doctor. The habit of Grace
in Christ not determined to one uniform manner of Acting. Saints and Angels
love God necessarily and freely. So Christ as Comprehensor. This not to the
purpose. The Refuters charitable Additions. The Acts of holy Charity of two
sorts: Of which the Doctor to be understood. The Doctors censure of the
Refuters Additions just.

Doctor HAMMOND.
. 6. FIrst, I said it not in these words which he undertakes to refute: These
are page 258. of his Book thus set down by him;

This point may serve for confutation of a passage in Doctor H. against Mr. C.
to wit, That Christ's love of God was capable of further Degrees.

7. These words I never said, nor indeed are they to be found in the Passage
which he sets down from me, and whereon he grounds them, which he says is this,

D. H. p. 222.

In the next place he passes to the inforcement of my Argument from what we
read concerning Christ himself, that he was more intense in Prayer at one time
than at another, when yet the lower degree was sure no sin, and prepares to
answer it, viz. That Christ was above the Law, and did more than the Law
required, but men fall short by many degrees of what is required. But sure this
answer is nothing to the matter in hand, for the evidencing of which that
example was brought by me, viz. That sincere Love is capable of Degrees. This
was first showed in several men, and in the same man at several times, in the
several ranks of Angels, and at last in Christ himself, more ardent in one act
of Prayer than in another.

8. Here the Reader finds not the words (Christ's Love of God is capable of
further Degrees,) and when by deduction he endeavors to conclude them from
these words, his conclusion falls short in one word, viz. (further) and it is
but this,

That the example of Christ will never prove Doctor Hammond his Conclusion,
unless it infer that Christ's Love of God was capable of Degrees.

9. This is but a slight charge indeed, yet may be worthy to be taken notice of
in the entrance (though the principal weight of my Answer be not laid on it)
and suggest this seasonable advertisement, that he which undertakes to refute
any saying of another, must oblige himself to an exact recital of it to a word
and syllable, otherwise he may himself become the only Author of the
Proposition which he refutes.

10. The difference i^ no more than by the addition of the word (further.) But
that addition may possibly beget in the Readers understanding a very
considerable difference.

11. For this Proposition (Christ's Love of God was capable of further Degrees)
is readily interpretable to this dangerous sense, that Christ's Love of God was
not full, but so far imperfect, as to be capable of some further Degrees than
yet it had. And thus sure the Author I have now before me acknowledges to have
understood the words, and accordingly professes to refute them from the
consideration of the All-fulness of habitual Grace in Christ, which he could
not do, unless he deemed them a prejudice to it.

12. But these other words, which though he finds not in my Papers, he yet not
illogically inferrs from them (that Christ's Love of God was capable of Degrees,
more intense at one time than at another) are not so liable to be thus
interpreted, but only import, that Christ's Love of God had in its latitude or
amplitude several Degrees, one differing from another secundum magis and minus,
all of them comprehended in that All-full perfect Love of God, which was
always in Christ so full and so perfect, as not to want, and so not to be
capable of further Degrees.

13. The matter is clear: The Degrees of which Christ's Love of God is capable,
are by me thus expressed, that his Love was more intense at one time than at
another; but still the higher of those Degrees of intenseness was as truly
acknowledged to be in Christ's Love at some time, viz. in his Agony, as the
lower was at another, and so all the Degrees which are supposed to be mentioned
of his Love, are also supposed, and expressly affirmed to have been in him at
some time or other; whereas a supposed Capacity of further Degrees seems at
least (and so is resolved by that Author) to infer, that these Degrees were not
in Christ (the direct contradictory to the former Proposition) and so that they
were wanting in him, and the but seeming asserting of that want is justly
censured as prejudicial to Christ's fullness. Here then was one misadventure in
his Proceeding.

. 1. TO this so clear vindication, wherein the Doctor very evidently declares,
1. That neither the Words this Author undertakes to refute are to be found in
his Book, nor the Sense he draws from them, 2. His acknowledgement of the
dangerous sense that Proposition, which he causelessly charges on the Doctor, is
readily interpretable to, and that he (who best knew his own opinions of any
man in the world) was so far from any such meaning, that he expressly declares,
that the but seeming asserting of that want in Christ's habitual Grace is justly
censured as prejudicial to his fullness, our Refuter returns a very proud
answer, and nothing to the purpose, thus;

JEANES.
1. He that says that Christ's Love of God was more intense in his Agony than
before, affirms that his Love of God before his Agony was capable of further
Degrees than yet he had: But you affirm the former; and therefore I do you no
wrong to impute the latter unto you. The Premises virtually contain the
Conclusion; and therefore he that holds the Premises maintains the
Conclusion. I shall readily hearken to your seasonable advertisement, that he
that undertakes to refute any saying of another, must oblige himself to an
exact recital of it to a word and syllable; but notwithstanding it, I shall
assume the liberty to charge you with the consequencies of your words, and if I
cannot make good my charge, the shame will light on me.

2. If there were any mistake in supplying the word (further,) it was a Mistake
of Charity, for I was so charitable, as to think that you spoke pertinently to
the matter you had in hand. I conceived that your scope in your Treatise of
Will Worship was, to prove that there be uncommanded Degrees of the Love of
God; that those large inclusive words, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, withal thy soul, etc. do not command the highest and most
intense degree of the Love of God, so that a man may fulfill this command, and
yet there may be room or place for further and higher Degrees of the Love of
God. Now this Proposition, Christ's Love of God was capable of Degrees, which
you confess to be not illogically inferred from your Papers, will never reach
this point, unless you understand the word (further;) and therefore your
censure of my supplying the word (further) as a misadventure in my proceedings,
is groundless.

. 2. You have said, Sir. And now to which of the former Paragraphs is this
answer addressed? Have you any where showed the falsehood or weakness of the
Doctors vindication of that Passage in his Account, from the charge laid in
against it in your Use of Confutation? Has he not here clearly demonstrated his
Innocence, and that neither the Words nor the Sense imposed upon him are his?
Has he not manifested, beyond exception, that by your own addition of the word
(further) not to be found in that Passage, you have charged him with an Error
that he is no ways guilty of, and as heartily abominates as you or any man
can? Review the Passage you taxed in your Use of Confutation, and compare it
with the present Defense; and if you can yet find it faulty, let us know your
reasons in short. Do not set a new house on fire, that you may run away in the
Smoke: for that will but aggravate your guilt. Remember, Sir, your Promise, and
retract what is amiss. Do not seek for new Calumnies, till the former be made
good. Howsoever the world must needs see by this your Qui non facit quod facere
debet, videtur facere adversus ea, quia non facit: Et qui facit quod facere non
debet, non videtur facere quod jussus est. Digest. de Reg. Jur. l. 50. tit. 17.
leg. 121:
Tergiversation, and hunting after new Cavils to countenance old Aspersions,
that the Doctor is innocent, and that a verse in Machiavels Proverbs, which he
borrowed from Tacitus, Calumniare fortiter, and aliquid adhaerebit, was your
Text, from whence you deduced your second Use of Confutation.

. 3. The former Passage then being supposed innocent by our Refuters Qui tacet,
non utique fatetur, sed tamen verum est eum non negare. Digest. de reg. Jur.
leg. 142. ibid.
no reply to the Doctors vindication, (for all Courts of Judicature in the
world absolve the person arraigned, when the Accuser either cannot or will not
make good his Crimination,) I shall now proceed to consider, whether the Doctor
ex post facto may be concluded guilty of the Use of Confutation, by this that
our Refuter has anew brought in against him.

. 4. The Indictment now is, The Doctor guilty, not directly, as before, but
only by consequence. And thus the Accuser endeavors to make good his Charge:

. 5. He that says, that Christ's Love of God was more intense in his Agony than
before, affirms (by consequence, you mean, Sir,) that his Love of God before
his Agony was capable of further degrees than yet it had: But you affirm the
former; and therefore I do you no wrong to impute the latter unto you. The
Premises virtually contain the Conclusion; and therefore he that holds the
Premises maintains the Conclusion.

. 6. In good time, Sir. But then it must be where the Syllogism is Leges
communes sunt septem: Prima, In Syllogismo non debent esse plures termini nec
pauciores tribus. Haec lex praecipitur l. 1. prior. c. 25.
just and right, and the Secunda lex, Non debet esse plus aut minus in
Conclusione quam fuit in Praemissis.
Conclusion logically and artificially inferred from Septima, Conclusio
sequitur partem debiliorem: quare cum propositio negans deterior sit
affirmante, and particularis universali, si altera Praemissarum negans aut
particularis sit, Conclusio quoque debet esse negans aut particularis.
true and unquestionable principles: Haec regula se extendit etiam ad
conditiones materiae, ita ut si altera Praemissarum sit necessaria, altera
contingens, Conclusio debet esse contingens, ut docetur l. 1. Prior. c. 24.
Burgers. dic. Log. l. 2. c. 8.
otherwise though the Premises virtually contain the Conclusion, yet the
inference will be false. Unless the matter as well as the form of the Syllogism
be true, the Conclusion, though rightly inferred, for all that will be an
untruth. Cum Conclusio dicitur (...) necessario sequi ex praemissis, non
intelligitur necessitas ipsius conclusionis quae sequitur, quae necessitas
consequentis appellatur; sed necessitas sequelae sive consequentiae. Necessitas
enim conclusionis consequentis in sola demonstratione locum habet, Necessitas
consequentiae in omni Syllogismo been formato: haec enim necessitas est anima
Syllogismi; ea enim sublata, Syllogismus non erit Syllogismus, sed
Paralogismus. Burgersdic. Log. l. 2. c. 6. in Comment.. 3.
Follow it may by a necessity of consequence, but there will be no necessity in
the consequent, and the inference will be naught. Though you are a writer of
Scholastical and Practical Divinity, yet I see I must be forced to read a
Logic Lecture to you. And therefore to make this evident by an undeniable
instance, and not to asperse, but only to give our Refuter a Use of
Instruction. He that says that the Pope is the supreme Head of the Church,
affirms by consequence that he has also power over every particular
Congregation. But you, Mr. Refuter, affirm the former; and therefore I do you
no wrong to impute the latter to you. The Premises virtually contain the
Conclusion; and therefore he that holds the Premises maintains the
Conclusion. I know, Sir, notwithstanding this Argument, you will bid defiance
to the Pope, and every the least ragge of Antichrist, and you will deny that
you are any ways concerned in the Conclusion, because the Assumption is false.
I believe it, Sir, and accept of your answer, and therefore acquit you from the
danger of the Inference.

. 7. But then withal I must ask you, in the Doctors behalf, And what if there
be no less then four terms in your Syllogism? and there be more in the
Conclusion then the Premises naturally infer? and that the Assumption also
is directly false? If these be all true, as I shall not fail to demonstrate,
must the Doctor lay his hand on his mouth, and say you do him no wrong, because
you now assume the liberty to charge him with consequencies he professedly
disclaimes, and deduce them from words he never said in the sense you impose
upon him? It was wittily said by the Poet,

Quem recitas, meus est, o Fidentine, libellus: Martial.

Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
You may do well to take notice of it, and adjoyn it to the Doctors seasonable
Advertisement. For he which undertakes to refute any saying of another, must
oblige himself not only, as the Doctor says, to an equal recital of it, to a
word and syllable, but also, let me add, to the true and clear meaning of
those words and syllables recited.

. 8. And now, though this in the general be sufficient, yet I shall return a
more particular answer to this irrefragable Demonstration. For so, sure, the
Refuter accounts it, or else he would never have professed in the Close, that
if he could not make good his Charge, the shame should light upon him.

. 9. First then, I say that whatsoever opinion this Refuter has of the force
and strength of it, yet it is no other then an empty Paralogism, the Picture
and Shadow of an Argument, like the Colors in the Rainbow, that are not what
they appear; and though the Inference is very gravely brought in with an Ergo
to usher it, yet it is in no mode and figure, and concludes nothing against the
Doctor, because it consists of four terms. Saepe contingit ut in Syllogismo
quatuor termini sint, cum tres tantum esse videantur, idque fit tribus
potissimum de causis: primo, quia vox aliqua aut oration in Syllogismo ambigua
est, ut in hoc Syllogismo, Quod caret principio and fine aeternum est: Mundus
caret principio and fine: Ergo Mundus est aeternus. Hic sunt quatuor termini,
quia principium and finis in Majore de duratione intelliguntur, in Minore de
magnitudine, etc. Burgersdic. Institut. l. 2. c. 8. Theor. 7.. 2.
For though it seem to consist only of three, and the Subject of the Major is
word for word the Praedicate of the Minor; yet for all that, by reason of the
ambiguity of the Term the Love of God, there are truly four, though three only
in show. For by the Term Christ's Love of God, etc. in the Proposition, the
Refuter must mean the habitual Love of God, otherwise the whole Proposition
will be false, and therefore so (as the Doctor observes) he declares himself to
mean in his Use of Confutation: but then by the same Term Christ's Love of God,
etc. in the Assumption, the Doctor means only Christ's actual Love of God, and
so he every where declares himself. If now our Refuter, to shift his neck from
this yoke, shall reply, that he also means the same in the Major as the Doctor
does in the Minor, I shall then allow his Syllogism indeed, but then I must
tell him, that both the Major and Minor are most notoriously false.

. 10. To begin with the Assumption, where the strength of the Inference seems
most to be lodged. I deny it, Sir, I deny it. For where I pray does the Doctor
affirm this? Is it in these words. 11. where he says expressly, That this
proposition, Christ's Love of God was capable of further Degrees, is readily
interpretable to this dangerous sense, (I pray mark it) that Christ's Love of
God was not full, but so far imperfect, as to be capable of some further
Degrees then yet it had? Or is it in those other. 12. That Christ's Love of God
was capable of Degrees, more intense at one time then at another, that is,
Christ's Love of God had in its latitude or amplitude several Degrees, one
differing from another secundum magis and minus, all of them comprehended in
that all-full perfect Love of God (I pray mark it) which was always in Christ
so full and so perfect (good Sir, I pray mark,) as not to want, so not to be
capable of further Degrees? If in these two Assertions the direct contrary to
what you conclude from the Doctors words be laid down, as his proper meaning,
what a strange unhappy man is this Doctor in his expression, (that yet was once
thought so eminent for his Language and Rhetoric, as to be chosen in public
Convocation for the University Orator) to deliver his meaning in such words
that speak contrary to his thoughts? Well; I shall never hope that Words can
clearly express the Notions of the Mind, when I see such Inferences drawn from
them that directly cross the Thoughts they were designed to represent.

. 11. But perhaps he will collect it from the following words in the next
Paragraph,. 13. The Degrees of which Christ's Love of God is capable are by me
thus expressed: That his Love was more intense at one time then at another, but
still the higher of these Degrees of intenseness was as truly acknowledged to
be in Christ's Love at some time, viz. in his Agony, as the lower was at
another; and so all the Degrees which are supposed to be mentioned of his Love,
are also supposed and expressly affirmed to have been in him at some time or
other: whereas a supposed capacity of farther Degrees seems at least (and is so
resolved by that Author) to infer that these Degrees were not in Christ (the
direct contradictory to the former Proposition,) and so that they were wanting
in him; and the but-seeming asserting of that want is justly censured as
prejudicial to that fullness.

. 12. What say you, Sir? Are these the words from whence you collect your
Inference? But -- ne saevi, magne Sacerdos: Vi^g^^.
Good Sir have Patience. For suppose the worst, suppose that the Doctor had
hastily let fall from his pen some obscure expression, that might be racked and
tormented by some Tyrant Adversary to make it speak otherwise then he meant;
all the Triumph and Acquest would be only this, That the Doctor was somewhat
unhappy in an expression, and spoke otherwise then he did intend. Errare
possum, haereticus esse nolo. August.
A Lapse this that may speak him Man, and frail, but not haeretical and
dangerous. A Lapse that the best and wisest men are subject to. A Lapse to be
pitied and excused, but not upbraided. For, Sir, I pray deal faithfully. Would
you be contented to be handled thus your self? And are all your own expressions
so clear and happy, that they cannot be warped to another sense then you
intended? If so, then remember that very wholesome good advise, and Whatsoever
ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye to them: for this is the Law
and the Prophets. Matt. 7. 12.
quod tibi fieri non vis alteri ne feceris. The Ael. Lamprid.
Emperor Alex. Severus, no good friend to Christians, so much admired the
Equity and Justice of that saying of our Blessed Savior, that he commanded it
to be frequently inscribed and set upon his Palace walls. If the Doctor had
immediately before so fully and so clearly expressed himself in this
particular, that it is impossible it should be more evident, why then did you
not rather judge his meaning by the Plain, then, like another Delius Natator,
Dive for that in the Obscure, which God knows he never meant?

. 13. There are three very excellent Rules in the Civil Law, which I shall
recommend to our Refuter, for a Use of Instruction, to guide and direct him
better to manage his Uses of Confutation. The first is, Semper in dubiis
benigniora praeferenda sunt, 1. Digest. de Regul. Juris, l. 50. tit. 17. leg.
56. 2. Ibid. leg. 96.
In all doubtful cases the fairest gloss and construction is to be preferred
as the best. The second is, In ambiguis orationibus, maxim sententia spectanda
est ejus qui eas protulisset, That in all ambiguous doubtful speeches, we must
especially regard the meaning and sense of him that delivered them. The 3.
Ibid. leg. 114.
third is, In obscuris inspici solet quod verisimilius est, aut quod plerumque
fieri solet, That in things that are dark and obscure, we must use to regard
that which is the most probable and likely to be true, or that which most
commonly is wont to be done. The reason and equity of them is so great, that
they are universally approved of. For what writing or speech is there in the
world, wherein the obscure and doubtful expressions are not, and in Justice
ought not to be, expounded by the plain? Is not this the course in all Courts
of Judicature in the world? Is it not usual in all Contracts, and familiar in
all Discourses and Disputes? And is it not a ruled case, both in the Pulpit and
the Schools, to unriddle the dark and doubtful intricate places of Scripture
by the more clear and manifest? How else, Sir, would you be able to Answer a
Julian, or a Porphyrie? or make return to a Socinian?

. 14. And shall not the Doctor have so much favor allowed him as to obtain
common Justice? Or shall that be a fault in him which is not so in all other
Writers? It is not only the Fate of Riddles and Oracles to be obscure. 2 Pet.
3. 16.
Saint Paul in his Epistles has many things hard to be understood, as well as
Ezechiel and the Revelation. Words and Language, Sir, are too narrow to express
the notions of the Mind; nor are they always faithful interpreters to others
of those Thoughts they were designed to represent.

. 15. And therefore, Sir, I beseech you to allow this Plea at least for the
Doctor, and if there be in this Paragraph any seeming contradiction to his own
true and proper meaning, and former plain expressions, let the one reconcile
the other; and though you and the Doctor differ in judgment, yet be not so
uncharitable as to make him at variance with himself.

. 16. But this only upon supposal that you have not misquoted the Doctor, and
that he had truly contradicted himself.

. 17. But the truth is, the Doctor needs no such defense. The matter is clear
to any man that will not wilfully mistake. And thus the Case stands. The Doctor
in the former Paragraph had declared his Opinion of Christ's all-full perfect
habit of Divine Love, which he acknowledges was always in him, so full and so
perfect, as not to want, and so not to be capable of further Degrees. And this
he is not only willing to assert, but also to demonstrate. And an Argument he
borrowes from that very Sentence that the Refuter first cavilled at; and it
proceeds a Posteriori, from the Effect to the Cause, thus: If Christ's Love of
God (in the Act and exercise) was capable of Degrees, more intense at one time
then another, and had in its latitude or amplitude several Degrees, one
different from another secundum magis and minus, all of them comprehended in
(because issuing from) the Habit of Divine Love, then this habitual Love of God
must be acknowledged all-full and perfect, always in him so full and so
perfect as not to want, and so not to be capable of further Degrees. But the
Antecedent is true, and therefore also the Consequent. The evidence of the
Sequel is supposed and grounded upon two very known Maxims; Nihil est in
Effectu quod non prius erat in Causa, and, Nihil dat quod non habet. And
therefore if the Acts be the Effect, and the Habit the Cause ( De Habitibus
infusis long diversa* ratio est; nam sine illis non habet potentia ullum
principium intrinsecum, proportionatum propriis actibus talium habituum Suarez.
Metaph. disp. 44. sect. 6.. 14.
especially in all supernatural productions, where the Will can do nothing of
it self, but by the assistance of the supernatural concurrence of the Habit)
whatsoever perfection is to be found in the Acts must also be acknowledged to
have been in the Habit from whence the Act springs. The Assumption he proves
in the 13th. Paragraph, thus: The Degrees of which Christ's Love of God is
capable, are by me thus expressed, That his Love was more intense at one time
(that is in one Act) then at another (in another Act;) but still the higher of
those Degrees of Intenseness was as truly acknowledged to be in Christ's Love at
some time, viz. in his Agony, as the lower was at another, and so all the
Degrees which are supposed to be mentioned of his Love are also supposed, and
expressly affirmed, to have been in him at some time or other. To make this
Discourse more clear and evident, I shall put it into form, and thus prove the
former Assumption. If the higher of these Degrees of Intenseness of which
Christ's Love of God is capable, was (and must be) as truly acknowledged to be
in Christ's Love at some time, viz. in his Agony, as the lower was at another,
then all the Degrees which are to be supposed to be mentioned of his Love are
also supposed, and expressly affirmed, to have been in him at some time or
other, and then by consequence it will follow, as in the former Assumption. But
the Antecedent is true; and therefore also the Consequent. I confess the
Doctors Discourse and manner of arguing is here Crypticall and -- Brevis esse
laboro, Obscurus fio. Horat.
obscure, and his laboring to be brief has made him leave out some words, which
has brought a cloud over his Discourse. But he supposed he writ to a Schoolman,
to whom dark phrases are no strangers. Howsoever I shall endeavor to clear all
by a familiar instance. Suppose I should commend Titius or Sempronius for a
most exquisite Musician, that had the Habit of his Art in its utmost
perfection, and for proof of it should say, he could play at first sight the
hardest Lesson could be set as well as the easiest, and that at such a time he
had actually done the one as well as the other; would not this be an evident
Demonstration of the perfection of this man's skill and Habit? I suppose that
it would; nor can our Refuter doubt of it, if he understand his own Maxim
quoted from Petr. Hurtad. de Mendo. de Anim. disp. 16. sect. 8. p. 672.
Hurtado, and it be true, as he says, that Intensio Actus secundi supponit
aequalem intensionem in Actu primo, cum Actus secundus supponit primum. The
reason is plain, because Vide Suarez. Metaph. tom. 2. disp. 44. sect. 5.. 6.
Quomodo si ab Actionibus fit Habitus, ab ipso Habitu fiunt Actiones? Circularis
enim esset demonstratio in eodem genere causae; quod cum per se fieri nequit in
natura, tum prohibetur ejusdem praeceptionibus. Verum haud ita est; ex Actionum
crebritate, etc Jul. Scaliger ad Cardan. de subtle. exercit. 307. sect. 4. p.
mihi 884. Vide eund. supra ibid. Vide Suarez, Metaph. tom. 2. disp. 44. sect.
6, 7. per tot. and sect. 10. praesertim. 17. and Scheibler. Met. lib. 2. c. 8.
tit. 4: art. 6. punct. 1, 2, 3.
the Habit together with the Will is the principle from whence these Acts flow.
And though there may be some doubt of this Maxim of Hurtado in respect of
Acquired Habits, because these are the effects of Acts, and attained by them;
yet of these Habits that are merely supernatural, and are alone bestowed by
Infusion from God, there can be none, quia illi habitus sunt per se necessarii
ad substantiam actus, and quia ob hanc rationem actus non possunt effective
producere aut intendere illos habitus, as Suarez very acutely.

. 20. Since then that these Acts are the effects of the Habit, and the Habit as
the Principle is only in ordine ad Actus, acquired and infused only in order to
this end, it is generally resolved that as Actus specificantur ab Objectis, so
Habitus specificantur ex habitudine ad Actus; and consequently the best way to
know the nature and perfection of the Habit will be by considering the
perfection of the Act. Nay indeed it is impossible either in regard of the
essence, or gradual intensive or extensive perfection of the Habit, to know it
any other way then by the Acts, except by Revelation. For Tertio loco, potest
ex dictis facile definiri in quo subjecto sunt hujusmodi Habitus. Dicendum est
enim solum esse in viventibus intellectualibus, and proxime tantum esse in
potentiis elicitivis actuum immanentium, and quae rationales sunt, vel aliquo
modo rationem participant, etc. Vid. Suarez. tom 1. Metaph. disp. 44. sect. 1,
2, 3, 4. and Scheibler. Metaph. l. 2. c. 8. tit. 4. art. 3.
Habits being only seated in the Rational Faculties, or those that are some
way partakers of Reason, are not discernible to Sense; and their Acts being all
of them immanent and elicite Acts, must only appear by some outward transient
Acts, and sensible expressions, that have necessary dependence on and connection
with the immanent and elicite Acts of the Rational Powers. And therefore the
resolution of Suarez Suarez. Metaph. tom. 2. disp. 43. sect 1.. 4.
even in this sense is most true: Quod ergo hujusmodi Habitus sint, a nobis
solum cognosci potest ex Actibus, quatenus aliquam facilitatem and consequenter
novam aliquam facultatem in operando relinquunt. And if this be true of all
acquisite Habits, it must be much more true of those that are per se infusi.
Because these, quatenus per se supponuntur ad actus ut connaturali modo fiant,
magis censentur habere rationem potentiarum quam habituum, as the same Suarez
does in that place very rationally determine.

. 21. He then that will assert a Perfection and all-full height of any Habit,
especially in those that are infused, to be in any Subject, he cannot possibly
prove his assertion (unless by Revelation, and extrinsecal Arguments drawn from
Authority, firm indeed, but inevident) except by instancing in the several Acts
that must demonstrate the in-being, and Capacity, and Perfection of the Habit.
He must suppose that if the Habit be in that Subject in all Perfection, that it
is a Quality whole essence consists in a latitude, and consequently has in its
latitude or amplitude (as the Doctor very Metaphysically) several Degrees, one
differing from another secundum magis and minus, all of them comprehended in
the Habit supposed to be all-perfect. For if it were a form absolutely
indivisible, it could not possibly be capable of gradual perfection. And now
when the Latitude of the form is supposed, he cannot prove that this form is
inexistent in it is utmost Latitude, but by instancing in the several Acts
gradually differing in Perfection one from another that flow from this Habit,
as the Doctor has done. And therefore says Saint James James 2. 18.
upon this very Principle of Reason, Yea, a man may say, Thou have faith, and I
have works: show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith
by my works. In vain it is for a man to pretend to have the Habit of Faith or
any other Grace, unless he can demonstrate it to them by the Acts, and works,
and fruits, and Effects of it. For as the same Saint James, James 2. 14.
What does it profit, my brethren, (does it any ways advantage him? is he
either the better man in himself, or the opinion of others?) though a man say
he have faith, and have not works?

. 22. Though then a supposed capacity of further Degrees seems at least (and is
so resolved by this Refuter) to infer that these Degrees were not in Christ;
yet the Proposition which the Doctor confesses is not illogically inferred from
his words (viz. That Christ's Love of God was capable of Degrees, more intense
at one time then at another) is a Proposition necessary to be supposed by any
man that by true and natural Medium's would prove the full Perfection of
Christ's habitual Grace, viz. by the fruits and effects and Acts of it, which is
the only rational way of proof. And therefore the Doctor in this Discourse is
so far from any direct or consequential denial of the Fullness of habitual
Grace in Christ, that he has taken the best way to demonstrate it. And strange
it is that our Refuter should be such an unhappy Disputant, as to draw from the
Doctors Principles the direct contrary Proposition to that which the Doctor
inferred from them, and labors to prove by them.

. 23. And therefore, good Sir, I beseech you tell us where the Doctor has let
fall the Assumption wherewith you charge him. In what place has he said that
Christ's Love of God was more intense in his Agony then before? Let us have you
prove the Crimination, otherwise I assure you the Boldness will be
unpardonable, although (as you somewhat insolently say) you shall assume the
liberty to fix it on him, and the shame must light on you, since you cannot
make good your Charge.

. 24. It is true indeed, the Doctor says that Christ's Love was more intense at
one time then at another, viz. in his Agony and dying for us more intense then
in his suffering Nakedness and Hunger for us.

. 25. And does not the Apostle tell us the same, when he says, Phil. 2. 6, 7,
8, 9.
That he being in the form of God, though he thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, yet made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of man, and being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross; wherefore God also has highly exalted him? His birth his life, his
death, were all Acts you see of Divine Love or holy Charity: but the greater,
the lower still the Humiliation; the more intense, the more high, the more
noble Act of Divine Charity, both in respect of God and us. And therefore God
also has proportioned his exaltation in the humane Nature to his a basement and
sufferings, and given him the (...), and (...), 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
People he had so dearly purchased, and advanced his Name to that height, that
it should transcend every name besides, and that every tongue should confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.

. 26. But then the Habit of Divine Love or holy Charity in Christ, as of all
other graces else, was always There is no doubt but the Deity of Christ has
enabled the nature which it took of man to do more then man in this world has
power to comprehend, forasmuch as (the bare essential Properties excepted) he
has imparted to it all things: he has replenished it with all such
Perfections as the same is any ways apt to receive, at least according to the
exigence of that economy or service for which it pleased him in love to be
made Man (Luke 2. 47.) For as the parts, degrees and Offices of that mysterial
administration did require which he voluntarily undertook, the Beams of Deity
did in operatione always accordingly either restrain or enlarge themselves
(vid. Theodoret. and Iren. l. 3. advers. haeres.) From whence we may somewhat
conjecture, how the Powers of the Soul are illuminated, which being so inward
unto God, cannot choose but be privy unto all things which God works, and must
therefore of necessity be endued with knowledge so far forth universal (vid.
Col. 2. 3.) though not with infinite knowledge peculiar to Deity it self. The
Soul of Christ, that saw in this life the face of God, was here through so
visible presence of Deity filled with all manner of Graces and Virtues in that
immatchable perfection, for which of him we read it written, that God with the
oil of gladness anointed him above his fellows. Vid. Esai. 1. 2. Luc. 4. 18.
Act. 4. 27. Heb. 1. 9. 2 Cor. 1. 21. Ioh. 2. 20, 27. Hookers Eccles. Policy,
lib. 5.. 54. p. 298. Vid. Field of the Church, l. 5. cap. 15. who from the
Schoolmen has most judiciously and profoundly stated this question of the
fullness of all Habitual Grace in Christ.
full and perfect, so full and so perfect, that it was not in him capable of
any further addition, without any possibility of want or increase. And so it
must be acknowledged by all Christians, when the Apostle tells us Coloss. 2. 9.
that in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. For it pleased the
Father that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1. 19. So acknowledged it
must be by all Christians, when the Evangelist. Jo. 1. 14. expressly asserts
that the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the
glory as of the only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth; and that
of his fullness we have all received, and that Grace for Grace, Verse. 16.
Habitually so full he was, that as the same Saint John assures us, c. 3. 34.
God gives not the Spirit by measure to him.

. 27. Most certain it is (say the Quod qudem elogium ipse Christus ante suum in
Coelos ascensu^ sibi tribuit, nor quod rem encomio isto notatam tunc revera
possidebat, cum nondum in Regni sui gloriam ingressus esset, sed quia certo,
idque mox, futurum erat, ut in Imperii istius possessionem constitue retur,
etc. Volkel. de vera Relig. l. 3. c. 21. ubi late illud prosequitur.
Quemadmodum ad ipsius Regnum viam quandam ei (mors ejus) aperiebat, ideoque
nondum plane regnare tunc, cum mortem pateretur, dici potuit: ita cum illius
Sacerdotium idem fere reipsa sit quod ejusdem Regnum, eandem mortem principium
seu praeparationem quandam istius Sacerdotii in coelo demum administrandi
extitisse, etc. Vid. Volkel. de vera Relig. li. 3. c. 37. page 145. ubi late
illud prosequitur.
Socinian what he will to the contrary, and it might be very largely
demonstrated, were it not eccentrical to the present Dispute) that Christ was
always Christ, as well so in the womb, as at the right hand of God. For
otherwise Elizabeth had never called Mary the (...); Luc. 1. 43.
Mother of her Lord, before he was yet born. Nor had the Angels said unto the
Shepherds at his birth, Behold I bring you tidings of great joy which shall be
to all people: for unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior,
which is (not, as the Quae vero ipsius Regni ratio est? Ea, quod Deus eum
suscitatum a mortuis and in coelos assumptum a dextris suis collocavit, ei
potestate in coelis and in terra omni data, and omnibus ipsius pedibus, se
excepto, subjectis, ut fideles suos gubernare, tueri, and aeternum servare
posset. Catechis. Racoviens. de offic. Christ. Reg. page 275.

Quid? an non erat sacerdos antequam in coelos ascenderet, and praesertim
crucifixus penderet? Non erat, etc. Ibid. de offic. Christ. Sacerdot. page 291.


Socinian perversely, which shall be after his ascension, and session at the
right hand of God; but (...) which is) Christ the Lord. Impossible it is he
should be otherwise, since he was God as well as Man from the first moment of
Conception. And therefore it was resolved justly against the Heretic
Nestorius, that his Blessed Virgin Mother was truly (...) the Mother of God.

. 28. Whosoever then he be that against Arrius, Photinus, and Socinus,
acknowledges the Divinity of our Savior (and he is no true Christian that does
not) must also ex consequenti acknowledge that the Manhood of our Savior now
anointed all over with the Godhead, was by virtue of the Hypostatical Union
full of grace and truth, not as a Vessel, but the Ocean, and the fountain of
living waters. For as God gave not the Spirit by measure to him, so when the
Word was made flesh, so full he was, that, as the Evangelist expressly, of his
fullness we have all received, and that Grace for Grace. All the Graces that we
have, either for kind or degrees, do all flow from his Fullness, as all Springs
and Rivers take their beginnings from the Ocean. And a perfection this is that
Vid. Aquin. 3. part. q. 7. art. 12, 13. Suarez. tom. 1. in 3 am. part. Thom.
disp. 22. sect. 1, and 2. per tot.
de congruo flows from the Personal Union and assuming of the Manhood into
God. It was not fit that he, who was all infinitely Perfect as God, should have
any thing of Perfection wanting in him as Man, so far forth as a finite Nature
was capable, and the present state and condition of that Office he had
undertaken to perform and execute in the days of his Flesh did admit.

. 29. But then let me add, for the further clearing of this debate, that

. 30. Though the Habit of Divine Charity in Christ, concretively considered,
and as supernaturally subjected in the Will of that man who was truly (...),
was by reason of the Hypostatical Union, though not infinite, yet incapable of
addition; though from the first moment of Conception it was in him in all
fullness, so as to be incapable of increase; yet precisely and abstractly
considered, this, as all other Habits, was capable of Intension and Remission:
as de facto we find it true in the same ( Dicendum, quod, sicut supra dictum
est, (art. 3. hujus) quando imperfectio alicujus rei non est de ratione speciei
ipsius, nihil prohibet idem Numero, quod prius fuit imperfectum, postea
perfectum esse, sicut homo per augmentum perficitur, and albedo per
intensionem. Charitas autem est amor de cujus ratione non est aliqua
imperfectio: potest enim esse and habiti and non habiti, and visi and non visi.
Vnde Charitas non evacuatur per gloriae perfectionem, sed Eadem numero manet.
Aquin. 1. 2. q. 67. art. 6. in corp.

Charitas quidem ex part est, ut saepe Sancti docent, quia ex part diligimus
nunc: and ideo ipsa evacuabitur in quantum ex part est, quia tolletur
imperfectio, and addetur perfectio; remanebitque ipsa aucta, and actus ejus and
modus diligendi. P. Lombard. 3. Sent. d. 31. lit. C. Vid. Scot. ibid. q. 1. n.
7, 8. Durand. ibid. q. 60. in corp. Aquin. alios ibid.


) numerical Habit of divine Charity in respect of the same Saint in patria, (
Deus quanto perfectius cognoscitur, tanto perfectius amatur. Aquin. 1. 2. q.
67. art. 6. ad. 3 am. -- Ignotinulla cupido.
) more intense then formerly in via, where we can love but in part, because we
know but in part, and our Love of necessity must bear proportion to our
Knowledge. And therefore it was wholly accidental to the Habit of Divine Grace
in Christ, that it should be thus in that superlative height conferred upon the
Manhood of Christ in the first moment of Conception, so that in that nature it
was now incapable of increase, even according to the ordinary power of God
himself. ( Ad Secundum dicendum, quod virtus Divina, licet possit facere
aliquid majus and melius quam sit habitualis Gratia Christi, non tamen posset
facere quod ordinaretur ad aliquid majus quam sit Personalis Vnio ad Filium
unigenitum; cum Vnioni sufficienter correspondet talis mensura Gratiae secundum
definitionem Divinae sapientiae. Aquin. q. 7. art. 12. ad 2 am. Potuisset
quidem D. Thomas clarius dicere, argumentum concludere posse, illi Gratiae
fieri additionem in gradibus intensionis de potentia absoluta, non tamen de
ordinaria: hoc tamen significavit illis verbis, ut utriusque partis rationem
attingeret. Ideo enim de potentia absoluta posset augeri seu intendi, quia
nullam involvit repugnantiam aut contradictionem, magis quam quod finita
quantitas secundum se and Mathematice considerata augeatur: tamen, quia ex
ordinatione Divina Gratia illa quasi coaptata est gratiae Vnionis, and non
potest ad altiorem ordinari, ad illum vero sufficit quantitas gratiae quae ex
dispositione Divinae Sapientiae Christo data est, ut in solutione ad secundum
aperte dicit D. Thomas, ideo sub hac consideratione haec Gratia habet rationem
connaturalis formae, and ideo augeri non potest secundum potentiam ordinariam,
ut dictum est. Suarez. tom. 1. in 3m. partem Thomae, q. 7. art. 3. in
Commentar. ad loc. supracitat. p. 315. B. C.
) This height and perfection sprang not at all from the nature of the Habit,
but only from Gods will, and the congruity between the Person and that fullness
of Grace on which it was bestowed. God that has thus heaped it in all fullness
on the Manhood of our Savior, might ( Vid. Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. tom. 1
disp. 18: sect. 4. p. 292. col. 2. and 293. col. 1. Vid. ibid. in commentar. ad
q. 7. art. 1. p. 284. col. 2. b. and ibid. sect. 1. p. 287. col. 1, 2. Amesii
Bellarm. Enervat. l. 2. c. 1. these. 1.. 6. and Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. tom.
1. disp. 38. sect. 4. p. 528. col. 2. E.
) at least de potentia absoluta by degrees have conferred it on the Manhood,
notwithstanding the Personal Union: and the Godhead in the Person of Christ
might gradually have communicated the sight and comfortable influence of the
Divine Nature to the superior faculties of the Soul (wherein, as shall be
showed in due place, he was always Comprehensor) as it did de facto
communicate it to the inferior faculties (in which regard in the days of his
flesh he was viator.) Now Suarez himself resolves that, quanquam Christi Gratia
fuerit tam intensa, ut juxta ordinem Divinae Potentiae nulla intensior esse
potuerit, de Potentia tamen Dei absoluta potuisse fieri intensiorem, tam in
ipsa anima Christi, quam in Angelo, vel in alia anima. And he has great Reason
and Authority on his side. Vid. Suarez. in tert. part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 22.
sect. 2. p. 322. col. 1. F, etc.

. 31. And this Habitual Grace of Divine Love is so often acknowledged by the
Doctor to be all-full and perfect in Christ, nay to be always in Christ so
full and so perfect as not to want, and so not to be capable of further
Degrees, nay so clearly acknowledged it is by the Doctor in this very
Paragraph, from whence the Refuter draws his Charge, that he acknowledges the
but seeming asserting of that want is justly censured as prejudicial to Christ's
fullness, that I cannot but wonder at the strange boldness of the man, that
though he says he would assume that liberty, yet for all that he durst lay
that to the Doctors charge which he had so clearly, so expressly, so frequently
disclaimed. But my wonder must cease, when I consider that from a
Country-Lecturer he is arrived to be a writer of Scholastical and practical
Divinity: since he has attained to the Philosophers stone in Theology, and (as
himself in effect tells us in this Pamphlet) he has all the Schoolmen at his
fingers end, nay just as many, no more nor no less, then are in Paul's
Churchyard and the Library at Oxford, he may now conclude quidlibet ex
quolibet, and by his Almighty tincture make an Ingot of a Brass Andiron.

. 32. And therefore, Sir, I must again renew my request, and desire you in good
earnest to tell us where the Doctor does say, that Christ's Love of God was
more intense in his Agony then before. I would you had as carefully observed,
as you profess you shall readily hearken to, the Doctors seasonable
Advertisement, that he which undertakes to refute any saying of another, must
oblige himself to an exact recital of it to a word and syllable. I have
carefully read over the whole Section, and do not find the very word (before)
in it: And yet let me tell you, Sir, that this word (before) is the only
serviceable word, that in probability might seem to infer that Conclusion which
you lay to the Doctors charge. For he that says that Christ's Love was more
intense in his Agony then before, does seem to imply that his Love did receive
addition and growth in his Agony. But this the Doctor says not, nay he
frequently and clearly even in this Section disclaimes it. This is only your
addition, and a second misadventure in your proceedings. You had formerly added
the word (further) to the Doctors expression, and now you will again assume the
liberty to add another word (before) to it, that must conclude the Doctor to
mean and speak what he never thought or intended. Sir, you are a bold man
indeed. But this is only to cudgel a Jack-of-Lent of your own making. And if
you make a quarrel, and destroy the shadow of the Lion which your self have
cast, how can you choose, Sir, but deserve the Laurel, and be cried up for a
Conqueror?

. 33. But perhaps (now he is called upon for it so earnestly) he will prove his
Assumption also by Consequence (for he is an excellent Sequele-man) thus;
Whosoever asserts that Christ's Love of God was more intense at one time then
another, viz. in his Agony more intense then in his suffering hunger for us,
does by consequence assert that Christ's Love of God was more intense in his
Agony then it was before: But the Doctor asserts the Antecedent: Ergo.

. 34. Hold you there, Sir; your Major I deny, and there is no connection and
consequence at all in it. For though he that says, Christ's Love was more
intense in his Agony then it was at another time in another Act, suppose of
suffering hunger for us, acknowledges a gradual difference in respect of the
intension of these two several Acts; yet he does not acknowledge a gradual
heightning or increase of any one of them. For it is not with the intension of
these Acts and Qualities that are the issues of the Will, as it is with those
that are the fruits and effects of Natural Agents. The Will here being a free
and voluntary Agent, may and does Voluntas nostra subito prorumpere potest in
ferventem and intensum actum amoris, etc. Suarez. tom. 2 Metaph. disp. 46.
sect. 3.. 15. Si agens sit liberum, potest pro sua liberate applicare vim suam
ad magis vel minus agendum. Suarez. ibid. sect. 4.. 14.
act how and when it pleases. It may instantly produce the most fervent, as
well as it does a less intense Act; or it may heighten the gradual Perfection
of the Act by degrees and successively. But then Vid. Suarez. Metaph. tom. 1.
disp. 46. sect. 3.
Natural Agents, by reason of the distance of the Agent from the Passum, or the
resistance of some contrary Quality to be expelled, or the weakness of their
own virtue, must of necessity intend the Quality successively, and the higher
degree cannot be produced before the lower have been first attained. And
therefore though one of these Acts in comparison of another is more intense,
yet neither of them is therefore said to be formally heightened and intended,
because being the free issues of the Will, they might be produced severally in
the same indivisible degree of height wherein they after continued; and
consequently here is no asserting that Christ's Love in his Agony was more
intended (as that signifies a gradual heightning of the same numerical form or
Quality) then it was before. Add to this, that he who says that Christ's Love
was more intense in his Agony then in his suffering hunger for us, does not by
Consequence assert that his Love was now more intense then it was before, but
only compare two Acts together; and notwithstanding this comparison, he may yet
further assert, that Christ's Love of God was more intense before his Agony then
in it, though in his Agony it was more intense then in his suffering hunger for
us, to wit, in that Act of his Love which was immediately terminated in God
himself, and in which Act of Divine Love all the rest were radicated and
planted. And indeed of necessity it must be so supposed. For though he loved us
men, and for our Salvation came down from Heaven, and was incarnate and made
Man, and lived and dyed for us; yet every step and degree of this Love, every
one single Act, wholly issued from this high transcendent Act of Divine Love
the most superlative of all, and still he loved us for Gods sake. Heb 10. 5, 6,
7, 12.
Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared me. In burnt-offerings and
sacrifices for sin thou had no pleasure. Then said I, Lo, I come (in the
volume of the Book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God, -- By the which
will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus once for all.
And therefore he says to his Disciples that were troubled when he foretold of
his death (Joh. 14. 31.) But that the world may know that I love the Father,
and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I do. Though then his Love of
God in his Agony and Death was the highest Act of Charity to us men; yet this,
as all the rest, was rooted in that higher Act of Love to his Father, because
they all issued from it, and in every Act though he loved us, yet it was only
for Gods sake.

. 35. But yet (to make our Refuter's Discourse as strong as he can desire) I
shall for the present suppose that the Doct. had positively and in terms
terminant affirmed, that Christ's Love of God was more intense in his Agony then
before; what then will be the issue? will it then appear that he does the
Doctor no wrong? and that he is able to infer his Conclusion against him?
Certainly not. For now the Major will be proved altogether as inconsequent as
the Assumption has already been evidenced to be false. It is this, He that
says that Christ's Love of God was more intense in his Agony then before,
affirms that his Love of God before his Agony was capable of further Degrees
then yet it had. But, etc. Ergo, etc. The whole strength and force of it does
depend and rest upon this only Supposition, That any gradual heightning in the
Acts of Christ's Love must of necessity infer a gradual heightning in the Habit.
But this is most notoriously false. For the Acts of Love in Christ, howsoever
heightened and advanced, can never possibly increase the Habit.

. 36. For first, Habitus infusi non producuntur, neque augentur, effective per
proprios Actus, etiam in proprio Subjecto. Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. tom. 1. q.
13. disp. 31. page 416. col. 2. 4.

Neque Habitus operativi -- ut charitas and aliae virtutes infusae, possunt per
se producere sibi similes. Et ratio reddi potest, quia haec est communis ratio
Habitus operativi, ut scil. non est productivus alterius Habitus, sed solum
actuum. Vel certe dici potest, Gratiam esse eminentem quandam participationem
Divinae naturae, quae propterea postulat ut solum per influxum Divinitatis
natura sua participari possit, and ideo non est qualitas activa sui similis,
sed a solo Deo, ut a principali causa, producibilis. Suarez. ibid. col. 1. D, E.


Infused Habits (such as this) as they cannot be produced, so neither can they
physically and effectively be augmented, by any Acts, or humane endeavors, as
already it has been proved.

Dicunt aliqui, Christum Dominum per Actus virtutum quos exercebat acquisivisse
augmentum harum virtutum: sed hoc nec vere nec satis considerate dictum est,
nam rations quae probant habuisse Christum hos Habitus a principio, probant
similiter habuisse illos in gradu Heroico, ut hic dixit D. Thomas; vel, ut
clarius dicamus, habuisse in sua summa perfectione, quam habere possunt vel
secundum legem Dei ordinariam, vel secundum naturalem capacitatem and
facultatem hominis, cui hi Habitus and eorum actus accommodantur; vel denique
in summa perfectione quam in ipso Christo unquam habituri erant.
Secondly, When any Habit already is in the utmost height that the Subject is
capable of, no Acts, howsoever gradually intense, can possibly increase it. Now
it is supposed on both hands that the Habit of Grace and holy Charity in Christ
was already in him in all fullness in gradu heroico, as Aquinas calls it.

Concedo ergo per hos Actus, neque Habitus neque augmentum eorundem Christum
acquisivisse, quia Actus non intendit Habitum, nisi sit intensior illo:
Christus autem a Principio habuit Habitus vel magis vel aeque intensos quam
futuri essent Actus. Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. tom 1. q. 7. art. 3. disp. 19.
sect. 2. p. 300. col. 1. C, D, E, F. Aquin. 3. part. q. 7. art. 2. and Suarez.
commentar in loc.

Actus nullo modo augent Habitum jam sibi aequalem. Vid. Suarez. Metaph. tom.
2. disp. 44. sect. 10.. 14, 15, 16, 17.

Habitus sicut generatur per Actus, ita etiam intenditur: non intenditur autem
nisi per Actus intensiores, ut infra dicemus. Suarez. ibid. sect. 6.. 2. page
431. col. 1. Vide etiam ibid.. 5.


Thirdly, No Acts can possibly intend even an Acquisite Habit, unless they be
more gradually perfect then the habit supposed to be intended by it. But in
this present case, the Habit is not acquired, but infused, and all the Acts,
howsoever heightened or intended, must also be acknowledged to issue and flow
from it. And consequently since the Effect cannot be more noble then the Cause,
they can never advance the Habit, or make it gradually more intense then
formerly it was. But of this again in due place.

. 37. But then fourthly, If there were any truth, any Consequence in this
Major, it will directly strike against the Scriptures, as well as Doctor
Hammond. For do not they every where magnify this last Act of Christ's Love
manifested in his dying for us, as the most transcendent and superlative, and
which is not to be parallelled amongst all his other acts of Love toward us?
Joh. 15. 13. Vide Maldonat. Jansen. and alios in loc.
Greater Love, says our Savior, has no man then this, that a man lay down his
life for his friends. And the Apostle, in Saint Tu majorem habuisti, Domine,
ponens eam etiam pro inimicis. Bernard. sermon. Fer. 4ta hebdom. sanctae. Romans 5.
10.
Bernards opinion, seems to go higher: for when we were enemies we were
reconciled unto God by the death of his Son. And again, Romans 5. v. 6, 7, 8.
For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ dyed for the
ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man will one dye; yet peradventure for a
good man some would even dare to die. But God (and Christ, let me add, for
Esaias 53. 7.
oblatus est quia ipse voluit) commends his Love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners Christ dyed for us. Well then might Saint John cry out in
Contemplation of this Love, Ecce quanta Charitas! 1 John 3. 1.
Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us! And again, Jo. 3.
16.
Sic dilexit, So God loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son. And
again, 1 Jo. 4. 9, 10.
In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his
only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is
Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. This, this was Love; the height and commendation,
and full manifesting of it. His Birth, his Life, his Doctrine and Miracles, his
suffering Hunger and Nakedness and Poverty for our sakes, were all high Acts of
Love. But hereby, as Saint John speaks, 1 John 3. 16.
perceive we the Love of God, because he laid down his life for us. And
therefore the Apostle, in the place formerly insisted on, to express the
Super-excellency of this Act above the rest, tells us, Phil. 2. 8.
That he humbled himself to death, even the death of the Cross.

. 38. And now I shall desire our Refuter to sit down, and sadly consider what
will become of his Consequence: If neither the Proposition nor Assumption can
be true, how then will he be able to infer his Conclusion against the Doctor?

. 39. Indeed he had said somewhat to the purpose, if this Habit of holy Love in
our Savior had been determined in its Operations to one equal uniform degree
and height, as natural forms are. Vid. Burgersdic. Log. l. 1. ca. 17. theor.
10, 11, 12, 13.
For these working by a necessity of nature to the utmost of their strength,
therefore always work the same, unless they be by some Accident hindered. And
consequently any variation in the Effect must argue a proportionable increase
or abatement of the natural virtue and efficacy of the Form, that is the Agent.
But here the case is far otherwise: For this Grace of holy Charity in Christ
being a Moral Habit, as our Refuter does and must acknowledge, and so
supernaturally seated in the humane Will of our Savior, must of necessity
partake of the nature of the Will, wherein it is subjected, and still Vid.
Suarez. Metaph. tom. 1. disp. 44. sect. 6.. 6, 7, etc.
concurring effectively with the Will to the production of the Act, it must
continue still free, as the Will it self is, which it qualifies and
modificates. Relinquitur ergo, non posse Habitum juvare aut facilitare
potentiam ad Actum, nisi augendo virtutem per se effectivam talis actus, etc.
Suarez. Metaph. ibid.. 10.

Actiones quae parto jam fiunt Habita, non ab ipso Habitu, tanquam ab
efficiente, oriuntur, sed ab eadem voluntate. Habitus autem ille quasi forma
quaedam est illarum Actionum, etc. Jul. Sca. lig. de Subtle. exercit. 307.. 4.
page 884.

Potentia and Habitus convenient ad effective causandum Actum, sicut unum
perfectum principium, ita quod ambosimul non differunt ab uno, sicut
imperfectum differt a seipso perfecto. Cajetan. in 1. 2. q. 49. art. 3.


Advance and heighten indeed it does the power and efficacy of the Will to the
performance of those Acts which of it self it is unable to perform: but then
the Will thus assisted by the Habit, continues still a free Agent, not
destroyed in its nature and working, but perfected.

. 40. If it shall be here replied, that the Saints and Angels in heaven love
God freely, and yet love him necessarily too, and quoad ultimum virium;

. 41. I readily grant it in the sense that Causa libera est quae consulto
causat; necessaria, quae non consulto, sed necessitate naturae causat -- Cum
voluntas libera dicitur, cumque causa libera causae necessariae opponitur,
Libertatis nomine nihil aliud intelligitur quam immunitas a coactione, and a
necessitate ac determinatione naturali. Burgersdic. Log. l. 1. c. 17. Theor.
10, 11.

Dico secundo, hanc libertatem voluntatis humanae Christi non solum
intelligendam esse oppositam coactioni, sed etiam necessitati, atque adeo
includere indifferentiam aliquam, seu potestatem operandi and non operandi. Non
est sensus, Christum in omnibus actibus suae voluntaris habuisse hanc
indifferentiam, non enim est hoc necessarium; nam Deum clare visum necessario
amabat and necessario illo fruebatur, sicut alii Beati: sed sensus est,
habuisse Christum libertatem in aliquibus actibus, etc. Suarez in 3. part.
Thom. q. 18. art. 4. disp. 37. sect. 1. page 512. Vid. eund. ibid. disp. 39.
sect. 2. per tot.


Freedom is improperly taken for a liberty from Coaction. And withal I
acknowledge it most true of the prime Act of Divine Love in Christ immediately
terminated on God, clearly seen and enjoyed, as Comprehensor in the superior
faculties of his Soul, he always loved God freely, and yet necessarily; and
because he could not choose but love God the greatest good, whom always he most
perfectly knew, he could not choose but love him in the height, and utmost
Perfection. But then withal I must add, that this is nothing to the purpose.
For it was an Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Esaias 53. 10.
Act of pure Love and Choice in Christ to be born and dye for us. And therefore
he loved us not of necessity, but freely, and he loved us as he himself best
thought fit. And therefore every Act of Joh. 10. 18. Non necessitate sed
voluntate crucem subiit. Hieron. in Isai. 53. Omni necessitate calcata, cum
voluit mortem sponte suscepit. Gregor. lib. 24. Moral. c. 2. Vid. Suarez. tom.
1. in 3. part. Thom. disput. 37. sect. 2. page 511, 512.
this Love respecting us must be commensurate to his own good will and
pleasure. And being all-wise, as well as all-good, he loved us in every several
Act proportionably to that which his own Wisdom thought fit. Every Act of this
Love being purely voluntary, though it was not equally intense, yet so high and
fervent it was, that it was not any way disproportioned to the present end and
occasion.

. 42. By this it evidently appears (that I may make some reflections on the
second Paragraph) how much of Charity there was in our Refuters adding, not
supplying, the word (farther) to the Doctors Discourse. If these be his
mistakes of Charity, to pervert an Adversaries saying to a contrary sense, and
that very erroneous, I wonder what is his Malice. The addition indeed might be
very pertinent to the matter that himself had then in hand, which was to
calumniate the Doctor, but it concerned not at all the business and scope of
the Treatise of Will Worship. For what though the Doctor in that Treatise had
undertaken to prove that those large inclusive words, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, with all thy Soul, etc. do not always pro hic and
nunc, (as they speak) oblige us in every single Act of Divine Charity to the
most intense and high degree, but only to that sincerity and fervor as the
present occasion does require? will you thence conclude it to be the Doctors
meaning, that a man may fulfill that command, though he loves not God with all
his heart? If you do, Sir, you are very uncharitable and irrational, as might
easily be demonstrated. But I am loath to run into an unnecessary Digression,
and therefore I shall reserve the full clearing of the sense of this
Commandment to its proper place. For this Refuter will anon give occasion to
prosecute it at large, according to those true and solid grounds that the
Doctor has already laid.

. 43. I shall only add, to preclude all subterfuges and captious advantages
that may arise from general and undistinguished and ambiguous terms, that the
Acts of holy Charity or the Love of God are of two sorts. 1. Those that are
immediately terminated on God the only good; 2. those that are immediately
terminated on us men for Gods sake, in whose Love, as the Prime Act, they are
all radicated and founded. The one the Schools call Charitas ut finis, the
other they call Charitas propter finem.

. 44. Now though there be a gradual difference in the tendency of these Acts to
the Object of Love; yet, because the divine goodness, though unequally
communicated, is one and the same, and the formal Object of both, Licet
charitas sit una virtus, habet tamen duos Actus, quorum unus ordinatur ad alium
sicut ad finem. Aquin: 2. 2. q. 44. ad 1.

In Dilectione proximi includitur Dilectio Dei, sicut finis in eo quod est ad
finem, and e converso. ibid. ad 4m.

Cum Habitus dicitur specificari per Actus, id intelligendum est cum
proportione. Triplex enim modus Habitus ex dictis colligi potest, etc. -- Alius
est qui in esse est etiam simplex qualitas, virtualiter autem seu in agendo est
multiplex; quia est potens ad plures Actus ita inter se connexos, ut in ordine
ad idem ac indivisibile objectum formale necessariam connexionem inter se
habeant, and in aliquo primario Actu quodammodo radicantur: and ideo talis
Habitus dici potest specificari ab illo primario actu in quo alii radicantur,
ut habitus, verbi gratia, Charitatis and Amoris Dei. Suarez. Met. tom. 2. disp.
44. sect. 11.. 70.

Habitus Voluntatis tendunt ad prosequendum aliquod bonum: omnis autem
prosecutio boni est ex aliquo motivo, seu ex aliqua ratione bonitatis, quae
Voluntatem attrahit. Hoc ergo motivum, seu ratio tendendi, est, absque dubio,
quae dat Actui specificationem -- quia semper id quod est formale, est quod dat
speciem -- Contingit unam and eandem rationem tendendi non aeque applicari
diversis materiis, and ideo non eodem modo attingi per Actus; ut est, v. g.
Bonitas Divina, quatenus est in Deo, and reddit illum amabilem, and quatenus
per quendam respectum applicatur proximo, ut illum etiam amabilem reddat. Nam
licet illa Bonitas in se una sit, non tamen illis rebus aeque convenit, and
ideo modus tendendi in illam non est idem. -- Tunc vero licet inter eos actus
sit aliqua diversitas, est tamen quaedam necessaria connexio. Quia Actus qui
versantur circa Objectum intrinsece and per se habens rationem illam, est radix
aliorum, and virtute continens illos, ut Amor Dei amorem Proximi, etc. Suarez.
ibid.. 30, 31.


it is generally resolved, that the Habit whence they issue is but one simple
Quality; and the Acts that flow from it are called by the same name, the Love
of God, or holy Charity.

. 45. Though then the Acts of Christ's Love, as immediately terminated on God,
were always at the height and one equal perfection (as was never yet
questioned or denied by the Doctor;) yet this nothing hinders but that the
other Acts of this Love (of which alone the Doctor speaks) regarding us for
Gods sake, might consist in a latitude, and gradually differ from one another,
and fall short of the fervor of those Acts that immediately respected God, as
has already in some part appeared, and shall further in due place be evidenced.

. 46. And therefore this Proposition, Christ's Love of God was capable of
Degrees, which the Doctor (in the sense already given of the phrase, the Love
of God) confesses to be not illogically inferred from his Paper, will
sufficiently reach the point he had in hand, without your understanding the
word farther. For though one Act of Divine Love may in comparison of another be
more intense; yet nothing hinders but both may equally flow (I say aeque,
though not aequaliter) from one and the same all-full habit of Charity, that is
free as the Will is, and indetermined in its Acts and Operations.

. 47. And therefore all the world will acknowledge, Sir, the Doctors censure of
your adding, not supplying, the word (farther,) as a misadventure in your
proceeding, to be just, and not groundless.

. 48. And now, Sir, because I find you a man of such unprosperous undertakings,
let me advise you for the future, that if you shall assume the liberty to
charge the Doctor with Consequences, as you boldly profess you shall, that you
do it purely from his own words, without any additions or alterations of your
own framing. For otherwise you your self, as the Doctor tells you, will be the
only author of the Proposition you undertake to refute. And since by such
unhappy Arts you will never be able to make good your Charge, the shame will
not only light, as you acknowledge, but also fix and dwell upon you; where I
leave it for the present, and hasten to the next Section.

SECTION. 6.
The Refuter acknowledges his own ignorance of a generally received Opinion.
Love a Genus to the Habit and the Act. Proved for the Refuters instruction. His
charging his Ignorance on Aristotle. Aristotle his Master, why? vainly quoted.
He speaks not to the present Controversy. The Assumption only denied.

. 1. THough we have already shaken the very foundations of our Refuters
Discourse, yet the Doctor tells us,

Doctor HAMMOND.
14. BUt this is but the Proemial part of my Reply; there is a more Material
part of it still behind, which may yet seem necessary to be added, viz. to mind
him of (what he well knows) the distinction between Habits and Acts of Virtues
or Graces; and that Love as the Genus does equally comprehend both these
Species; and that his Discourse of All-fulness belonging to the Habitual Grace
of Christ, I speak distinctly of another matter, viz. of the Degrees of that
Grace discernible in the several Acts of it.

. 2. To this our Refuter replies, with a very unfavoury and immodest
acknowledgement of his own Ignorance, which he charges upon Aristotle, as if he
had been the sole Author of it.

JEANES.
THe distinction between the Habits and Acts of Virtues or Graces I very well
know; but that Love as a Genus does equally comprehend the Habit and Act of
Love, is a thing which I confess that I am yet to learn, and if it be a matter
of Ignorance in me, you must blame my Master Aristotle, for he has misguided
me herein. He tells me, lib. 1. top. c. 15. n. 11. that if a word be
praedicated of things put in several praedicaments, that then it is homonymous
in regard of them. (...). Now the Habit of Love is in the Praedicament of
Quality, the Act of Love in the Praedicament of Action: and hereupon I cannot
but conclude that the Praedication of Love concerning the Habit and the Act is
only aequivocal, and consequently Love no Genus to them. No Genus can equally
comprehend those things which do differ to to genere, and are therefore termed
primo diversa rather then differentia: but now such are the Habits and the Acts
of the Love of God; and therefore Love as a Genus does not equally comprehend
them as its Species.

. 3. But how is this, Sir? Are you a professed writer of Scholastical Divinity,
and yet to learn this vulgar Truth, that every Puisney in Metaphysics and
Logic is acquainted with? Howsoever, if you be not too old to learn, and your
more profound thoughts be not so drowned in the Schoolmen, that you can recover
a little breath, and gain leisure to look back on those Authors you have either
not thoroughly read, or well weighed and considered, or at least utterly
forgotten, I undertake you may be taught it. Nor shall I put you to much
trouble, but shall only refer you to that Suarez whom you your self have so
seriously recommended to our Critick-Doctors consideration.

. 4. If you will be pleased to turn to him, you may in very many places find
that Habitus and Actus specie distinguuntur, and that it is a Habitus and Actus
communi omnium consensu specie differunt, etc. Suarez. Metaph tom. 2. disp. 42.
sect. 6. n. 16.
generally received Truth, whereof no man of sense doubts. And he has
demonstratively proved it in the place formerly quoted.

And now, that you may be sure to be taught it against another time, I shall
add another place from the same Author, and I shall give it at large. His
words are these, Superest ut responde amus ad difficultatem in principio
positam, de mutua efficientia inter Habitum and Actum. In qua suppono Habitum
and Actum esse Qualitates specie distinctas (you see he supposes it as an
undoubted Truth, that they are both Qualities, and specifically distinct) nam
si essent ejusdem speciei, facilis esset solutio illius difficultatis, nam
inter res ejusdem speciei nullum esset incommodum, ut una res efficiat aliam
similem illia qua facta est, quia inter illas est emanatio aequivoca (I read it
univoca.) Non possut autem Habitus and Actus censeri ejusdem speciei, quia
Actus est Qualitas (I pray mark it, Sir,) natura sua pendens in fieri and
conservari ab actuali influxu potentiae vitalis; Habitus vero est Qualitas
permanens sine tali dependentia. Vnde etiam habent hae Qualitates formales
effectus specie diversos, etc. Suarez. Metaph. to. 2. disp. 44. sect. 9.. 14.

Once more (that you may be sure to understand it) thus the same Author in the
very next Paragraph,. 15. Licet Objectum in se sit idem, modi autem tendendi in
illud sunt in Actu and Habitu ita diversi, ut inde etiam satis colligitur
specifica diversitas. Nam Actus attingit immediate Objectum, illudque unit
actualiter potentiae, vel praesentative, trahendo Objectum ad Potentiam, vel
impulsive seu effective, trahendo Potentiam ad Objectum: Habitus vero attingit
Objectum mediante actu, propter quod dioi solet Habitus specificari per Actus,
and Actus per Objecta. Differunt ergo simpliciter in specie Habitus and Actus,
unde non habent inter se convenientiam essentialem in aliqua differentia
ultima, ratione cujus dicantur esse ejusdem ultimae Speciei aut simpliciter aut
secundum quid. Posset tamen concipi inter eos aliqua peculiaris conveniontia in
ordine ad idem Objectum, ratione cujus dicantur ejusdem generis proximi, vel
speciei subalternae -- id tamen ad praesentem difficultatem non refert; satis
est enim, quod inter Habitum and Actum sit simpliciter differentia essentialis.
Ex quo principio (Mark that, Sir,) sequitur, juxta communem doctrinam, alteram
ex his Qualita ibus esse perfectiorem essentialiter, quia non dantur duae
species rerum aeque perfectae, ut circa lib. 8. Metaph. c. 3. tactum est.

. 5. And so much be spoken for the Instruction of our writer of Scholastical
Divinity in a Metaphysical Speculation, wherein, to the great prejudice of his
Theological Reserches, he professes he is yet to seek. But I wonder he should
not have taken notice of this Doctrine in his perusal of the Schoolmen, since
it is to be found in Aquin. opus. 48. Scot. 1. Sent. d. 3. q. 6.. Hic sunt.
Durand. Gabriel 1. Sent. d. 27. q. 2.
Thomas, in Scotus, in Durand, Gabriel Biel, and others: and Cajetan is to far
from making the Act and the Habit to be primo diversa, that he makes both the
Power and the Habit and the Act to be all of the same species. Potentia and
habitus, says he, licet absolute distinguantur specie, ut tamen sint principia
talis Actus non differunt, nisi secundum magis and minus perfectum in eadem
specie, quia sunt ejusdem speciei cum Actu, and consequenter interse. Cajetan.
in 1. 2. q. 49. art. 3. p. 98. col. 3. D. But Bernardus non vidit omnia; even
our writer of Scholastical Divinity himself sees not all things in the
Schoolmen.

. 6. But what talk we of Suarez and Cajetan, and the rest of the Schoolmen, in
this Case? Let them say what they will. If this be matter of Ignorance in our
Refuter, we must not blame him, he says (by all means take heed of that) but
his great Master Aristotle, for he has misguided him herein.

. 7. But bless me from wonder and astonishment! What read I? My Master
Aristotle? It is certainly so. But, good Sir, I beseech you tell us, how long
has Aristotle been your Master? It is well, I see, you conceive that he speaks
for your advantage. If the Doctor, in a Controversy that concerned your own
Copyhold, had made use of such a Plea, we should instantly have heard, Mat.
23. 9.
That we must call no man Master upon Earth, and that Romans 14. 23.
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. But if Aristotle seems to speak for the
Advantage of your Cause, he shall instantly be your Master: Nay, if any of the
Fathers drop a word in favor of the present design, then not only Austin and
Jerome, but even Tertullian also shall be a Saint. But if they speak any thing
in opposition to what your self call the Truth, we shall instantly hear of the
Montanism of Tertullian, the Choler of S. Jerome, and the Retractations of S.
Austin. And why all this? but only to prove, that because they were men (though
Fathers in the Church) and have had their Lapses and Errors, as all other men
have had, that therefore they must not be trusted or believed in any thing they
say, if it chance to make against us.

. 8. But this, Sir, notwithstanding, I shall no ways envy you the honor of so
great a Master. Go on and prosper in your study of him so long till you rightly
understand him, and know how better to apply his Maxims to your advantage,
then you have done in the present Controversy.

. 9. For what, I pray Sir, says Aristotle to misguide you in the case? Is this
it you mean, in the place quoted from his Topics, 1. Top. c. 15. n. 11? Is it
this, (...); Alas, alas, Sir, why should you conjure up Aristotle's Ghost to
speak an Oracle and Truth that never was yet questioned? You might have saved
the Printer the labor of troubling his Greek Characters. Smiths Elements of
Logic had been sufficient to prove that, which every Fresh-man in Logic knows
to be an undoubted Axiom. But you were willing to let us know you had
Aristotle's Organon in your study, and that you could quote him in Greek.

. 10. But, good Sir, I pray tell me, how could your great Master Aristotle
misguide you in the point depending betwixt you and the Doctor? Was it ever
denied by your Adversary that Entia primo diversa cannot be put in the same
Praedicament? or has he any where asserted, that a word is not ambiguous that
is attributed to things that are put in diverse Praedicaments? To this only
speaks Aristotle. But by the way give me leave to tell you, that either the
Printer or your Amanuensis were mistaken in this Quotation. For it is not to be
found in the 15th. but in the 13th. Chapter, at least in my Edition, wherein
there are but fourteen Chapters in that Book. Howsoever, the words I
acknowledge, and pass by the Lapse as venial: and if you can now prove, that
Love, which the Doctor makes the Genus of the Habit and the Act, is a
transcendental thing, and found in several Praedicaments, like the Philosophers
(...), which he in that place instances in, I shall then acknowledge the force
of this Quotation from Aristotle; but till you can make this appear, and make
good your Assumption, I cannot take it for an Oracle, that the Habit and the
Act of Love are Entia primo diversa, things put in several Praedicaments,
because that you have asserted it. You may spare your pains, Sir, in proving
Axioms, and your Major should have been granted you for asking, without
Aristotle's authority. Till the Minor, which is only the matter in debate
betwixt you and the Doctor, be made good, and you can prove that Actual Love is
not a Quality, but a simple Praedicamental Action, I must say, that since
Conclusio sequitur partem debiliorem, you have concluded nothing against the
Doctor. And so I take my leave of this Section with a Nego Minorem.

SECT. 7.
The Refuters Reply impertinent. The Doctors distinction of Love into the Habit
and the Act found in the Tract of Will Worship, and the Answer to Mr. Cawdrey.
Outward sensible expressions refer first and immediately to the inward Acts of
Love. The Refuters digression to a matter never doubted. The Doct. never
asserts that Love was univocally praedicated of the Habit and outward sensible
expressions. The Refuters four Reasons against no body. His unhappiness in
proving a Clear Truth. His third most false. In univocal productions the Cause
and Effect still comprehended under the same Genus, sometimes also in
aequivocal. His Assumption of his First Reason infirm. His second and fourth
Reasons coincident. Raynaudus seasonable assistance. The Refuter misunderstands
him. Love not univocally praedicated of the Habit and outward sensible
expressions, proved: not concerns the Doctor.

. 1. THe Doctor now having cleared the Ambiguity of the Phrase that gave the
Captious advantage to the Use of Confutation, and showed that he spoke of
another matter then the Author of the Mixture did, comes now to show that this
was no new-coined distinction, on purpose invented to decline the force of that
Use.

Doctor HAMMOND.
15. THis Distinction I thought legible enough before, both in the Tract of
Will Worship, and in the Answer to Mr. Cawdrey.

16. In the former the Refuter confesses to find it, reciting these words of
mine, It is possible for the same person constantly to love God above all, and
yet to have higher expressions of that Love at one time then at another. Where
the expressions, at one time, and at another, must needs refer to the several
Acts of the same all-full habitual Love.

. 2. To this our Refuter makes a very large reply, but nothing to the purpose,
thus;

JEANES.
THe distinction which you thought legible enough before in your Tract of
Will Worship, in which you say that I confess to find it, is such a distinction
between the Habits and Acts of Love, as that Love equally comprehends them both
as Species. Now I utterly deny that there is any such distinction in those
words of yours which I recite, It is possible for the same person constantly to
love God above all, and yet to have higher expressions of that Love at one time
then another. And the reason of this my denial is, because love as a Genus does
not comprehend the expressions of Love equally with the Habit. 1. Nothing can
as a Genus be equally praedicated of things put in several Praedicaments: but
the Habit of Love and expressions of Love are put in several Praedicaments:
therefore Love as a Genus does not equally comprehend them both. 2. The Habit
of Love is formally and intrinsecally Love; the expressions of Love (that is,
as you expound your self.. 21. the outward expressions of the inward Acts of
Love) are termed Love only by extrinsecal denomination from the inward acts of
Love: and therefore Love does not as a Genus equally comprehend the Habit and
expressions of Love. Raynaudus in Mo^. discip. did. 3. n. 144. makes mention
out of Gabriel Biel of a distinction of Love into affective and effective: and
what is this effective Love, but the effects and expressions of Love? But now
that he does not take this to be a proper distribution of a Genus into its
Species, appears by what he says out of the same Author concerning the
division. Effectivum dicit ipsum illius Amoris eliciti effectum. Translato
quippe causae nomine ad effectum, is dicitur amare effective, qui non ostentat
infertilem ac sterilem amorem, sed cum se dat occasio, erumpit in fructus
dignes amoris. Quam esse admodum impropriam amoris divisionem fatetur Gabriel,
quia amare proprie est in sola voluntate tanquam in subjecto; ea autem
productio effectuum amoris in aliis facultatibus cernitur, estque actus
transiens non immanens voluntatis. 3. No one word can as a Genus equally
comprehend the Efficient and the Effect: The Habit of Love is the Efficient
cause, and the sincere and cordial expressions of Love are the Effect:
therefore Love is not predicated of them equally as a Genus. 4. That which is
predicated properly of one thing, and tropically of another, cannot equally
comprehend them both as a Genus: But Love is predicated properly of the habit
of Love, tropically (viz. Metonymically) of the expressions of Love, by a
Metonymie of the efficient for the effect: therefore love as a Genus cannot
equally comprehend them both.

. 3. Put the case, Sir. And what will you thence conclude against the Doctor?
Will this ever make him guilty of denying the Habitual Fullness of Christ's
Grace? or prove that he never aimed at the distinction of Love into the Habit
and the Act in either of these Discourses? Suppose you had not found this
distinction so clearly laid down in the Tract of Will Worship; me thinks,
unless you had resolved to be captious, it might have sufficed you to have seen
it in the Answer to Mr. Cawdrey, which was the Treatise you quarrelled at. For
does not the Doctor tell you plainly, that he thought it legible enough in
both? Is there no such distinction in either Tract to be met with either in
terminis or by just consequence? Let us know your positive answer, and run not
out into new Controversies. Howsoever, though the whole that is here replied be
a most perfect digression to a matter clearly impertinent, not any ways hinted
or occasioned by the Doctor, yet I am resolved to follow you through all this
winding Labyrinth.

. 4. Thus then you return, The distinction which you thought legible enough
before in your Tract of Will Worship, in which you say that I confess to find
it, is such a distinction between the Habits and Acts of Love, as that Love
equally comprehends them both as Species. Now I utterly deny that there is any
such distinction in those words of yours which I recite, It is possible for the
same person to love God above all, and yet to have higher expressions of that
Love at one time then at another. And the reason of this my denial is, because
Love as a Genus does not comprehend the expressions of Love equally with the
Habit.

. 5. Well, Sir, if this be all you aim at, your reasons might have been spared:
It is granted as to the recital, and express mention of that distinction in the
words by you recited. But yet I beseech you deal plainly, is it not clearly
there intimated? For what speak the Antecedents and Consequents? Read you not
in the two very next preceding lines this distinction very plainly employed? Are
not these the Doctors words Treatise of Will Worship, Sect. 49. p. 101. edit.
London.
? which (loving God in a more intense degree) may be observed amongst the
Angels themselves, the Soraphin being so called because they are more ardent in
zeal then other Angels. Nay for the same person constantly to love God above
all, and yet etc. Is it not clearly here evident the Doctor means the height
and fervor of the Seraphins actual Love? Can their greater ardency in zeal
refer to any thing else then that Love which is modificated by it? But yet if
this be not plain enough, what think you of the words immediately following the
passage by you recited, and which the Doctor added on purpose to prove and
explain it? Consider what he says, Sir. Treatise of Will Worship, ibid.
Thus we read of Christ himself, Luc. 22. 44. (who, we know, did never fail in
performing what was man's duty in Prayer, or any thing else, yet) that he at
that time prayed more earnestly; which is a demonstrative evidence that the
lower Degree is not sinful, when the higher is acceptable to God. What say you
now? Does not this evidently refer to the height and fervor of the inward Act
of Prayer? And does not the Doctor expressly and (...) say so in the
Recapitulation of this whole passage in the Account of Mr. Cawd. trip. Diat. c.
6. sect. 5.. 5. p. 222.
Account to Mr. Cawdrey's triplex Diatribe, and in the very words by you cited
in your Use of Confutation? This (that sincere Love was capable of Degrees) was
first showed in several men, and in the same man at several times, in the
several ranks of Angels, and at last in Christ himself, more ardent in one Act
of Prayer then in another. Is not this now plain enough, and by you
acknowledged also in your Mixture Jeanes Mixed. of Scholast. Divin. with Pract.
treat. 2. p. 258.
, where you have in perpetuam rei memoriam your self recorded it? And therefore
said not the Doctor truly, that he thought this distinction legible enough
before, both in the Tract of Will Worship, and in the answer to Mr. Cawdrey?
For I hope you will not say, that the Doctor in the last passage, on which your
Use of Confutation is grounded, does refer to the outward sensible expressions,
and that by Christ's greater ardenoy in this Act of Prayer in his bloody Agony,
he only means a more earnest cry, and louder noise, and deeper groan.

. 6. But suppose we that no more had been expressed concerning this distinction
then what is intimated in these words rehearsed, and by you acknowledged to be
recited in your Jeanes Mixture, ibid. p. 259.
Mixture. Yet, Sir, deal plainly with the world; can you think the Doctor a man
of so crude, raw Judgment, as to take the outward sensible expressions for the
inward Acts of Love? Or can you believe him so weak, as not to understand his
own meaning? or to have lost so much of Christianity with his Ecclesiastical
preferments, as that he is not fit to be believed and trusted when he professes
to declare what was his own meaning? One of these you must needs say, or this
whole Reply is nothing to the purpose.

. 7. For though it were granted (as the contrary has been showed) that the
Doctor in that Passage does only mention the Habit of Love, and the outward
expressions; yet plain it is, that the outward sensible expressions can refer
to nothing but the inward Acts of Love, which (according to the Doctrine of the
best Metaphysicians and Schoolmen, as has been declared) the Doctor makes
specifically distinct from the Habit. For the expressions of Love must first
and immediately refer to the Acts, and by them to the Habit; otherwise your
great Master Aristoteles eum qui tantum habet Habitum comparat dormienti, eum
vero qui Actum exercet, vigilanti. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 44. sect. 9:. 14.
Aristotle had vainly compared the Habit to a man asleep, and the Act to one
waking. The outward expressions in the subordinate inferior Faculties must
first denote the promptness and facility in the Act, and then this ready
nimbleness in the Act must declare the perfection of the Habit. If therefore
expressions be expressions indeed, and there be a necessary relation between
the sign and the thing signified, then the expressions of Love, the outward
sensible expressions, must of necessity respect the inward Acts of Love, of
which alone they are properly and immediately expressions. And therefore we may
well take the Doctors word, when he says, though (in the words acknowledged
and cavilled at by this Refuter) he only mentioned the outward sensible
expressions, yet there the expressions, at one time and at another, must needs
refer to the several Acts of the same all-full habitual Love. Which inward
Acts, alone, and nothing else, he makes to be specifically distinct from the
Habit of Love.

. 8. But in a Parenthesis to his second Argument he tells us, that by the
expressions of Love the Doctor expounds himself to mean,. 21. the outward
expressions of the inward Acts of Love, which are termed Love only by
extrinsecal denomination.

. 9. True, Sir. But is it with exclusion of the inward Acts? How then are they
expressions of them? But let us view the Doctors own words in the 21.. that our
Refuters fair dealing may notoriously appear. I must only say (says the Doctor
there) that is a mis-apprehension: for that by loving with all the heart, in
the first place, I certainly meant the sincere habit of Love, by love in the
latter place, the inward Acts of Love, and by the expressions of Love, the
outward expressions of those inward Acts; and of these Acts only I speak, and
of these expressions, when I say they are more intense at one time then another.

. 10. But now, though it be so clearly evident, that in the places already
quoted the Doctor by the expressions of Love still refers to the inward Acts,
which only he makes specifically distinct from the Habit, yet this was hint
enough to give our Refuter advantage to make a noise and a Book. He has now
found new matter of Dispute, and with might and main he labors to prove that
which no man ever doubted, and the Doctor never thought of. We shall now have
Reasons and Authority, no less then a whole Page-full, in this puisny Pamphlet,
to prove that which might have been granted for asking. And, O what pity it is
that our School-man should not have Truth more often on his side, because he
makes so much of it when he chances to meet it, though it be out of his rode*

. 11. But in good sadness, Sir, why no less then four Reasons to prove that
which was never denied you? Has Doctor Hammond asserted any thing to the
contrary? Did he ever affirm, that Love was univocally predicated of the Habit
and the outward sensible expressions as its Species? If he has, pray quote us
the place, that we may also confess and acknowledge his mistake. If he has not,
(as without doubt he no where has) then you only fight with a shadow of your
own casting, and much good do you with the Conquest. If you set up a
Shroveing-Cock from your own Dunghill, I shall not any ways forbid you to
throw as many Cudgels at him as you please.

. 12. But yet, Sir, I cannot choose but take notice of your Craft: you have
cunningly raised a Cloud of Dust, to amuse your unwary Readers, who will think
that all this while you fight with the Doctor, because they see you so zealous
in your Mood and Figure, and have urged no less then four Reasons, backed and
confirmed with two venerable Authorities, most demurely against No body.

. 13. And now I assure you, Sir, it is well that your Conclusion is a Truth
sufficiently evident of it self. For otherwise (so profound a Disputant you
are) your Reasons would very, very hardly enforce it.

. 14. Your Third (to begin with that, for I shall not tie my self to your
Method) is most ridiculously false. You say (not to trouble our selves about
the Mood and Figure) (3) No one word can as a Genus equally comprehend the
Efficient and the Effect: the Habit of Love is the Efficient cause, and the
sincere and cordial expressions of Love are the Effect: therefore Love is not
praedicated of them equally as a Genus.

. 15. Your Major, Sir, your Major; by all means have a care of your Major. For
what think you, Sir, of all (...). Arist. l. 2. Gener. Animal. c. 4. in fine.
univocal productions? When Fire produces Fire, and Corn brings forth Corn,
when a Man begets a Man, and one Heat makes another, does not one and the same
word as a Genus comprehend the Efficient and the Effect? And is it not in these
a certain Maxim that Qualis est causa, talis est effectus, such as the Cause
is in nature, such also is the Effect? And I hope you will think it lawful for
things of the same nature to be comprehended under the same Genus. Nay, are not
these distinguished from Quaedam est quae effici^ Effectum ejusdem rationis;
and haec dicitur Vnivoca, ut Ignis quum generat Ignem: and universaliter Causa,
quae operando per virtutem suae formae similem reddit Effectum, est Causa
univoca, and in suo ordine Principalis, ut recte notat D. Thomas 3. p. q. 62.
art. 1. Alia vero est Causa producens Effectum alterius rationis, quam oportet
esse nobiliorem Effectu; et haec appellatur Causa Aequivoca; quia non convenit
formaliter cum Effectu in eadem forma, sed eminenter illam continet. Suarez.
Metaph. tom. 1. disp. 17. sect. 2.. 21. Vid. cund. disp. 26. sect. 1.. 6. and
sect. 5.. 13, 14, 15, 16, etc.
Aequivocal productions, because in these Effectum est ejusdem rationis cum
Efficiente, but in the other Efficiens non convenit cum effectu in eadem forma,
sed eminenter illam continet? Nay, does not your own Scheibler. Metaph. l. 1.
c. 22. tit. 9. n. 116, 117, etc.
Scheibler as well as Suarez (both whom you so seriously commend to the Doctors
perusal) tell you that Causa univoca est quae producit effectum similem in
specie? But me thinks, Sir, if (since your more noble, more serious employments
in the study and writing of Scholastical and Practical Divinity) you had
thought fit to neglect such vulgar Authors, and to forget the common Notions
and Maxims delivered by them, yet you should at least have observed this in
your Reading of Aquinas, that in his Sums Vid. Aquin. Sum. p. 1. q. 4. art.
2. in corp. and Cajetan. Javel. alios, in loc. and 3. part. q. 62. art. 1. in
corp. and alibi saepissime.
does frequently deliver this Doctrine, and makes very good use of it. And now,
Sir, I hope you will think it lawful for things of the same nature to be
comprehended under the same Genus. For where, I pray, will you rank the several
Individuals of the self-same Species (for such are all Univocal Causes and
Effects, as is plain from sense and experience) if not under the same Genus?

16. I might prove the gross and palpable falsehood of your Major, Sir, by
diverse instances drawn from Aequivocal Productions, where the cause and effect
must be placed in the same Praedicament, and consequently under the same remote
Genus at least, which is sufficient to destroy your Major. When the Sun and
Stars produce Gold and Silver and Brass, and other Minerals, when they produce
Stones of all sorts and kinds in the bowels of the earth, are not the cause and
effect, at least as Species subalternae, placed under the same Genus of
Substantia corporea? When an Ass begets a Mule, or a Man produces Worms and
Vermin in his head and entrails, and when a woman brings forth monstrous
births in stead of legitimate issues, as Serpents, Moles and Froggs, and other
such like (of which among Ita nonnullas mulieres Serpents, Talpas, Ranas, Mutes,
Aves, aliaque animalia enixas fuisse inter historias relatum est. Imo vero in
Apulia and Lombardia frequentem esse talium animalium generationem multi
Authors referunt, idque Genus animalium ideo vocari Fratrem Lombardorum, a
Gordonio, Tornamira, aliisque Barbaris Medicis Arpa, seu Arpia, nominatur, quod
hujusmodi monstrum multos plerumque habeat pedes, quos etiam sermon illo
barbarico Arpas nominant. Lazar. River. Observe. med. Cent. 2. observe. 100. p.
201. Vid. Schenckium and Lycosthenem de Prodigiis.
Physicians there are many true stories) I pray, Sir, must not the cause and
effect be both ranged under the same immediate Genus proximum, which is Animal?
So when light produces heat, are not the cause and the effect both put in the
same Praedicament, under the same Genus of Patible Qualities? To keep closer to
the business more immediately in controversy. The habit of Love Dicendum est
habitum simul cum potentia efficere actum, and hunc esse proprium finem ejus.
Vid. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 44. sect. 5. n. 6. and sect. 6. n. 12. Scheibler.
Metaph. l. 2. c. 8. tit. 4. art. 2. n. 59. and art. 4. punct. 2. n. 104. Vid.
etiam Aquin. 1. 2. q. 49. art. 3. in corp. Et Cajetan. in loc. late, Scot. l.
1. Sent. did. 17. q. 2, 3. and 4. Sent. did. 49. q. 1.
effectively concurs with the Will to the production of the inward Acts of
Love, and yet I say that Love as a Genus is equally praedicated of the Habit
and the inward Acts of Love, as has already been demonstrated, and may in due
time be further proved, notwithstanding any thing you have or can say to the
contrary. And this is abundantly more then sufficient to show the falsehood of
your Major, when you say that no one word can as a Genus (whether proximum or
remotum, summum or subalternum (for you absolutely deliver it) equally
comprehend the Efficient and the Effect.

. 17. But perhaps you had read somewhat like it, concerning the First most
universal Cause, God, and his effects; or perhaps you had heard the like
concerning the Cause and the Effect in Actu Signato, and therefore you would
apply it to all Causes and Effects in Actu also Exercito. And so much be spoken
to your third Argument.

. 18. I come now to your First. And this though it be not altogether so absurd,
yet is false enough in conscience. For whereas you say, that nothing can as a
Genus be equally predicated of things put in several Predicaments; but the
Habit of Love and Expressions of Love are put in several Predicaments;
therefore Love as a Genus does not equally comprehend them both: Here, Sir,
your Assumption is too infirm. For let me ask you, Quanta est Minor? Is it not
universal? And if it be not, your Syllogism will be false, and you will
conclude an Universal, contrary to all Rules of Art and Reason, from a
Praemisse particular. If it be universal, as the Mood and Figure and Conclusion
requires, (for rightly framed it is in Celarent, thus, Whatsoever things are
put in several Praedicaments cannot have the same Genus: But the Habit of Love
and the Expressions of Love (in general) are put in several Praedicaments:
Ergo, the Habit of Love and Expressions of Love (in general) cannot have the
same Genus) I say it is false, and you will never be able to prove and make it
good, if any one instance can be produced to the contrary. What say you now?
Are not Joy and Grief and the other Passions of the mind frequent expressions
of Love? Joh. 11. 35, 36.
when Jesus, seeing Mary and the women weeping for Lazarus, groaned in the
Spirit, and was troubled, and also wept, said not the Jews truly, Behold how
he loved him? But now I hope you will not say, that these Passions of the mind
are any thing else then Patible Qualities, and ranked in the third Species, as
Habits are in the first. And consequently true it is, that all the Expressions
of Love are not (though true it is, I grant, of many or most of them that they
are) put in several Praedicaments. And if so, your Conclusion, though most true
in it self, does not follow by virtue of these Praemisses, because your
Assumption is false. And so much for your First.

. 18. Your Second and Fourth have somewhat in them, I confess, of the Face of
an Argument. An argument, I say; For though you have slit it into two, and
divided it from it self by another what-ye-call't between, yet it differs no
more then Socrates in one suit does differ from himself in another. The matter
is the very same, though the words be different, and both the Minors depend
upon one and the same Medium.

. 19. But, good Sir, let me advise you, that though now you have the good luck
to light upon a right proof of your Conclusion, yet do not for the future
obtrude your Arguments upon the world without any more confirmation then your
bare Ipse dixit. For I assure you, Sir, you have all-along in this Discourse
showed your self so unhappy a Disputant, that even now when you have clear and
evident truth in your Conclusion, men would not believe that it followed from
your Praemisses, if Raynaudus had not been brought in to your assistance, who
has said more to the purpose in that small passage you have quoted from him,
then you have done in the whole page besides.

. 20. And yet I must be bold to tell you, that though Raynaudus be your Friend,
you do not thoroughly understand him, and that Author in the place quoted means
more then you seem to apprehend. Your words are these, Raynaudus makes mention
out of Gab. Biel of a distinction of Love into Affective and Effective; and
what is this Effective Love but the Effects and Expressions of Love? Thus you.
Now the subject matter of your present discourse leads me necessarily to
understand your interrogation of the outward sensible effects and expressions
of Love. And if this be your meaning, I must tell you that Raynaudus is not so
to be understood; and plain it is from that Author, that Love effective is not
only the outward sensible effects and expressions, but also something else. For
though it be true, that all the outward sensible effects and expressions of
Love be Love effective, or in plain English the issues and effects of Love; yet
the terms are not reciprocal and convertible. For there are many effects of
Love that are not sensible and thus external. For instance, good Wishes, good
Prayers, are the effects of true Love, so also are Joy at the welfare of the
beloved Persons well doing, and Sorrow and Grief at his miscarriage; and yet
they are not always expressed, nor does any prudent man always show his Joy
or Grief, or express his good wishes, thoughts and desires to him he most
tenderly affects. The truth is, Raynaudus speaks clear and plain to any man of
understanding, and with him Love effective is nothing else but the effect of
the Affection of Love. This an Imperate Act, which is the Effect; the other an
Elicit Act, the Cause. This performed by any of the other Faculties, and is
purely a transient Act; that an immanent Act of the Will, wherein this Love
affective is subjected. His words as you cite them (for I have not the Author
by me) are these, Effectivum dicit ipsum illius amoris eliciti effectum;
translato quippe causae nomine ad effectum, is dicitur amare effective qui non
ostentat infertilem and sterilem amorem, sed cum se dat occasio erumpit in
fructus dignos amoris. Quam esse admodum impropriam amoris divisionem fatetur
Gabriel, quia amare proprie est in sola voluntate tanquam in subjecto; ea autem
productio effectuum amoris in aliis facultatibus cernitur, estque Actus
transiens, uno immanens, Voluntatis.

. 21. And the truth of it is, Love cannot as a Genus comprehend nor be equally
praedicated of the Habit and the outward expressions of Love. 1. Because this
Love, the Genus of the Habit, is seated in the Will, and not in any other
Faculty wherein the outward expressions are subjected. Now since Vid. Keck.
Log. l. 1. c. 3. can. 2a. Generis perfecti, p. 55. Ar. 4. Top. c. 1.
tota natura generis continetur in qualibet specie, Vid. Burgersdic. Log.
Institut. l. 1. c. 11.. 15.
if the Genus and Species be Accidents, they must have both the same Subject.
Hence it is that Science is not, cannot be the Genus of Moral Virtue, quia
Scientia est in intellectu, and Virtus in appetitu. And therefore Aristot. l.
4. Top* c. 3. mihi page 314. A.
Aristotle tells us, (...) etc. 2. I might add, (if it were needful in a case
so clear) that the outward expressions of Love are either Actions, or Passions,
or Patible Qualities, but never any thing belonging to the first Species of
Quality, wherein the Love we now speak of is always placed. 3. That Love is an
Elicit Act of the Will, but the expressions of Love are always Acts imperate.
4. That Love is an immanent Act of the Will, but the expressions of it are
transient, and performed by the other Faculties, in obedience to the Dictates
and Commands of the Will, as Raynaudus has well observed.

. 22. -- Sed jam dic, Posthume, de tribus Capellis. Martial.
What is all this Pro or Con to Doctor Hammond, who never said any thing to
give just occasion to this Digression of our Refuter? Go we on then to the next.

SECT. 8.
The Refuters Tongue-combat. He a man of Business. The Pertinency of the
Doctors first papers to explain the meaning of the latter. Unjustly censured
for speaking cautelously. The Refuters understanding the Doctor for a Critic,
and a Dunce. Erasmus's fate the same with the Doctors. Critic, an honorable
title. The best Scholars Critics, and who. The true Critic an universal
Scholar. Sextus Empiricus and Crates character of a Critic. Quintilianus
character of the true Grammarian. Aristotle the first Author of Criticisme and
Grammar. Necessary to complete the Divine. The best way to advance Learning, to
unite Criticisme and School-learning. Pity the Refuter had not been a Critic.
His mistake of the word Salvo; what it signifies. The method of the Schools in
Polemical discourses observed by the Doctor. The Refuter saying and unsaying.

Doctor HAMMOND.
. 1. ONly I guess not what Temptation he had to choose that expression which he
there makes use of, viz. [That there Doctor Hammond minceth the matter, and
speaks more cautelously,] adding [that what he there says is nothing to the
matter now in hand.] Whereas, 1. those of Will Worship, being the First Papers
written on that Subject, are sure very pertinent to ascertain him of the
meaning of the latter, written in defense of them.

JEANES.
THat your first Papers written on this Subject are very impertinent to
ascertain me of the meaning of your latter is easily discernable unto any man
that will compare both together; however I shall offer to your consideration
two reasons to prove the impertinency of them for that purpose. 1. In your
first papers you speak only of the Expressions of Love, i. e. (as you interpret
your self) the outward expressions of the inward Acts of Love: in your latter
Papers you speak of Love it self. Now the outward expressions of love are
termed love only extrinsece, denominative, and participative from the inward
act of Love; as some say the imperate acts of the Will are said to be in this
sense only free or voluntary. 2ly. That your first Papers are very short in
explaining the meaning of your latter, is apparent by this your Reply, wherein
you extend the Love of God, which you affirm to be capable of Degrees, beyond
the outward expressions, unto the very inward acts of Love.

Doctor HAMMOND.
ANd 2ly, the early cautelous speaking there, might have made further latter
caution unnecessary.

JEANES.
I Had thought that in Polemical writings, it had still been needful for a man
to continue on his caution, for otherwise he may expose himself unto blows and
knocks which he never dreamed of. Early cautelous speaking is no Salvo unto
after-unwariness.

Doctor HAMMOND.
ANd 3ly, I could not be said to mince (which to vulgar ears signifies to
retract in some degrees what I had said before) and again, speak more
cautelously, when that was the first time of my speaking of it.

JEANES.
I Am very loath to enter into a contest with so great a Critic touching the
meaning of a word; however I shall adventure to say thus much, That a man may
be said to mince a matter, and speak more cautelously at the first time of
speaking of it, then afterward at a second time of speaking of it. Neither
shall I be beaten from this mine assertion, by your bare and naked affirmation,
that to mince to vulgar ears signifies to retract in some degrees what has
been said before: for I appeal to both vulgar and learned ears, whether or no
we may not say truly of diverse erroneous persons, that in the first broaching
their Errors they mince the matter, and speak more cautelously then afterward,
when they are fleshed and encouraged with success.

Doctor HAMMOND.
17. Meanwhile it is manifest, and his own confession, that there these were
my words, and those so Cautious, that this sense of the words which he
undertakes to refute could not be affixt on them. And this I should have
thought sufficient to have preserved my Innocence, and forestalled his Use of
Confutation.

JEANES.
SVppose that in your tract of Will Worship those were your words, and withal
that they were so Cautious that this sense of the words which I undertake to
refute could not be affixt on them; yet this is nothing at all unto the
purpose, and contributes nothing to the clearing of your Innocence, and
forestalling my Use of Confutation: and the reason hereof is very evident,
Because that which I undertook to refute was affixt by me, not on these your so
Cautelous words in your tract of Will Worship, but on a passage in your Answer
to Mr. Cawdrey. Indeed I censured those your words in themselves impertinent
unto your matter in hand, and withal proved them to be so. But if you had gone
no further then these words, you should not have heard from me touching this
subject; for time is more precious with me, then to wast it in meddling merely
with the impertinencies of any man's discourse.

. 2. And here in all this we find very little to the purpose, but an empty
Contest about words and phrases, which he carps at in the Doctor, who is a
little too old to be taught the meaning of his Mother Tongue, and the usual
import of it. Only I observe, that though he profess in the Close of this
Tongue-combat, That time is more precious with him, then to wast it in meddling
merely with the impertinencies of any man's discourse, yet he is so much at
leisure for all that as to spend the compass of two pages at least in his
puisny Pamphlet, upon some words and phrases of the Doctors. He is a man of
business indeed.

. 3. But I cry him mercy. Did I say it was only a controversy about words
this? I am afraid I was mistaken. For he will offer to consideration no less
then two reasons to prove the impertinency of the Doctors first Papers to
ascertain him of the meaning of the latter. The first is, because the Doctor
there mentions only the Habit, and the expressions of Love, which are called
Love only by extrinsecal denomination, but here he mentions the inward Acts
themselves. The second is, because the Doctor now extends the Love of God,
which he affirms to be capable of Degrees, beyond the outward expressions, unto
the very inward Acts.

. 4. And with your Patience, good Sir, ought he not so to extend it? why else
did you so lately blame him for not doing so? But what then, Sir? what then?
Conclude, man, with your Ergo Pot-lid. What Is all this to the purpose? Suppose
the Doctor there speaks only of the outward expressions of Love (and yet we
have clearly evidenced that he speaks also of the inward Acts,) yet must not
these of necessity imply and relate to the inward Acts of Love whereof they are
Expressions? Why then could you not guess at his meaning in this passage? Can
you be so uncharitable, as to think the Doctor was a man of so slender shallow
parts, as to take the outward Expressions of Love for Love it self, and a
coordinate Species of the same Genus? If not, without doubt the Doct. must of
necessity mean nothing else then what he professes, that best knew his own
meaning of any man in the world.

. 5. The truth is, the Doctor then thought he writ to men ingenuous and candid,
that would not look for knots in Bullrushes. But after finding by sad
experience, that he was to deal with some that endeavor to move every stone, to
throw at those that are not in every thing of their Judgment, though never so
ridiculous and false, though never so disadvantageous to the peace and welfare
of the Church; he was forced clearly to express that which before he had
sufficiently employed.

. 6. And yet now he must be told, that at first he did mince the matter, and
speak more cautelously then afterward, as Heretics indeed are wont. Before he
was condemned for speaking too little, and now he is upbraided for speaking too
much. Nay our Refuter can do no less then to appeal to both vulgar and learned
ears, whether or no we may not say truly of diverse erroneous persons (such as
without doubt the Doctor is) that in the first broaching of their Errors they
mince the matter, and speak more cautelously then afterward, when they are
fleshed and encouraged with success.

. 7. It is readily granted, Sir, and for your further confirmation, I refer you
to Lysimachus Nicanor, and to Sleidan's History of the Anabaptists in Germany,
and other true stories, and Pasquills, and practices of later times.

. 8. And now, though it be high time to leave this Tongue-Combat, yet I cannot
part with this Section, without expressing my just indignation at this Refuters
so contemptuous undervaluing the Doctors excellent Learning. I am very loath
(says he) to enter into a contest with so great a Critic touching the meaning
of a word. The Doctor, in our Schoolmans opinion, is some petty Grammaticaster,
that knows the meaning of Musa, and can tell how to decline Lapis, some great
Critic forsooth, one fit to teach Schoole-boyes perhaps the meaning of a Greek
or Latin Author: but for any skill in the Arts, and Reserches of Philosophy,
he is a very Dunce, and not at all seen in the curious Speculations and
Subtleties of Schoole-learning.

. 9. And now I see this under his hand in print, my wonder must cease, that he
even among his Apron-men of Bridgewater so fastidiously decries the Doctor for
a Dunce. For it has been assured me, from very credible witnesses, that he
every where braggs, he has made this Doctor a very Dunce.

. 10. This minds me of the Fate of the great Erasmus, that Phosphorus to all
curious learning which so brightly shines in the Christian world; whose wit,
and Judgment, and industry, and skill, all Scholars admire, and very few
equal, and scarce any exceed: whose Countrymen thought themselves so highly
honored in his Birth (as once the Graecians did in that of their Homer) that at
the public charge they erected a Brazen Statue for him, as well to their own
honor as his memory. And yet this Erasmus, whose Writings shall outlast ten
such Brazen Statues, was so highly undervalued by our Countryman Lee and the
Paris Divines, and some such Pretenders to School learning as our Refuter is,
as to be counted no Scholar, no Divine, but a Critic and a whiffling
Grammarian. His Apologies for himself in this kind are swelled into a Volume:
and in this Work he has showed as much Judgment and Learning as in any that he
ever wrote; and has clearly demonstrated the advantage of the Critic above the
Pretender to the Sums and the Sentences, and that more goes to the making a
true and genuine Scholar then to rally up a Distinction, and to quote Aquinas
and Scotus; men indeed of admirable parts, and high sublime Judgments, and
curious subtle inventions, and which wanted nothing but the Critic to make
them more perfectly deserve the titles of Doctor Subtilis and Doctor Angelicus.

. 11. And therefore this Refuter has been so far from blasting the Doctors
reputation, that he has written a libell to his Honor, and has defamed him to
his Credit.

. 12. A great Critic! Sir, it is the only style that befits a Prince among
Scholars: And all the knowing men that ever were have gloried in the Title. Let
me tell you, Sir, that even Vid. Dan. Heinsii Prolegom. ad Aristarch. Sac. seu
Nonnum, page 18, 20, etc.
Esdras himself, and the * Masorites, and R. Moses Ben Maimon (of Tritum est
inter Judaeos and passim notum, quod Hebraei de eo dicunt, (...), h. e. A Mose
(Propheta scil.) ad Mosen (istum Aegyptium) non surrexit sicut Moses (iste qui
doctrina and eruditione Mosi Legislatori aequiparandus esset.) Addu^itur ab
Elia Levita in praefatione prosa Libri Thisbi. Buxtorf. in Praefat. ad More
Nevochim. Vid. amp.
whom they say, a Mose ad Mosen non erat talis Moses) were all Critics among
the Jews. Let me tell you, Sir, S. Paul himself (praefiscine dixerim) was not
only an Apostle, but also a Critic: one bred up indeed at the feet of
Gamaliel, but withal so exquisitely skilled in all exotic learning, so
admirable a Rhetorician, and so powerful in Argument, that the blasphemous
Porphyrie was wont to say, that it was pity so gallant a man should be
bestowed upon so mean a Religion. Nay I must tell you, Sir, that the great
Aristarchus, and Varro, nay Cicero, and your great Mr. Aristotle, were
Critics. If you will not take my word, let the most excellent Vid. D. Heins.
Prolegom. in Non. p. 3, 14, 19. and passim pertotam Dissertationem. Critices
and omnis sapientiae Monarcha Aristoteles, etc. Heins. ib. p. 34.
Heinsius assure and prove it to you beyond exception. Further yet, Sir, (as
the same judicious Heinsius) our Origin, and Hierome, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Eusebius, and Tertullian, and Basil, and Isidore, and Photius, and the most
learned of all the Christian Fathers, were Critics. To come down to our own
times. What think you of Erasmus (magnus ille literarum restitutor, as Heins.
ibid. p. 24.
Heinsius worthily calls him?) What think you of the two Portents of Learning,
the Father and the Son, Scaligers? What think you of Cardinal Cajetan and
Tolet? I hope you will value them at least for their School-learning, and yet
these were high Critics. Nay Serrarius, and Possevine, and Maldonate, and
Bellarmine, let me add, and Suarez, and Sirmond, and Petavius, and whosoever
of that Society has the name of a Scholar, will be proved to be thought a
Critic. I cannot choose but expatiate. The Leiden Triumvirate of all good
letters, the incomparable Grotius and Vossius and Heinsius, all were Critics.
Nor must Salmasius be forgotten. Our Andrews, our Usher, our Montacute, our
Davenant, our Savill, our Cambden, our Boys, our Fuller, our Seldom, the great
glories of our Nation, were all Critics. To go further, Paraeus, and Beza, and
Cameron, and Casaubon, and Fagius, and Rivet, and Drusius, and Gerard, and
Chemnitius, nay even Calvin and Luther, the glorious lights of the Reformation,
were all Critics. And to make short, let this Refuter tell me of any Scholar
in the world that ever gained a solid name, that was not a Critic?

. 13. If this in our Refuters ear savor too much of Declamation, let me refer
him to learn from the exquisite Heinsius Vid. D. Heinsii Prolegom. in Nonnum,
which that Author calls Ad Aristarchum, sive, De verae Criticae apud veteres
ortu, progressu, usuque in caeteris disciplinis, tum in Theologia praesertim,
Dissertatio.
the true worth and abilities of a Critic. He will there find, to his wonder
and amazement, that the great Crates was wont to say, as Sextus Empiricus has
observed, omnem eruditionem ac scientiam in Critico requiri, That the Critic
must be a universal Scholar, and that Language and Grammar make up the very
least part of him. Though he speak as many tongues as Mithridates of Pontus, or
the Apostles did at the day of Pentecost; yet if he be not skilled in all the
liberal Arts and Sciences, if he knows not the History of times, and the rites
and customs of Nations, and be not acquainted with their Laws, if he has not
searched into the secrets and mysteries of Nature, and with Solomon can read a
lecture from the Cedar to the Hyssop on the wall, and if he crown not all the
rest with a profound skill in the depths of Theologi, he will many times be to
seek, and not able to give a right Judgment and solution to doubts that may
arise. So much therefore as he is defective in any kind of solid learning, so
much is the Scholar wanting of the Perfection of the true Critic.

. 14. Though then our great School-man count a Critic but a Grammarian, and a
Grammarian but an empty Paedagogue, yet let Sextus Empiricus, a Philosopher of
some note (and so perhaps the more venerable with our Scholastical Pretender)
tell him the difference between the Grammarian or Paedagogue, and the Critic.
(...). That is, the saying of Crates may seem to be of some weight and moment,
who said that this was the difference between a Grammarian and a Critic; the
Critic indeed must be skilled in all the liberal Arts and Sciences, when the
Grammarian is only an interpreter of language, and a teacher of Accents, and
knows only such trifles: So that the Critic is like, and may be compared to
the Architect, and the Grammarian to his Labourer or Hods-man.

. 15. And now if our Refuter should retract the word Critic, which at first he
understood not, and call the Doctor a Grammarian; yet let Quintilian tell our
Refuter what the true Grammarian is, that so at last he may leave the Doctor no
other but his ordinary household language, that he so frequently bestows upon
him, in plain English, A Dunce. But what says Quintilian Fab. Quint. l. 1. c.
4. De vero Grammatico, p. 19, 20. Vid. amplius.
for our Schoolmans instruction in the nature of the true Grammarian? Nec
Poetas legisse satis est; excutiendum omne Scriptorum genus, non propter
historias modo, sed verba, quae frequenter jus ab Authoribus sumunt. Tum nec
citra Musicen Grammatice potest esse perfecta, cum ei de metris rhythmisque
dicendum sit. Nec si rationem Syderum ignoret, Poetas intelligat, qui (ut alia
mittam) toties ortu occasuque signorum in declarandis Authoribus utuntur. Nec
ignara Philosophiae, cum propter plurimos in omnibus fere carminibus locos ex
intima quaestionum naturalium subtilitate repetitos, tum vel propter Empedoclem
in Graecis, Varronem and Lucretium in Latinis, qui pracepta sapientiae versibus
tradiderunt. Eloquentia quoque non modica est opus, ut de unaquaque earum quas
demonstravimus rerum dicat proprie and copiose. Quo minus sunt ferendi qui hanc
artem ut tenuem and jejunam cavillantur, quae nisi Oratori futuro fundamenta
fideliter jecerit, quicquid superstruxeris corruet: necessaria pueris, jucunda
senibus, dulcis secretorum comes, and quae sola omni studiorum genere plus
habet operis quam Ostentationis. Thus Quintilian, who of any was best able to
judge of the Parts and due abilities of a Grammarian indeed.

. 16. And therefore it is the less to be wondered that Dion. dissert. 53. de
Homero.
Dion tells us of Aristotle, (...), that from this Prodigy of knowledge, in
whom God has showed how far humane Reason is able to pierce into the secrets of
Nature, both Criticism and Grammar first took their beginning.

. 17. I might now show how useful, how necessary the Critic and Grammarian is
to complete the Divine: But the most Excellent Heinsius has saved me that
labor in the Dissertation already quoted. I shall only appeal to all knowing
and judicious Divines, whether the best Expositors of Scripture are not also
the best Critics, and whether since that kind of Learning has been in fashion
in the world, we have not known more of the obscure, doubtful and knotty places
of Scripture in this last Age, then the Christian world was able to discover in
five hundred years before, and in the very height of School-learning.

. 18. But yet I would not be thought to undervalue this Learning also. I know
the great use and Advantage of a judicious skill in it. I admire at the strange
heights and curious subtilties and profound reasonings of those Doctors; and I
know nothing wanting to make them the most admirable of men, but the true
Critic and Grammarian. And he that would advance Learning to the height, must
fix the aerie speculations, that now begin to flote too much in some Critics
heads, with the solid Reason of the Schools. And he, at least in my Judgment,
will prove the only Scholar, that judiciously studies both.

. 19. And therefore though our School-man so much undervalue this learning,
(wherein the Doctor has demonstrated his excellence to the world in his very
many writings, particularly in his exquisite Comment on all the Books of the
New Testament, and that other upon the Psalms,) yet what pity is it that such
a profound Doctor and so eminent a School-man as he is, had not also been a
Critic, that so he might have truly understood the import of words and phrases
that are used in his own mother-language?

. 20. For very ignorantly he tells the Doctor, though he speak it as
sententiously as if Seneca's Ghost had inspired him, that Early cautelous
speaking is no Salvo unto after-unwariness. For though the word Salve in
English signify a Medicine, yet this hybridous word Salvo most certainly does
not. Borrowed it is from the use and practice and customs of the Law, which
are wont to express clauses of Reservation and Exception with a Salvo jure meo
and the like, from which and the like forms it is translated into our Language
to signify a Reservation and Exception. And this is all our Don Henrico has
gained by speaking English in a Spanish Dialect, to talk exquisite Nonsense,
and make his language ridiculous.

. 21. But why, I pray Sir, is Early Cautelous speaking no Salvo, no excuse you
mean, for after-unwariness? I had thought that in Polemical writings and
Scholastical Disputes it had been the method of the Schools, first to set down
the state of the Question, and then to guide and steer the whole body of their
Discourse by that Chart and Compass. Though the Dispute does multiply into
never so much length, it is not the custom of those Authors to make a new
state, or repeat the old at every turn, because they count that done
sufficiently in the beginning of the Discourse. And therefore, Sir, you betray
your self to be no great Master of Method in such Eristical Discourses, for
blaming the Doctor for his Early cautelous speaking, which in the Judgment of
all the world, that know the manner of such Controversies, might justly make
latter caution unnecessary; since all that follows in the continuation of such
Disputes, by the practice of all writers, is only to be understood according to
the first state and setting the bounds of the Question. The Doctor indeed had
not the spirit of Divination, nor could he foresee what a subtle Disputant he
should cope with: otherwise without doubt he would have dreamed at least of the
Blows and Knocks he is now exposed to, and would as carefully have warded them.

. 22. But if his words in the Treatise of Will Worship were so cautious, that
this sense of the words you undertake to refute could not, by your own
confession, be affixed on them, why then is this no clearing of his Innocence?
Is it not usual all the world over, for men to expound latter doubtful speeches
by the former? especially when so cautious a Repetition of a man's meaning, at
every turn, would be so ridiculously nauseous? Good Sir, give me a Reason why
the Tract of Will Worship, wherein the state of the Question was first very
punctually set down, should not serve to explain the meaning of the Account to
Mr. Cawdrey, since this last was written in defense of the former, and is
nothing else but a Continuation of the former Dipute? If you cannot, (as I know
you cannot) then let his early cautious speaking there be a sufficient clearing
of his Innocence here, and an absolute forestalling of your Use of Confutation.

. 23. But how is this, Sir? what? your Use of Confutation grounded on a Passage
in the Doctors Answer to Mr. Cawdrey? I had thought, Sir, you had told us it
was grounded on the 21th.. of the Doctors (...). I am sure, when the Doctor had
professed his own innocence in that passage by you quoted, and proved it, and
publicly renounced the Error which you then laid to his charge, you then told
us, that you would charge him by Consequence, and in the Close of your first
Argument (which makes the greatest part of this your Reply) grounded on the
(...) you tell us, Thus you see what the Reason was that induced me to charge
you with this Opinion.

. 24. But this saying and unsaying is now no news to me: since I am gotten so
far in the Examination of this Empty Pamphlet, I am fully confirmed that you
are nothing but Words and Noise; and you can with great Confidence say any
thing against a great Critic. And so I come to the next Section.

SECT. 9.
The Refuters impertinent referring to former performances. His vain pretenses
of proof. The Refuters reasonings with himself inconsequent: proved. The
intension of the Act proportioned to the intension of the Habit, so as not to
exceed it, unless by Accident; but not always to equal it. Proved by instance
of the Lutenist, and Painter, and Preacher. Habits not necessary, but voluntary
causes, unless ab extrinseco determined.

Doctor HAMMOND.
18. BUt the Answer to Mr. Cawdrey, which occasioned it, was, I think, as
cautious also, 1. in the words recited by the Refuter, viz. that Christ himself
was more ardent in one Act of Prayer then in another; 2. in the words following
in that Answer, but not recited by him, viz. that the sincerity of this or that
Virtue expressed in this or that performance, is it we speak of, when we say it
consists in a latitude and has Degrees: where the (this or that performance)
are certainly Acts of the Virtue, consisting in a latitude; and having Degrees
(viz. in that latitude) no way implies him that has Virtue in that latitude
(viz. Christ) to want at present, and in that sense to be capable of further
Degrees.

19. I am willing to look as jealously as I can on any passage of my own, which
falls under any man's Censure; and therefore finding nothing in the words (set
down by him as the ground of the Refutation) which is any way capable of it, I
have reviewed the whole Section, and weighed every period as sufficiently as I
could, to observe whether I could draw or wrest that Consequence from any other
passage not recited by him.

20. And I find none in any degree liable, except it should be this in the
beginning of the Section, where setting down the Argument as it lay in the
Tract of Will worship, I say, it is possible for the same person which so loves
God (i. e. with all the heart) to love him, and express that Love more
intensely at one time then another, as appeared by the example of Christ.

21. And if this be thought capable of misapprehension, by reason of the (and),
disjoyning Love from the expressions of it, and so the expressions belonging to
the Acts, the Love be deemed to denote the habitual Love, I must only say, that
is a misapprehension, for that by loving with all the heart in the first place,
I certainly meant the sincere habit of Love, by Love in the latter place, the
inward acts of Love, and by the outward expressions of Love, the outward
expressions of those inward Acts: and of those Acts only I speak and of those
expressions, when I say they are more intense at one time then another.

JEANES.
I shall here briefly represent unto you that which made me think you guilty of
detracting from the All-fulness of Christ's habitual Grace, and refer you for
confirmation hereof unto what I have said in the beginning of this my
Discourse. The undeniable consequence of what you say in answer to Mr. Cawdrey
is, as I have proved, that Christ's Love of God was capable of further Degrees.
Now hereupon I thus reasoned in my mind: You were to be understood either of
the Habit, or of the inward Act of Love; for as for the outward Expressions of
Love, it is without dispute that they cannot be said to be Love properly, but
only by a Trope. If you should have said that you spoke of the Habit of Love,
then you would have expressly impugned the All-fullness of Christ's habitual
Grace; and if you should say, as now you do, that you meant the inward Acts of
Love, why then you would even hereby impliedly, and by consequence, have
opposed the perfection of Christ's habitual Grace, because the intension of the
inward acts of Love proceeds from the intension of the habit of Love, and is
therefore proportioned unto it. But of this more fully in the place above
mentioned. Thus having showed you what invited me to my Use of Confutation, I
shall pass over the three other Sections, which you your self I presume would
have spared, if you had been privy unto that which I now acquaint you with.

. 1. The Doctor in the four former Paragraphs had truly stated the Question in
Debate, and clearly set down his own meaning, and after the most impartial
survey of every suspicious period in the quoted Section, had found nothing that
with any ingenuity could be forced to speak contrary to his present judgment
here expressed. And now our Refuter, in stead of convincing the Doctor, and
disproving any thing here said, steps in, and tells us that he shall briefly
represent to the Doctor that which made him think him guilty of detracting from
the All-fullness of Christ's habitual grace, and refer him for confirmation
hereof unto what he has said in the beginning of his Discourse.

. 2. Say you so, Sir? I see then your skill in Music is but little, because
you are always harping upon one string. But, good Sir, forbear, in charity
forbear: for know you not that

Occidit miseros Crambe repetita Magistros? Juvenal.


Howsoever, if you can allow us no new Arguments, it is not fit, nor can you in
justice expect to receive any but old Answers. And therefore have the Patience
to look back, and you shall find this your invincible Demonstration proved no
better then a ridiculous Sophisme and a Farrago of Mistakes.

. 3. But he goes on with Triumph, and the Galliardise of a Conqueror, and
says, The undeniable consequence of what the Doctor says in answer to Mr.
Cawdrey is, as he has proved, that Christ's Love of God (his habitual Love he
must mean, if he speak any thing to the purpose; for the Doctor positively
maintains a gradual difference in the Acts of Christ's Love) was capable of
further Degrees.

. 4. But, good Sir, I beseech you do not talk too much of Proof. Where, where
have you performed this so wonderful Achievement? In good earnest tell us,
that we may erect for you no less then Bacchus monuments and Hercules Pillars,
with a Ne plus ultra inscribed for a Motto, and a Trophee of your great
Acquests. For my own part, I cannot yet tell where to find it, but all along I
see that your Proofs and your Conclusions are at far greater distance then your
self and Doctor Hammond. For little hope there is they should ever be
reconciled, though in good time you and the Doctor may. You seem indeed (to
speak to you in your own Rhetorical expressions, which I hope Jeanes Answer to
the (...) page 15.
will therefore please you) most vehemently to assert your Conclusion, and to
affirm that you have proved it. But you must pardon me if I entertain not your
vehement Asseverations for solid Arguments, as if they were Propositiones per
se notae. Pray, Sir, review your Proofs again, and put more strength into your
Arguments. If you can make good that they contain any disproof of what the
Doctor has said, unless begging of the Question, and your own (...) be
argumentative, you shall have my hearty leave to triumph over the Doctor as you
please. And now I give you thanks for this answer, with which your own papers
have supplied me.

. 5. But now we have need of an O yes. For he will condescend to discover to
the world his own secret thoughts, that surpass those Contemplations of
Columbus, that first drew him on to the search of a New world. Say on, Sir, and
we shall give you as venerable Attention as the votaries of Apollo Pythius did
to the Oracle when it spoke.

. 6. Now hereupon, says our Refuter, I thus reasoned in my mind: You, Mr.
Doctor, were to be understood either of the Habit, or the inward Act of Love;
for as for the outward Expressions of Love, it is without dispute that they
cannot be said to be Love properly, but only by a Trope. If you should have
said (which he never did, but always declared the contrary) that you spoke of
the Habit of Love, then you would have expressly impugned the All-fulness of
Christ's habitual grace (which yet the Doctor does always profess to
acknowledge;) and if you should say, as now you do, that you meant the inward
Acts of Love (as he always did) why then I concluded, that you would even
hereby impliedly, and by consequence, have opposed the Perfection of Christ's
habitual grace, because the intension of the inward Acts of Love proceeds
from the intension of the Habit of Love, and is therefore proportioned unto it.
But of this more fully in the place above mentioned.

And thus, he says, he has showed us what invited him to his Use of
Confutation.

. 7. Well, we see what rouzed the good man. But yet I cannot choose but suspect
the whole for a plain sophistical Elench, since all that follows the Because,
upon which alone as the Basis the whole Argumentation is founded, is a very
gross mistake. But they say the Ephesian Temple, one of the Wonders of the
world, was built upon a Quagmire.

. 8. And therefore, good Sir, notwithstanding your (because,) I must needs deny
your sequel; and because I deal fairly with you, I shall give you my Reasons
for it.

. 9. It is true, the intension of the inward Acts of Love must proceed from the
intension of the Habit, so as it is Potentia ex vi Habitus non potest efficere
Actum intensiorem quam sit ipse Habitus: quia nulla forma remissa potest per se
confer ad effectum intensiorem, ut supra disp. 18. fusius tractatum est.
Suarez. Metaph. disp. 44. sect. 6. n. 3.
impossible that the Act should per se be more intense and perfect then the
Habit. Because the Act is the Effect, and the Habit is Cause of the Act; now no
Effect can be more noble then its Cause, because Nihil dat quod non habet, aut
eminenter, ut in causis Aequivocis, aut formaliter, ut in Vnivocis. For I speak
not now of Causes per Accidens, because they have no place here.

. 10. But then, though the Act, which is the Effect, cannot be more high and
intense then the Habit from whence it effectively flows, and so the intension
of the Act must proceed from the intension of the Habit, and is therefore in
this sense Propter necessariam proportionem inter Habitum and Actum, non potest
Habitus remissus per se efficere intensiorem Actum se, quia Habitus non
inclinat nisi ad Actus similes illis a quibus fuit genitus, test Aristotele,
2. Eth. c. 1. and test etiam experientia, etc. Suarez. ib. n. 4.

Denique, etiam in Habitibus infusis, docent communiter Theologi ex vi illorum
non posse Potentiam efficere Actus intensiores ipsis Habitibus; quamquam in eis
posset esse major ratio dubitandi, vel quia tales Habitus sunt perfectiores
suis Actibus, vel quia non solum dant facilitatem sed etiam potestatem:
nihilominus, quia revera sunt Habitus, and dantur cum debita proportione ad
Actus, ut ex vi illorum fiant Actus connaturali modo, ideo quantum est ex
intrinseca virtute talium Habituum, non valet Potentia efficere intensiores
Actus ipsis Habitibus, sed si eos interdum elicit, est ratione alterius auxilii
Divini. Suarez. ibid. n. 5. Vid. ibid. ampl. n. 6, 7.


proportioned unto it: yet let me ask you, Sir, is it necessary, vice versa,
that the Act should be always as high and perfect and intense as the Habit? I
trow not, Sir. And if it appear so in the issue, as without doubt it will, then
you have put a Fallacy upon your self, and by a downright mistake fallen upon
your Use of Confutation.

. 11. For instance. I hope you will not say that any Lutenist can ever play
better then his Art can guide him, or that his playing shall regularly and per
se exceed his skill, or that the Painters fingers should outdo his Art; unless
the This story is at large in Strabo Geograph. l. 6. p. 180. edit Basil. which
Erasmus in his Adagies, Tit. Taciturnitas laudata, Adag Acanthia Cicada seu
(...), has thus elegantly rendered; Strabo Timaeum citat authorem, quendam in
Pythiorum certamine Eunomum Locrensem, and Rheginensem Aristonem in canendi
certamen venisse: Aristonem Apollinem invocasse Delphicum, ut sibi canenti
fieret auxilio, quod a Delphis Rheginenses olim essent profecti. Eunomus
respondit, Rheginensibus ne certandum quidem omnino de Musica, apud quos
Cicada, vocalissimum animal, voce careret. Vtrisque ce^ta^tibus, cum in Eunomi
Cithura una inter canendum chorda frangeretur, Cicada supervolans astitit, ac
vocem alioqui defuturam suo cantu supplevit: atque ita victor declaratus
statuam Cithara di posuit cum cicada citharae infidente. Vide etiam Erasmum,
Tit. Auxilium, Ada^. Chordae vice.
Grass-hopper, as I remember to have read, that once in the Pythian Games he
did come in to mend the Music which the Artist failed in; or the Est in ea
Canis mire factus, ut quem pariter casus and ars pinxerit. Non judicabat se
exprimere in eo spumam anhelantis posse, cum in reliqua omni part (quod
difficillimum erat) sibi ipsi satisfecisset. Displicebat autem ars ipsa, nec
minui poterat, and videbatur nimia, ac longius a veritate discedere, spumaque
illa pingi non ex ore nasci, anxio animi cruciatu, cum in Pictura verum esse,
non verisimile vellet; absterserat saepius mutaveratque penicillum, nullo modo
sibi approbans. Postremo, iratus arti, quod intelligeretur, spongiam eam
impegit inviso loco tabulae, and illa reposuit ablatos colores, qualiter cura
optabat; fecitque in Pictura Fortuna Naturam. Hoc exemplo similis and Neaclem
successus in spuma equi similiter spongia impacta secutus dicitur, eum pingeret
poppyzonta retinentem equum. Canem ita Protogenes monstravit and Fortuna. Plin.
Nature. hist. lib. 35. ca. 10. mihi page 346. tom. 3.

(...). Arist. lib. 6. Eth. ca. 4.. 3.


Painters rage casually directs his Pencill to draw the Dogs and Horses
foame, which all his skill and frequent attempts could not reach to. The
Perfection of the Act still argues the Perfection of the Habit, and the
intension here must be derived from the former. But then, though the Painter
cannot limne beyond his skill, nor the Lutenist play unless by chance; yet I
hope the Lutenist and Painter is not morally or naturally bound and
necessitated always to play and limne as well as they can.

. 12. To come closer; I suppose Mr. Jeanes to be a good Preacher (for I have
seen a good Sermon of his in print concerning Abstinence from all appearance of
evil, and he would do well to think of his own Doctrine;) but yet I cannot
think him bound either by Gods law or man's to preach always as well as he
can: Nor do I believe he makes his Sermons with the same care and pains, and
sets them off with the same Learning and Rhetoric when he preaches weekly to
his Parish at Chedzoy, as when he preaches before the Judges in the face of the
Country. And yet still the intension of the Act must proceed from the intension
of the Habit. A man of lower parts, and less learning and Judgment and
Rhetoric then himself, cannot speak or write so well as he himself can: And
yet he himself is not always bound to exceed a meaner Scholars performances,
and many times Prudence and Discretion will invite him to stoop and condescend
to the weakness and Capacity of his Auditors.

. 13. For the Dicendum est ergo, quod Habitus determinat Potentiam ad hoc, ut
ipsa Habitu perfecta sit proprium principium perfecti operis, in quo sua
consummatur perfectio. Et quoniam Habitus est quo quis operatur cum vult, and
non cum habet, and propterea est quo quis operatur infra ejus Potestatem,
quantum vult, non quantum potest, ut patet in Artificibus; ideo non mireris si
Actus Potentiae habituatae non sunt semper perfectiores Actibus Potentiae non
habituatae. Cajetan. in 1. 2. q. 49. art. 3. page 98. col. 4. K.

Habitus in tantum potest esse Principium Actus Liberi, in quantum possumus eo
uti cum volumus: non ergo dat ipse Habitus libertatem, sed potius (ut ita
dicam) illam accipit a Potentia in qua residet quatenus Potentia est, quae
Habitu utitur, ut in ejus facultate positum est illo uti vel non uti, etc. Vid.
amp. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 19. sect. 5. n. 8.

Dicimus Qualitatem ex se habere talem naturam (intensibilem) and non ratione
alterius, quamvis quoad existentiam redigatur in actum magis vel minus
perfectum ab agente inaequali, vel in virtute vel in approximatione, vel in
voluntate si sit liberum. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 46. sect. ^. n. 3. vid. ibid.
sect. 3. n. 9. and n. 15, 16. and sect. 4. n. 14. p. 497. col. 1. and Suarez.
disp. 19. sect. 2. and sect. 4. n. 8. etc. --

Voluntas ab objecto proposito non semper determinatur ad unum; certa est and
recepta ab omnibus, eamque ex professo probat D. Thomas 1. 2. q. 10. art. 2.
Nam perinde est dicere Voluntatem non necessitari ab alio, quod non determinari
ad unum ab illo -- Sed est certum non necessitari ab omnibus objectis, ergo nec
determinari ad unum. Igitur quoad Exercitium solum in Patria ab infinita
bonitate Dei clare visi determinatur ad unum, juxta receptam doctrinam; quoad
Specificationem vero a Bono in communi, aut aliis similibus objectis, etc.
Suarez. Metap. disp. 19. sect. 6. n. 9. Vid. ibid. sect. 5. n 7.


Habits whereof we speak, being seated in the Will, do ordinarily partake of
the nature of the Will wherein they are subjected, and concurring still
effectively with the Will to the production of the Act, must still be free and
voluntary causes to act, not necessarily and ad ultimum virium, but how and
when and in what manner and measure he that has the Habit shall think fit,
unless the Will be otherwise limited and determined. For instance, The blessed
Saints and Angels in Patria love God ad ultimum virium necessarily, and yet
freely (as freedom is improperly taken) because such is the excellency of the
Object, God, which now they know face to face (being Comprehensores and in
Patria, as they speak in the Schools) that he cannot choose but most
necessarily and most ardently be loved. But then this determination is wholly
extrinsecal to a Habit ut sic, and praecisely considered, and only by accident
in respect of the Knowledge and Perfection of the Object, which cannot choose
but be always most perfectly loved where it is so perfectly known.

. 14. And Thus (to speak in your own Complement, which you vouchsafe in the
Close of this Section to spend upon the Doctor) having showed you the ground of
your mistake that invited you unto your Use of Confutation, I might pass over
not only the three other Sections, but the rest of your whole Book, which you
your self I presume would have spared, if you had been privy to that which I
now acquaint you with.

But we must attend you in your motion.

SECT. 10.
The Refuters Saying is the only proof that Actual Love is in the Praedicament
of Action. The contrary proved by Suarez, Smiglecius, Scheibler. In Actual love
the Action and the Terminus of it considerable. The Refuters Remarques in
Scheibler impertinent. His Oracles nothing to the purpose. The Propositions to
be proved. Immanent Acts in what sense Qualities. Scheibler not slighted.
Aristotle his Character of Eudoxus agreeable to the Refuter. His words not home
to the Refuters purpose, proved from Reason and Suarez. Habitual and Actual
Love both Qualities and Species of the same Genus: proved from sundry places in
Suarez. The Refuters further Impertinencies. Immanent Acts of Love in what
sense Dispositions, in what not, from Smiglecius, Aquinas. Acts of two sorts.

Doctor HAMMOND.
22. THe word Love, as I said, is a Genus equally comprehending the two
Species, habitual and actual Love, and equally applicable to either of the
Species, to the Acts as well as the Habit of Love. And so when I say, Love is
capable of Degrees, the meaning is clear, The Generical word Love restrained to
the latter Species, i. e. considered in respect of the Acts of Love gradually
differenced one from the other, is in that respect capable of Degrees both
inwardly and in outward expressions: that Act of Love that poured out and
expressed it self in the more Ardent prayer, was a more intense Act of Love then
another Act of the same habitual Love which did not so ardently express it self.

JEANES.
THat Love is not a Genus equally comprehending habitual and actual Love, as
it is two Species, I have already proved by this Argument, Because they are in
several Predicaments, Habitual Love in the Predicament of Quality, and Actual
in the Predicament of Action. There are, I know, diverse great Philosophers and
Schoolmen that make all immanent Acts, and consequently all inward Acts of
Love to be Qualities; they are, say they, only Grammatical Actions, not
Metaphysical Actions in the Predicament of Action. But this opinion is untrue
in it self, and no ways advantageous unto your cause in hand.

1. It is untrue in itself; and to confirm this, I shall offer to your
consideration two arguments out of Scheibler, which clearly prove immanent acts
to be true, proper, and predicamental actions in the Predicament of Action. In
universum id sine incommodo potest dici Actio, quod sufficit ad constituendam
causalitatem Efficientis: Atqui dantur causae efficientes, quibus non convenit
alia causalitas quam quae sit actio immanens: Ergo actio immanens vere est
actio. Propositio patet, Quia praedicamentum Actionis ponitur ad locandam
causalitatem efficientis causae in genere entium, ut supra disputatum,
explicando divisionem praedicamentorum. Et confirmatur, Quod actio sit
adaequata causalitas efficientis, ut supra visum est, lib. 1. c. 12. Assumptio
patet. Nam Homo absolute est causa efficiens in quantum denominatur videre aut
intelligere: et tamen isti sunt actus immanentes. That which is the Causalitie
of an efficient Cause is a true and predicamental Action in the predicament of
Action: But immanent Acts are the causalities of efficient causes; and
therefore proper and predicamental Actions. Deinde ad actus immanentes sunt
potentiae activae: Sed potentiae activae sunt per ordinem ad veras actiones:
Ergo actus immanentes sunt verae actiones. Et si hi solum titulo tenus sunt
actiones, Ergo etiam potentiae illae activae titulotenus sunt potentiae
activae. That which terminates and actuates an active power is a proper and
predicamental action: But every immanent act terminates and actuates an active
power: and therefore every immanent act is a proper and predicamental action.
Met. lib. 2. cap. 10. n. 27. You may perhaps slight Scheibler, as a trivial
author; but I urge his reasons, not his Authority: and if you can answer his
reasons, you may speak your pleasure of him, and of me for alleging of him.
But I can press you with an Author far greater then Scheibler, our great Master
Aristotle, of whom you make somewhere in your writings honorable mention. He,
lib. 10. Ethic. c. 3. tells us roundly, that the operations of virtues, and
even happiness it self, are not qualities, (...) but these are immanent Acts,
and therefore in his opinion immanent acts are not qualities. But secondly,
suppose this opinion were true in it self, yet will it no ways advantage your
cause; for the patrons of it range immanent acts under the first Species of
quality, and then are they either Dispositions or Habits. If you say they are
dispositions, as most of the abovementioned schoolmen hold them to be, against
this I object, That however they may be so in other men, yet they cannot be so
in Christ: for a Disposition carries in it is notion inchoation and
imperfection, and therefore to attribute it unto Christ is to throw an apparent
dishonor upon him. If you say they are habits, why then, you cannot deny them
to be gracious habits, and so you will fall upon that opinion of which in this
reply you so studiously endeavor to acquit your self, viz. that the same habits
of Grace in Christ may be more intense at one time then another, and
consequently that his habitual Grace was not always full and perfect.

. 1. Whereas the Doctor had been forced again to mind our Refuter of the useful
distinction of Love into it is Species, Habitual and Actual, he tells us again,
that Love is not a Genus equally comprehending them as it is two Species, as he
has proved by this argument, because they are in several Predicaments, habitual
Love in the Predicament of Quality, and actual Love in the Predicament of
Action.

. 2. It is true indeed that you have told us seven or eight times already that
this you have proved. And what pity is it, that since you are a man of such
Gravity and parts, that we should not take your word for it? But my good
Pythagoras, since we are out of our five years Probation, give us more then
your bare word for the proof of this part of your Assumption, that actual Love
is in the Predicament of Action, and not of Quality. Review your former Pages
(that I may retort your own language) and tell us whether you have attempted
any thing to this purpose. Do not then beg the Question, like a Puisny
Sophister, but prove it like a Schoolman. Shall I again bestrew your way with
your own Rhetorical flowers? Jeanes Answer to the Eclenest. page 15, 17.
I am resolved as well as you to swallow none of your proofless Dictates:
seeing I have entered the Lists with you, you must not think me irreverent and
saucy, if (as the Soldiers speak) I dispute every inch of ground with you, and
be so bold as to call upon you for the Proof of whatsoever you assert touching
that which is in controversy between us. Said indeed you have often that
actual. Love is a Predicamental Action, and not a Quality, but you have no
where proved it.

. 3. And give me leave to tell you, that it will be impossible to make it good,
till first you shall demonstrate against Suarez, and the best Metaphysicians
and Philosophers, that Actio, ut sic, non dicit essentialem respectum ad
terminum, and that there can be any Motion, whether instantaneous or
successive, and not from a Terminus a Quo to a Terminus ad Quem, and give us a
solid answer to their Arguments.

. 4. And now that you may see that Suarez is not singular in this Doctrine,
besides the Authors I have already quoted to this purpose (for I am willing to
move your Palate with a fresh Dish) I shall now refer you to Smiglecius Logic,
a book of solidity and clearness in matters of this nature. He tells us, Non
solum sunt in corpore passibiles Qualitates, sed etiam in anima. Nam etiam in
anima oriuntur affectus ex passione and alteratione corporea, ut ira, gaudium,
timor, tristitia, Amor, etc.

Quod si objicies affectus istos esse Actiones mentis, and in Praedicamento
Actionis reponendos (how say you Mr. Refuter?) Respondeo, in Action duo
considerari; primo, Actionem, secundo, Terminum, qui est effectus Actionis.
Ratione primi, affectus spectant ad Praedicamentum Actionis; ratione secundi,
spectant ad Praedicamentum Qualitatis. Smiglec. Log. disp. 11. q. 3. p. 417.
edit. Oxon.

. 5. Nor must you be ready to take advantage, and say, that though actual Love
be not a predicamental Action, yet Smiglecius you see makes it a Patible
Quality, and so Love as a Genus cannot comprehend the Habit in the first
Species of Quality and the Act in the third, and therefore hence at least it
will appear that the Doctor is mistaken.

. 6. For the same Smiglecius has sufficiently prevented this Objection, when in
the beginning of his disputation Smiglec. Log. disp. 11. q. 1 p. 412. Vid.
etiam Suarez. Metaph. disp. 42. sect. 5. n. 15.
he lays it down for a ground, that eadem Specie qualit as potest induere
omnes illas rations, and esse simul and Habitus, and naturalis Potentia, and
Passibilis Qualitas. And therefore actual Love, though as considered with
respect to the alteration arising by it, it be ranked among Passible Qualities,
yet as it is Qualitas been vel male afficiens subjectum, abstrahendo ab hoc,
quod sit facile vel difficile mobilis, it belongs to the first Species.

. 7. Nay, which perhaps will raise a wonder in our Refuter, I do not think but
this Doctrine will also be found in his own Master Scheibler. Scheibler.
Metaph. lib. 2. c. 8. n. 105. p. 918.
For whereas it had been objected, that Actionis non datur Actio, his answer is
-- Respondeo, Actus immanentes per quos fiunt habitus posse bifariam aestimari,
nempe simpliciter in ratione Actionis, vel quantum ad intrinsecum terminum suum
qualitativum. Actio igitur convenit hoc solum posteriori respectu, ut Suarez.
determinat disp. 18. Metaph. sect. 4. and disp. 44. sect. 8 n. 23. Actionis
autem non est actio immediate and ex vi sua, seu in quantum talis est, and
dimisso respectu ad qualitativum terminum. Vid. supra c. 6. tit. 4. art. 3.
punct. 1. number. 37.

. 8. Well then, in Actual Love two things may be considered, the very Action of
loving, or the Quality of Love produced by that Action, which is it is terminus
and product. Now these two, by reason of the narrowness of language, are
comprehended under the same common name as other immanent Acts are: but yet
though the name and expression be the same, the nature of the things are so
different, that they are put in several predicaments; the immanent act of love
considered as in fluxu is in the Predicament of Action, but considered as in
termino continually depending on the action of Love (as light does upon
illumination) that produces it, it is a Quality, and in the first Species
ranked and placed. I have already cleared this Doctrine in the answer to our
Refuters irrefragable demonstration.

. 9. But now we shall hear news indeed, and he will let us know his own
Remarques in Scheibler, and he tells it us as gravely as the Roman Priests
were wont to relate the Fate of the Empire from the books of the Sibylls, which
themselves could only read. Never any man without doubt made the like
observations.

. 10. There are, I know, says he, diverse great Philosophers and Schoolmen that
make all immanent Acts, and consequently all inward acts of Love, to be
Qualities; they are, say they, only Grammatical actions, not Metaphysical
actions in the predicament of Action. But 1. this opinion is untrue in it self;
and 2ly no way advantageous to the Doctors cause in hand.

. 11. For once, Sir, be it granted. And what do you thence conclude against
Doctor Hammond? I see you are a cunning Angler, that having fished long and
catched nothing, now fall to troubling the stream. But, En Rhodus, en Saltus.
The Doctor made use of a distinction of Love into the Habit and the Act, which
all the world, for ought I could ever find to the contrary approve of; and our
Refuter to oppose it tells us, that some Schoolmen and Philosophers make all
immanent Acts Qualities, etc.

. 12. And is not now Doctor Hammond confuted? Sing, sing your Io Paean; while
we look out some Diogenes with his Candle and Lanthorn, to find out in what
corner our baffled Doctor hides his head. Well, Sir, I see you are so excellent
a Schoolman, that I must give you my Vote to answer Bellarmine. There is
nothing can withstand your all-powerful Confutation.

. 13. But, good Sir, I beseech you tell us, what is all this to the Doctor or
the present dispute? Did he ever take part with those Philosophers and
Schoolmen? I pray what temptation had you then to run into this Digression?
Truly none, but that a book was to be made, and Doctor Hammond to be confuted,
whether he spoke right or wrong, or say any thing or nothing. By this I see,
Sir, you can answer Quodlibets, and Ergo you are a writer of Scholastical and
Practical Divinity.

. 14. But if we will but stay and have patience till the Sun is up, this
Memnon's head will vent an Oracle.

First then he says, This Opinion is untrue in it self; and to confirm this he
shall offer to the Doctors consideration two arguments out of Scheibler, which
clearly prove immanent Acts to be true, proper and predicamental Actions in the
Predicament of Action.

. 15. And have you not told us news indeed? you should have brought us word
that the Sun shines at Rhodes, or when it is in it is Zenith. There is nothing
more generally received in the Schools then that is. And I dare say, scarce any
Philosopher or Schoolman of any note has for these hundred years almost
delivered any thing to the contrary. Why then urge you Scheibler and his
reasons, as if he, being a late writer, had discovered a Truth which former
Authors were mistaken in? If in the next edition of your book, or Rejoinder to
Doct. Hammond, it may any way gratify you, I shall refer you to Authors of a
greater Bulk and larger name then Scheibler for the proof of this point. I
shall refer you to Smiglecius, to Ruvio, to Suarez, and all the Authors they
have quoted: but especially I shall refer you to Suarez his most excellent
reasons which he has urged in the Demonstration of it. And give me leave to
tell you, that your Master Scheibler first lighted his Candle at his Taper.

. 16. That you may see we will not always be at difference, and that it is not
love of contention and victory, but Truth only that I strive for, it is granted
to you, and your Master Scheibler, that Actio immanens vere est actio. But then
withal let me add, that this is not the question between you and the Doctor.
The Proposition you must prove is only this, that Actus immanentes sunt tantum
Actiones, and nullo respectu Qualitates, that immanent Acts are only Actions,
and in no respect Qualities. Soncinas, it is true, said that Actus immanentes
sunt tantum qualitates; and Suarez, and your Scheibler, and others have
demonstrated the falsehood of that assertion. But then this said not the Doctor,
and so falls not under the lash of this Use of Confutation.

. 17. He said indeed that Actual Love was a Quality specifically distinct from
Love that is the Habit. But he never denied that the Action of loving
(comprehended under the same common name with actual Love) was a predicamental
Action.

. 18. Prove then, good Sir, if you will acquit your self like a Schooleman,
either 1. that the immanent act of Love in no respect or consideration is or
can be a quality, or 2ly that all immanent acts in general, or 3ly that this
immanent act of Love in particular, has no terminus or Quality produced by it
which is called by the same name. When you shall have done this, I shall not
then blame you for starting a new Question.

. 19. If you will be pleased to consult, you may find that the same Suarez
Suarez. Metaph. disp. 48. sect. 2. n. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
, who proves that all immanent acts are not simply Qualities, but in some
respect also true predicamental actions, does also demonstrate Suarez. Met.
disp. 42. sect. 5. n. 13, 14, 15,
that immanent acts are not only actions, but also qualities, called by the
same name with the Actions themselves, and that it is de intrinseca ratione
Actionis ut sic, ut habeat intrinsecum terminum ad quem tendat ut producendum
per ipsam: and consequently that the immanent Act of Love, as well as all other
immanent Acts, is not only a predicamental action, but includes in it is essence
a transcendental respect to the quality of actual Love that is it is Terminus,
and which is that very Quality which the Doctor truly makes the opposite
species to habitual Love, and equally comprehended under one and the same
immediate Genus.

. 20. Though then true it is, that all immanent Acts that are causalities of
efficient causes are consequently predicamental Actions, which is all Scheibler
says in his first argument; yet as true it is, as Suarez and others say, that
all predicamental Actions, and consequently all immanent Acts, that are truly
such, must of necessity relate to some term by them produced, which in the
present case is a Quality called by the same name as the Action is. And
therefore Doctor Hammond must be concluded to be in the right, till you shall
answer Suarez his arguments, and prove his Doctrine to be in the wrong.

. 21. Though secondly it be granted to your Master Scheibler, that immanent
Acts, because they terminate active powers, must be concluded to be
predicamental actions; yet it cannot be denied to Suarez and others, that
immanent Acts, because they are predicamental Actions, must have some Quality
to terminate them. As there cannot be an efficient Cause without it is
Causality: Suppono quod impossible est esse motum vel mutationem realem sine
termino reali. Ex hoc arguo sic, etc. H. Cavell. in Addit. ad Scotum l. 1.
Senten. d. 17. q. 5. n. 3.
so impossible it is there should be any Causality, where nothing is produced
and caused by that Causality. As it is impossible there should be an Active
power without respect to the Act that terminates the Power: * so impossible it
is there should be any Action without some product to terminate the Action.

. 22. And thus I have neither slighted Scheibler nor his reasons, but
acknowledged that truth which that Author labors to prove by them.

. 23. But he says he can yet press us with an Author far greater then
Scheibler, our great Master Aristotle, of whom the Doctor makes somewhere in
his writings honorable mention.

. 24. And do you think, Sir, the Doctor will cease to give him that venerable
respect, because you now seem to have borrowed from his writings an argument
against him? I dare assure you the Doctor is still the same civil man, and
being himself a Person of great learning and Parts, he knows how to give that
respect such a gallant man deserves. And if you can make good that Aristotle
speaks on your side against the Doctor, I dare pass my word to bring you his
public Recantation.

. 25. But what says our great Master? Arist. lib. 10. Eth. cap. 3.
He tells us roundly, says our Refuter, that the operations of Virtues, and
even happiness it self, are not Qualities: (...).

. 26. The words indeed I acknowledge, but I cannot understand them with our
Refuters Comment.

. 27. The truth is, one (...). Arist. l. 10. Eth. c. 2.. 1.
Eudoxus, as we find in the beginning of the second Chapter of that Book, did
maintain that Pleasure was the Last End, and greatest Good.

And by the way give me leave to mind our Refuter of his great Master
Aristotle's (...). Arist. ibm.. eod.
observation concerning this Eudoxus. He tells us, that though the man's
reasons were weak, and no ways able to support his Opinion; yet because he was
looked on as a sober temperate man, he gained credit and belief with many. For
so good and virtuous a man as he, could not be deemed by them thus to teach for
love of Pleasure, but only because it was indeed the very truth. And is not
this the present Fortune of our Refuter? does he not gain many Proselytes and
Votaries to the Errors he has vented in this Treatise, because he is looked on
by some young men not only as a man of parts and great Judgment, but also as a
leader and Captain in School-learning. But Eudoxus, though otherwise never so
good, was much mistaken in this Point, and so is our Refuter, though otherwise
never so venerable and learned. I doubt not but that already this has
sufficiently appeared, and I shall in the Process also further demonstrate it.

. 28. For (to return to the text in Aristotle) whereas Plato had undertook to
refute the opinion of Eudoxus, his great Scholar, though he agreed with him in
the Conclusion, yet he could not approve of his Masters reasons as sufficient.
And the first of them gave occasion to this Text that our Refuter has urged. It
was this, as I find it reduced to form by Aquinas, Tho. Aquim. Comment. in loc.
in his Commentary on the place; Bonum videtur ad genus Qualitatis pertinere;
quaerenti enim quale est hoc, respondemus quoniam bonum: Delectatio autem non
est qualitas: Ergo non est bonum. To show the weakness of this Reason the
Philosopher replies, (...). It follows not, as Plato thought, though Pleasure
be not ranked among the number of Qualities, that therefore it is not good: for
even the Operations and Acts of Virtues and Felicity it self are not Qualities,
which no man yet can deny to be good.

. 29. And now to show how little this makes to our Refuters advantage, the
Philosopher in this reply (as appears from the sixth Vid. Arist. l. 10. Eth. c.
6.. 1, 2, 3.
Chapter of this Book) refers to what he had more largely delivered to this
purpose in the very entrance of this Treatise. He had there proved by
induction, that Love was a Transcendent thing, and placed in all (...), etc.
Arist. 1. Eth. c. 6. 2, 3.
Predicaments. He had also proved that Felicity, as it was the greatest good,
so it consisted not in a dull and lazy quality; that it was no (...). Arist. l.
10. Eth. c. 6.. 2. Vid. eund. l. 1. Eth. c. 5.. 3. etc. 7. 3, 4, 5. and ibid.
c. 8.. 7. where this is at large prosecuted.
habitual goodness, but a quick and active thing, whose excellence and
perfection did consist in Act and Operation, in use and exercise, not in
Possession; and that virtue too, though it were in it is own nature a habit, yet
it did perform nothing good, but only in the use and operation. And both these
he proves by this excellent reason, because a man may be habitually virtuous
and happy whilst he sleeps, or does any thing or nothing, even in the midst of
sufferings and miseries and greatest misfortunes. But they cannot possibly be
so in regard of the Acts and exercise of virtues. And therefore he concludes,
that as in the Olympic Games, not the most beautiful and strong, but those
that run and strive, because only such do conquer, are crowned; so amongst
those that are good and honest in the course of humane life, those only that do
well do win the Prize and Laurel.

. 30. And now, Sir, what is all this to your present purpose? Because Aristotle
disputing against Plato, asserts, as he had before proved, that the Operations
of virtues are not habitual qualities, but Actions placed in another
Predicament, that Felicity consisted not in the habitual possession of Virtue,
but in the Act and exercise of it, and that both these were good, though not
qualities; will you therefore conclude from this place that they are Actions
not terminated in qualities, or that there can be any such thing, without a
transcendental respect to that which terminates the Action, and is produced by
it? Says the Philosopher any thing Pro or Con, as they speak, to this purpose?
And yet the only matter in debate between you and the Doctor is, whether
immanent Acts, such as that of actual Love is, be purely predicamental Actions,
and nothing else, not terminated in qualities that are called by the same names
with the predicamental actions by which they are produced?

. 31. Indeed if our moral Philosopher had here said any thing to this purpose,
he had digressed from his Theme into a Metaphysical Reserche and speculation;
he had been guilty of that which they call Transitio a Genere ad Genus, a fault
which the great and best Master of Method had declared to be unpardonable.

. 32. In short then, Virtue and Felicity consist not in the Habit, but in the
Act and exercise; and being thus properly considered, and in fluxu and
operatione, they are Actions and not Qualities; and because though thus
considered they are Actions, and not Qualities, yet the one being the greatest
good, and the other also good because virtuous, they must be acknowledged to be
good, though not Qualities. And this as it was sufficient against Plato, so it
was all that the Philosopher there intended.

. 33. But then secondly, because these acts of Virtue and Felicity, as all
other immanent Acts, are something more then bare Actions, and carry with them
a transcendental respect to the Qualities that terminate them, hence it is that
these Acts are in this respect called Qualities, and those Qualities are placed
in the same Predicament with the Habits whereof they are the Effects and Acts.

. 34. And now, Sir, that you may see I do not speak altogether without Book,
you shall find the very same answer in Suarez; Suarez. Metaph. disp. 42. sect.
5.. 14.
Solum potest obijci difficilis locus Aristotelis l. 10. Eth. c. 3. ubi sic
ait, Atqui neque si voluptas non est qualitas, propter hoc bonum non est, neque
Operationes virtutis sunt qualitates, neque felicitas ipsa. Constat autem
voluptatem, felicitatem, and operationes virtutis esse actus immanentes, and
ita etiam absolute docent D. Thomas and alii non aliter interpretando verba
Aristotelis. Existimo tamen aliquo indigere moderamine, nimirum Voluptatem aut
Felicitatem non esse puram qualitatem, quae non necessario consistit in actuali
operatione ejus qui voluptate vel felicitate afficitur, quia nemo potest aut
voluptate affici vel fieri felix, nisi actualiter aliquid efficiendo, non tamen
potest negari quin illud quod facit Qualitas sit. To this, for the greater
confirmation, I shall subjoin another passage in the same Author. Suarez.
Metaph. disp. 48. sect. 2. number. 25.
Rursus cum dicitur Beatitudo consistere in action immanente, si proprie
loquamur, intelligendum est consistere in ipso actu immanente, ut est Qualitas
informans ac ultimo perficiens ipsum operans; nam in action ut actio est non
consistit nisi praesuppositive and in via ad talem perfectionem.

. 35. Indeed I wonder that you should see the Objection in that Author, and not
refute or take the least notice of this Answer. But perhaps you thought that so
great a Critic as the Doctor would not dip in Suarez Metaphysics, because
there was nothing in it for a Critics observation. And therefore you might
easily suspect that your objections thence taken would not be answered by him:
yet you did forget your art, when you pointed the Doctor to Suarez for
satisfaction in this kind. Without doubt the Doctor, though a Critic, has
shown himself better read in Metaphysics then your self, though a writer of
Scholastical and Practical Divinity.

. 36. And that I may make it good, and also instruct you in that wherein you
profess your self yet to seek, viz. that habitual and actual Love are both, as
the Doctor says, Qualities in the same Predicament, and coordinate Species of
the same next and most immediate Genus of Love, nay that it is the
generally-received opinion amongst Metaphysicians, I shall now acquaint you
with some of my observations to this purpose in that very Suarez, whom for
instruction in this point you recommend to the Doctors perusal. First then, in
his Disp. 14. sect. 3. tom. 1.

. 14. I find that Habitus and actus earum (potentiarum) in eodem genere in
rigore collocantur. Licet enim Actio ut Actio (I pray mark it, Sir,) pertineat
ad praedicamentum Actionis; tamen ut Actus vitalis habens esse consummatum in
suo genere, collocatur in praedicamento Qualitatis. You may see it proved in
that place, if yet you doubt it, ibid.. 14, 15, 16. To the same purpose look
the same Suarez disp. 44. sect. 8.. 14, 15. and disp. 42. sect. 5.. 13, 14, 15.
and disp. 48. sect. 3, 4. per tot. And thus I hope I am out of your debt for
your observations from Scheibler.

. 37. And now our Refuter having spent no less then one whole Page to no
purpose, to charge Doctor Hammond with an untruth he never thought of, nor had
any Temptation in the Controversy to let fall from his pen, he is now at
leisure to tell the world, that suppose this Opinion were true in it self, yet
it will no ways advantage the Doctors cause in hand.

. 38. Well, grant, Sir, that this opinion of those diverse great Philosophers
and Schoolmen; against whom you dispute, is not only untrue, but also nothing
to Doctor Hammond's purpose, yet what is all this to the Confutation of your
Adversary? Did he ever say, that immanent Acts in general, or that Love in
particular, were, as some say in Suarez, Suarez Metaph. disp. 48. sect. 2.. 10.
purae qualitates, and non actiones nisi aequivocae; vel, ut alii loquuntur,
Grammaticales, quia significantur per modum actionis tendentis ad objectum ut
in terminum, cum tamen in illud nihil producant? If even the same Suarez
himself, who confutes this opinion (which you deliver in his very phrases and
language translated) do yet also maintain that the Habit and the Act are both
Qualities specifically distinct, how then could this reach the Confutation of
Doctor Hammond, that only says that Love was divided into the Habit and Act as
a Genus into it is Species? Or would you be so uncharitable as to proclaim him
to the world a man of so shallow Judgment, as not only to speak gross
untruths, but that which also is most impertinent? Well, Mr. writer of
Scholastical and Practical Divinity, far more able adversaries then your self
have felt the force of his Judicious pen, and found that it is not his custom
in any kind (though you count him no Schoolman, no Philosopher, but a Critic,
forsooth, a great Critic, nay a very Dunce) to make use of other men's errors
to gain Credit to his own, but to speak true and to the purpose.

. 39. But, good Sir, let us see how well you prove this Opinion is to no
purpose, that your admirers may behold what a Schoolman and a Philosopher you
are.

. 40. You say 2ly, Suppose this Opinion were true in it self, yet it will no
ways advantage the Doctors cause, for the Patrons of it range immanent. Acts
under the first species of Quality (they do indeed, and for this you may see
Suarez, Smiglecius, Ruvio and others;) and then they are either Dispositions or
Habits. If you say they are Dispositions, as most of the abovenamed Schoolmen
hold them to be, against this I object, that however they may be in other men,
yet they cannot be so in Christ: for a Disposition carries in it is Notion
inchoation and imperfection; and therefore to attribute it unto Christ is to
throw an apparent dishonor upon him.

. 41. Would not a man wonder you should dispute so gravely, and with so much
confidence, and yet so ridiculously? that you should so often give us the same
impertinent stuff under your hand, and in Print?

. 42. Though then Dispositions that are in order to Acquisite Habits, and the
Acts that produce, and consequently precede them, carry in their Notion
inchoation and imperfection in respect of the Habit; yet in Infused Habits (of
which alone you and the Doctor speak) as also in the Acts that flow from
Acquisite Habits now complete and full, the case is far otherwise.

. 43. For Infused Habits, especially this of divine Charity in Christ, are
immediately, supernaturally, and instantaneously produced by God, without any
the least concurrence of humane endeavor. They are all full and perfect in an
instant. For nescit tarda molimina Spiritus Sanctus; God and his holy Spirit,
Ambrose.
being infinite in Power, do all things like themselves. They but speak the
word, and it is done; they but say, Let the Habit be infused, and instantly it
is created. No Acts then can precede them to produce an imperfect quality in
the soul, to be advanced by after -Acts unto habitual perfection. And therefore
the Acts that flow from them cannot, are not by any called Dispositions, as
that is properly taken for an imperfect inchoate thing in order to an Acquisite
Habit; but for other reasons already mentioned.

. 44. And then, as for the Acts that are the Consequents and Effects even of
Acquisite Habits now complete, they neither can be nor are by any counted as
Dispositions properly taken, but for other Reasons. And let Suarez and
Smiglecius tell you them.

. 45. It would be too tedious a task for me to transcribe whole Disputations:
Take the sum of it in short from Smiglecius. Smiglec. Log. disp. 11. q. 2. p.
413. Vid. Sua. rez. Metaph. disp. 42. sect. 6.. 16.
Sciendum igitur est Dispositionem dupliciter accipi: Primo in Communi, pro
Qualitate been vel male afficiente Subjectum, abstrahendo ab hoc quod sit
facile vel difficile mobilis, and sic est veluti Genus ad Habitum and
Dispositionem: secundo, pro Qualitate been vel male afficiente Subjectum, and
leviter inhaerente Subjecto, ita ut facile sit mobilis a subjecto; and sic
distinguitur ab Habitu intra latitudinem speciei, sed accidentaliter tantum.
When therefore the Act and the Habit are both ranged under the first Species of
Quality, both the Habit as well as the Act are called by the name of
Dispositions, as that is taken in the first sense, and makes the first distinct
Species of the four in the Praedicament of Quality.

. 46. The reason why the Acts that follow, and are the Effects of Habits, are
ranged under this Species, may be seen in the forecited Authors, and already we
have quoted some of them from Suarez.

. 47. But if these should not content our writer of Scholastical and Practical
Divinity, I shall refer him for further Instruction to Aquinas Aquin. 1. 2. q.
49. art. 2. ad 3m.
his Sums. -- Dispositio-dupliciter acciptur, uno modo secundum quod est
genus Habitus; nam in 5. Metaphys. text. 25. tom. 3. Dispositio ponitur in
definitione Habitus: alio modo secundum quod est aliquid contra Habitum
divisum. Et potest intelligi Dispositio proprie dicta condividi contra Habitum
dupliciter: uno modo sicut perfectum and imperfectum in eadem specie, ut
scilicet Dispositio dicatur, retinens nomen commune, quando imperfecte inest,
ita quod de facili amittatur; Habitus autem, quando perfect inest, ut non de
facili amittatur: and sic Dispositio fit Habitus, ut Puer fit Vir. Alio modo
possunt distingui sicut diversae Species unius generis subalterni, ut dicantur
Dispositiones illae qualitates primae Speciei, quibus convenit secundum
propriam rationem ut de facili amittantur, quia habent causas transmutabiles,
ut Aegritudo and Sanitas; Habitus vero dicantur illae qualitates, quae secundum
rationem habent quod de facili transmutentur, quia habent causas immobiles,
sicut Scientiae and Virtutes: and secundum hoc Dispositio non fit Habitus. Et
hoc videtur magis consonum intentioni Aristotelis, etc. Thus he.

. 48. It will not now, for a close of this Section, be amiss to tell you, the
Doctor never takes Acts for Habits, but specifically distinguishes them; nor
yet counts them Dispositions, as that word is properly taken, but says only at
large that habitual and actual love are both Qualities, and Species of the same
Genus. And now that you may have no opportunity to mistake his meaning, I must
mind you of the known distinction of Acts, some whereof precede the Habit to be
produced, and effectively concur to the making of it, and others follow the
Habit now complete and perfect, as effects and issues of it. The first are
inchoate imperfect things in order to the production of a Habit, and so are
Dispositions properly so called. The other are not so, but follow as Effects
from their Cause, whether the Habit be infused or acquisite; and are called
Dispositions, not specially and properly, but generally and improperly taken,
for reasons formerly alleged. And strange it is, you should not observe this
doctrine in Suarez, in Scheibler, in Aristotle, where it is to be found, all
which you yet recommend to the Doctors inspection for satisfaction in this kind.

. 49. And so much at present for our Refuters long-since forgotten
Metaphysics: we come now to his Familiars, his dear Acquaintance, the
Schoolmen.

SECT. 11.
The Doctors explication from the Refuters Concessions. The Refuters Reply and
valiant resolution. His first Charge answered. His second Charge answered in
three distinct Propositions. 1. Expressions gradually different may, and in
Christ always did, flow from a Love equally intense in the Habit. This not the
question. 2. Nothing naturally hinders but that expressions gradually different
may flow from Acts of Love gradually the same. Proved. God's outward favors
and expressions different. The inward Act of his Love still one and invariable.
Proved against the Socinian. Gods Love one infinite and substantial Act,
against Crellius. In what sense God in Scripture said to love some more, some
less. The doctrine of the Schools safer then that of the Socinian. God by one
immutable Act dispenses all the variety of his favors. Illustrated. The
variety in Gods outward favors: whence it arises. Confirmed from Lombard,
Aquinas, Scotus. Applied to the Refuter. 3. In men the outward expressions
ordinarily vary according to the gradual difference in the inward Acts of Love.
Proved by Reason, and the authority of Gregory, Durand, Aquinas, Estius. The
Doctors assertion hence proved as fully as the thing requires. The Doctor not
engaged to prove, that expressions gradually different could not proceed from a
Love equally intense. The third Charge answered. No mystery in the word
proportionably. The correspondence between the inward Acts of Love and the
outward expressions to be understood, not according to Arithmetical, but
Geometrical, Proposition.

. 1. THe Doctor having now truly stated the Question in Controversy between
him and his Adversary, and showed that the Acts of Christ's Love (of which alone
he spoke) were sometimes gradually differenced one from another, and in this
respect were capable of Degrees, though his habitual grace were not; he comes
now. 23. to explain (explain he says, and not confirm or prove) this by the
Refuters own Confession.

Doctor HAMMOND.
23. I Shall explain this by the Refuters own confession. The Death of Christ,
says he, was an higher Expression of Christ's Love of ut, then his Poverty,
Hunger or Thirst. To this I subjoin, that such as the Expression was, such was
the Act of inward love of which that was an expression, it being certain, that
each of these expressions had an Act of internal Love, of which they were so
many proportionably different expressions. And from hence I suppose it
unavoidably consequent, that that Act of internal Love expressed by his dying for
us, was superior to those former Acts which only expressed themselves in his
Poverty, and so the same Person that loved sincerely, did also love, and
express that Love more intensely at one time then at another, which was the
very thing I had said in another instance. But this I have added ex abundanti,
more then the Refuters Discourse required of me.

. 2. To this our Refuter returns three things in three Sections.

JEANES.
IF you had repeated that which you call my confession full and entire, as it
lay in my Book, the impartial and unprejudiced Reader would soon have discerned
that there was in it nothing that made for your advantage. My words at large
are these; There may be a gradual difference in the expressions of the same
Love for Degree. Christ's Death for us was an higher expression of his love of
us then his Poverty, Hunger, Thirst, etc. and yet they might proceed from a
Love equally intense. Now, Sir, have you said any thing to prove that they
could not proceed from a Love equally intense? You seem indeed most vehemently
and affectionately to affirm that they could not, but you must pardon me if I
entertain not your vehement Asseverations as solid Arguments, as if they were
Propositiones per se notae. Pray, Sir, review this Section, and put your
Argument into some form. If you can make good that it contains any disproof
of what I have said, unless begging the Question be argumentative, you shall
have my hearty leave to triumph over me as you please: however until then I
shall take your words asunder, and examine every passage in them.

Doctor HAMMOND.
TO this I subjoin, that such as the expression was, such was the Act of inward
Love of which that was an expression; it being certain that each of these
expressions had an Act of internal Love, of which they were so many
proportionably different expressions.

JEANES.
THat each of these expressions had an act of inward Love of which they were so
many different expressions, is an obvious Truth, but impertinent to the matter
in hand, unless you can prove that they were of necessity equal in point of
intension: and the proof of this you have not hitherto so much as attempted.

Doctor HAMMOND.
ANd from hence I suppose it unavoidably consequent, that that Act of internal
Love expressed by his dying for us, was superior to those former Acts, which only
expressed themselves in his Poverty, and so the same person that loved sincerely,
did also love and express that Love more intensely at one time then at another:
which was the very thing I had said in another instance. But this I have added
ex abundanti more then the Refuters discourse required of me.

JEANES.
FRom hence: whence, I pray? If from the words immediately foregoing, then your
Argument stands thus, Every of these expressions had an Act of internal Love,
of which they were so many proportionably different expressions: therefore that
Act of internal Love expressed by his dying for us, was superior to those former
Acts which only expressed themselves in his Poverty. And here I must profess that
the reason of your Consequence is to me invisible, and I shall never
acknowledge your Inference legitimate, until you drive me hereunto, by
reducing your Enthymeme unto a Syllogism. But perhaps there may be some
Mystery in the word proportionably, and your meaning may be, that these
different expressions in regard of intension must be proportioned exactly unto
their inward respective Acts of Love equal or parallel unto them. And if this
be your meaning, then your Argument is guilty of that Fallacy which is called
Petitio principii. It is my desire and purpose to have fair wars with you, and
my pen shall not drop a disrespective syllable of you; but yet I am resolved to
swallow none of your proofless dictates. Seeing you have entered the Lists with
me, you must not think me irreverent and sancy if (as the Soldiers speak) I
dispute every inch of ground with you, and be so bold as to call upon you for
the proof of whatsoever you assert touching that which is in controversy
betwixt us.

. 3. And thus our valiant Hector is resolved to stand his Ground, and not yield
an Inch to this Achilles, till he be forced and dragged by the heels about the
walls of his falling Troy.

. 4. But I find him yielding already. For he grants to the Doctor that it is an
obvious Truth, that each of these expressions had an Act of inward Love, of
which they were so many different expressions. I shall desire him to remember
it. For I doubt not but from this poor Concession to prove the pertinency of
the Doctors Discourse, and also to demonstrate before we part, that he can have
nothing justly to reply against it.

. 5. In the mean while I come to give an answer to his three Charges he has
laid in against the Doctor, in these three several Sections.

. 6. The first Charge is, That if the Doctor had repeated his Confession full
and entire, as it lay in his Book, the impartial and unprejudiced Reader would
soon have discerned that there was in it nothing that made for his advantage,
etc. Because he added these words, which the Doctor has omitted, and yet they
(expressions gradually different) might proceed from a Love equally intense.

. 7. How pertinent this reply is, the Reader, if he will but peruse your words
at large, as they lie in your -- But of this we may say as he does of Mr.
Cawdrey's answer, it is nothing to the matter now in hand. Because there may be
a gradual difference in the expressions of the same Love for Degrees. Christ's
death for us was an higher expression of his Love of us then his Poverty,
Hunger, Thirst, etc. and yet they might proceed from a Love equally intense.
His argument then (you see) from Christ's example will not serve the turn,
unless it conclude a greater intension in his Love of God at one time then at
another. And the falsehood of such an assertion is evident from the point here
handled and confirmed, the absolute fullness of Christ's grace; which by the
general consent of the Fathers and Schoolmen was such, as that it excluded all
intensive growth. It was a Sequel of the Personal union, and therefore it was
from the very first moment of conception. The Word was no sooner made Flesh,
but it was forthwith full of grace and truth. His Love of God was incapable of
further Degrees, unto whom God gave not the Spirit, that is, the Gifts and
Graces of the Spirit, by measure, etc: Jeanes Mixture of Scholast. etc. Tract.
2. p. 259, etc.
Use of Confutation, will instantly discern, and that you are a most exquisite
Architect for a Monument of Confusion, that thus pull down with one hand what
you build with the other. For how I pray, Sir, understand you the word (Love)
in the Clause you pretend that the Doctor has so much to your prejudice
omitted? of the Habit, or the Act? if you say, of the Act of Love, then you
make the whole passage in your Use of Confutation to be nothing to the matter
there in hand, that only concerns the fullness of Christ's habitual grace. If
you say it was meant of the Habit (as the Antecedents, and Consequents, and
Proofs from Scripture, and the authority of the Fathers and Schoolmen, and
your Subject and Title Page confirm) then this Reply is nothing to the present
Purpose, and you contradict not the Doctor, who speaks only of a gradual
difference in the Acts of Christ's Love and the several expressions of them.
Which way soever you shall take, you cannot avoid either the Quick-sand or the
Rock.

. 8. The truth is, the Doctor finding this Clause in that part of your
Treatise, which was designed to prove the allfulness of habitual grace in
Christ, he would not be so uningenuous as not to understand this general
expression, but with Relation to the subject matter of your discourse. Your
Title had proclaimed you a Writer of Scholastical and Practical Divinity; and
the Doctor well knew that it was not the Custom of such Authors to speak
loosely and at random. Though in Poets and Orators, whose aim is rather to
delight and persuade then convince, it may be pardonable to leap from one thing
to another; and Digressions sometimes may be looked on not as Blemishes, but
Ornaments: yet those Military men (among whom you desire to be numbered) that by
the power and force of Reason endeavor to conquer the Judgment, and subdue it
to assent, must still carefully traverse their Canon to the Point, otherwise
they will prove as contemptible as the Gunner that has neither Powder nor
Bullet, and like the Engineer in Kett's camp that discharged his Artillery over
the heads of his enemies: they may fall by the Sword of that Conqueror whom
they would be thought to have spared. I doubt not but if the Doctor had made
use of those words, and imposed the sense on them to your disadvantage, which
your self do now give, he should have been impleaded for injustice, and you
would have managed your cause by clear Arguments drawn from the Antecedents and
Consequents in the Use of Confutation. But since you have showed your self so
ill a Master of Defense, as by warding one blow upon the Shin to expose your
whole Body to the stroke; and since, to acquit your self from the Doctors
Argument a Concessis, you are content to proclaim your self no Master of Method
in a Professed Scholastical discourse, and are willing, when your Argument is
the Habitual grace of Christ, to restrain your general expressions to the
Actual, of which you there spoke not; I am content for the present so to
understand you. Nor shall I labor by Consequences to rack your words, to make
them speak and confess that which you would not be thought to mean, though this
has been your own frequent Practice all along against the Doctor.

. 9. But then I must add that Doctor Hammond, who understood you in this
Passage according to the Current of your Discourse, did you therefore no wrong
in omitting those words, which (in the sense he justly conceived he was bound
to understand you) did no more concern the present Debate, then any part of
your whole Book. For it was a received and acknowledged truth on both sides,
that the Habit of Divine Grace was always perfect, and at the utmost height
possible in Christ; and therefore though the outward expressions were gradually
different in themselves, it must also mutually be granted, that they must flow
from a Love still equally intense in the Habit. But then this being nothing to
the present controversy, which only concerns the gradual difference of the
Acts of Christ's Love, it was no whit material whether he took it in or left it
out, and he might justly use his freedom without any man's offense. But be your
meaning what you please, I shall easily grant you the liberty, my good Sphinx
Philosophicus, to expound your own Oracles and Riddles. And what then will be
the issue?

. 10. Why then, says our Refuter, (and it is his second Charge) The Doctor has
said nothing to prove that these several expressions could not proceed from a
Love equally intense; Nay (as he adds in the following Section) he has not
hitherto so much as attempted it, unless vehement Asseverations be solid
Arguments, etc.

. 11. That I may give a clear account to this Charge, and bring the present
debate to some issue, it will be necessary to distinguish. And couch the Answer
I shall in these several Propositions.

. 12. First then, I say, That Expressions gradually different may flow, and in
Christ always did, from a Love equally intense as respecting the Habit.

13. But then this is not the Question, and makes nothing to the purpose,
unless our Refuter can prove That all the Acts of Christ's Love represented by
those expressions were equally intense and full, as the Habit from whence they
proceeded. It is true, in this Reply he does vehemently and affectionately
affirm it, (that I may retort his own language) but pardon me he must, if I
entertain not his vehement Asseverations as solid Arguments, as if they were
Propositiones per se notae. And as he has no where in all this Pamphlet
attempted the Proof of it, unless begging the Question be argumentative; so I
know it is impossible for him to make it good, and I have in due place
demonstrated the contrary. And therefore

. 14. Secondly, I say, That nothing Naturally and ab intrinseco hinders, but
that several outward expressions of Love in themselves gradually different, may
sometimes flow from several Acts of inward Love that are gradually the same.

. 15. For the outward expressions of Love being Imperate Acts of the Will, and
under it is command, the Will is naturally free, and still at Liberty, unless it
be by some superior cause ab intrinseco determined to one uniform expression,
to represent its own internal and Elicite Acts how and in what manner it
pleases.

. 16. And now because this may be of some importance in this Controversy, I
shall (to gratify our Refuter) endeavor to clear it by some apposite
instances.

. 17. Suppose we then a Father with the same height of Actual love to affect
his only Son, for some space of time at least. Suppose we the same Husbands or
Friends to do the like, in respect of the Wives of their bosoms, and the
inmates of Vid. Platonem in Convivio and in Phaedro.
their Breasts. We need not run to Plato's School for Examples; the world does
daily afford us such lovers as well as his Socrates. And yet no man will say,
that these are always bound, or do or can express the same equal love after
one and the same sort, and with the same height and fullness. For sometimes they
have not the opportunity to do it, and sometimes Prudence enjoines them to
conceal it, and sometimes there may be a necessity to express it beyond what
they have, or indeed can do at another time.

. 18. Further yet (that I may clear it beyond exception) we know that God loves
his Chosen, his Predestinate in Christ, with the same equal Love, not only
because he loves them as in and for Christ's sake, but also because this inward
Act of his Love is no other but himself. And yet Gods outward Love and favor
does not always shine on them in it is Noon and Zenith; sometimes it looks
higher, sometimes lower: and though it knows no night, no going down, though
the native light be still the same, yet sometimes, by the interposition of a
dark opacous body, the light (as that of the Sun) lies hidden from our sight in
a sad Eclipse. Sometimes the Cant. 3. 1, 2.
Spouse in the Canticles was put to seek him whom her soul loved, and though
she sought him, yet she found him not. And therefore the Lord her Redeemer
says to her in Esai. 54. 8.
Esaias, In little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee. Nay it is also true of Christ
Matt. 3. 17.
the Beloved in whom alone he was well pleased, That though he were always
Christ, always God-man, yet the Leo it is that first said it (and all
Antiquity allow of it) Non solvit unionem, sed subtraxit visionem. The union
was not dissolved; true; but the Beams, the Influence was restrained: and for
any comfort from thence, his Soul was even as a scorched heath-ground, without
so much as any drop of dew of Divine comfort, etc. Bp. Andrews Sermon. 2.
Passion, p. 356. Confer Leonem Sermon. 16, and 17. de Passione Domini, p. 53, 54.
humane Nature did not always enjoy the comfortable influence of the Godhead.
And therefore we find him crying out upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me?

. 19. And as in respect of the same Person, the light of Gods Countenance is
not always lift up to the same Degree of Altitude; so it shines not equally on
several Objects. There are as well the sands, and stones and deserts of Arabia,
as the Spices: and though the whole Country enjoy the same common name and
Climate, yet all is not Felix, but some part is Petraea, and another Deserta.
Though those that live under the Equator enjoy a constancy of Sunshine and
equality of Day; yet those of Lapland and Finland have little else but night
and Frost for almost half the year together. The case is very plain. I believe
no man will say that those outward Acts of Gods Love that appear in his common
Providence, and whereby he makes Mat. 5. 45.
his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall as well upon the unjust as the just,
are to be equalled and paralleled with those more peculiar Acts of his Love
whereby he regards his Saints and Chosen. For the Apostle has told us, that
though God be a Savior of all 1 Timothy 4. 10.
men, yet it is with an especially of them that believe. His eye and his ear
are always open to the Righteous; they are not so unto Psalm. 34. 15, 16.
the wicked. He loves indeed all the Creatures he has made, and therefore
constantly preserves them. But Man he loves more then the rest of the
Creatures, which he made for Man's use. But then his Deuteronomy. 10. 15.
Delight is in the Saints, and those that fear his name. For their sakes his
Son dyed and rose again; for their sakes he made Heaven, and there has laid up
for them a never-fading Crown of Glory. But his Son he loves more then all
Saints and all Angels. This, this is his beloved Son in whom alone he is well
pleased.

. 20. But then, though these outward Acts of his favor be thus gradually
different, yet by reason of the infinite Perfection of his Essence, the inward
Act of his Love must be still one and the same, because it can be no other but
himself, one and the same Act always infinitely loving, and one and the same
Object always infinitely amiable and beloved. And therefore the Scriptures are
(...) to be understood, and in a way that best suites with the Majesty and
Excellence of God, when speaking (...), after the manner of men, they represent
to us this one most simple infinite Act of his Love, as if it were many, and
those in themselves also gradually distinct; because among men the inward Acts
of Love do usually vary according to the gradual difference of Goodness in the
several Objects beloved, which the greater it is truly or falsely apprehended
to be, the more it still allures and draws the affections and inclinations of
the Will.

. 21. And now because the Socinian denies it, and it is of great importance in
the Christian Faith, I shall upon this occasion endeavor to make it good. And
I hope that our Refuter himself will pardon this Digression, that speaks so
much for his advantage.

. 22. Say then Vorstius and Crellius what they will to the contrary, those
places of Scripture that speak of the different Ea vero (attributa) sunt
Voluntatis Divinae Actus in ipso residentes, seu Actiones voluntatis
immanentes, ut vocant -- Actus vero illi -- sunt duplicis generis. Alii enim
affectuum similitudinem inprimis referunt, eorumque nominibus in sacris literis
praecipue designantur: alii Decreta sunt. Illi sunt Voluntatis Divinae, ut ita
dicam, commotiones, praesertim vehementiores, seu actus ejusmodi quibus
Voluntas vehementius vel in objectum suum fertur, vel ab eo refugit atque
abhorret. Vt ut forte res ad quam affectus incitat, non sit firmiter conclusa,
etc. Crellius de Deo and attributis apud Volkel. lib. 1. de vera Religione,
cap. 29. p. 295. Vide eund. ibid. per tot. and cap. 30, 31. per tot. Vorst. de
Deo. Biddle's Catechis. c. 4.
Degrees of Gods Love cannot properly be understood, and as if in God the
inward Acts of his Will were gradually different, as in men commonly they are.
For being the First Cause of all things, he has no superior to limit him, nor
will he limit himself, because this were to lessen his own perfection; neither
could he indeed bound and determine his own Being and Excellence, if he could
possibly will or attempt it, because he is the one and alone necessary Being,
(...), who is Exodus 3. 14. and 6. 3.
I am that I am. Nor can any Second inferior Cause do it, be it of what kind
soever; because they being the free issues of his Power, who Ephesians. 1. 11. Vid.
Esaias 14. 24. and 40. 13. Romans 11. 33, 34, 35. Ephesians. 3. 20. Psalm. 115. 3.
works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will, they must of
necessity be supposed to flow from him, when now he has his Essence already
undetermined. And therefore he being the First Cause of all things, and
consequently infinite in his Essence as well as his Power and Perfection, which
only flows from the Infinitude of his Essence, he must be absolutely simple in
this his Essence, and most perfectly One, as much without all shadow of Parts
or Accidents, as he is of Change or Alteration. For if he were made up of
Parts, he could not be the First Cause of all things; because the Parts are
first in Nature at least before the Whole compounded of them. And if there were
in him any Accidents, he could not be the Malach. 3. 6.
Lord that changes not, no more infinite in Perfection, (which the Accedit quod
perfectissimum unicum tantum est. -- Quis vero dubitat supremum Numen, primum
Naturae Principium, esse Perfectissimum? quis id aliquo defectu laborare dicat?
Crell. apud Volkel. l. 1. ca. 17. p. 113.

Haec Dei immensitas atque Omnipraesentia (Potentiae, Sapientiae, Potestatis,
Perfectionis) ut omnium confessione certissima, and sacris literis
testatissima, ita nobis creditu utilissima, etc. -- Ejus autem Essentiam in
quovis pulvisculo -- latere nondum ex sacris literis discere potuimus -- viri
quidam doctissimi -- ex Christianorum scriptis ea collegerunt dicta, quae
vulgarem sententiam de diffusione Essentiae Divinae per res universas vel
penitus refellunt, vel non ^arum labefactant, etc. Crell. ibid. cap. 27. p.
277, 278. vide ibid. per tot.


Socinian dares not deny against so many clear express Scriptures) then they
say he is in his Essence; because he stands in need of those Accidents and
changeable alterations that must complete his Perfection. Nor could he indeed
be that One all-perfect Being from whom all things else flow, if he were not
absolutely as well without Accidents as Parts; because by the Addition of any
thing (whatsoever it be) of necessity he becomes finite, and simpliciter and
per se imperfect, because capable of this Addition. And therefore it is most
rationally determined by the Schoolmen (though the Socinian will not grant it)
that In Deo neque est aliud, neque Accidens; and Quicquid est in Deo, Deus est.
That God is nothing else but one entire, and simple, infinite and eternal Act;
and that nothing can possibly be found, or at least imagined, in him which is
not himself.

. 23. Hence it necessarily follows, that when God in Scripture is said to love,
he must not be understood properly to love as man does, by the help of Cum
autem Actiones etiam Divinae duplicis sunt generis, a^iae -- immanentes --
aliae transeuntes: etiam facultates quae earum sunt principia duplicis sunt
generis. Aliae enim immanentium propria sunt principia, aliae transeuntium.
Facultates quae per se immanentium, consequenter and transeuntium actionum sunt
Principia, duae in Deo sunt, Intellectus and Voluntas, quae vitam ejus veluti
determinant, ac differentiarum instar ad eam restringunt Speciem quae est
perfectissima. Facultates similiter quae actionum transeuntium sunt principia
duae sunt, Potentiae, quae in efficacia consistit ac viribus, and Potestas,
quae in Jure, etc. Crellius apud Volkel. ibid. li. 1. ca. 19. page 131.
Natural Faculties and Habits; but his love is only one and the same infinite
and substantial Act, which is nothing but Himself. And this is it that S. John
means, when he tells us, 1 John 4. 8. That God is Love, infinite and essential
Love. For, think De hoc amore loquitur Johannes, cum ait Deum Charitatem esse,
1 John 4. 8. quod quidem nihil aliud est quam Deum Charitate, ut ita dicam,
plenissimum esse, hunc in illo affectum veluti dominari, and luculentissimis ab
eo effectis ac documentis demonstrari. Metonymia enim est, in qua attributum
abstractum, ut in Scholis vocant, de suo subjecto emphatice enunciatur, vel,
quod eodem recidit, abstractum -- Charitas pro Charitate plenus ponitur. Crell.
ibid. c. 30. p. 301.
Crellius what he will, this is no Metonymical Praedication, and he is not
properly full of Love, but Love it self: such additional perfections as these
are belong to finite Creatures only, not to God; to whom we can assign no
Attribute that is not properly and infinitely himself. Nor do I like Hunc in
illo affectum] Dicitur Deus esse Charitas, sive, ut Crellius interpretatur,
plenus Charitatis, non per modum affectus, sed per modum virtutis and
perfectionis moralis; ad quam and nos pro modulo nostro tam saepe invitamur.
Maresii Hydra Socinianism. expugnat.
Maresius's Animadversion on this place of Crellius much better, unless it be
very warily understood. For as God cannot be said to be Love per modum
affectus, so neither can he properly be said to be Love, or full of Tertio,
intelligi potest ex dictis, eas virtutes quae sunt in Deo proprie non esse
cogitandas per modum habitus, sicut in nobis, sed solum per modum Actus ultimi:
nam Habitus est quid medium inter Potentiam and Actum: ubi ergo non est
Potentia, sed purus Actus, non debet, nec potest vere concipi virtus per modum
Habitus, sed tantum per modum puri Actus. Loquor autem ex part rei conceptae,
nam ex part concipientis fieri potest ut hae virtutes concipiantur in Deo
secundum aliquam rationem Actus primi, ac si essent Habitus, ad modum supra
explicatum in scientia, est enim eadem ratio, etc. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 30.
sect. 16.. 68. Vid. amplius. 69, 70. and confer cum. 59, 60. ib.
Love, ( Dan. Heinsius, Aristarch. Sac. in Prolegom. pa. 49. 8vo.
) per modum virtutis, and perfectionis Moralis. God is as well free from all
Habits and such Moral Perfections, or any thing like them, as from Passions:
and if we at any time conceive such things in God, this arises only from the
weakness of our apprehensions and Intellects, there is no such thing in God;
and when these and the like are attributed to him, the Praedication is not
Formal, but Identical, and the Distinction between the Subject and Attribute is
only Rational, not Real. And therefore I rather approve of that in * Heinsius
his Prolegomena upon Nonnus, Virtutem constat esse Habitum, quem in Deo locum
non habere inter Scholasticorum Scita est: quemadmodum virtutes singulas quae
ei tribuuntur eminenter esse in eo, ut loquuntur ipsi. Sed and Ethicorum Primo,
negat magnus Doctor Deum proprie laudari posse. Laudem enim proprie virtutis
esse, (...), inquit; quia, ut recte ibi interpretes, idonei ab ea ad praeclaras
actiones fiunt homines, quod in Deo locum non habet. Et in Magnis Moralibus ab
eodem dicitur, (...), Deo non convenire virtutem, quia melior virtute est Deus,
neque ex virtute dici potest bonus. Quare in Deo locum haec non habent. Thus he.

. 24. I confess this is very hard, if not impossible, to be understood by us,
whose understandings are finite as well as our Natures. And therefore the
Lombard. l. 3. Sent. did. 32. B. infra citand.
Mr of the Sentences said well in this case, that Gods Love, as well as his
Peace, surpasses all understanding, because it is infinite, as himself is. And
the Holy Ghost in Scripture does in these and the like expressions condescend
to our weakness, and in forms of speech borrowed from our selves, does rather
represent to us some external effects of God then any thing in him; who,
because he is infinite, can be only known and comprehended by himself, 1 Timothy
6. 16.
who only, as the Apostle speaks, has immortality, dwelling in the light which
no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen nor can see; to whom be Honor
and Power everlasting. Amen. And for his eternal Honor it is, that he can be
seen or known by nothing but himself.

. 25. Now as God's Love is still one and the same substantial Vide Suarez.
Metaph. disp. 30. sect. 16.. 59.
Act, always equal and uniform (as I may so say) in it self, because always
infinite and commensurate with himself; so this Love can have no other Object
then what is proportionable to it self. And therefore the Act being it self
infinite, the Object of this Act cannot possibly be less. For between things
Finite and Infinite there can be no proportion, because the difference will
always be infinite between them. When therefore God loves, he can properly be
said to love only himself. The Psalm. 16. 2.
goodness of all the Creatures in the world, no more then David's, extends to
him. For Job 22. 2, 3. Confer c. 35. 7. and Psalm. 50. 9, etc.
Can a man be profitable to God, as he that is wise may be profitable to
himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? or is it
gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect? That goodness alone which is
the greatest, and no less then infinite, which can be nothing else but God, can
possibly content or satisfy his Love. For if God could properly be said to
love any thing but himself, he could not be infinitely Perfect in himself, as
most necessarily he is. For Goodness being the one Proper Object of Love, if
any good, which is not God, could be the Proper Object of his Love, that
Goodness must be wanting in God, because loved and desired by him. No Love then
of Desire or Complacence, as they call it, is here to be found, in a Proper
acceptance. Wisd. 11. 21, 22, 23.
He sees nothing desirable or lovely in them, but the free communications of
his own grace and favor. By his own good will and pleasure and Power they were
all created; and when he had now made them all what now they are, then he Genesis
1. 31: Eccl 39. 16. Vid. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 30. sect. 16.. 60.
saw all things that he had made, and lo they were very good. And therefore in
this sense he may be said indeed to love them, because by his favor they are
what they are, nor can they arrive to any higher advancement but only by his
bounty. Nothing therefore of Excellence and Perfection can he possibly find in
them, but what issues from himself by a voluntary Communication, and was
infinitely in himself from all Eternity before, and thus only fitted for his
Love. And this is it which the most Scot. in 3. Sent. did. 32. q. 1.. 5, 6.
infra citand.
Subtle Doctor means, when he tells us that the Act whereby God loves all
things is still equal, always one and the same; Quia una est Potentia, unum
Objectum primum, and habet unum Actum infinitum adaequatum sibi, Because the
Power and Object and Act is always one and the same, and nothing else but God,
who as he is the last and only Good, so is he One simple infinite, and Eternal
Act, nothing but God.

. 26. When therefore God is said in Scripture to love any thing without
himself, the expression is not proper, but only Metonymical, in regard of those
effects of his grace and goodness bestowed upon them: and when also he is said
to love some more, some less, the like Figure is also to be understood. And
because men do ordinarily affect less or more, where they bestow the less or
greater favors and pledges of their Love, therefore by an Anthropopathy God,
though his Love be still the same, yet is said in Scripture to love more where
he bestows the greater blessings, and marks and tokens of his Goodness.

. 27. But then let me add, since -- (...), Arist. l. 1. Eth. c. 1.. 1. Vid.
eund. ibid. c. 7. Et lib. 8. Eth. c. 5.. 7. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 23. sect. 5.
Bonum est quod omnia appetunt, and Goodness, wheresoever it is found, cannot
choose but be affected, and the greater still it is, the more amiable it
appears, and is the more eagerly beloved; God, loving only himself, and his own
infinite Perfection, may yet be said virtually, though not Formally, even in
regard of this inward Act, to love those things more that partake most of his
Goodness, and carry the greatest likeness and resemblance with his own
all-infinite Perfection, which to him is alone amiable and lovely, Maresii
Hydra Socinianism. l. 1. c. 30. p. 549.. In eoque libertas divina.]
Cum (as Maresius in his Animadversions on Crellius says well) non tam res
ipsas amat, quam seipsum in illis, and bonitatis aliquos radios quos in illas
effundere, prout omne Bonum est sui communicativum, dignatus est.

. 28. And therefore in this sense I can safely allow this in Crellius to be
true, Crellius apud Volkel. l. 1. c. 30. p. 301.
Omne bonum cognitum per se amatur, and quanto melius esse cernitur, tanto
magis. Quod ergo Deus valde bonum esse vidit videtque, quomodo etiam non
amaret? Similiter autem dubitare nemo potest, qui vel Sacras Literas vel ipsam
Rationem consulit. Deum pietatem hominum factaque suae voluntati consentanea
amare, etc. So again, Ibid. p. 302.
Vnde etiam Sacrae Literae de piis nominatim, atque adeo peculiari ratione,
affirmant, eos a Deo diligi, quasi caeteri ab eo non diligantur, etc. -- Vid.
Psalm. 146. 9. Joh. 14. 21, and 23. etc. 16. 27. Jud. Ep. verse. 21. And again,
Ibid. p. 302, 303.
Jam quod ad homines etiam pios attinet, non dubium est alium alio magis a Deo
amari, prout vel ipse magis Deum amet, vel Deo in ipsum placeat esse
benigniori. Nil dicimus nunc de discrimine amoris Dei in Homines and Angelos,
in quo quidem ex part Angeli nos antecellunt, sed ex part vicissim a nobis
superantur, etc. -- Quis vero dubitare potest supra omnes and Angelos and
Homines pios diligi a Deo Christum, quem ipsemet Filium suum dilectum, in quo
been ipsi complaceat, seu quo insigniter delectetur, voce de coelo bis repetita
pronunciavit? Matt. 3. 17. and 17. 5. Vid. Coloss. 1. 13. Ephesians. 1. 6. Esai.
42. 1. Mat. 12. 18. Joh. 3. 35. and 5. 20. But then when he adds, Ibid. p. 303.
Diversitas autem haec Amoris Divini partim ex ipso Deo, liberrimaque ipsius
voluntate ac decreto proficiscitur, partim ex ratione Objecti in quod Amor ille
fertur, etc. -- I can by no means approve it in the sense he puts upon it; as
if there were a true and real difference in the inward Acts of Gods Will,
proportionably diverse in themselves according to the various goodness of the
Object, or the will and pleasure of him from whom they flow. For though it be
thus with men, yet it is far otherwise with God. Because they being Creatures
finite, and more or less compounded in their Natures, it can be no derogation
from their perfection, if they have different Powers and Habits and Acts
superadded to their Essence, since naturally they are Creatures perfectible by
means of such additions: But God being most simple, because infinite in his
Being, to attribute any such Acts to him that are distinguished in themselves,
and different from his Being, must needs highly derogate from this his Essence,
and all infinite Simplicity and Perfection, and therefore cannot properly be
ascribed unto him without implying a Contradiction.

. 29. The Doctrine therefore of the Schools is far safer, that tells us that
the inaequality of Gods Love, of which the Scriptures make frequent mention, is
not to be considered in regard of the Act of God loving, which because it is
but one simple, infinite, and immutable Act, is not capable of Intension and
Remission; but only in regard of the things beloved, and the things bestowed
upon them, which make them thus beloved. Scot. l. 3. Sent. did. 32. q. in
fine, 217.
Scotus calls the one Actus operantis, and the other Actus transiens super
Objecta. The one is nothing else but Gods Essence and Being; but the other are
outward Effects and Communications of his Love and Goodness to the Creature. Si
vero, as Durand. l. 3. Sent. d. 32. q. 1. art. 3. 1.
Durand, inaequalitas and gradus attendatur ex part boni voliti, sic Deus non
aequaliter diligit se and omnes Creaturas, sed plus se quam Creaturas, nec
omnes Creaturas aequaliter, etc. Though then it be most certainly true, to make
use of the same Durand. ibid. in fine.
Durand, quod magis bonum est magis diligendum intensive a voluntate, quae
movetur ab objecto; yet Voluntas Divina, quae ab Objecto non movetur, sed
bonitatem rerum causat, hanc impressionem non recipit ab Objectis, sed actu
invariabili vult uni bonum quod alteri non vult, and quibus vult bona, sive
aequalia, sive inaequalia, vult aequali voluntate, The will of God, that is not
moved by any outward Object, is not subject to these changes and alterations,
but by one immutable Act does dispense all the several varieties of his outward
Love and Favors. As the Sun, according to the opinion of Copernicus, though it
continue still fixed in one immovable center of the world, always equally
projecting it is Light in an uniform Ray, yet by reason of the various posture
of the Sphere, arising from the triple motion of the Earth, it makes Perigaees
and Apogaees, and at one and the same moment distributes Summer, and Winter,
and Autumn, and Spring, and Morn, Noon and Night to the several parts and
Climates of the habitable world: So this various participation of Gods outward
Love and Favor arises not from any difference and variation in the inward Act
of Gods Love, but only from the several approximations of the Creature to God
in its Essence or additional perfections, or as it is fitted and qualified to
receive and admit a greater portion of it. And therefore most certain it is,
that when any such change is wrought, the Creature varies, and not God, whose
inward Love is eternally one, the same infinite and immutable Act, that has no
other Object but it self, always loving and beloved. To make this yet more
clear, I shall prosecute the former illustration. We know the Sun, according to
whatsoever Astronomical Hypothesis, continues still invariable in its Light,
and Heat, and Influence: and yet the effects of these three are not uniform and
equal, but vary in regard of the Bodies they work on. The Stars borrow their
light from this fountain; but then because they are celestial Bodies, and, as
Aristotle determines, of a nature Quintessential, they are not capable of Heat,
and such elementary qualities, and alterations arising from them. The Air,
because perspicuous, transmits its Light and Heat and Influence. The Earth,
because opacous, withstands the Light, but imbibes it is Heat and Influence; and
Stones and Minerals in the bowels of it are multiplied in their kinds by them.
Plants vegetate and flourish by them; and Animals not only increase and grow,
but also move, and feel, and perceive them. But Man, the Microcosme, being
himself a little World, enjoyes within himself all varieties of effects to be
found in any of the Creatures springing from them. And yet notwithstanding
there be so great a difference and multiplicity of effects, this arises not at
all from the Sun, whose Light, Heat and Influence is always the same, but only
from the several dispositions and tempers and Perfections of the Creature,
whereby they are qualified and fitted for these Effects and Alterations. And
now because -- sic parvis componere magna solemus, we may say the like of God.
The inward Act of his Love, as well as his Essence, is always one and the
same, and all the difference in the outward effects of it arises from the
various disposition and capacity and approximation of the Creature to him in
his Being and Perfection. If natural and irrational Creatures partake only of
the fruits of his common Sustentation and Providence, their natures are not
capable of higher advancements. If the Carnal man perceives not spiritual
Objects, it is because he wants a Principle to receive them; or he wilfully
shuts his eyes, and withdraws himself from the Sunshine. If the Angels and
Spirits of just men made perfect now share not in those various dispensations
and assistances of Grace that the Church militant is partaker of, it is because
they are above it, and are free from all humane Changes and Alterations. If the
wicked and reprobate arrive not to heaven, it is because it was prepared for
the Saints, and those only that fear Gods name, that carefully seek after it.

. 30. It is true indeed, that this variety in the several participation of Gods
Love and Favor, which is found in the Creature, springs originally from the
will and pleasure of God, which alone gives them Being in that variety and
difference, that qualifies them for this several reception, and approach to
him, or distance from him. But yet his Love is still the same, though the Gifts
and Graces and Favors be thus different; as the Light of the Sun is still the
same, though the Slime be only warmed, and the Plant be. quickened from it is
seed, and the several Births and aequivocal productions of Froggs and Insects
and the like brought forth by it, are capable of and enjoy higher perfections
and advancements from it.

. 31. And now, because we have had occasion often in this Discourse to refer to
the Doctrine of the Schoolmen, I shall, with the Readers Patience, endeavor
further to clear and confirm this by some passages taken from them. And I shall
begin with the P. Lombard. l. 3. Sent. did. 32. A. B. C.
Master of the Sentences. Dilectio Dei divina (...) est: eademque dilectione
Pater and Filius and Spiritus Sanctus se diligunt and nos, ut supra
disseruimus. Cumque ejus dilectio sit immutabilis and aeterna, alium tamen
magis, alium minus diligit. Vnde Augustinus, Incomprehensibilis est dilectio
Dei atque immutabilis, qua Deus in unoquoque nostrum amat quod fecit, sicut
odit quod fecimus. Miro ergo and divino modo, etiam quando odit, diligit nos.
Et hoc quidem in omnibus intelligi potest. Quis ergo digne potest eloqui
quantum diligit membra Vnigeniti sui, and quanto amplius Vnigenitum ipsum? De
ipso etiam dictum est, Nihil odisti eorum quae fecisti. Ex his percipitur, quod
Deus omnes Creaturas suas diligit, quia scriptum est, Nihil odisti eorum quae
fecisti. Et item, Vidit Deus cuncta quae fecerat, and erant valde bona. Si
omnia quae fecit bona sunt, and omne bonum diligit, omnia ergo diligit quae
fecit, and inter ea magis diligit rationales creaturas, and de illis amplius
quae sunt membra Vnigeniti sui, and multo magis ipsum Vnigenitum. Cum autem
Dilectio Dei immutabilis sit, and ideo non intenditur vel remittitur,
quaeritur, quae sit ratio dicti, cum dicitur magis vel minus diligere hoc quam
aliud, and cum dicitur Deus omnia diligere. Dicimus dilectionem Dei, sicut
Phil. 4. 7.
Pacem, exuperare omnem sensum humanum, ut ad tantae altitudinis intelligentiam
vix aliquatenus aspiret humanus sensus. Potest autem intelligi ea ratione dici
omnia diligi a Deo quae fecit, quia omnia placent ei, and omnia approbat in
quantum opera ejus sunt, nec tunc amplius placuerunt ei cum facta sunt, quam
prius antequam sierent: imo ab aeterno omnia placuerunt ei, non minus quam
postquam esse coeperunt. Quod vero rationales creaturas, id est homines vel
Angelos, alios magis, alios minus diligere dicitur, non mutabilitatem
charitatis ejus significat; sed quod alios ad majora bona, alios ad minora
dilexit, alios ad meliores usus, alios ad minus bonos. Omnia enim bona nostra
ex ejus dilectione nobis proveniunt. Electorum ergo alios magis, alios minus
dilexit ab aeterno, and diligit etiam nunc: quia aliis majora, aliis minora ex
dilectione sua praeparavit bona, aliisque majora, and aliis minora bona confert
in tempore. Vnde magis vel minus dicitur hos vel illos diligere.

Consideratur enim duobus modis Dilectio Dei, secundum Essentiam, and secundum
Efficientiam. Non recipit magis vel minus secundum Essentiam, sed tantum
secundum Efficientiam: ut magis dilecti dicantur, quibus ex dilectione ab
aeterno majus bonum praeparavit, and in tempore tribuit, and minus dilecti,
quibus non tantum. Inde etiam est quod aliqui, quando convertuntur and
justificantur, dicuntur tunc incipere diligi a Deo: non quod Deus nova
dilectione quemquam possit diligere, imo sempiterna dilectione dilexit ante
mundi constitutionem quoscumque diligit; sed tunc dicuntur incipere diligi ab
eo, cum aeternae dilectionis sortiuntur effectum, scil. gratiam vel gloriam.
Vnde Augustinus, Absit ut Deus temporaliter aliquem diligat quasi nova
dilectione, quae in ipso ante non erat, apud quem nec praeterita transierunt,
and futura jam facta sunt. Itaque omnes sanctos suos ante mundi constitutionem
dilexit, sicut praedestinavit; sed cum convertuntur and inveniunt illum, tunc
incipere ab eo diligi dicuntur, ut co modo dicatur, quo potest humano affectu
capi, quod dicitur; sic etiam cum iratus malis dicitur, and placidus bonis,
illi mutantur, and non ipse: ut lux infirmis oculis aspera, firmis lenis est,
ipsorum scil. mutatione, non sua. Ita cum aliquis per Justificationem incipit
esse amicus Dei, ipse mutatur, non Deus, etc. Thus Lombard.

. 32. I shall annex the Determinations of his two great Scholars, Aquinas and
Scotus, who divided the whole School between them.

. 33. Dicendum, says Aquinas, quod Amor dupliciter mensuratur. Aquin. in 3.
sent. did. 32. q. 1. art, 4.
Vno modo ex suo Principio, and sic dicitur magis amari illud, ad quod amandum
efficacius Voluntas inclinatur; and sic Deus aequaliter omnia diligit, quia in
dilectione sua respectis cujuslibet rei, habet infinitam efficaciam in
diligendo. Alto modo ex part Objecti, secundum quod dicitur aliquis magis
diligere illud cui vult majus bonum; and sic Deus dicitur magis diligere unum
quam aliud, in quantum vult majus bonum: and ex hoc etiam habet majorem
effectum in illo, quia Voluntas ejus est causa rerum. Thus he in Corpore. And
then in his Answer to the second Objection he says, Dicendum quod Dilectio non
tantum importat id quod est ex part Dei, sed etiam id quod est ex part
Creaturae; cujusmodi bonum, prout est a Deo volitum, in dilectione Dei
includitur. Et ideo, quia creaturae non se habent aequaliter ad Deum, nec
possunt aequaliter bonitatem ejus participare, ideo non aequaliter omnia
diligit. And then in his Answer ad quartum, Dicendum quod non dicitur magis
diligere quia intensius diligit, sed quia majus bonum vult. And then he adds
ad quintum, Dicendum quod quantum ad effectum dilectionis semper eundem
aequaliter diligit, quia semper vult ei idem bonum finaliter, quamvis non velit
quod semper habeat aequale bonum vel idem, and ideo secundum effectum non est
aequalis. So again in his Sums, Dicendum Aquin. Sum. part: 1. q. 20. art. 3.
in corp.
quod cum amare sit velle bonum alicui, duplici ratione potest aliquis magis
vel minus amari: uno modo ex part ipsius actus Veluntatis, qui est magis vel
minus intensus; et sic Deus non magis quaedam aliis amat, quia omnia amat uno
and simplici actu Voluntatis, and semper eodem modo se habente: alio modo ex
part ipsius Boni quod aliquis vult amato; et sic dicimur aliquem magis alio
amare cui volumus majus bonum, quamvis non magis intensa voluntate. Et hoc modo
necesse est dicere quod Deus quaedam aliis magis amat. Cum enim amor Dei sit
causa Bonitatis rerum, ut dictum est, non esset aliquid alio melius, si Deus
non vellet uni majus bonum quam alteri. Thus Aquinas.

. 34. To the same purpose Scotus; Tertium patet, (sc. Scotus 3. sent. did. 32.
q. 1.. 5, 6. p. 216, 217.
Actum diligendi omnia in Deo esse unum) quia una est Potentia, unum Objectum,
and habet unum Actum infinitum adaequatum sibi: nec oportet illum unum esse
omnium, quasi omnia requirantur ad perfectionem hujus Actus; sed solum ex
perfectione hujus Actus sequitur, quia perfect tendit ad primum terminum, quod
etiam, perfect tendit in omnia circa quae primus terminus est totalis ratio
agendi tam Intellectui Divino quam Voluntati; quia si aliquid aliud posset esse
prima ratio agendi, vilesceret illa Potentia.

Ex hoc patet quomodo est aequalitas in Deo in diligendo omnia, comparando
Actum ad Agens: sed comparando ad Connotata, sive ad ea super quae transit, est
inaequalitas, non tantum quia illa volita sunt inaequalia, vel inaequalia bona
sunt eis volita; sed etiam quia secundum quendam ordinem transit super illa:
nam omnis rationabiliter volens vult primo Finem, and secundo illud quod
immediate attingit Finem, and tertio illa quae remotius sunt ordinata ad
attingendum Finem. Cum igitur Deus rationabilissime velit, licet non diversis
actibus, sed tantum uno, in quantum illo diversimode tendit super Objecta
ordinate, primo vult finem, and in hoc est Actus suus perfectus, and Voluntas
ejus beata; secundo vult illa quae immediate ordinantur in ipsum
praedestinando, sc. Electos -- tertio vult illa quae sunt necessaria ad
attingendum hunc sinem, sc. bona gratiae; quarto vult propter illos alia quae
sunt remotiora, puta hunc mundum sensibilem, ut serviat illis, etc. --

Patet igitur inaequalitas volibilium, quantum ad ipsa volita, non ut volitio
est ipsius Voluntatis, sed ut transit super Objecta modo praedicto. Nec tamen
illa inaequalitas est propter bonitatem praesuppositam in Objectis quibuscunque
aliis a se, quae sit quasi ratio sic vel sic volendi; sed ratio est in ipsa
Voluntate Divina: quia sicut ipsa acceptat alia in gradu, ita sunt bona in
talia gradu, and non e converso. Vel si'detur quod in eis, ut ostensa sunt ab
Intellectu, ostenditur aliquis gradus bonitatis essentialis, secundum quam
debent complacere voluntati, hoc saltem est certum, quod complacentia eorum,
quantum ad actualem existentiam, est mere ex Voluntate Divina, absque alia
ratione determinante ex part eorum. And then he adds in his Answer to the
third Objection, Et ista inaequalitas Dilectionis, hoc est effectus
Dilectionis, concedenda est, non solum quantum ad gradus specificos, sed etiam
in individuis ejusdem speciei; nec ratio est in isto and in illo, sed sola
Voluntas Divina, etc. Thus Scotus.

. 35. I might add more from Durand. l. 3. Sent d. 32. q. 1. art. 3. Nichol. de
Orbellis l. 3. Sent. d. 32. Dub. 1. Estius l. 3. Sent. d. 32.. 1. pa. 110. E.
F. and 111. A. B. Hales and Bonaventure, Argentinus, Gabriel Biel and others
are quoted by H. Cavellus to this purpose, in his Scholia on this place of
Scotus. But it were vain to fill paper with more quotations, since in citing
these I have pointed out all the rest. And I believe there is not a writer on
this distinction in the Sentences, or on that question in the Sums, but has
expressly delivered himself to this purpose, as the Master and these his
Scholars had done before them.

. 36. And therefore I cannot choose but wonder that our Refuter should take no
notice of these or the like passages, which to ordinary eyes would have showed
more to his advantage then all that he has quoted in his Pamphlet from the
Schoolmen, and Suarez and Scheibler to boot. But this and some other Passages
in his Book, which offered themselves at first sight, make me not value his
School-learning at the same rate and price he has put upon it in the Title Page
of his Mixture. But old Homer was blind, though he were the prince of Poets;
and our writer of Scholastical and Practical Divinity sees not all things in
those Doctors that may most serve for his advantage.

37. Howsoever the Proverb is on his side, and (...) Euripid.
(...), his second thoughts may be wiser. Now I have helped him to a Festcue,
and pointed him to the places, we may in his next rejoinder meet with these and
more the like observations. For methinks I already hear him at his Dicite Io
Paean, and Io bis dicite Paean, and that as cheerfully he sings it as the great
Archim^des did his (...), when he had found out the Demonstration of that
Problem which a long time in vain he had attempted. Here at least it is
acknowledged that he has all the Schoolmen on his side: and therefore did not
he rationally challenge the Doctor in any of those Writers to be had in
Pauls-Church-yard or the Library at Oxford?

. 38. But, good Sir, soft and fair. For I doubt not but I shall yet be able to
pull off the Wheels from your Triumphal Chariot, though you were now entering
the very gates of the Capitol, to sacrifice to your Goddess Victory.

. 39. For in the third place, I must tell you, that though nothing naturally
hinders but that the inward Acts of Love in Men may be gradually the same where
the outward Expressions, are gradually different; yet ordinarily they are not,
but the inward affection commonly varies according to the intension and
remission of the outward Expressions and Effects.

. 40. And hence it is, that God Almighty is very frequently in Scripture (that
speaks (...) and after the manner of men) said to love some more then others,
and the same person more or less at one time then he does at another, though
his Love in the inward Act must of necessity be still the same, because it is
most usual with men (from whose custom this is borrowed, and applied to God)
that the outward Expressions do carry a proportionable correspondence to the
inward Affections, and as the one gradually varies, so most commonly do the
other. Nor would the Scriptures by an Anthropopathy have applied this to God,
unless it had been most usual and ordinary with men.

. 41. Indeed this is in it self so familiar and obvious a Truth, (so commonly
also received among the Schoolmen,) that I am even ashamed at our Refuters
either Ignorance or Folly, that he should put the Doctor, because he is a
Critic, to prove that which every days experience does manifest to all sorts
of people. For else how can we be able to distinguish true Love from that which
is hypocritical and counterfeit, but only upon the supposal of this Maxim,
That in the ordinary course of affairs among men, there is and must be a
Correspondence between the inward Acts of Love and the outward Expressions.
Upon what score but this did our Savior reprove Judas, for betraying the Son
of Man with a kiss? Luke 22. 47. Judges 4. 18. and 5. 25, 26.
When Jael courted Sisera with fair language and profers of security and
protection, at the time she had resolved his destruction in her heart, when in
one hand she brought milk and butter in a Lordly Dish, and the nail and hammer
in the other; when Joab struck Amasa under the fifth rib and killed him, and at
2 Samuel 20. 9, 10.
the same time cried Hail, Brother, and took him about the neck and kissed him,
where else lay the cruel hypocrisy but only in this, that the outward
Expressions spoke abundance of Love, when there was war and bloodshed in the
Heart?

. 42. And indeed were not this a generally-received Truth amongst men, that
such as are the outward Expressions such also ought the inward Acts to be, and
that as the one does grow or decrease, so ordinarily do the other, there could
be no security of any man's Love or Friendship in the world, but all things must
fall into Jealousy and Confusion. For the inward Acts of Love being immanent
Acts of the Will, it is impossible that they should appear and be discovered to
others but only by the outward signs and Expressions. And as it is impossible
that the inward and elicite Acts of the mind should be discerned and known to
others but only by the outward transient Acts: so also it is generally received
from Saint Austin, that mentiri est contra mentem ire, and men in Sincerity
are bound as well heartily to express, as to speak truth to their neighbors;
else there will be as much a Lie in the Action as is in the Tongue.

. 43. If our Refuter shall here reply from the 38th. Page, that though it be a
piece of high dissembling for a man to make great pretenses and shows of
Affection, when there is little or none in the Heart, yet there is no such
matter where either it is not expressed to the height, or else totally
concealed;

. 44. To this I answer, That as there is no General Rule without exceptions, so
it has already been granted, that it may be lawful sometimes to conceal our
Love, or not express it to the height, and Prudence also dictates that in some
cases it is both commendable and necessary to assume and put on even a Illud
hic generatim dici potest; Vbicumque Simulatio aut dissimulatio per se nihil
habet quod Dei gloriam laedat, aut in alterum sit injurium, aut nostrae laudi
vel commodo nimium aurigetur, eam ad breve tempus, cum res ita fert, adhiberi
posse; saepe enim ad gubernationem rerum, and ad consilia perficienda, opus est
quaedam dissimulare; nonnunquam etiam severitas quaedam simulari potest in
liberos, aut alios qui nobis subsunt, ad eos imperio continendos: quod tantum
abest ut reprehensionem mereatur, ut potius laud sit dignum, tanquam ad
disciplinam servandam vehementer utile. Joh. Crellii Ethic. Christian. l. 4. c.
27. pa. 517.
contrary Passion of Anger and Severity toward those we most tenderly affect,
and consequently that he is no Hypocrite that in these cases hides his Love, or
does not fully express it. But then these being but extraordinary cases and
exceptions from general Rules, can no whit prejudice the usual contrary
Practice and Obligation. And hence it is that I said (which this Objection no
way strikes at) that ordinarily the outward Expressions must, and commonly do,
carry a correspondence and proportionable agreement with the inward Acts of
that Love which they are designed to represent.

. 45. And now for this in the next place I appeal to the Common Notions and
general apprehensions of Mankind. For all men naturally are persuaded, that
where they conceive the Passion is not counterfeit, there, such as are the
outward Expressions, such also is the inward Love; and as the one falls or
rises, so also does the other. I pray, Sir, do not you your self guess at your
welcome by the freedom and nobleness and height of your entertainment? Though
the Table be loaded with plenty, yet if a -- Super omnia vultus Accesscre boni
-- if locks Ovid. Metam.
come not in to grace the entertainment, or if others be more friendly accosted
then your self, you will soon enough descry that you are none of the Guests for
whom the Feast was provided, and that your room would be better accepted then
your company. When the Jews saw our Savior weeping for dead Lazarus, Joh. 11.
35, 36.
did they not make a just construction of this Action, and say truly, Behold
how he loved him? When Mary Magdalene washed Luke 7. 38, etc.
our Saviors feet with her tears, and wiped them with her hair, and kissed
them, and anointed them with precious ointment, did not our Savior from thence
truly argue the greatness of her Love, and prove that it was (though she were a
sinner) far more then that of Simon his entertainer, because he neither (as the
Custom was) had offered him a kiss, or oil for his head, or else water for
his feet? And therefore the Schools do generally conclude from Saint Gregory,
that Probatio dilectionis Gregor Magn. Homil. in Evangel mihi pa. 321. E.
exhibitio est operis, (It is in his 30th. Homily upon the Gospels) Such as is
the Expression, such is also the Love; and the one is the Index and Touchstone
to manifest the other.

. 46. Indeed true Love is a very fruitful and operative thing, and it cannot
choose but be communicative. Like Mines of Gold and Silver in the Bowels of the
Earth, it manifests the rich treasure by certain Signs and Indications. And
though we would our selves, yet it cannot, will not lie hid. Every Concealment
lays Shackles and Bonds upon it, and shuts up that in a most tedious
imprisonment which was born to be free, and cannot long live restrained. Like
the natural heat in the Body, it must have its vent; and therefore if the Pores
be shut up, it puts all in a Flame, till the Passages be opened. Every Tree,
says Luke 6. 44, 45.
our Savior, is known by its fruit; and out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks. And again, If ye love me, keep my Joh. 15. 21.
commandments. He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that
loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and manifest my self to him. Indeed true Love does as naturally manifest
it self by the outward Expressions, as Springs of water discover themselves by
the verdure of the grass they run under. It Is excellence consists in doing
good, and being communicative; and, like Light, it was as well made to show it
self as comfort others; and it has this Property also of Light, that the
greater or less it is still in the Fountain, the stronger or weaker it always
is in the Ray. Nay it is altogether useless, unless it be working, and
manifesting it self: and a Love concealed is altogether as if it were not. What
Saint James says of Faith, may be as well said of this, As Jam. 2. 26.
the body without the Spirit is dead, so Love without works is dead also.

. 47. This then being the nature of true Charity, the Christian grace of
sincerity requires that our Love be not only such as it seems, but that it
appear in the effects to be such as it truly is. And therefore says S. John,
My little Children, let 1 John 3. 18.
us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. From which
place Tolet, in his Commentary on Romans 12. 7. (...) let Love be without
dissimulation, observes that Tolet. Commentar in Epist. ad Romans c. 12. p. 527,
528.
there are two sorts of hypocritical and counterfeit Love. Nota, says he, duas
dilectiones fictas and simulatas. Una est quae fit verbo, quando aliquis amat
quidem, sed amor ejus non se extendit ad opera, sed ad sola verba bona erga eum
aut de eo quem amat. Huic opponitur dilectio seu amor conjunctus operi, quando
qui amat and verbo and opere amorem internum ostendit erga amatum. Joh. 14. 21.
Qui habet mandata mea, and servat ea, ille est qui me diligit: et Jacob. 2. 15,
16. Si frater aut soror nudi sint, and indigeant victu quotidiano, dicat autem
aliquis, Ite in pace, calefacimini, and saturamini, non dederit autem ea quae
necessaria sunt corpori, quid proderit? Haec igitur est dilectio ficta: quamvis
enim qui sic se habet interius, aliquo modo amet, tamen ad verba sola
progreditur. Altera est quae fit sola lingua: quando homo non amat interius,
tamen exterius amare se dicit, iste amat lingua; cui opponitur amor and
dilectio in veritate. De illa dicitur Matt. 15. 8. Populus hic labiis me
honorat, cor autem long est a me. Joannes ergo verbo Opus linguae veritatem
opponit; quia ficta dilectio est quae sit verbo sine opere, aut lingua sola.
Illa vero est perfecta and sine simulatione quae fit opere and veritate, tam
erga Deum quam erga proximum; ad quam nunc Paulus exhortatur.

. 48. The Love then that is true and sincere, and such as ought to be found
among Christians, is neither barren nor counterfeit, hypocritical nor lame, and
is always perfect as well in deed as in truth, except where Christian Prudence
does dictate a temporary concealment in some very few cases. And therefore
though he that pretends love where it is not is in that regard only an
Hypocrite; yet he also that pro tempore conceals it either in whole or in part,
puts on another shape, and appears to be what he is not, and in that sense does
dissemble. And if all men should do that, which is lawful only for some time,
and in some cases, and for good ends, there could be no certainty and assurance
of any man's Love or Friendship; and the concealment of our Love generally
would prove as dangerous as the personating of it.

. 49. Since then that Love and Charity, where it is true and perfect, cannot
choose but be operative, and Sincerity requires that it appear no other then it
is, except only in some cases; since also men apprehend, where they conceive
there is no deceit, that such as are the outward expressions, such is also the
inward Love; and since there is no other way to distinguish the Hypocrite and
pretender from the true Lover; it necessarily follows, that there is, and
ordinarily must be, a Proportion and Correspondence in respect of Intension and
Remission between the inward Acts of Love and the outward Expressions, and as
the one falls or rises, so commonly do the other, and the Love else would prove
imperfect and fruitless, or counterfeit and hypocritical: (...).

. 50. And now though this be sufficient to demonstrate the truth of the
Assertion, and to give a full and satisfactory Answer to the utmost pretenses
of the Objection; yet because I conceive that this is all that with any color
of Reason can be said against it, and we are now to deal with a Schoolman and a
soldier, that is resolved to dispute every inch of ground with us, I shall, to
give him a total Rout, call in the Auxiliary forces of the School. And indeed
it will be necessary, at least for the Doctors Vindication. For whereas he had
most truly asserted, that such as the Expression was, such was the Act of
inward Love of which that was an Expression; it being certain that each of
these Expressions had an Act of inward Love, of which they were so many
proportionably different expressions; this our Refuter calls a proofeless
Dictate, a plain begging of the Question, and a Fallacy, and expressly says,
that the Doctor must pardon him, if he entertain not his vehement Asseverations
as solid Proofs, as if they were Propositiones per se notae. And who that reads
this, and a great deal more such vaunting stuff, would not verily think that
the Doctor was most grossly mistaken, and had asserted that for a Truth which
could not possibly be made good by any shadow of Reason, or Countenance from
Authority? But this is not the first time that our great Writer of Scholastical
and Practical Divinity has betrayed his Ignorance in the Schoolmen. And that I
may make this appear as evident as the Doctors Assertion, which he so highly
decries, I shall now come to them.

. 51. To begin then with Durand. Quantum ad secundum (sc. An ordo iste
(Charitatis) attendatur secundum solum Durand. l. 3. Sent. did. 29. art. 3. E.
affectum, an secundum effectum?) Dicendum est quod secundum utrumque. Cujus
ratio est, Quia quando duo Actus sic se habent, quod unus dependet ab alio
praecise, and sicut posterius a priore, secundum ordinem qui est in primo
oportet ponere ordinem in secundo: Sed affectus interior and effectus exterior
se habent sicuti prius and posterius; quia effectus est posterior affectu and
ab ipso dependet praecise, quia ad completum affectum seu ad completum velle
sequitur effectus seu operari respectu eorum quae sunt nobis possibilia: Ergo
secundum ordinem qui est in affectu est ordo in effectu. Unde Gregor. in Homil.
Probatio dilectionis exhibitio est operis. Unde ei quem plus teneor diligere in
affectu, teneor ex debito charitatis plus impendere in effectu, si aequaliter
indiget; ita quod si oportet alterum carere, eligendum esse illum carere qui
minus ex charitate diligendus est -- Est etiam advertendum, quod cum dicitur
quod effectus correspondet affectui, intelligendum est de effectu qui non est
ex alia causa debitus, etc. Thus Durand.

. 52. To the same purpose Aquinas upon the same Question, Utrum ordo charitatis
sit attendendus secundum affectum vel secundum effectum. His words are, Sed
contra Gregor. dicit, quod Probatio dilectionis est exhibitio operis: si ergo
secundum effectum est ordo, oportet quod etiam sit secundum affectum. 2.
Praeterea, Bonum est Objectum Charitatis quantum ad affectum: sed ordo
Charitatis, ut dictum est, attenditur secundum diversitatem bonorum: ergo
Charitas habet ordinem non solum secundum effectum, sed etiam secundum
affectum. 3. Praeterea, sicut Charitas principaliter affectum, ita Beneficentia
respicit effectum: si ergo ordo esset solum secundum effectum, non esset haec
ordinatio Charitatis, sed solum Beneficentiae, quod est contra authoritatem
Canticorum in litera inductam.

Respond. Dicendum quod effectus exterior non pertinet ad Charitatem, nisi in
quantum ex affectu procedit in quo primo est Charitatis actus. Unde si esset
ordo in effectu tantum attendendus, ordo ille nullo modo ad Charitatem
pertineret, sed ad alias virtutes magis, sicut ad Liberalitatem vel
Misericordiam. Unde cum Charitas ordinata perhibeatur, oportet quod ordo in
affectu observetur, and ex affectu in effectum procedat; non hoc modo, quod ei
qui plus ex affectu diligitur magis in effectu impendatur, sed quod homo sit
paratus magis impendere si necesse foret, quia quandoque qui diliguntur nostris
auxiliis non indigent. Et hoc etiam patet per simile in Natura, quia unicuique
rei naturali tantum inductum est a Causatore de amore naturalierga aliquid,
quantum necessarium est ut effectum circa id exhibeat. Et similiter secundum
gradum, qui necesse est ut observetur in effectu, ordo affectus lege Divina
imperatur. Aquin. l. 3. Sent. distin. 29. q. 1. art. 2. in corpore.

. 53. To the same purpose Estius. Alia Scriptura est Gal. 6. Operemur bonum ad
omnes, maxim autem ad domesticos fidei. Cum igitur probatio dilectionis
exhibitio sit operis, test Gregorio homil. 30. in Evangelia, consequens erit
eos maxim diligendos, qui fide and charitate sunt nobis conjunctiores. I
confess the whole is brought in by him as an Objection, but I urge it only for
the Antecedents sake, upon which the Consequence is built. And that this is
acknowledged by him for an undoubted Truth, that Probatio dilectionis exhibitio
sit operis, appears from what follows, in his Resolution of the Question, ibid.
p. 102. col. 2. C. D. Vt ad haec objecta breviter respondeamus, sciendum circa
id quod primo loco objiciebatur, quorumdam fuisse opinionem, quam in textu
Magister recitat, omnes proximos pari charitatis affectu diligendos esse, etsi
non pari charitatis effectu, i. e. operum exhibitione prosequendos (And what
say you now, Mr. Refuter? are not you one of this number, at least by just and
lawful consequence?) Quam sententiam merito Magister rejicit, (pray mark it,
Sir, against another time) and S. Thomas refutat, 2. 2. q. 26. art. 6. quia
sicut in naturalibus, ita and in spiritualibus oportet Inclinationem rei
proportionatam esse actui ejus convenienti. Quare sicut Terra majorem habet
gravitatem quam Aqua, eo quod natura petat locum inseriorem; ita major debet
esse affectus Charitatis erga eos quibus debemus externa beneficentiae opera.
Estius l. 3. Sent. d. 39.. 5. p. 102. col. 1. C. and col. 2. C. D.

. 54. Aquinas in his Sums delivers the same Doctrine. Respondeo, Dicendum
quod 2a Opinio circa hoc fuit. Quidam enim dixerunt, quod omnes proximi sunt
aequaliter ex charitate diligendi quantum ad affectum, sed non quantum ad
exteriorem effectum, ponentes ordinem dilectionis esse intelligendum secundum
exteriora beneficia, quae magis debemus impendere proximis quam alienis; non
autem secundum interiorem affectum, quem aequaliter debemus impendere omnibus,
etiam inimicis. Sed hoc irrationabiliter dicitur. Non enim minus ordinatus est
affectus Charitatis, qui est inclinatio Gratiae, quam Appetitus naturalis, qui
est inclinatio Naturae. Utraque enim inclinatio ex Divina sapientia procedit.
Videmus enim in naturalibus, quod inclinatio naturalis proportionatur actui vel
motui qui convenit Naturae uniuscujusque; sicut Terra majorem habet
inclinationem gravitatis quam Aqua, quia competit ei esse sub Aqua. Oportet
ergo quod etiam inclinatio Gratiae, quae est affectus Charitatis,
proportionetur his quae sunt exterius agenda (How say you, Sir? what think you
now of your Doctor Critic? had he not the Schoolmen before his eyes, when he
delivered his Proposition in the very English reddition of Aquinas words? And
is it not certain, as he said, that each of these Expressions had an Act of
internal Love, of which they were so many proportionably different
Expressions?) ita scil. ut ad eos intensiorem Charitatis affectum habeamus
quibus convenit nos magis beneficos esse, etc. -- Aquin. 2. 2. q. 26. art. 6.
in Corpore.

. 55. Upon which place Cajetan thus, Secundo, repugnat corpori praesentis
articuli. Nam contra primam opinionem conclusum est, quod proportionalis est
interior dilectionis affectus exteriori Beneficentiae. Si enim Benevolentia and
Beneficentia proportionatae sunt, non erit Benevolentia ad omnes, and
Beneficentia ad quosdam. Et si una est ad quosdam, and altera ad omnes,
sequitur quod non respondeant sibi invicem proportionaliter -- Ad (quod) dubium
dicitur, quod procedit ex malo intellectu Literae. Non enim in Litera docemur
proportionalitatem simpliciter and absolute inter diligere and benefacere, quia
potius (ut modo expositum est) falsa invenitur ista proportionalitas; sed
traditur in Litera proportio inter Beneficentiam and Benevolentiam, ita quod
major Beneficentia (I pray mark it, Sir,) praesupponit majorem Benevolentiam ut
causam. Et hoc contra opinionem dicentem, quod erat major Beneficentia absque
majori Benevolentia (how say you now, Mr. Refuter?) Ex hac enim proportione,
sc. quod major Benevolentia and major Beneficentia mutuo se inferunt, non
sequitur quod, si Benevolentia est ad omnes, Beneficentia sit ad omnes, (hoc
enim est extra rationem majoris and minoris intensive, de quibus est sermo;) (I
pray again mark it) sed been sequitur, quod major est Benevolentia ad illos ad
quos est major Beneficentia. Cajetan. in loc.

. 56. It were vain to trouble the Reader and my self with more quotations to
this purpose. I dare say, not any Author on the Sums or the Sentences, that
have written on these questions, but have declared their minds concerning that
Proportion that is and ought to be between the inward Acts of Love and the
outward Expressions, as the Doctor here has done.

. 57. That I may not fill paper with Translations, the sum and substance of
the former Doctrine in short is this; That there is and ought to be a
proportionable correspondence betwixt the outward Expressions and the inward
Acts of Love, and that the one does manifest the other, according to that of S.
Gregory, Probatio dilectionis est exhibitio operis. For the Cum ergo causa per
Accidens non sit proportionata ad Effectum, sed solum Causa per se, etc. Aquin
2. Sent. d. 21. q 1. art. 3. in Corp.
outward Expressions depending precisely upon the inward Acts, as the Effect
upon their Cause, it necessarily follows, that the more I love, the greater
Expressions of this Love I am bound to exhibit, and to whom I am bound to show
the greater tokens of Love, him I ought to love more in proportion to the
Expressions, otherwise let me add, the Love will be lame and imperfect, or
else hypocritical and counterfeit. Not that every man is bound at all times to
express his Love according to the height and intension of the inward Act, but
that he is obliged to do it when a just Occasion offers, and a Necessity
requires it. For sometimes they whom we love do not either stand in need at all
of our outward signs and expressions, or perhaps do less want them then others
less beloved; or else there may not be a fit Opportunity to express our Love
unto the height, when they want or we desire; or perhaps it may be more
advantage for those we love, to have the height and Ardour of this Love for the
present concealed, as we also have already intimated. But then, though
sometimes it be convenient not to express our Love unto the height, yet
ordinarily it is required that there be a proportion and agreement, in respect
of Intension and Remission, between the outward Expressions and the inward Acts
of Love. For the affection of Charity, which is an inclination of Grace, is not
less ordinate then the Appetite and Inclination of Nature, because both flow
from the same divine Wisdom. But we see in Nature, that the inward Appetite
is proportioned to that outward Act and Motion which is proper to every thing.
For the Earth has a greater inclination to gravity then Water, which naturally
is seated above it. And therefore since, as the good Father said, Amor meus
pondus meum, since Love is as it Augustine.
were the weights and plummets of the Soul, the more the Soul loves in the
inward Act, the more it carries the Soul to higher and nobler Expressions; and
a proportionable agreement and correspondence there will and must be between
the inward Affection and the outward Effects; and as the Bounty increases and
is more intense, so in proportion does the Love: which is the very same that
the Doctor had asserted.

. 58. And this was abundantly sufficient to the Doctors purpose, though he
never had attempted to prove, that Expressions gradually different in
themselves could not flow from several Acts of Love that were gradually the
same, or that the outward Expressions and the inward Acts of Love were of
necessity equal in point of Intension. For since you grant to the Doctor that
it is an obvious Truth, That each of these Expressions had an Act of inward
Love in Christ, of which they were so many different Expressions; then, if (to
use Cajetan's word) major Benevolentia and major Beneficentia mutuo se
inferunt, and, unless there be a proportion between the outward and the inward
Acts of Love, the Inclinations of Grace, as Aquinas proves, would be less
orderly then those of Nature, the Doctor might very well conclude, that where
the outward Expressions were gradually different, there the inward Acts, from
whence the Expressions issue, were gradually different also. If it be
ordinarily so with all others, that the greater Expressions argue the greater
Love, what should hinder but that the Doctor might conclude it was so in Christ?

. 59. It will not be enough to Reply in this case (and yet this is all you have
to say) that the Doctor has said nothing to prove that these Expressions, which
are acknowledged to be gradually different in themselves, might not, could not
proceed from a Love equally intense.

. 60. For though nothing naturally and ab intrinseco hinders, but that
different Expressions (because they are imperate Acts of the Will, and subject
to its Command) may flow from Acts of Love still the same for Degrees; yet
ordinarily they do not. And therefore unless you can show that the case is
different in Christ from all other men, and that every Act of his Love, that
flowed from the same all-full all-perfect Habit of Divine Charity, was of the
same height and intenseness, and equal to the Habit, it cannot be denied but
that the Doctors Conclusion is most rational and just.

. 61. For Morality admits not of Mathematical Demonstration; but, as the (...),
etc. -- (...), Arist. l. 1. Eth. c. 3.. 1.
great Master of Method tells us, sufficient it is if here the Conclusion be
inferred from Praemisses and Medium's that are (...) and most commonly so. And
therefore, Sir, if the gradual intension and remission in the inward
Expressions do most commonly argue and infer a proportionable increase and
decrease in the inward Acts of Love, you must needs be unjust for charging the
Doctor, for not saying any thing to prove that these different Expressions
could not proceed from a Love equally intense, and for speaking impertinently
to the matter in hand, unless he can prove that they were of necessity equal in
point of Intension. For why should you require the Proof of that which the
nature of things will not admit of? The Doctor now was not engaged in the
Demonstration of a Mathematical, but an Ethical Problem (for the Schoolmen
will tell you of Theologia Moralis;) and he that proves that such a Proposition
is most commonly so, has as demonstratively concluded as that Science does
re-require.

. 62. But why cannot the Doctors Conclusion evidently follow, unless he can
first prove that they ought of necessity to be equal in point of Intension? For
will you therefore conclude, because Expressions gradually different may flow
(since there is no necessary reason to the contrary) from Acts of Love
gradually the same, that therefore they do so, or necessarily must? If you
should, (as you intimate by this your redoubling your charge against the
Doctor) I must tell you that you are guilty of arguing A potentia ad Actum
affirmative, which is the most simple and palpable Sophisme of all: just as if
I should argue, Because nothing naturally and of necessity hinders but that Mr.
Jeanes may be a Jesuit in a Ministers cloak, therefore without doubt he is so.

. 63. Whereas you then put the Question to the Doctor, and thus ask him, Now,
Sir, have you said any thing to prove that they (Expressions of Love gradually
different) could not proceed from a Love equally intense? and then add in the
following Section, That though it be an obvious Truth, that each of these
Expressions had an Act of inward Love of which they were so many different
Expressions, yet it is impertinent unto the matter in hand, unless he can prove
that they were of absolute necessity equal in point of Intension, the proof
whereof he has not hitherto so much as attempted; It is evident you are
mistaken, and the Doctors Conclusion will rationally and clearly follow, though
he never attempts to prove that which you so eagerly require, and though indeed
it is impossible for him to perform it in respect of every Act. And so much for
your second Charge.

. 64. And now because you profess (and it is your third Charge) that the reason
of the Doctors Consequence is to you invisible, and that you shall never
acknowledge his Inference legitimate, until you be driven thereunto by
reducing his Enthymeme unto a Syllogism; I shall once, for your better
satisfaction, perform it. Thus then; If ordinarily there is and must be a
proportionable agreement in respect of Intension and Remission betwixt the
inward Acts of Love and the outward Expressions, then that Act of internal Love
expressed by Christ's Dying for us was superior to those former Acts which only
expressed themselves in his Poverty, etc. But the Antecedent is true, as we have
showed from Reason and Experience, and the Authority of Gregory and the
Schoolmen. Therefore also is the Consequent.

. 65. And thus you see, Sir, that there was no Mystery, but a plain and obvious
Truth in the word proportionably. Not as if the Doctor thereby had meant, as
you descant, that these different expressions in regard of their Intension must
be proportioned exactly unto their inward respective Acts of Love equal or
parallel unto them; but only thus, That the greater or the less the outward
Expressions are, the greater or the less commonly are the inward Acts of Love.
For here I must mind you of a known Distinction, There is an Equality of
Proportion, and an Equality of Quantity; and it is made use of by Estius to
Estius 3. Sent. d. 29.. 5. p. 104. col. 2. E
this very purpose. For whereas among other Passages this also had been urged
out of Austin for an Equality of Love, where the Expressions were different,
Quis est, inquit, qui non judicat personaliter? qui diligit aequaliter.
Dilectio aequalis facit non acceptari personas. Nam cum homines diverso modo
pro suis gradibus honoramus, tunc timendum est ne personas accipiamus.
Augustine. tract. 30. in Joan. To this Estius there answers, Non aliam hic
requirit aequalitatem, quam quae personarum acceptionem excludit. Itaque
aequalitatem intelligit Proportionis, non Quantitatis. So, say I, is the Doctor
to be understood, as speaking of an Equality of Proportion betwixt the outward
Expression and the inward Act, and not, as you would have him to mean, an
Equality of Quantity. Sufficient it is if, as the inward Acts of Love increase
or diminish, the outward Expressions do so too, though the increase and
decrease in both be not parallel and exactly equal.

. 66. But in case that Distinction should be quarrelled at, yet I hope this of
your great Master Aristotle shall be allowed. He tells us in his Ethics of a
twofold Proportion, and it is approved of as most undoubted by all
Mathematicians in the world, for ought I ever could find to the contrary. The
one (...). Arist. li. 5. Ethic. ca. 3.. 8. Vid. l. 5. Eth. c. 4.. 1, 2. Et l 2.
c. 6.. 2. Quod proportionem Arithmeticam observat, eodem modo semper se habet,
and ubique atque omnibus unum idemque est: quod proportionem observat
Geometricam, hoc non ubique, aut omnibus, aut semper est idem, sed pro rerum
diversitate varium. l. Crellii Eth. Aristotel. par. 2. c. 5. p. 42.
Arithmetical Proportion is when diverse numbers differ according to equal
reason, that is, have equal differences: Geometrical Proportion is when diverse
numbers differ according to like reason, etc. Wingate's Arithmetic Natural,
lib. 1. c. 9.. 4. and 17.
he calls from them (...), the other (...). In the first, the Proportion
Arithmetical, the increases are always equal, as in 2. 4. 6. 8. 10. 12. in the
other, the Geometrical, they are like, as 2. 4. 8. 16. 32. When therefore the
Doctor says, that there is a proportionable difference between the outward
Expressions and the inward Acts of Love, and that as the one increases and
decreases in respect of Intension and Remission, so also do the other, he is to
be understood, that the increase or decrease between them is not according to
Arithmetical Proportion, so as the Intension in the outward Act is still equal
to the Intension of the inward; but only according to Geometrical Proportion,
and that as the inward Act increases, so in like manner also does the outward,
though the Intension be not equal and parallel in both.

. 67. And thus you see, Sir, (though the Doctor added it ex abundanti, more
then your discourse required of him) that even from hence (from hence, I say,)
he did justly suppose it unavoidably consequent, that that Act of internal Love
expressed by Christ's Dying for us was superior to those former Acts expressed
in his Poverty, etc. And so the same Person that loved sincerely, did also love
and express that Love more intensely at one time then at another: quod erat
demonstrandum, and was the very thing he had said in another Instance. And so I
proceed to the next Section.

SECTION 12.
The Doctors proof of the vanity of the Refuters Use of Confutation: made good
from the Refuters Mixture. The Refuters Reply and endeavor to make good his
Charge by Consequences, impertinent. The Refuters momentous Objection strikes
as well against himself and other his friends, as the Doctor. The weakness of
it. The intension of Christ's actual Grace so proportioned to that of his
habitual Grace, as not to exceed it; but not so, still as to equal it.
Illustrated by a clear instance. The Schoolmen no where say, that the Intension
of Christ's actual Grace is exactly equal to that of his habitual. Aquinas of
the Refuters, not the Doctors citation. He speaks fully to the Doctors purpose.
What meant by works and the effects of wisdom and Grace in Aquinas. An
intensive growth in the inward Acts of wisdom and Grace argues not an intensive
increase in the Habits. Asserted also by the Refuter. Cleared by a Distinction.
The Chedzoy Challenge. The vanity of it. Christ did gradually increase in the
Acts of wisdom and Grace as he did in stature. Proved from the Refuters
Mixture: from Ames, Vorstius, Grotius, Hooker, Field, Suarez, Estius, Others,
both Fathers and Schoolmen, and Reformed Divines. The Defenders advise to the
Refuter to be more wary in his challenges.

Doctor HAMMOND.
24. IT now only remains that I consider whether this Refuter have in the
process of his Discourse added any thing wherein I may be any whit concerned.

25. And 1. says he, the falsehood of such an Assertion is evident from the
point there handled and confirmed, the absolute fullness of Christ's Grace, which
by the general consent of the Fathers and Schoolmen was such, as that it
excluded all intensive growth.

26. But to this the Reply will be easily foreseen from the Premises, that as
the point by him handled and confirmed was distinctly the all-fulness of
habitual grace in Christ, so his proof of it by the consent of Fathers and
Schoolmen belongs still to that fullness of habitual Grace.

27. Witness one for all, Aquinas Par. 3. qu. 7. art. 12. ad secundum; Licet
virtus Divina possit facere aliquid majus and melius quam sit habitualis Gratia
Christi, non tamen -- though the Divine power may make somewhat greater and
better then is the habitual Grace of Christ, yet -- So it is plain he speaks of
the fullness of the habitual Grace. And ad tertium; In Sapientia and Gratia
aliquis proficere potest dupliciter: uno modo secundum ip. sos Habitus
sapientiae and Gratiae augmentatos; and sic Christus in eis non proficiebat:
alio modo secundum effectus, in quantum aliquis sapientiora and virtuosiora
opera facit; and sic Christus proficiebat sapientia and Gratia, sicut and
aetate, quia secundum processum aetatis perfectiora opera faciebat -- and in
his quae sunt ad Deum, and in his quae sunt ad homines. One may increase in
wisdom and Grace two ways: One way according to the habits of them increased;
and so Christ increased not: another way, according to the effects, when any
does more wise and virtuous works; and so Christ increased in wisdom and
Grace, as he did in Age, because according to the process of his Age he did
more perfect works, and that both in things belonging to God and men also.

28. And thus are the Schoolmen understood by the Refuter himself, in his
producing their Testimonies, as appears by the express words (habitual Grace,
page 260. lin. penult. and holiness, and the Image of God in him, page 261.
lin. 13.) And so it is most clear, their Consent belongs not, even in his own
opinion, to the matter I had and have in hand, no way denying, but asserting a
Capacity of Degrees among the Acts of Christ's Love of God, and the Expressions
of it.

. 1. And now, my good Refuter, I pray deal ingenuously, and speak plainly
without any subterfuges and ambages. Could any thing be said more fully for the
proving the vanity of your Use of Confutation? For was not your Theme the
All-fulness of habitual grace in Christ's Manhood? Does not the Title of every
Page from p. 229. to p. 297. speak as much? Does not the whole carriage and
Proof of your Doctrinal part evidence it? Do you treat of any thing but that?
Nay do you not usher in your first Use of Information from your former Doctrine
thus; From the dwelling of all-fulness of habitual Grace in Christ we may infer
this Qualification and fitness for all his Offices, etc? And then does it not
follow in order after this Use, p. 258. thus, Secondly, this Point may serve
for Confutation of a Passage in the learned Doctor Hammond against Mr. Cawdrey,
to wit, that Christ's Love of God was capable of further Degrees? I pray, Sir,
what does this Ordinal (Secondly) mean? Has it not relation to that which went
before? Or what is the Antecedent to this Relative (This?) Is it not the Point
of the All-fulness of habitual Grace in Christ? Is it not from hence that you
conclude Doctor Hammond guilty? Did you from page 237. to page 258. (where
begins your Use of Confutation) speak of any thing else? Nay do you not
continue on this Argument to page 297? Nay do your Authorities from Aquinas, 3.
part. q. 7. art. 12. and in 3. Sent. did. 13. say any thing else? Nay do not
your Thomists and Scotists that, you say, are unanimous in asserting that the
grace of Christ's Humanity was in regard of Vide Davenant. in Coloss. c. 1. v
19. p. 99, 100. Suarez tom. 1. in 3. Part. Thom. disp. 22. sect. 2. p. 322. et
disp. 26. p. 306. col. 1 C. ibid. sect 2 p. 367. col. 2. A. B.
Gods Power ever (which yet would be considered of, were this a place fit for
it) Summa, both positive and negative, speak the same? Are not your two reasons
which you fetched from Aquinas, which, you say, are dilated on by his
Commentators, brought in only to this purpose? Do you not say expressly in your
first Reason, 1. Ex part Formae ipsius Gratiae, The habitual Grace of Christ
was referred unto the grace of Union, as a consequent Ornament of it, and
therefore in all congruence it was to be suited and proportioned to it? Is not
your second Reason taken ex part Subjecti to this purpose also? Say you not,
that Christ was not pure Viator, but in his soul he was also Comprehensor, and
that from the first instant of his incarnation? He always therefore in his
soul enjoyed heaven, happiness, the beatifical vision; and therefore all his
Graces, and consequently his Love of God, were in termino, and therefore could
not admit any further degrees? And do you not therefore add, to show you speak
only of habitual Grace, that it is not to be denied, but that by special
dispensation there was some restraint of the influence of happiness or
beatifical vision in the whole course of his Humiliation, and particularly in
the time of his doleful Passion? But surely it seems very improbable, and no
ways sortable unto the state of Christ's blessedness, for his Grace and
Holiness, the Image of God in him, his Love of God, etc. to be liable unto
perpetual motion and augmentation. Sir, If these be your Vide Jeanes Mixture of
Scholast. and Pract. Divinity, p. 260, 261.
words even in the midst of your Use of Confutation, as you know they are, what
could be said more to the purpose to acquit the Doctor from the dint and force
of it, then he has done? Your Subject is as clear as the Sun, the fullness of
Christ's habitual Grace, and nothing else; and from this Doctrine you infer
your second Use, a Use of Confutation of Doctor Hammond, who never any where
denied this fullness of habitual Grace, and in the Passage you undertake to
refute, spoke only of a gradual difference in respect of some Acts and some
Expressions of Christ's Love. If this be not clearly to acquit himself, I know
not what is. And I shall sooner expect that Calvin and Luther shall receive
absolution in the Conclave at Rome, then the Doctor in the Judgment of our
Refuter. But if this plea be not admitted, I shall never believe that any thing
can be proved, and shall instantly turn Sceptick, and think that all the world
will be Pyrrhonists as well as my self. I remember that somewhere it is
reported of Diogenes, that when a bold simple animal would against all sense
and reason undertake to maintain there was no Motion, he did instantly refute
him with a blow on the Pate. Yet I would not be mistaken. All I urge this story
for, is to show that Diogenes with his Cudgel did not more clearly refute him
that maintained there was no Motion, then the Doctor by this Answer has
overthrown your Use of Confutation.

. 2. But the Doctor must comfort himself, and patiently take up his Cross. I
see it is a part of his portion to be loaded with Uses of Confutation. For when
our Refuter cannot now deny the Doctors plea to be just, and when he had
cleared his Innocence from that charge and Crimination, as if every line were a
Sunbeam, he now adventures by Engines and Consequences to torment and rack the
Doctors words to acknowledge this guilt of the denial of the fullness of Christ's
habitual Grace. For thus he says in answer to the Doctors plea, and it is
divided into three Paragraphs: for -numero Deus impare gaudet.

JEANES.
1. THey that can so easily foresee this your Reply, may with as little
difficulty foreknow the Objection against it, to wit, that the Intension of
Christ's actual Grace is exactly proportioned unto that of his habitual Grace;
and therefore your denial of the perpetual all-fulness of Christ's actual Grace,
is a virtual and implied denial of the all-fulness of Christ's habitual Grace:
and how you are provided of an Answer hereunto the event will show. It is not
then so clear as you pretend, That the testimony of the Schoolmen belongs not,
even in mine own opinion, to the matter you had and have in hand.

2. As for that place you quote out of Aquinas, it is plain that therein, by
the effects of wisdom and Grace, are meant such as are outward, for these are
most properly termed works. And besides, an intensive increase in the inward
Acts of wisdom and Grace would argue and presuppose an intensive increase in
the very Habits themselves.

3. Whereas you say in the close of Section the 28. that the consent of the
Schoolmen is no ways denying, but asserting a capacity of Degrees among the
Acts of Christ's Love of God, i. e. of the inward acts thereof; There will be
little sense in your words in themselves, and less pertinency unto the matter
in hand, unless your meaning be, as you elsewhere express your self, that the
inward Acts of Christ's Love of God were more intense at one time then at
another: and if this be your meaning, I must needs assume the boldness to tell
you, that no such matter is visible unto me in any of the Schoolmen. But
perhaps, you may mean such Schoolmen as such a Puny as I never saw or heard of:
however you cannot expect belief until you produce their testimonies. And I
shall entreat you to allege such as may be had in Paul's Churchyard, or at
least in the Library at Oxford.

. 2. Most gallantly spoken! and with scorn and Confidence enough, yet with far
greater ignorance, as shall instantly be proved!

. 3. But, good Sir, were all granted, yet how serves this to prove Doctor
Hammond guilty of denying the habitual fullness of grace in Christ, the thing
you undertook to make good in your Use of Confutation, inferred from the former
Doctrine? Have you said any thing of Deductions and Consequencies all along in
that Discourse? Nay do you not every where charge it upon him as his downright
opinion? and do you not confront this Proposition, That sincere Love is capable
of Degrees, with Proofs and Confirmations of the absolute fullness of Christ's
habitual Grace? How you are provided of an Answer and defense of this so
uncharitable Crimination the event has declared; and though you are not so
ingenuous as to acknowledge your Offense, yet you dare not deny your Guilt, and
therefore you craftily raise a mist and a cloud that you may run away
undiscovered. But, my good Achelous, you shall not escape me so. For I am
resolved to hunt you, Sir, through all your shapes.

-- Etenim tibi saepe novandi
Corporis, o Juvenis, numero finita potestas. Ovid. Metamor. lib. 8. in fine.

. 4. Whereas then you say, that the event will show how the Doctor is provided
of an Answer to your Objection against his Reply; let me tell you, that when
the Event has declared how well you are provided to make good your Objection,
the Doctor will instantly be provided of an Answer.

. 5. But, good Sir, I had thought you had all this while been making good the
Charge you laid in against him in your Use of Confutation. And is it now come
only to an Objection against his Reply? But for once I shall let it pass, and
take it for granted, that the Doctor is innocent from the former Charge,
against which the Use of Confutation was addressed, and see whether de novo he
can by Consequence be concluded guilty.

. 6. But what is this momentous Objection, that is with as little difficulty
foreknown as the Doctors Reply was easily foreseen? Why, in plain English this,
no less nor no more, That the Intension of Christ's actual Grace is exactly
proportioned unto that of his habitual Grace, and therefore your denial of the
perpetual all-fulness of Christ's actual Grace, is a virtual and implied denial
of the all-fulness of Christ's habitual Grace; and then this will be enough, at
least by a Jus postliminio nati (for it is built on a passage taken from the
(...), that was Printed half a year after that the Charge against the Doctor
was published) to conclude the Doctor guilty of the Use of Confutation.

. 7. A most weighty Objection indeed this, and well worthy the second thoughts
of a writer of Scholastical and Practical Divinity! But I pray, Sir, how do you
prove that the Intension of Christ's actual Grace is exactly proportioned unto
that of his habitual Grace? Prove me that, Sir, and I shall acknowledge Doctor
Hammond confuted indeed. But then withal I must add, that if this can be made
good, I shall anon also clearly prove that Mr. Jeanes and his friend Doctor
Ames, and Aquinas, and diverse others to boot, are all, as well as Doctor
Hammond, within the compass of the Lash of this Use of Confutation. I deny then
your Antecedent, and withal for your Comfort I tell you, that it is impossible
for you to prove it. And if this be not proved (since it is impossible from
false Premises Vide Arist. 2. prior. Analyt. c. 2.
that a Truth should per se and virtute praemiss arum be inferred) I pray then,
Sir, what will become of your Conclusion? Must Doctor Hammond for all that be
concluded guilty? Or is the world bound to believe your Conclusion, because it
is inferred against the Doctor? Well; the world is grown to a fine pass, and
any thing shall be cried up for an Objection, if it be thrown at Doctor
Hammond, as any thing was an Apple in Rome that was thrown at Vatinius.

. 8. But, Sir, to keep you close to the subject matter, I shall here
distinguish your Antecedent, thus; The Intension of Christ's actual Grace is
exactly proportioned unto that of his habitual Grace, so as it cannot exceed
it. For then the Act, which is the Effect, should be more noble then the Habit,
which is the Cause, and there should be something in the Effect that was not in
the Cause, contrary to that received Maxim, Nihil dat quod non habet, aut
eminenter aut formaliter. And you know, I have already told you, that I speak
only of Habits infused, (though the reason be the same of Habits acquired, that
are now complete and full) and of the Acts that flow from them. And if this be
your meaning, you are a most egregious Sophister, and speak nothing to the
purpose; and then I deny the sequel of your Enthymeme. And let me tell you
withal, that from the Antecedent in this sense, it will be impossible to
infer your Conclusion against the Doctor. And therefore secondly I say, that
the Intension of Christ's actual Grace is not exactly proportioned to that of
his habitual Grace, so as the actual Grace does always equal the fullness and
height and Intension of his habitual Grace. And as this is the Proposition to
be proved against Doctor Hammond, so when you shall make it good -- Eris mihi
magnus Apollo, et -Phyllida solus habeto; I shall Virgil. Ecl. 3.
acknowledge you for a Schoolman, and a Confuter of Doctor Hammond.

. 9. But to clear this by a known and received Instance. It is an undoubted
Truth in Natural Philosophy, that Sennert. Epit. not. scient. l. 1. c. 5. p.
47. Edit. Oxon.
in qualibet viventium specie dantur intrinseci magnitudinis and parvitatis
termini, extra quos Natura viventia nec producere nec conservare potest. And
this according to the frequent Determination of the Aristot. 1. Phys. c. 4..
36. and 2. de Anima, c. 4.. 41. et 4. de genesis Animal. c. 4. and polit. 7. c. 4.
Aquinas part. 3. q. 7. art. 12. ad primum. Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. tom. 1.
disp. 18. in expos. q. 7. art. 12. ad primum, p. 315.
great Philosopher. Suppose we then the greatest height of man in nature to be
4 Cubits, and the least to be 1, it will be impossible to find any man above 4
cubits high or under 1, but all will be either 4, or 3, or 2, or 1, or of some
other intermediate Stature between one and four. So again suppose we any one
degree of I^^^^sion for the height of the Habit, be it 8, or 7, or 5 degree of
Intension: the intension of the Act that flows from the Habit, as the Effect
from the Cause, will never exceed the degree of intension in the Habit; and so
in this sense it will be exactly proportioned to the intension of the Habit.
But what? will you thence conclude that because it cannot exceed, that
therefore always the Act equals the intension of the Habit? Then, Sir, you may
as well prove that all men are of an equal stature, because none is taller then
four Cubits or shorter then one, the two extremes of Natures Boundary.

. 10. And now, Sir, though it be a very sufficient answer to your Objection, to
deny your Antecedent, yet, before I part with you, I promise you to prove, that
the Acts of Christ's Grace are not, nay cannot always be exactly proportioned
unto that of his habitual Grace, so as still to equal it in Intension.

11. And now, whereas in the close of this Paragraph you infer from the former
Objection, and say, that it is not then so clear as the Doctor pretends, that
the Testimony of the Schoolmen belongs not, even in mine own opinion, to the
matter you had and have in hand; I must say, that I see not from whence this
Inference is deduced.

. 12. For do the Schoolmen any where say that the Intension of Christ's actual
Grace is exactly proportioned unto that of his habitual Grace? Nay do they any
where say that Christ's actual Grace is not capable of Intension and Remission,
as they do of his habitual? If Aquinas, in the places quoted by the Doctor,
which is of your own Citation, denies only an increase of Christ's habitual
Grace, and nothing else, as is plain to any that shall read the places you have
cited (and do not you your self quote them only for that very purpose, as has
already been demonstrated from your own Papers?) is it not then as clear as the
Sun at noon, that the Testimony of the Schoolmen by you cited belongs not even
in your own opinion (as you have all along in those Papers expressed it; for of
that the Doctor only spoke, and not of that which you should af^^^ declare) to
the matter the Doctor had and has in hand, which is ^^e gradual difference in
the Acts of Grace in Christ, and not the gradual difference in the Habit, which
he always did believe to be full and complete, still one and entirely the
same, without possibility of addition or decrease?

. 13. And therefore this being so evident, in the second. you are put to a new
Shift. For thus you say, As for that place you quote out of Aquinas, it is
plain that therein by the Effects of Wisdom and Grace are meant such as are
outward, for those are most properly termed Works.

. 14. Now, Sir, I thought it had been you that had first quoted this place of
Aquinas. And all that the Doctor had to do, was to show that even that
Schoolman, whom you had cited to countenance your Use of Confutation, spoke
nothing against him; for all that he said, or that you quoted him for, was only
for asserting, that Christ could not possibly increase according to the Habit
of Wisdom and Grace, which could not possibly concern him that spoke only of
the gradual difference in respect of some Acts of Grace and holy Charity. And
now, Sir, I pray tell me, does not Aquinas speak fully to this, and nothing
else? And did not you therefore quote him in your Use of Confutation? And if
this be so, then did not Doctor Hammond rightly infer that this Aquinas in this
Testimony spoke nothing against him? To what purpose then do you divert the
Reader to another thing, that was never in controversy between you and the
Doctor? Whether the Effects of Wisdom in this place of Aquinas be either
inward or outward, it is no whit material to the present debate. For Doctor
Hammond sought no advantage by it. All that he had to prove was only this, That
when Aquinas and the other Schoolmen, in the places by you quoted, denied all
intensive growth of Grace and holy Charity in Christ, they were only to be
understood of the Habit, as they had in express terms declared in the very
places by you cited. As for the Acts that flow from those Habits, and their
intensive perfection, whether they were all equal in themselves or gradually
different, as it concerned them not in point of Argument there to determine, so
they had said nothing at all concerning them; which was all the Doctor aimed at
to demonstrate, and was sufficient to secure him from your Use of Confutation,
that spoke clearly of another thing then he meant.

. 15. But for the present be it granted that the Doctor meant to make advantage
by this latter Passage of Aquinas, and thence had concluded, that as Aquinas
denied all increase in the habitual Grace of Christ, so he no ways denied, but
asserted, a Capacity of Degrees among the Acts of Christ's Love of God, and the
Expressions of it, as appears from this place of Aquinas by him cited in his
answer ad 3 m. For does not Aquinas say there expressly, that as Christ
increased in Age, so he did in Wisdom and Grace, because according to the
process of his Age, he did more perfect, more wise and virtuous works, and that
both in things belonging to God and Men also? And have we not already cleared
it from Aquinas, that such as the outward Expressions of Grace are, such are
also the inward Acts from whence they flow? and that the Schoolmen, in
particular Aquinas, do generally maintain from Saint Gregory, that Probatio
dilectionis is Exhibitio operis? If this be clear, as indeed it is, why then
might not the Doctor say truly, that the Consent of the Schoolmen was no way
denying (as most plain it is to any man that will read the places by you cited,
because they speak not a word expressly of the inward Acts) but (rather)
asserting (for the Doctor, though he positively there speaks, must be
comparatively understood) a Capacity of Degrees among the Acts of Christ's Love
of God and the Expressions? For that Aquinas speaks plainly of a gradual
difference in the Expressions of Christ's Love, your self do maintain; and that
this by consequence implies a gradual difference in the inward Acts themselves
whereof they were Expressions, we have also declared to be the opinion of
Aquinas and other of the Schoolmen.

. 16. But how plain is it, I pray Sir, that in that place of Aquinas, by the
Effects of Wisdom and Grace are meant such as are only outward? Is it because
these are most properly termed works?

. 17. But now suppose, Sir, this reason be invalid. For what, I pray Sir, do
you think of a Mathematical Demonstration? Arist l. 2. Eth. c. 6.. 3. Our
Refuters Master Scheibler also calls a mental Syllogism (...) a work. Vid.
Scheibler. Metaph. l. 2. c. 10. n. 29. p. 703. already quoted.
Is it not truly (...), opus, a work? why else does Aristotle say, (...); And
yet I hope you will not say that it is external as it is an intellectual work,
and purely formed in the brain, and there subjected. For no necessity lies upon
the Mathematician to express by words or writing the Demonstration he has
framed. But perhaps you heard of the difference of (...) and (...), and that in
artificial productions, such as properly are Poietical, the works as they are
permanent and lasting, so they are commonly external. But does not Aquinas
expressly say, that alio modo proficere quis potest secundum effectus, in
quantum sc. aliquis sapientiora and virtuosiora opera facit, et sic Christus
proficiebat sapientia and gratia sicut and aetate? And are not the inward Acts
of Wisdom and Grace as truly, nay more properly, the Effects of the infused
Habit of Wisdom and Grace then any outward Expressions of them? For the inward
Acts that flow from this Habit, as the Effect from the Cause, are the proper
natural elicite Acts of the Will, but the other are imperate, transient Acts.
Besides I would desire our Refuter to tell me, how it is possible for any man
to do sapientiora and virtuosiora opera, or perfectiora opera sapientiae and
virtutis, where the inward Acts of Wisdom and Grace are supposed to be the
same. For I must here remember him of his own distinction, and tell him, that
the Suppono ex prima 2 da q. 20, and 21. proprium and formale meritum esse in
actu elicito Voluntatis; actus vero externos per se non addere me ritum actui
Voluntatis, neque esse formaliter and intrinsece meritorios, sed solum per
extrinsecam denominationem ab actu meritorio voluntatis, a quo imperantur, and
extrinsece seu moraliter informantur, sicut etiam ab illo denominantur liberi
and studio. si. Suarez tom. 1. in 3. p. Thom. disp. 39. sect. 1. p. 540. col.
1. C. D. Vide Aquin. 1. 2. q. 20. art. 1. in corp. Cajetan. alios in loc.
outward works are not properly called works of Wisdom and Grace, but only by
a Metonymy of the Effect, and by extrinsecal denomination: it is the very same
with the outward Expressions of Wisdom and Grace, as he says of the outward
Expressions of Love, that are Love only by extrinsecal Denomination and the
Metonymy of the Effect. And therefore Suarez in tert. part. Thom. q. 7. p. 315.
col. 2. E. F. in Comment. ad loc. infra citat.
Suarez (who without doubt as well understood Aquinas as our Refuter or any man
else) expounds him, in his Commentary on this very place, of an intensive
growth of the inward Acts themselves of Wisdom and Grace, as shall in this
Section be manifested in due place.

. 18. The truth is, Aquinas is no otherwise to be understood; and though the
word (Opus a work) sometimes signifies that which is external, yet it is
generally received in the Schools, that a Moral work or Action (such as these
without doubt are of which Aquinas speaks in this place) consists both of the
inward Act of the Will and the outward Performance, as the two essential Parts
that concur to the being and constitution of a Moral Action. For this let
Suarez speak; Suarez tom. 1. in 1. part. Thom. disp. 38. sect. 4. p. 519. col.
2. A B.
Illud praeceptum, says he, direct cadit in ipsum Actum exteriorem, qui est
objectum interioris Actus Voluntatis, qui etiam consequenter praecipitur,
quatenus cum exteriori componit unum Actum moralem and liberum. But to make it
more authentic, let us hear Aquinas himself. Aquinas 1. 2. q. 20. art. 3. in
corp. and respons. ad 1m. Vide Cajetan. in loc.
Dicendum, says he, quod, sicut supra dictum est, Actus interior Voluntatis
and Actus exterior, prout considerantur in genere moris, sunt unus Actus. In
Corp. And then in his Answer ad primum, Dicendum, says he, quod ratio illa
probat, quod Actus interior and exterior sunt aiversi secundum genus naturae:
sed tamen ex sic diversis constituitur unum in genere moris, ut supra dictum
est. The place he refers to is in the 17th. Question art 4. in corp. Thus,
Sicut autem in genere rerum naturalium, aliquod totum componitur ex materia and
forma, ut homo ex anima and corpore, qui est unum Ens natural, licet habeat
multitudinem partium; ita etiam in actibus humanis, actus inferioris potentiae
materialiter se habet ad actum superioris, in quantum inferior potentia agit in
virtute superioris moventis ipsum, sic enim and actus moventis primi formaliter
se habet ad actum instrumenti: unde patet, quod imperium and actus imperatus
sunt unus actus humanus, sicut quoddam totum est unum, sed est secundum parts
multa. To the same purpose also he speaks ibid. q. 18. art. 6. in Corp. To the
same purpose Durand: Durand. 2. Sent. did. 42. q. 1. B. C. p. 153. col. 1.
Actus interior and exterior sunt boni vel mali moraliter eadem bonitate vel
malitia secundum numerum, quae est in actu interiori subjective, in exteriori
autem objective solum and extrinsece. Quod patet dupliciter: primo, quia nulli
actui convenit bonitas vel malitia moralis nisi voluntatio ut voluntarius est,
dicente Augustino, quod peccatum adeo est voluntarium, quod si non fuerit
voluntarium, non erit peccatum. Sed actui interiori competit esse voluntarium
subjective vel intrinsece, velle enim in voluntate est: actui autem exteriori
non competit esse voluntarium nisi objective, actus enim exterior est objectum
actus interioris voluntatis, and in hoc solum est voluntarius. Ergo, etc.
Though much more might be added to this purpose from other Schoolmen, yet this
is abundantly sufficient to clear the meaning of Aquinas; and Suarez. was not
mistaken, when he understood him of a real increase in the inward Acts of
Wisdom and Grace, which are the formal parts of a moral Work or Action, the
exterior or outward Work being only the material part of it, according to
Aquinas his own Doctrine.

. 19. But he has another Reason behind, that will strike it to a hair: for he
adds, And besides, an intensive increase in the inward Acts of Wisdom and
Grace would argue and presuppose an intensive increase in the very Habits
themselves.

. 20. But are you indeed sure of this, good Mr. Refuter? How then shall the
Author of the Mixture of Scholastical and Practical Divinity (I hope you know
the man, Sir,) escape the lash of this Use of Confutation? For though Doctor
Hammond never said that there was an intensive growth in any one Act of divine
Grace in Christ, yet Mr. Jeanes himself has said it of many. All that the
Doctor ever said was only this, that one Act of Divine Grace or holy Love and
Charity in Christ, compared with another Act, was more high and intense; as the
light of the Sun is more intense (though still equal in it self) then the light
of a Candle, or a Starr of the least magnitude, when both are compared
together. He says that Christ's ardency in one Act of Prayer, to wit, in the
Garden, was more intense then at another time in another Act, when there was
not that occasion for the heightning this Ardency. He says that Christ's Love
of us men was more high, more intense in that Act of his Dying for us, then in
those other of his suffering Hunger, Poverty, Nakedness and the like. He never
says that any one numerical Act was ever gradually intended.

. 21. But before I come to make this good from our Refuters own words, let me
be so bold to ask him how he proves, that an intensive increase in the inward
Acts of Wisdom and Grace would argue and presuppose an intensive increase in
the very Habits themselves. I deny it, Sir, I deny it; and I beseech you let us
have no more of your ipse dixit's for a proof. For I assure you, Sir, you have
all along showed your self a most bold obtruder of the crudest notions on the
world, that I ever yet saw vented and published in print.

. 22. For are not, Sir, the inward Acts of the Habit of Grace elicite Acts of
the Will? and are they not absolutely free, as the Will is, from whence they
flow? Though it be not possible for any inward Act of the Will to be gradually
more intense then the Habit is from whence it coeffectually with the Will
flows; yet is not the Will free (ab intrinseco, I mean) and still naturally at
Liberty, unless otherwise determined ab extrinseco by some superior command, to
act how and in what manner it pleases? I have already demonstrated it, and
therefore shall not trouble the Reader with nauseous repetitions, but shall
recommend that piece of Art to our Refuter.

. 23. In short then, though in acquisite Habits, not yet perfect and complete,
but only in fieri, an intensive increase in the praecedaneous Acts, that
concur to the Efficiency and Perfection of the Habit, may argue and conclude
an intensive increase in the very Habits themselves, and Vide Arist. Eth. l. 2.
c 2, and 3.
Aristotle has proved it; yet in infused Habits, and Habits now perfectly
acquired, and complete and full, the Intension and Remission of the Acts that
are subsequent, and now flow from the Habit, as the Effect from the Cause, does
not argue a proportionable increase or decrease in the Habit, but only an
innocent exercise of the Liberty of the Will, if that be not by some superior
Cause or Command limited to a constant equality of acting: which yet our
Refuter has not undertook to make good, in respect of all the internal Acts
that flowed from that all-full and perfect Habit of Grace in our Blessed Lord.

. 24. But now here enters a Conqueror indeed. Nothing now but Ovations and
Triumphs can serve the turn. And that it may be done to purpose, behold he
sings his (...) himself, in a loftier strain then Nero did when he returned
from his Conquest of the Grecian Musicians. For in the 3d.. he cries, Whereas
you say in the close of Section the 28, that the consent of the Schoolmen is no
ways denying, but asserting a Capacity of Degrees amongst the Acts of Christ's
Love of God, i. e. of the inward Acts thereof, there will be little sense in
your words in themselves, and less pertinency unto the matter in hand, unless
your meaning be, as you elsewhere express your self, that the inward Acts of
Christ's Love of God were more intense at one time then at another. Well, Sir,
it shall be granted you for asking, that it was the Doctors meaning, that some
inward Acts of Divine Charity in Christ were more high, more intense, at one
time then others were at another. But what then? why, And if this be your
meaning (says our Refuter) I must needs assume the boldness to tell you, that
no such matter is visible unto me in any of the Schoolmen. But perhaps you may
mean such Schoolmen, as such a Puisny as I never saw or heard of. However you
cannot expect belief until you produce their Testimonies. And I shall entreat
you to allege such as may be had in Paul's Churchyard; or at least in the
Library at Oxford.

. 25. Lo there now. Is not this a bold challenge? and was ever the like heard
of? What, in all the Schoolmen to be had in Paul's Churchyard, or in the great
Bodly's Library? Not any old Moth-eaten and obscure Manuscript excepted? Was
ever the like Schoolman heard of? Alas, Suarez, that man of so prodigious
Judgment and Memory, though (as Strada testifies of him) he were able to quote
any passage in Saint Austin, or his Vide Strad. Prolusiones, li. 1. prolus. 1.
orator. p. 7.
own voluminous writings, both to page and column, and antecedents and
subsequents, was but a shallow-brain'd man to our profound Undertaker.
Methinks, Sir, you should have excepted those at least of the last Mart, whose
names are scarce yet come to your study at Chedzoy. Sir, you are a man of a
high Spirit, and Alexander the great, when with his handful of Macedons he
undertook the conquest of the vast Persian Empire, was but a Fencer in
comparison. What now can the world imagine after this notorious flourish, but
that the Doctor is overcome? What not be able to allege any thing for his
Cause out of any one Schoolman, to be had either in Paul's Churchyard or the
Library at Oxford? Well, good Mr. Refuter, the world will say, you are a bold
adventurous man, though you chance to be mistaken, and that you have Magnis
tamen excidit ausis for your comfort; and a Gog-magog Leap and a Chedzoy
challenge shall be both equally famous. Howsoever I thank you, Sir, you have
afforded me field-room; I have liberty to range for the proof of the present
Point in any of the Schoolmen either in Paul's Churchyard or the Library in
Oxford. But, Sir, not to trouble you with hard names, or to be so uncharitable
as to put you to the trouble and expense of going to Oxford or London to peruse
Quotations, I shall search for this point, in debate betwixt you and the
Doctor, only in such of the Schoolmen as my own and some friends private
Studies have afforded me; and the Authors shall be such as you make the world
believe that you have read, by the Quotations in your Margin.

. 26. The Point then to be proved is this, That the Schoolmen no ways deny,
but assert a Capacity of Degrees amongst the inward Acts of the all-full,
all-perfect Habit of Divine Grace in Christ. And then in doing this I shall in
effect make good my promise, and prove to you, without any need of a new
undertaking, (and yet in due place I shall further make good that engagement by
rational Arguments) that the inward Acts of Christ's Grace are neither equal in
themselves, nor can always be exactly proportioned unto that of his habitual
Grace, so as still to equal it in intension.

. 27. And then withal I shall prove that Mr. Jeanes himself has asserted this
very Doctrine, though Doctor Hammond has not. And therefore if it be true (as
old Cato, or whosoever Vide Marci Zuerii Boxhornii Quaest. Roman. q. 14. p. 73,
etc.
was the Author of those Distichs) and Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit
ipsum, Mr. Jeanes himself will deserve this Use of Confutation. I shall begin
with the last first.

. 28. And now because our Refuter has left me the liberty to allege any
Schoolman to be had in Paul's Churchyard, or in the Library at Oxford, I shall
begin with an Author without doubt to be had on every stall in Paul's
Churchyard. It is no other then the Author of a Mixture of Scholastical
Divinity with Practical, Mr. H. Jeanes of Chedzoy, an Author of our Refuters
near Acquaintance: his words are these, page 249.

2. As for his state of humiliation, the fullness of his knowledge in that was
consistent 1. with the nescience of diverse things. He knew not as man the day
of Judgment, Mar. 13. 32, the barrenness of the fig tree, Mar. 11. 13. 2.
with increase in his knowledge; for in Luke 2. 52. he is said to increase in
Wisdom in the same sense wherein he is said to increase in Stature, for they
are both coupled together by Luke. But he increased in Stature really, indeed
and in Truth, and not only in the opinion of men, and therefore also there was
a Reality in the growth of his wisdom. For this also our Divines usually
allege Luke 2. 40. And the Child grew and waxed strong in Spirit, filled with
Wisdom, and the Grace of God was upon him. The word translated filled denotes
three things.

1. The fullness that was in the Wisdom of Christ: He was full of wisdom.

2. The dependency of it upon its Efficient. Christ as man was filled with
Wisdom, to wit by God. The Humanity did not, could not fill it self, but was
replenished by the Deity.

3. We have here implied the Antecedent or Terminus a Quo of this his fullness,
to wit, a denial of the antecession thereof, The Child grew, etc. and was
filled with wisdom. He was filled then and not before. The manhood was always
even from the very first moment of its conception full of Wisdom, according to
the first Act (that is, in plain English, according to the Habit, which Anima
Christi neque in actu primo, seu Habitu, videt, etc. Suarez 3. p. Thom. tom. 1.
q. 10. disp. 26. tect. 2. p. 336. col. 1. F.
Metaphysicians and Schoolmen call the first Act, in opposition to the Acts
that issue from the Habit, which they call Actus secundi; for he cannot mean
the Natural faculty of the Understanding by the first Act) and yet we see here,
there is a fullness of Wisdom de novo accrewed unto him, to wit of actual
apprehension.

And then Bellarmine is alleged, and confuted for speaking contrary to this
Doctrine, tom. 1. de Christ. l. 4. c. 2.

. 29. And is this good Doctrine, Mr. Refuter? and does Bellarmine deserve to be
opposed for speaking against it? How then comes Doctor Hammond under the lash
of your Use of Confutation, that said not half so much as your self do here?
nay not the very shadow of that you after urge against Bellarmine out of Ames?
For do not you expressly say he was ignorant or nescient of many things?
particularly of the day of Judgment? Nay do you not say that he really, and
not in the opinion of men only, did increase, and that there was a Reality in
the growth of his Wisdom and Grace, as well as his Stature? Do you not say, in
effect, that it is the usual doctrine of our Divines of the Reformation? Do
you not add that there was implied a Terminus a quo of this his fullness, a
denial of the antecession of it? He was filled then and not before. And do you
not add, to clear your meaning, that though the Manhood was always according
to the first Act or Habit filled with Wisdom, yet a fullness of Wisdom de novo
(actual Wisdom you mean) accrewed unto him, to wit in regard of actual
apprehension?

. 30. And now, Sir, I pray tell me, has the Doctor said half so much of the
intensive growth of the Acts of Divine Love in Christ, as you have done of the
Acts of Wisdom, both which flow from the same One all-full, all-perfect Habit
of Divine Grace, from whence, as their first spring and Ocean, flow as well the
Acts of his Wisdom as his holy Love? For under this term of Habitual Grace the
Schoolmen comprehend all Divine infused Perfections. Is it a Crime in Doctor
Hammond, which is none in your self? And shall Bellarmine be confuted for
speaking contrary to this Doctrine, which you decry as erroneous in Doctor
Hammond? Certainly either Doctor Hammond is innocent, or Bellarmine is unjustly
confuted. What now, Sir, is become of your Reply in your second Paragraph? Is
it so plain in the place quoted from Aquinas, as you say it is. 2. that by the
Effects of Wisdom and Grace are meant, not the inward, but the outward Acts;
for these are most properly termed works? And besides, is it so plain, as we
must take it upon your bare word, that an intensive increase in the inward Acts
of Wisdom and Grace argue and presuppose an intensive increase in the very
Habits themselves? What, is this good Doctrine because it is addressed against
Doctor Hammond, the contrary to which was true reformed Doctrine in your former
Writings, when addressed against Bellarmine? I see, Sir, you are as valiant as
Sampson, and you will pull the pillars of the house you lean on down about your
ears, that so you may destroy your Adversary; and you will strike your sword
through your own Bowels, that the point may reach the Doctor, as Ajax killed
himself to strike the shadow of his enemy.

. 31. I know you will be apt to reply, that you speak not here of an infused,
but acquisite Habit of knowledge; and that to this purpose you had before said,
p. 248.. 5. There was in him (Christ) an acquisite or experimental Knowledge,
gotten and gained by experience, and for this they quote Heb. 5. 8. That 2.
there was in his Knowledge a fullness of Degrees, and therefore his increase in
Wisdom spoken of Luke 2. 52. is extensive only, and not intensive. That 3.
there was in his Knowledge a fullness of Objects, etc.

. 32. But how you will reconcile this with that follows, I leave any man to
judge. For you add, Some Schoolmen have affirmed that Christ as Man even in
this life knew all creatures possible. Most of them affirm that he knew all
things past, present, and to come. Becanus limits the extent of Christ's infused
Knowledge only unto all things concerning Men, Angels, and himself. But we for
our parts shall presume only to say, that he always knew all things in every
Article of time, that then was necessary for our salvation and the execution of
his office. Distinguish we must betwixt his state of Humiliation and Exaltation
-- etc.

As for his state of Humiliation, the fullness of his knowledge in that was
consistent 1. with the Nescience of diverse things etc. -- 2. with increase in
his knowledge etc. -- and that real not imaginary etc. as we have already
quoted.

. 33. Secondly, how you will reconcile this distinction with that you have
quoted out of Ames against Bellarmine, the Reader must judge. I shall quote as
much of that Passage in Latin as is necessary, because you have already
translated it into English. Concedimus (says Ames, as you have quoted it
right) Amesii Bellar. enervat. l. 2. c. 1. These. 1.. 3. p. 83.
Christum fuisse unctum Spiritu sapientiae ab ipsa conceptione, (frustra enim
sophistice occupatur hujus temporis negatio a Bellarmino, quasi esset nostra
defensio:) sed sicut divina natura in ipso comprimebat aliquo modo, and
occultavit suam majestatem in humiliatione Christi, ne exereret illam
dignitatem, quae postea apparuit in Exaltatione; sic etiam cohibebatur Spiritus
ille Sapientiae, ne statim in perfectione, sed paulatim proratione status
Christi exereretur. 2. Spiritus sapientiae est ubi faculcas adest omnia
percipiendi, quae sunt necessaria scitu prout occasio fert, quamvis omnia
singularia actu non sciantur. 3. Sapientia illa quae intensive and Actu primo
est perfecta potest actu secundo augeri per extensionem ad Objecta nova. And
then in the 4th. p. 84. he adds, illi ipsi qui aliquam sapientiam ab initio
plenam and perfectam Christo tribuunt, fatentur tamen de scientia acquisita,
quod Christus in illa non tantum profecit secundum effectum, nec tantum
secundum experientiam, sed etiam Essentiam vel habitum ipsius Scientiae. Thom.
in sum. part. 3. q. 12. a. 2. ubi ad Ob. 2. respondet etiam Scientiam Christi
fuisse perfectam secundum tempus (hoc est pro ratione aetatis,) sed non
simpliciter, and secundum naturam. Then in the 6th. which you have taken notice
of he adds, Ista dona de quibus agitur, non naturaliter and necessario
sequebantur ex unione, sed ex libera communicatione. Credibile est igitur
potuisse certo consilio paulatim communicari. 2. Aeque credibile est, quaedam
dona vel donorum gradus non fuisse in ipsa incarnatione effusos in animam
Christi, ac in corpus non fuisse statim effusam gloriam illam quam in
resurrectione accepit. And when. 7. Bellarmine had urged, Sapientia and gratia
Christo homini fuit naturalis; he answers, naturalia dona non solent hominibus
Simul and Semel in summo gradu adesse. In the 12.. when Bellarmine had said of
this place Luke 2. 40. and 52. sensus est, organa corporea magis repleta fuisse
indies sapientia, and aptata ad opera excellentiora; he returns, hoc aliquid
est, sed non totum. Evangelista enim affirmat eum corroboratum fuisse spiritu,
non corpore solo, quatenus implebatur sapientia, (...). And when Bellarmine had
again said, Replebatur sapientia acquisita per experimentum proprium Practice
earum rerum quas non ignorabat Theorice; he replies, Neque in Scripturis, neque
usquam alias reperitur haec phrasis, tali sensu, ut quis dicatur sapientia
impleri, eo quod experitur illa quae antea perfect sciebat. 2. Hac ratione
crescebat in sapientia etiam post Resurrectionem, non minus quam in pueritia.
Tunc enim expertus est, quid sit in coelum ascendere, sedere ad dextram Patris.
And when Bellarmine had added, Proficiebat Christus sapientia and gratia
opinione hominum, quibus indies magis aperiebat sapientiam suam; he replies,
Verum hoc est de persona Christi, sed humana natura etiam humano more
proficiebat. 2. Eodem sensu dicitur profecisse in Sapientia, quo proficiebat in
Statura, conjunguntur enim a Luca: sed revera crescebat statura, non opinione
solum. 3. Thomas ipse in Sum. p. 3. q. 12. a. 2. affirmat and probat ex hoc
loco ipsum habitum sapientiae acquisitae suscepisse incrementa una cum Corporis
aetate ac statura, cui etiam assentiuntur multi veterum, ut Medina in illum
ostendit.

. 34. To Ames I shall adjoyn Vorstius in his Anti-Bellarminus, in this work not
suspected; Christum juxta animam Conrad. Vorstii Antibellarm. contract. tom. 1.
p. 36, 37.
suam seu naturam humanam, mox ab initio suae conceptionis, nondum vere and
plene omniscium fuisse; sed quaedam vere and proprie in statu humilitatis
ignorasse, and multa progressu temporis, tum ex divina patefactione tum
propriis experimentis, vere didicisse seu before cognovisse, adeoque sapientia
and aliis id genus Spiritus S. donis vere profecisse, his fere argumentis
probare solemus. Luc. 1. 52. At qui vere proficit gratia and sapientia, is
majorem sapientiam and gratiam acquirit. Ergo, etc. Exceptio -- de Christi
profectu non vero -- sed apparente Textui -- contraria est, etc. 2 John 8.
sicut me docuit pater ita loquor. At qui docetur is revera discit, quia relata
simul sunt natura. Sic Heb. 5. Neque hic de apparente, sed de vera docendi and
discendi ratione agitur. And after he had quoted diverse Texts for Christ's
ignorance of the day of Judgment, Barren fig tree etc. he concludes, Itaque
non modo non absurdum, sed and probabile and rationi congruum est, Christum
aliquando nonnulla vere ignorasse quae tamen omnia nunc exact noverit,
postquam sc. ad dextram Dei exaltatus est, and Judex omnium factus sit, etc. In
the next Section he tells us, Rursus eundem Christum juxta animam humanam in
statu humiliationis, nondum perfect beatum, seu prorsus felicem and Vorst.
Antibel. tom. 1. p. 36.
gloriosum, etc. his argumentis evidenter ostendimus, etc. And in his Answer to
Bellarmines arguments he tells us -- Unctio Ibid. p. 39.
Christi licet aliquatenus ab initio coeperit, non tamen uno Momento statim
absoluta; sed suis quibusdam gradibus paulatim perfecta fuit, etc. And then he
concludes, Denique distinguendum Ibid. p. 40.
est hoc loco prudenter inter Divinam sive increatam Christi scientiam, quam
semper eandem habuit sine ulla mutatione, and humanam sive creatam, eamque
duplicem, tum Infusam, tum Acquisitam sive experimentalem, h. e. proprio studio
and experimentis comparatam; secundum quam utram que anima Christi paulatim
profecit, h. e. multa progressu temporis didicit ac before cognovit quae antea
vere ignorabat, ut supra vidimus.

. 35. To these I shall add H. Grotius, a man whose excellent writings,
especially in his book de Jure Belli and Pacis, show him as well skilled in the
Schoolmen as in the Civil law, unles he deserves to be Outlawed for this kind
of learning, because H. Grotius annotat. in nov. Testam. p. 637.
he is a Critic, as Doctor Hammond is. In his Annotations on Luk? 2. 40. he
tells us, (...)] Et hoc Actum, insolitum quidem, sed tamen Successivum, ut
loquuntur, significat. Tale est and infra, (...). And upon Mark 13. 32. Idem
ibid. p. 581.
(...)] Videtur mihi, ni meliora docear, hic locus non impie posse exponi hunc
in modum, ut dicamus divinam Sapientiam menti humanae Christi Effectus suos
impressisse pro temporum ratione. Nam quid aliud est, si verba non torquemus,
(...), Luc. 11. 52? Sicut igitur post resurrectionem accepit omnem potestatem,
ita and omnem Scientiam. Ac nequis hanc sententiam ab antiquitate damnatam
putet, satis admonere hos potest illud Ambrosii, Secundum carnem utique
Sapientia Dei implebatur and Gratid. Pro tempore enim (...) suae Jesu opus non
erat scire diem universalis Judicii, quem Deus Pater latere voluit. Nec aliter
sensisse Christianorum vetustissimos indicio est Irenaeus, qui lib. 2. cap. 48.
and 49. Scientiam, inquit, dici illius Filius non erubuit refer ad Patrem,
and dixit quod verum est. Item: and secundum agnitionem itaque praepositus esse
Pater annunciatus est a Domino. Leontius de sectis: (...) (...). So Grotius.

. 36. To these I shall adjoin, of our own, that most incomparable pair, the
Judicious Hooker, and the profound Doctor Field, men as well skilled in
School-learning as any whatsoever.

. 37. The first, in his Ecclesiastical Policy, treating of the fullness of
habitual Grace in Christ, tells us, that though the Deity did replenish the
humane nature of Christ with all perfection of Grace according to the Habit,
yet it was with a gradual difference in respect of the Acts and Operations. We
have already quoted the whole passage at large; but the words that Hooker
Eccles. pol. l. 5.. 54. p. 298.
concern the present purpose in short are these -- The Deity of Christ -- has
replenished (the humane nature) with all such Perfections as the same is any
way apt to receive, at least according to the exigence of that economy or
service for which it pleased him in love to be made Man. For as the parts,
degrees and offices of that mystical administration did require, which he
voluntarily undertook, the Beams of Deity did in Operation always accordingly
either restrain or enlarge themselves. Thus Hooker.

. 38. The second, Doctor Field, having declared the all-fulness of habitual
Grace in Christ, quoad Essentiam and virtutem, intensive and extensive, he
proceeds to unfold the present Difficulty.

. 39. The passage is too long to be here transcribed; and therefore I shall
take only what is sufficient to the present purpose, and referr the Reader to
the whole Discourse well worthy his perusal. Thus then He: How is it then, will
some man say, that the Scripture pronounces that he (Christ) increased in the
Perfections of the mind, to wit, both in Grace and Wisdom, Luke 2. 52.
as he grew in Stature of body? And here that question is usually proposed and
handled, Whether Christ did truly and indeed profit and grow in Knowledge, as
not knowing all things at the first, as he grew in Stature of body from weak
beginnings, or only in the further manifestation of that Knowledge he had in
like degree of Perfection from the beginning? For the clearing whereof we must
note, That there were in Christ two kinds of Knowledge, the one Divine and
Increate, the other Humane and Created, etc. -- which the Schoolmen divide into
two kinds; the one in verbo, the other in genere proprio; that is, the one in
the eternal Word, wherein he sees all things, the other, that whereby he sees
things in themselves, etc. -- Concerning his Divine Knowledge, the Perfection
of it was such and so infinite from all eternity, that it is impious once to
think that he grew and increased in the same.

Touching the Humane Knowledge he had of things in the eternal Vide apud
Scotum. 3. d. 14. q. 2. opinionem Henrici, quodlib. 5. q. 14. etc.
Word, and in the clear glass of the Divine Essence, it is most probably
thought by some of excellent Learning, that though the soul of Christ had at
the first, and brought with it into the world, a potential hability and aptness
to see all things in God, so soon as it should convert it self to a distinct
view of them; yet it did not Actually see all things in the divine Essence of
God at once from the beginning, but afterward in process of time: and for the
other Ibid. quaest. 4.
kind of Knowledge and apprehension of things which he had as beholding them in
themselves, they think it was perfect in Habit from the first moment of his
Incarnation, but not in actual apprehension, wherein he did truly increase and
grow, as also in experimental Knowledge. For the humane Knowledge that was in
Christ, was by conversion to those phantasmata and sensible representations of
things, that from without are by the senses presented unto the soul, and was
discursive; though not proceeding from things known to find out things
altogether unknown, yet from things actually known to such as he knew but
habitually only, and not actually, before. That the humane Knowledge of Christ
had of things in themselves was discursive, and by conversion to the sensible
representations of them from without, it is evident, in that all Perfections
are received according to the condition and capacity of the receiver. Now the
condition of the soul of Man in the state o^ this life is, to know nothing but
by conversion to the sensible appearances of the same, and that not only in
respect of things Natural, but Mystical also, and Supernatural. Quia
impossible Dionys. citat. ab eod. Durand. ib. q. 3.
est (says Dionysius Areopagita) nobis aliter superlucere radium divinum, nisi
sacrorum velaminum varietate circumvelatum, Because it is impossible the beam
of divine light should shine on us, unless it be veiled on every side with the
variety of sacred veiles.

Thus then we see how it may be truly said that Christ grew in Wisdom and
Knowledge as he did in Stature of body, non quoad habitus Essentiam and
Extensionem, sed quoad actualem cognitionem and experimentum: that is, not in
respect of the Essence or extension of the Habit, but of actual Knowledge and
Experience. That which Thomas and others have, that Christ knew all things at
first by an Insused Knowledge, and afterward attained another kind of
Knowledge which they named Acquisite, is not so fit (I pray mark it, good Mr.
Refuter:) for two Forms or Qualities of one kind cannot be in the same Subject.
Now as the sight which is in men naturally, and which once lost is restored
again by miracle, is of the same nature and condition: so is that Knowledge of
things that is by infusion, and that which is acquisite, howsoever these men
seem to make of them two kinds. Wherefore passing by this conceit as not
probable to conclude this point. Alexand. de Hales part. 2. q. 89. mem. 2. With
Doctor Field Scotus lib. 3. sent. d. 14. q. 3. agrees, and argues excellently
against this opinion of Aquinas; quem vide: So also Durand. l. 3. Sent. d. 14.
q. 4. Nay Suarez himself in this forsakes his great Master.
Even as touching the condition of Children, etc. -- so likewise some think
that the Babe Jesus, even in his humane Soul, had the Actual Knowledge of all
things from the beginning, and that he grew only in experimental Knowledge: but
there are other of as good judgment, and as great Learning, who think that,
howsoever he had the habit of all Knowledge from the beginning, and brought it
with him out of the womb; yet not the Act and Use of it: and this is all that
either Luther or Calvin say, and yet we know how clamorously some inveigh
against them, as if they had broached some damnable Heresy (And therefore,
good Doctor, possess your soul in Patience; you see you have good Company to
bear a share in this Calumny, and no worse men then Luther and Calvin have been
traduced as broachers of some damnable Heresy, and denying the habitual
fullness of Christ's Grace, as you have been in direct terms and by Consequence
concluded, because they maintained a gradual difference in the Acts of divine
Grace, and that successively and by degrees he received increase, though not in
the Habit, yet in the Act and Use, and internal operation.) But some will say,
If we grant that Christ in his humane Soul knew not all things from the
beginning, but in process of time learned that which he actually knew not, we
fasten on him the disgraceful note of Ignorance, and consequently b^ing him
within the confines and compass of sin. Hereupon Hug. de S. Victore de Sac.
fide, l. 1. part 6. ca. 26.
Hugo de S. Victore (let me add, and Quamvis demus ex rebus quae in sola
divina potentia continentur, and ab ea fieri possunt, aliquas non cognovisse,
de quo infra dicetur; tamen illa carentia seu negatio scientiae non potest dici
vera ignorantia, quia ignorantia non significat quamcunque negationem
cognitionis, sed privationem illius scientiae quae inesse deberet juxta
conditionem vel statum propriae naturae; ut non dicitur homo ignorans, eo quod
careat scientia Angelica: cognoscere autem omnia possibilia fortasse. non
pertinet ad statum vel conditionem intellectus creati; and ita Christus nihil
eorum nescivit seu ignoravit quae oportuit scire, consideratis dignitate
personae, condition naturae, and ratione statu^ seu officii; and ita,
simpliciter loquendo, ignorantiam non habuit, sed plenitudinem scientiae
Suarez. 3. in par. Thom. disp. 24. sect. 3. p. 343. col 1. A B.
Suarez too) answers, and shows the folly of this silly Objection,
peremptorily resolving, that Non omnis qui aliquid nescit, aut minus perfect
scit, statim ignorantiam habere seu in ignorantia esse dicendus est; quia
ignorantia non dicitur, nisi tunc solum cum id quod ignorari non debuisset
nescitur: that is, We must not say that every one that knows not a thing, or
does less perfectly know it, (I beseech you mark that, Sir, for the avoiding of
after-cavils; for I know you will be apt to talk of an extensive augmentation
to more Objects, and not an intensive growth) is ignorant or in ignorance,
because ignorance is the not knowing of such things as should have been known.
Neither is there any distinction more trivial -- then that of Nescience and
Ignorance: and therefore though some in the heat of their distempered passions
(such as that of our Refuters was) lay a heavy imputation of horrible impiety
upon Luther and Calvin, and others, (as our Refuter has done upon Doctor
Hammond) for that they say there were some things which Christ in his humane
soul did not actually know from the beginning; yet Maldonate (for their
acquittance in this kind) confesses -- that many of the Ancient Fathers --
denied not, but that there were some things which Christ in his humane nature
did not actually always know -- yea upon the 24. of Matthew he testifies,
Maldonat: in 2. Luc. 40.
that many of them said plainly that Christ as man knew not the day of
Judgment. And though he labor to construe some Maldonat. in Matt. 24. 36.
of their words to another sense, yet Doctor Field shows that Origin says,
That Christ knew not the time of the day of Judgment Origin. tract. 3. in Matt.
when he said, Of that Day and hour knows no man, no not the Son; but that
afterward he knew it, when he was risen, and appointed of his Father King and
Judge. He proves the same also of Cyrill, and this is confessed of both these
by Jansenius; Cyrill. l. 9. Thesaur. c. 4. citat. a Jansenio Comment. ^n
Evangel. concord. p: 123.
and that this is not the Heresy of the Agnoetae, as some ignorantly affirm.
Field of the Church lib. 5. cap. 14. p. 435, 436, 437. edit. ult. Oxon.

. 40. And thus we have Protestants and Papists, Schoolmen and Fathers, men of
all Ages and Interests and Judgments, Calvin and Luther, Ames and Grotius,
Vorstius and Field, Henricus and Scotus, Durand and H. de S. Victore, Origin
and Cyrill; I might add Ambrose and others, nay Maldonate, and Jansenius, and
Hooker, and our very Refuter himself, acknowledging a gradual increase, though
not in respect of the Habit, yet of the Acts of Christ's Knowledge and Wisdom
and Grace, as well as Doctor Hammond.

. 41. But the spite of it is, that these are none of the Schoolmen as may be
had either in Paul's Churchyard or the Library at Oxford. These are such
Schoolmen as such a Puisny as our Refuter is perhaps never saw; and therefore
he tells the Doctor, that he cannot expect belief, until he produce the
Testimonies of those Schoolmen he is acquainted with, such as he has seen and
heard of; and for this end he entreats him to allege such as may be had in
Paul's Churchyard, or at least in the Library at Oxford.

. 42. Well, Sir, if there be no remedy, I shall now allege such as you have
heard of and seen, unless your Margin and Text be stuffed with other men's
Collections and Observations, such as without doubt are to be had in Paul's
Churchyard and the Library at Oxford, and (unless you have very much deceived
the world) even at Chedzoy too.

. 43. I shall begin then with the very acute Suarez (as you justly style him)
in tertiam partem Thomae tom. 1. one very frequent in your books. And it is in
his Commentary on the 7th. Question, Art. 12. in his explication of Aquinas,
Answer ad 3m, the place now in Controversy. For whereas some doubt might be
made whether Aquinas understood that place of Saint Luke, Puer autem crescebat
sapientia, aetate and gratia, non de augmento ipsius Gratiae in se, sed in
ostensione and manifestatione sua, not of an increase of Grace in it self, but
only in the further manifestation of it to men, in respect of some outward work
and more noble expressions, as Mr. Jeanes does here expound it; He says thus,
Sed de priori dubitari potest, quia ita dicitur de Christo, crevisse in gratia
sicut in aetate: sed in aetate non solum ostendit augmentum, sed vere
comparavit illud (and does not Mr. Jeanes say the very same in his Treatise of
Christ's habitual Grace, and conclude also with an) Ergo and in gratia; unde and
itidem dicitur crevisse coram Deo and hominibus: Respondetur, Ideo D. Thomas
hic non solum dixit crevisse ostendendo gratiam suam, (I pray mark it, good M.
Refuter,) sed crevisse in effectibus (the inward Acts without doubt he means,
as appears not only by the adversative particle sed, but by what follows)
faciendo excellentiora opera ipsius gratiae. Et hoc modo revera crescebat, quia
re ipsa efficiebat opera Gratiae excellentiora, per quae licet ipse non fieret
sanctior (in respect of the Habit he means) aut justior, (I pray mark it, Sir,
and that he speaks not only of the Acts of Wisdom, but of Justice and Piety
and holy Charity also) nec plus aliquid mereretur propter infinitam dignitatem
personae suae, and quia a principio habuit gratiam consummatam (in regard of
the Habit;) nihilo minus illa opera de se (I pray mark it against another time,
when we shall have use of it) erant sufficientia ad augendam gratiam, quatenus
novum meritum continebant. Suarez in 3. p. Thom. tom. 1. q. 7. art. 12. in
Commentar. p. 315. col. 2. D. E. F.

. 44. But if this be not full enough to the present purpose, and for the
clearing as well of Doctor Hammond as Aquinas; let us hear the same Suarez in
the same book, q. 9. art. 1. disp. 24. sect. 2. p. 339. col. 2. F. and p. 340.
col. 1. Dico secundo, in intellectu Christi fuit actus creatus intelligendi.
Hanc etiam Conclusionem existimo de fide certam and definitam in 6. Synodo and
aliis conciliis (how say you, Mr. Refuter?) quae definiunt, in Christo esse
duas Operationes, Divinam and humanam: est enim universalis definitio, quae non
minus locum habet in actu Intellectus quam Voluntatis (I pray, good Sir, mark
it.) Item ex supra citatis generalibus locutionibus, quibus affirmant Concilia
fuisse in Christo utramque naturam perfectam cum omnibus proprietatibus.
Probatur autem breviter ex Scriptura ipsa. Isa. 11. 2. Requiescet super eum
Spiritus Domini, Spiritus Sapientiae and Intellectus, Scientiae and Consilii;
quod esse intelligendum de donis creatis, supra ostendimus ex Sanctis, qui
magis de Actibus quam de Habitibus loquuntur. Item Lucas 2. 52. Proficiebat,
inquit, sapientia and aetate and gratia apud Deum and homines. Nam licet hic
locus a multis Sanctis exponatur de demonstratione and ostensione Sapientiae,
sicut supra diximus agentes de gratia (he means the place now quoted) tamen,
sicut etiam diximus hanc ostensionem non esse sine aliquo augmento in ipsis
Actibus Gratiae (what can be more plainly said? and can an augmentation or
increase in the Acts of Grace signify any thing else then an intensive growth
and gradual increase in respect of their Perfection?) ita non suit sine Actibus
Scientiae, praesertim quia insra, q. 12. referemus multos Patres qui locum hunc
intelligunt de vero augmento Scientiae creatae (this is far higher you see, a
gradual increase of the very Habit it self) per proprios Actus ejus. Ac denique
ex contextu constat, sicut est sermo de aetate and gratia hominis, ita and de
Scientia hominis, ut express docuit Ambrosius lib. de Incarnat. Dom. Sacram c.
7. ultimo, ratio sumpta ex proprietate and perfectione humanae naturae (which
is the Reason our Field grounds on) quae est in Christo hoc confirmat. Once
more in the same book, q. 12. art. 4. disp. 30. sect. 2. p. 402. col. 2. F. Ad
tertiam confirmationem respondetur, primum, illud Testimonium Lucae 2. a multis
Patribus exponi eodem modo de Scientia sicut de Gratia, scil. de augmento quoad
ostensionem and operationem, quos ante citavimus, q. 7. circa art. 12. And thus
in one Suarez we have Fathers, and Councils, and Scripture, and Reason, let me
add and Schoolmen too, to acquit Doctor Hammond, all attesting a Real increase
and growth and gradual intension in the inward Acts as well as the outward
Expressions of the Grace as well as the Knowledge of Christ.

. 46. But, say Suarez what he will for the explication of Aquinas, he has
reason on his side, though but little Authority. For he adds as a most
irrefragable demonstration; Besides, an intensive increase in the inward Acts
of Wisdom and Grace would argue and presuppose an intensive increase in the
very Habits themselves. His proof is, ipse dixit, we assert it; and that is
sufficient against twenty Critics, were Grotius and Heinsius, nay Scaliger and
Vossius, and Salmasius also, of the number.

. 47. But let his own acute Suarez supply him with a Use of Instruction. It is
to be found in the self-same book also, which shows the man had very ill luck
in his reading, that he could observe nothing in that Author that any way made
to the purpose. For when it had been objected, Christum Dominum per Actus harum
virtutum quos exercebat, acquisivisse augmentum harum Virtutum; after he had
first proved the falsehood of this Assertion, because Christus habuit hos
Habitus a principio in gradu heroico, ut hic Aquinas, vel, ut clarius dicamus,
in summa perfectione quam habere possunt, vel secundum legem Dei ordinariam,
vel secundum naturalem capacitatem and facultatem hominis cui hi habitus and
eorum actus accommodantur, vel denique in summa perfectione quam in ipso
Christo unquam habituri sunt, quia hoc totum debitum erat unioni; and secondly
had confirmed it, 1. quia modo in beatitudine non augentur hi Habitus in
Christo per Actus, sed a principio conceptionis fuit perfect beatus, etc.
sicut nunc est, 2. quia Christus non reddebatur promptior vel facilior ad
operandum studiose per exercitium Actuum, ut eleganter dixerunt Basilius and
Dionysius praecedent. disp. cit. sect. 3. quia omnis haec perfectio est
naturalis Christo; He now in the third place makes answer to the Objection
thus, Concedo ergo per hos actus, neque habitus neque augmentum eorundem
Christum acquisivisse: quia Actus non intendit Habitum, nisi sit intensior
illo; Christus antem a principio habuit Habitus vel magis vel aeque intensos
quam futuri essent Actus. Suarez. in 3. p. Thom. q. 7. art. 4. disp. 19. sect.
2. page 300. col. 1. D. E. F.

. 48. Well then, in the Judgment of Suarez, and it is (as has been showed)
demonstrable by Reason and Experience, where the Act gradually intends the
Habit, there the Habit it self must be capable of increase, and the Act or Acts
also that augment it must be more intense then the Habit they increase. But
where the Habit is now in its utmost Perfection possible, and more, at least
equally intense as any Act can be, there a gradual increase of the Act or Acts
can never argue, much less presuppose, an intensive increase in the very Habits
themselves. And this is the present case of the habitual perfection of Grace in
Christ, which is at the utmost bounds in him both quoad Essentiam and virtutem,
intensive and extensive, so that no Act how far soever intended can exceed it
in height and gradual perfection, and very few equal it.

. 49. I shall cite but one Schoolman more, and it is only because he is an
Author to be had in very many private Studies. For he that is acquainted with
this kind of learning may by knowing one Schoolman, easily find out all the
rest, because they go upon a Road in the Sums and the Sentences. And no
meaner Author then Estius is the man. He in Sent. lib. 3. did. 13. (where the
Master treats of this Question). 3. p. 39. col. 2. thus says, Nonnullam
quaestionem habet quomodo superiori doctrinae (de plenitudine habitualis
Gratiae Christi) non sit contrarium quod ait Lucas c. 2. Jesum profecisse
Sapientia and Aetate and Gratia apud Deum and apud homines, etc. -- Ad hoc
respondet Magister, Christum non in se, sed in aliis, Gratia and Sapientia
profecisse: dum videlicet hominibus munera Gratiae and Sapientiae suae secundum
processum aetatis magis magisque ostendebat, etc. Verum huic expositioni
obstare videtur primum, quod Lucas in eodem ordine Gratiam and Sapientiam ponit
cum aetate, in quibus Christum profecisse dicit; unde sicut revera atque in
seipso profecit aetate, ita profecisse videtur and Gratia and Sapientia. Deinde
quod non tantum apud homines, sed and apud Deum profecisse dicitur; quod certe
non ita accipi potest, ut non in seipso, sed in oculis Dei intelligatur
profecisse; cum idem sit coram Deo and in veritate quippiam fieri: unde omnino
significatus videtur verus aliquis Christi in semetipso profectus.

Quocirca planior est aliorum responsio, qui dicunt Christum revera quidem in
Gratia and Sapientia profecisse, non tamen secundum Habitum, sed secundum
Actum; quia licet Habitus Gratiae and Sapientiae ab initio conceptionis animae
ejus infusus nullum acceperit incrementum, ab eo tamen Habitu per accessum
aetatis majora subinde opera gratiae and sapientiae procedebant (they are the
very words of Aquinas almost to which he referrs in the margent. 1.) Majora,
inquam, (let our Refuter mark it well) secundum rei veritatem, ideoque non
tantum coram hominibus, sed and apud Deum. Per hoc etiam fiebat ut and iste
Habitus Gratiae and Sapientiae ejus, qui revera non crescebat, hominum tamen
opinione cresceret. Atque hoc sensu non incommode accipi possunt verba Bedae a
Magistro citata, quem sensum indicat etiam Damascenus, l. 3. c. 22, etc. --
sunt autem qui memoratum Evangelii locum malunt intelligere de Sapientia
acquisita, quam etiam secundum Habitum putant aetatis successu auctam in
Christo. Sed obstat huic intellectui quod adjungitur de Gratia. Non enim
credibile est Christum secundum aliquem Habitum acquisitum in Gratia
profecisse, qua Deo and hominibus paulatim gratior evaderet. Et sane rectius
Scientiae, quae rerum est humanarum, quam Sapientiae, qua res divinae
cognoscuntur, Habitus aliquis acquisitus videretur in Christo agnoscendus:
quare retinenda est superior explicatio. Thus far Estius.

To these I might add Scotus l. 3. Sent. did. 14. q. 3. and all the rest of
the Schoolmen that H. Cavellus has there quoted, Durand. lib. 3. Sent. d. 14.
q. 3. ad 3. and q. 4. ad 1. Aquinas 3. par. q. 7. art. 12. ad 3m. and q. 12.
art. 2. in corp. Cajetan and others in loc. For the best Commentators in these
places understand him as speaking of a real increase in the inward Acts of
Wisdom and Grace. Ames in the place fore-quoted cites Bartholomeus Medina in
tertiam partem Thom. q. 7. a. 12. and q. 10. a. 2. to this purpose. But

O me probe lassum juvate! Posteri. It is time to cry out, Claudite jam rivos,
pueri, sat prata biberunt. Virgil.
If this be not enough to edify our writer of Scholastical and Practical
Divinity, it is not a Demonstration but a Miracle must do it.

But before I part with this Section, I must advise him for the future to be
more wary in his Challenges, and to let the Schoolmen in Paul's Church yard and
the Library at Oxford alone, and rather to entreat the Doctor to allege the
Testimonies only of such as are in the King of Spains Library of Saint
Laurence, or the Vatican at Rome, where the Inquisition will be sure to keep
the Doctor or his Hyperaspist from discovering his ignorance or folly. And so
farewell my bold Challenger, till we meet in the next Section. Only let me add
for a close, that since I have showed that you have few or none of the
Schoolmen on your side, which in your ecstatical passion and Galliardise you
called all your own, that now I expect with the Grecian Madman (that in his
pleasant dream called all the Ships in the haven his) you will cry out as he
did (after his friends had cured him of his Frenzy) and declaim against my
cruel Courtesy with a -- pol me occidistis, amici, Horace.


Non s^rvastis, -- And so we go on to the next Section.

SECTION 13.
The Refuters Melancholy Fancy: his acknowledging the Doctors Innocence. The
Doctor constantly speaks of the gradual difference in some Acts of Charity,
never of the Habit. The Refuters Consequence hereupon. His Monstrous Syllogism
examined. The Acts of Christ's Love were primario and per se, and not only
secundario and per accidens, capable of Degrees: Demonstrated. Actions and
Passions intended and remitted only in regard of their Terms. The Habits and
Acts of Charity in Christ gradually only, and not specifically different from
those in all other men. God by his extraordinary Power may create something
greater and better then the habitual Grace of Christ. Asserted by Aquinas,
Suarez, and many other Schoolmen, and the Refuter himself. The Acts of the
Habit of Grace in Christ de facto gradually different in themselves, and from
the Habit. The phrase, The love of God, variously taken in Scripture: Proved.
In what sense the Doctor constantly takes it. Demonstrated. The greater good to
be more intensely beloved. There is an Order in the Acts and Degrees of Love.
Asserted by the Schools. Of the Order in the Love of Christ. The Habit of Love
to God and our Neighbors one and the same Quality: Proved. God and our
Neighbors not to be loved with the same equality and degree of Affection.
Actus efficaces and inefficaces what they are. That they were in Christ. Of the
gradual difference between them. Hence demonstratively proved, that the first
great Law of Charity, Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart, etc. does
not always oblige us pro hic and nunc to the highest degree and noblest Act of
Divine Love. Of the gradual difference between the free and necessary Acts of
Christ's Love. Phrase Actual Love distinguished. The Acts and operations of
Grace in Christ were neither intensively nor extensively still commensurate
with the Habit. Proved. In what sense Aquinas 's Rule urged by the Refuter
holds.

. 1. THe Refuter in a Melancholy Contemplation (and Melancholy men are full of
Fancy, they can create Armies and Castles in the Clouds, and Lions and
Dragons in the Sielings of their Chambers; and the very Curtains of their Beds)
was pleased to imagine that the Doctor was his Enemy, and to raise Objections
against his Doctrine, a full year shall I say? or rather twelve at least?
before his Mixture had been published to the world. For the Passage in the
Account; against which his Use of Confutation is addressed, is but a
recapitulation of what had been more largely delivered to that purpose in the
Treatise of Will Worship. And therefore the Doctor is willing to undeceive him
in this misapprehension also. Thus then he.

Doctor HAMMOND.
29. SEcondly, he will hear the Doctors Objection, and consider of what weight
it is.

Objection? against what? against the fullness of habitual Grace in Christ? Sure
never any was by me urged against it. And he cannot now think there was. The
degrees of intenseness observable in the several Acts of Christ's Love, his
praying more ardently at one time then another, was all that I concluded from
that Text Luc. 22. 24. and that is nothing to his habitual Love.

. 2. Indeed the Case is so plain in it self, and the Doctor in this and the
former Sections has so fully cleared his own Innocence, that now even our
Refuter himself professes his readiness to believe it, though his Lucid
intervals are very short. For thus he bespeaks the Doctor in the very entrance
of his Reply.

JEANES.
THat this Objection was not intended by you against the fullness of Christ's
habitual Grace, upon your Protestation I readily believe, but, that by
consequence it reaches it, I thus make good, etc.

. 3. But why upon your Protestation? why not rather upon your Proof and Reason?
For has not the Doctor all along demonstrated that his words could be meant of
nothing else but the degrees of actual Love? Nay is not this expressly and
(...) declared even in that very Passage you quarrel at? Are not these the very
words, as you your self have cited them even in your Use of Confutation, That
sincere Love was capable of Degrees, was first showed in several men, at
several times, in the several ranks of Angels, and at last in Christ himself,
more ardent in one Act of Prayer then in another? But if the words of
themselves were not so clear and plain, yet the whole subject matter of the
Treatise of Will Worship, and the Account to Mr. Cawdrey, would abundantly
declare it. For is not the whole business and design of those Discourses to
show, that there be some Acts and Degrees of Piety and Devotion, that are not
commanded by any particular Law, which yet are acceptable to God when performed?
and that Love which is sincere in the Habit is capable of Degrees in the
several Acts and exercise? And is it not for this, among other Instances, that
this example of Christ's ardency in Prayer is produced by him? How then was it
possible that you should be so strangely mistaken? And what Temptation could
you have, to charge the Doctor with the denial of the habitual fullness of
Christ's Grace, from a Passage that speaks expressly of the Act, a thing
specifically distinct from it? However you are a courteous man to take the
Doctors word at last for his own meaning, that best knew it of any man in the
world. But proceed in your new-begun ingenuity, and take your pen and write a
Deleatur also to your Use of Confutation. For to what purpose serves that
against Doctor Hammond, that never denied, or so much as questioned, your
Doctrine of the Fullness of habitual Grace? If you believe as you profess, the
world will count you unjust, unless you write an Index expurgatorius unto your
former Treatise. For the Schoolmen will tell you, non tollitur peccatum nisi
restituatur ablatum; and you cannot otherwise restore the Doctor his good Name,
of which you have, by your confession, so unjustly, so unworthily robbed him.

. 4. But hold; we are too quick and nimble. For says he not, he will make the
Charge good by Consequence, although the Doctor never meant it?

Sure the man was born under a Mood-and-Figure-Planet; and Ferio was the Lord
of his Ascendent: he is altogether for Consequences. But what is the
Consequence? It is this to a word and syllable.

JEANES.
THat Objection which is urged against the perpetual all-fulness and perfection
of Christ's actual Love, the inward Acts of his Love of God, strikes against the
perpetual all-fulness and perfection of his habitual Love: because the degrees
of the inward Acts of his Love of God are commensurate unto the degrees of his
habitual Love. For they have no degrees at all, but secundario, in regard of
the Habit of his Love: but now this Objection is urged by you against the
perpetual all-fulness and perfection of his actual Love, the inward Acts of his
Love; for it is brought to prove, that the inward Acts of Christ's Love were
more intense at one time then another, and a greater intension presupposes a
remission and imperfection, for intensio est eductio rei intensae de imperfecto
ad perfectum, as Aquinas very often. Therefore this Objection strikes against
the perpetual fullness and perfection of Christ's actual Love of God, and so
consequently against the perpetual fullness and perfection of his habitual Love.

. 5. What a monstrous Syllogism is here? Like the Trojan horse, it has Troops
of Arguments and Proofs in the bowels of it: and the Major, Minor and
Conclusion are not bare Propositions, but Syllogismes themselves. It is not a
single Man of war, but a Spanish Half Moon, an invincible Armado linck'd and
coupled together.

O patria! O Divum domus Ilium! and inclyta bello
Moenia Dardanidum! --
Now or never Troy is Virgil.
taken, and Doctor Hammond confuted.

. 6. But, Sir, there is nothing proved all this while, but only by your own
venerable authority. For what if the whole be no other then a Sophisme (...),
and the Doctors Assertion will by no means infer your Conclusion? For proof of
it, I first deny your Major; there is no consequence at all in it: for we have
already demonstrated, that Acts which issue from Habits that are seated in the
Will are free, and not necessary effects of the Will from whence they flow, and
therefore may be gradually different in themselves, where the Habit continues
gradually one and the same. We have showed you also from Reason and Scripture,
and Authority of Protestants and Papists, as learned as any, from Schoolmen and
Fathers also, that there was a gradual difference in some Acts of Christ's
Wisdom and Grace, and that they did successively increase in Perfection, as he
himself did in Stature, though the Infused Habit of Wisdom and Grace were in
him always at the utmost height, both intensively and extensively.

. 7. But what are all the Fathers and Schoolmen that are to be had in Paul's
Churchyard or in the Library at Oxford to the purpose, if he can prove his
Major? which thus he does. If the degrees of the inward Acts of Christ's Love
are commensurate unto the degrees of his habitual Love, then whosoever says
the Acts are not always intensively perfect, says also by consequence that
the. Habit is not always intensively perfect. But the degrees, etc. Ergo.

. 8. Here, Sir, you are in danger of a double Sophism. For first, you prove
Ignotum per ignotius, aut aliquid saltem aeque ignotum, because it is as
doubtful (in the sense you should mean, if you speak to the present purpose)
whether the degrees of the inward Acts of Christ's Love are so commensurate unto
the degrees of his habitual Love, as still to equal them in intensive
perfection; and to assert it without Proof is Sophisma (...). Secondly, if you
conclude that the Acts and Habits are commensurate in every thing, because they
are commensurate in this, that the Act can never exceed in Perfection the Habit
from whence it effectively flows, (as you do all along in this Discourse, but
more particularly in your first Argument, p. 25, 26.) you most sophistically
argue a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. For though the Acts of
Christ's Love may be full and perfect in suo genere, yet they may not be all
equal in themselves, and with the Habit: and though they may and must be
commensurate with the Habit, as not to exceed it in perfection, because they
are the effects of the Habit; yet they may not, for all that, still equal the
gradual perfection of the Habit, because the Habit is not a necessary, but a
voluntary cause, and the Acts that flow from it are all Acts of the Will. And
consequently this way of proof will be no other then a plain Sophism (...),
thus, Because the Act Arist. l. 1. Soph Elen. h. c. 4.
is in some respect commensurate with the Habit, Ergo, it must alsolutely and
in every respect be commensurate with it: just as if I should argue, Mr. Jeanes
has read some Passages in Suarez and Durand, therefore he is skilled
sufficiently to challenge Doctor Hammond in all the Schoolmen in Paul's
Churchyard, or the Library in Oxford.

. 9. But leave Sophismes and Elenchs to Ignatius his Conclave and the
Aequivocating Jesuits; he has proved this assertion also.

. 10. But, Sir, what is that which you have proved? Is it this, That all the
inward Acts of Christ's Love are (...), simpliciter, absolutely and in every
respect commensurate with the Perfection of the Habit? Show me this, Sir, and I
have done. For if you make not this good, but speak only (...), secundum quid,
of a commensuration of the Habit and the Acts in some kind and sort, all is
nothing to the purpose. But how and where is this proof? Why, all lies dormant
in the Bowels of this monstrous Major. -- illos patefactus ad aur as

Reddit equus, laetique cavo se robore promunt
Tisandrus Sthenelusque duces, and dirus Ulysses.
And Virg. Aeneid. 2.
this last is a subtle one indeed, it can be no other then Ulysses himself for
cunning. Thus it is. If the inward Acts of Christ's Love have no Degrees at all,
but secundario in regard of the Habit of Love, then the inward Acts of his Love
of God are commensurate unto the degrees of his habitual Love. But they have no
Degrees at all, etc. Ergo. Lo now; here is a For, able to prove any Because
whatsoever. It is able to make good contradictions, and make the two extremes
of the North and Southern Poles to meet. They are commensurate in gradual
perfection with the Habit, which is as high and intensely perfect as can
possibly be imagined, beyond all the perfections of all men and Angels, though
united and joined together; and consequently they are ab intrinseco all full
and intensively perfect. And yet in the Antecedent that is brought for a proof
of it it is said, that they have no Degrees at all in themselves, but
secundario in regard of the Habit, which is only ab extrinseco. Sir, you have
an admirable faculty in discourse. For what with your ipse dixit's, and your
proving of one Contradictory by another, you are able to demonstrate any thing,
and confute not only Doctor Hammond, but the whole world of Critics. For if
the Acts have no Degrees at all, but only secundario in regard of the Habit,
how then are they commensurate to the Habit in Degrees, that is gradually
perfect in it self? And thus you see your Sequel wants another For to make it
good; and so it will be, Sir, in such Sequeles, though you go on in infinitum.
Where one unknown is proved by another, there the proofs must still be endless.

. 11. And therefore, to proceed on to examine your For, upon which the whole
strength of your Proof depends, How know you that the Acts of Christ's Love have
no Degrees, but secundario in regard of the Habit of his Love? 1. Is it because
being commensurate with the Habit, they are always in one height and
indivisible perfection? But then this, as it is no other then Petitio
principii, (...), so if it were granted, it must prove that they have all
gradual perfection in them, as the Habit has. 2. Or is it, that they have no
Degrees at all, but secundario in regard of the Habit of love, because the Acts
effectively flow from the Habit? But will you therefore conclude that a hot
Iron has no Degrees of Heat in it, but only secundario in regard of the Fire,
because it is Heat proceeds not from it self, but only from the Fire? Has it not
Heat in it self, because not from it self? Sir, you had been an excellent man
to have preached in old time before a Trial by fire Ordeal. But then let me
tell you, Sir, that as your Minor in this sense is false, so the whole is a
Sophism a non causa pro causa. For as the Iron is formally and so gradually hot
in it self, though effectively it be not the cause of its own Heat; so the Acts
of Christ's Love are formally Love, and have a gradual perfection in them,
though the Acts all proceed from the Habit of Divine Love. 3. Or is it, that
they have no Degrees at all but only secundario, because Actions (among which
you range the immanent Acts of Love) are only thus intended? If this be your
meaning, I must tell you that you are guilty of a double Mistake. For first, we
have showed that the immanent Acts of Love are not only Actions, but Qualities,
that are called by the same common name, of which alone the Doctor speaks. And
secondly, I must tell you that Actions (supposing the immanent Acts of Love
were purely of that number) are not said to be thus intended in regard of the
Efficient, but only in regard of their Terms or Qualities; as shall instantly
be showed both from Suarez and Scheibler. For here we take not Intension
effective, but formaliter; which distinction you may also learn from Scheibler.
l. 2. Metaphys. c. 8.. 191.

. 12. And therefore now to let the world see your profound skill in
Metaphysics, I shall demonstrate that the Acts of Christ's Love were primario
and per se, and not only secundario and per accidens, capable of Degrees. And
thus I perform it. All Qualities whose Essence consists not in an indivisible
point, but in a Latitude, are primario, per se and essentialiter capable of
Degrees: But all Habits and Acts that effectively flow from them are Qualities
whose Essence consists not in an indivisible point, but in a Latitude: Ergo.
The Major is evident in it self; for Intensio proprie sumitur pro Latitudine,
seu modo Entitatis formae intensibilis and remissibilis, ratione cujus est
capax illius intensionis and remissionis. So Suarez Metaph. tom. 2. disp. 46.
p. 380. col. 1. A. So again, Dicendum est, 1o. Qualitatem intensibilem non esse
in Entitate sua indivisibilem, sed habere aliquam Latitudinem partium ratione
cujus potest interdum secundum se totam esse in Subjecto, interdum secundum
partem majorem vel minorem: Et quia talis Qualitas naturaliter non est in rerum
natura, nisi etiam insit, ideo talis est etiam illa Entitas ut aliquando possit
tota esse in rerum natura, aliquando vero secundum partem; and inde provenit ut
possit esse intensior and remissior, and ut possit magis and minus afficere
Subjectum. It is his first Conclusion in his resolution of the Question, and
there by him demonstrated. Ibid. sect. 1.. 24. p. 486. Let the same Suarez also
demonstrate the truth of the Minor, thus. Quod vero (haec proprietas seu
latitudo intensiva) sit in prima and tertia specie, (Qualitatis,) satis constat
inductione in Habitibus and Actibus animae, and in primis Qualitatibus
Elementorum, ut in Coloribus and aliis hujusmodi. Ratio vero reddi potest, quia
in his Qualitatibus inveniuntur omnia quae ad hanc Latitudinem intensivam
sufficere possunt. Nam omnes illae fiunt per proprias actiones absque
diminutione naturali; vel si aliquae earum manent naturaliter ab aliquibus
formis, ut calor a forma ignis, frigus a forma aquae, habent tamen contrarium,
a quo impediri possunt and minui, and per se etiam seu per propriam actionem
fieri possunt. Rursus hae qualitates ex vi suarum rationum essentialium
includunt indivisibilitatem repugnantem huic Latitudini intensivae, and alioqui
habent proprias Entitates accidentales, in quibus possunt esse capaces hujus
Latitudinis: Qui discursus probat optime, si in aliquo genere dantur qualitates
intensibiles, ut revera dantur, in his maxim dari. Suarez. ibid. sect. 2.. 13.
p. 490. But more particularly to the present purpose, thus; Et in qualitatibus,
and subjectis spiritualibus, in quibus non est extensio partium, est id
evidentius, quia etiam in illis qualitas recipit hoc augmentum (intensivum,) ut
amor vel voluptas circa idem Objectum: unde etiam ex Principiis fidei certa
redditur haec veritas, nam Gratia, Charitas and Fides augeri and perfici
possunt in eodem subjecto indivisibili, etiam absque aliqua extensione ex part
objecti: illud ergo augmentum non potest esse nisi intensivum. Suarez. ibid.
sect. 1.. 1. pa. 380. With Suarez agrees your own Scheibler. l. 2. Metap. c. 8.
art. 2. punct. 1, 2, 3, 4. Vid.. 208.

. 13. 1. If you say (as formerly) that these immanent Acts are not Qualities,
but Actions; to this I must reply, That as I have formerly demonstrated the
falsehood of this your (...), so were it granted unto you, it would not profit
in the present case. For suscipere magis and minus non convenit actioni and
passioni nisi ratione suitermini, quatenus in illo est latitudo intensionis. So
Suarez, ibid. sect. 2.. 2. and your own Scheibler says that in Relatione,
Action and Passione datur intensio and remissio secundario, and mediante
qualitate, ut docet Arist. l. Categ. c. 9. And that there might be no doubt
what Quality Vid. Burgersdic. Log. lib. 1. cap. 8. page 36. Theor. 23.. 1.
he means, he adds, Idem est in actionibus and passionibus: Ita frigefactio
and calefactio dicuntur intensiores vel remissiores ratione Terminorum quos
producunt, Caloris sc. vel Frigoris; and sic in aliis. Scheibler, ibid. c. 8.
art. 2. punct. 4.. 209. Since therefore Actions and Passions are intended only
by reason of their Terms, suppose the Acts of Christ's Love were Actions, not
Qualities, they must be intended secundario only ratione Terminorum, and not in
regard of the Habit of Love from whence they flow, as the Effect from the Cause
and Principle.

. 14. 2. If you say that though the Acts of Grace in all other men are per se
capable of intension and remission, but it is otherwise in Christ, in whom by
virtue of the hypostatical union, and the good pleasure of God, both the Habits
and all the Acts of Grace were in summo, in that absolute and indivisible
height, that they could be neither increased nor diminished; I answer that
although this were all granted, yet it does no whit help you here. For the
Habits and Acts of Divine Charity in Christ were not specifically different in
him from those in all other men, but gradually only. And therefore since magis
and minus non variant speciem, and quod convenit speciei convenit omni
individuo sub specie contento, it necessarily follows, that as the Habits and
Acts of Divine Charity in all other men are essentially and per se capable of
Intension and Remission, it must be so also in Christ, since in him they are
not specifically, but only gradually different from the rest, and that it is by
accident only (I speak in respect of the infused Graces and Acts themselves)
that they be not capable of being gradually more or less perfect. And then
further let me tell you, that though the Schoolmen do all generally hold that
the habitual Grace of Christ, (in particular the infused Habit of Charity)
though it were as high as possibly it could be, even in the person of Christ,
quoad potentiam ordinariam; yet being but a created, because an infused, Grace,
and consequently in its own nature sinite, therefore virtus divina potest
facere (per potentiam scil. extraordinari^m) aliquid Aquin p. 3. q. q. n. 12.
ad 2.
majus and melius quam sit habitualis Gratia Christi. You know it is Aquinas,
and in this he is generally approved and followed by the Schoolmen. Dicendum
est igitur, says Suarez (as Quanta sit haec perfectio in Anima Christi eodem
modo judicandum est sicut supra in simili dubio de perfectione. Gratiae
respondimus: est enim summa, quae de potentia ordinaria esse potest, quamvis de
potentia absoluta possit esse major; ut hic etiam circa articulum quartum cum
D. Thoma notatum est, and magis ex sequenti disputatione patebit. Suarez. tom.
1. in 3. part. Thom. disp. 26. p. 360. col. 3. C. Vide ibid. sect. 2. p. 367.
col. 2. A. B.
we have formerly noted) quanquam Christi gratia fuerit tam intensa, ut juxta
ordinem divinae sapientiae nulla intensior esse potuerit, de potentia tamen Dei
absoluta potuisse fi^ri intensior^m, tam in ipsa anima Christi, quam in Angelo,
vel in alia anima. And for this he there cites Aquinas, Lombard, Gabriel Biel,
Capreolus, Aureolus, Gregor. Ariminens. and Ocham. Suarez in 3. part. Thom. q.
7. art. 13. disp. 22. sect. 2 p. 322. col. 1. C. and 2. A. B. C. where he does
not barely dictate, but prove it. Nay our Refuter himself acknowledges that
there is more moderation in this opinion then in that of their Adversaries.
Mixture of Scholast. and Pract. Divinity, page 231, 232.

. 15. 3. But then as for the Acts of this Divine Grace, it is so far that they
all should be in the same perfect height as the Habit was, that we have seen it
proved from the Schoolmen and others, that Christ did gradually increase in the
perfection of the Acts of Wisdom and Grace, as he did in Stature, and our
Refuter is of the number.

. 16. But because he is still harping upon Consequences, and that I may not
only free the Doctor from guilt but from all suspicion of it, I shall now
undertake to demonstrate, That the Acts of the All-perfect Habit of Divine
Grace in Christ, or holy Charity, were not only de facto gradually different in
themselves, and so not at all commensurate with the height and intensive
perfection of the Habit, but also that they must of necessity be gradually
different from one another.

. 17. And now, because our Refuter seeks for Refuge under Vide Crellii Ethic.
Christian. infra citat.
the Ambiguity of this phrase, the Love of God, and to bring the debate between
the Doctor and him to a final issue, it will be necessary in the first place to
distinguish that Term, that so every thing may be clear before us in the
present Debate, and the Truth and the Doctors Innocence may be evidenced to the
world, and the Sophismes and mistakes of this Refuter be discovered.

. 18. First then, this phrase, the Love of God, (which the Refuter always
construes in a different sense from the Doctor, and only for his advantage) may
be, and is commonly taken in a threefold sense. First more generally, as it
signifies the Divine Grace of holy Charity, as the Schools call it from Saint
Paul 1 Cor. 13, the greatest of the three Theological Graces, and that alone
which never fails, that Grace which the Apostle there most excellently
describes, and the Schoolmen treat of l. 3. Sent. d. 27. and 2. 2. q. 23, 24,
25, 26, etc. the Grace that in its latitude or amplitude conteins the whole
duty of man toward God and our Neighbors, whatsoever is good and excellent in
him. And therefore the Master of the Sentences defines P. Lombard. 3. Sent.
did. 25. B. Vid. Aquin 2. 2 q. 25 art. 1.
it thus, Charitas est dilectio qua diligitur Deus propter se, and proximus
propter Deum, vel in Deo; and it is approved by all his Scholars, for ought
that I can find to the contrary.

. 19. Secondly, more specially for Piety and Holiness and Devotion toward God,
and the Duties of the first Table.

. 20. Thirdly, most strictly for that most sublime and perfect Love,
immediately terminated and concentred in God the only Good, in which alone all
the Acts of Piety and Charity are founded, and from whence alone they stream
and flow. This is that which Aquinas frequently calls Charitas ut finis, the
other Vid. Aquin. 2. 2 q. 44. art. 3. in Corp. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 44. art. 1. in
corp. Aquin. ibid. art. 3. ad 2.
he calls Charitas propter finem. Finis, says he, spiritualis vitae est ut
homo uniatur Deo, quod fit per Charitatem, and ad hoc ordinantur, sicut ad
Finem, omnia quae pertinent ad spiritualem vitam: unde Apostolus dicit, 1 Timothy
1. Finis praecepti Charitas est de cord puro, and conscientia bona, and fide
non ficta, etc. And now because, as the same Aquinas, that alii actus
Charitatis consequuntur ex actu dilectionis, sicut effectus ex causa, hence is
it that by a Synecdoche generis, or a Metonymy of the Efficient, (Tropes
familiar in all Writers) all the Acts of Piety and Mercy and Charity and Virtue
are called the Love of God, because they flow from it.

. 21. And now that this is no new-coined distinction, invented on purpose to
salve the present sore, will appear from the Scriptures themselves, where we
have it in express terms.

. 22. For though to English ears this phrase, The Love of God, seems
especially to import the prime and more principal Love, that has God for its
immediate Object; yet in Scripture Phrase Tertull. cont. Marcion. l. 4. c: 27.
p. 548. A. B. ex edit. Rigalt. Vide Bezae major. Annot. in loc. Luc. Brugens.
tom. 2. in Evangel. p 802. Piscator. Maldonat. Theophylact. alios in loc.
it frequently does not. And therefore says our Savior, as we find it S. Luke
11. 42. Woe unto you Pharisees, for ye tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner of
herbs, and pass over Judgment, and the Love of God; these ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone. It is in the Original (...), Judicium
and charitatem Dei. So Beza, and the Vulgar Latin. But in the vulgata vetus,
in use in Tertullians days, it is vocationem and dilectionem Dei, and
accordingly we translate it the Love of God. The true meaning of the place
Tolet, methinks, has fully reached -- Majora mandata praeteritis, nempe
Judicium and Charitatem: Judicium quidem, nocendo aliis, and rapiendo aliena,
contra leges Justitiae; Charitatem vero, non miserendo proximi, nec eleemosynam
pauperi conferendo. Non solum ergo rapinas and injustitias non recompensatis
eleemosynis, sed and illas perpetratis contra judicium, and eleemosynas non
facitis contra charitatem, quae sunt majoris momenti quam decimas dare tales.
Addit (Dei) quia charitate Deus diligendus est, and proximus. Pharisaei autem
nec Deum nec proximum diligebant: qui enim non diligit proximum, non diligit
Deum, 1 Jo. 3. Qui viderit fratrem suum necessitatem habere, and clauserit
viscera sua ab eo, quomodo Charitas Dei manet in illo? 1 Jo. 4. Qui non diligit
fratrem quem videt, quomodo Deum quem non videt diligere potest? Tolet. in Luc.
11. 42. p. 690. in Commentar. I know the place is otherwise expounded by Vide
Erasm. in loc. H. Grot. in Annot. ad Matthew. 23 23.
diverse, and we have no need of doubtful places. S. John, the beloved Disciple,
whose argument is Charity and the Love of God, whose Text and Sermons were, as
Ecclesiastical Story testifies, nothing else but this, does in one short
Epistle afford us instances sufficient beyond all exception. 1. Ep. John 2. 5.
But whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the Love of God (Charity, as Saint
Paul, or Love, as the same Apostle and Saint John himself often indefinitely
and generally style it) perfected. Hereby 1 Cor. 13. Romans 13 10. Gal. 5. 14. 1 Timothy 1. 5, 14.
know we that we are in him. It is (...). So again 1 John 3. 17. But whosoever has
this worlds good, and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up his bowels
of compassion from him, (...); how dwells the Love of God in him? So again 1 John 4 20. If a man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar: for
he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has not seen? And therefore in the close of his Epistle, 1. 5. verse. 3* thus
he describes the Love of God, (...), For this is the Love of God, that we keep
his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. Plain then it is,
that in Scripture Language the Love of God is put for the Grace of divine
Charity in general, extending it self to that Love that is immediately centred
on God himself, and on our neighbors for Gods sake. This is that Love which
the Apostle tells us is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 10. 1 Timothy 1. 5.
and the end of the Commandment.

. 23. And therefore sure it can be no tergiversation, if we say that Doctor
Hammond does take this phrase, the Love of God, or sincere Love, wheresoever he
uses it, as Saint John does, in the general notion for the Grace of Divine
Charity and holy Love; which to distinguish from all other Loves, he calls the
Love of God: 1. because he is the giver and the alone infuser of it, by his
holy spirit; and 2ly, because he also is the prime and principal Object of it,
and for whose sake alone we love our Neighbors; and 3ly, because this alone is
the root on which all the other parts and branches of holy Charity are
grounded, and from whence they all spring, and without which they are nothing
worth.

. 24. And that I shall prove by such clear Arguments as the Doctors writings
afford.

If then, as the great Philosopher tells us, that Words are but the images and
expressions of the Thoughts of the mind, and (...). Arist. l. 1. de
interpretatione, c. 1.. 1.
Writings are the pictures and indications of Words, then, if the meaning of
any word be questioned as doubtful, the best way to unfold it is, by
considering the subject matter of the Discourse, and the scope and purpose of
it.

. 25. And now I doubt not but it will appear obvious to the most ordinary
capacity, that the subject matter of the Doctors discourse could not possibly
tempt him to make use of this phrase, the Love of God, in any other sense then
what we have given of it; and that the cause he undertook to defend had utterly
been betrayed and lost, not supported, by the meaning that the Refuter puts
upon it. For the main business and scope of the Treatise of Will Worship, and
the defense of it against Mr. Cawdrey, is only to show, that there be certain
Degrees and Acts of Piety and Charity and Virtue, that no particular law
enjoines, which yet God accepts of as free will Offerings from the Christian
when performed. For this we shall not need further proof then what one short
Passage affords, wherein the Doctor has briefly summed up his Opinion in both
Treatises so largely insisted on. It is in his Preface to the Reader prefixed to
the Account,. 5. And besides these there is somewhat of more sublime
consideration (on occasion of that of Will Worship) the free will Offerings,
which will very well become a Christian to bring to Christ, rewardable in a
high degree, though they are not under any express precept; such are all the
Charities and Devotions, and Heroical Christian Practices, which shall all not
only be degraded but defamed, if every thing be concluded criminous which is
not necessary, if all uncommanded Practice be unlawful.

. 26. And now, though this in the general might suffice to clear the Doctors
meaning from any possible mistake unless to the wilfully perverse, yet because
the remainder of the Refuters Reply is wholly built upon this abused Notion of
the Phrase, and what he calls his threefold Demonstration (so industriously
placed in the Frontispiece of his Pamphlet, to amuse vulgar Readers, and those
that look not beyond Titles) has no other Basis and Foundation, I shall, with
the Readers patience, descend to a more particular confirmation of it.

. 27. The task, I confess, would be endlesly tedious to search for Proofs, as
they lie severally dispersed in those Treatises. And therefore for brevity sake
I shall confine my self to that very Section in the Account that first
occasioned the Use of Confutation.

. 28. In the very first. of that Section the Doctor tells us, Doctor Hammond's
Account to Mr. Cawdrey's Triplex Diatribe, cap. 6. sect. 9. p. 221.
that those large inclusive words, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, etc. denoted only two things: 1. the sincerity of this Love of God,
as opposed to partial divided Love (to which I now add, for further
explication, that what we do according to the precepts of Gods Law, we do out
of Love toward God, not hypocritically, or as by constraint;) and 2ly, not
admitting any thing else into competition with him, this sincere Love of God
mean while being capable of Degrees: so that it is very possible for two men to
love God with all the heart, and yet one to love him more intensely then
another, (as was exemplifyed among the very Angels;) nay for the same person
which so loves him, to love him, and express that Love, more intensely at one
time then another; as appeared by the example of Christ, Luc. 22. 44. To this I
shall subjoin the very words upon which the Refuter grounds his Charge in the
Use of Confutation,. 5. of that Section. But sure this answer is nothing to the
matter now in hand, for the evidencing of which that example of Christ was
brought by me, viz. That sincere Love is capable of Degrees. This was first
showed in several men, and in the same man at several times, in the several
ranks of Angels, and at last in Christ himself, more ardent in one act of
Prayer then in another, wherein what is affirmed of Christ is common to Angels
and Men, etc. And now I appeal to our Refuter himself, and desire him to tell
me, whether the Doctor can possibly mean any thing else by this Phrase, the
Love of God, and sincere Love, in these places, then the grace of holy Charity,
that in its general comprehensive notion contains in it whatsoever is holy,
good, or virtuous for kind or degree, that the Christian out of a sincere Love
to God either freely or by way of Duty performs? Can he possibly here mean by
Christ's Love of God in these places, that Beatifick Love of God which was
always in termino, and was proper to him as Comprehensor? Does he not expressly
add, in the Close of those words, that what herein is affirmed of Christ, is
common to Angels and Men? And do not his several instances speak as much? Let
our Refuter himself judge, what other Love can the Doctor mean, that is common
to Christ, to Angels and Men, except that Love and Charity which the Doctor
constantly makes a Genus to habitual and actual Love?

. 29. That this, and no other, was the Doctors meaning, will 2ly appear from
Mr. Cawdrey's Reply, and the Doctors answer to it,. 2. For whereas the Doctor
had affirmed that this Grace of holy Love (or Divine Charity) consisted in a
sincere endeavor after perfection; Mr. Cawdrey now returns that it consisted
in an absolute sinless Perfection, such as was that of Adam in innocence, and
therefore perfect Love, such as did cast out fear, 1 Jo. 4. 18. Now to this the
Doctor returns, 1. that that perfect Love of Adam in innocence consisted not in
an indivisible point in the several Acts; 2ly, that S. John 's Love was not
that of Adam in innocence, which is confessed not to be attainable, but that
other which is in every Confessor and Martyr, which is called (...), Love of
Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 24.

. 30. Thirdly, this appears from the several Acts the Doctor instances in that
consisted in a Latitude; the Love of Adam in innocence; the Zeal of the Martyrs
and Confessors for Christ in their patience and sufferings; the ardency of
Christ in several acts of Prayer; the different ardency of Prayer in other men,
which he acquits from sin by the example of Christ; and lastly by several acts
of Mercy and Liberality to the poor. All which as it is plain they are Acts of
the infused Grace of holy Charity, all rooted in that high sublime Love
immediately centred in God himself, so clear it is that they are not that Love
as thus specially and properly taken, but rather fruits and expressions of it.

. 31. Lastly, this will appear from express words in the Doctor,. 5. of that
Section, thus; Still it must be remembered, says he, that it is not the sinless
Perfection we speakof, when we say it consists in a Latitude, and has Degrees,
but Sincerity of this or that virtue, (I pray mark it, good Sir,) expressed in
this or that performance: and as this, though it excludes not all mixture of
sin in the Suppositum (the man in whom it is) yet may by the grace of God in
Christ exclude it in this or that Act (for it is certain, that I may in an act
of Mercy (mark it again) give as much as any law obliges me to give, and so
not sin in giving too little;) so to this his answer belongs not at all, nor
shows any difference or reason, why such Sincerity may not in any pious
Christian be capable of Degrees as well as in Christ himself, (I pray, good
Sir, mark it) and the lower of them be sinless, and all the superior voluntary
oblations more then the strict Law required of us.

. 32. And thus also was the Doctor understood by Mr. Cawdrey in his instance in
Christ himself. For whereas the Doctor had urged, he was more intense in Prayer
at one time then another, when yet the lower degree was no sin; to this Mr.
Cawdrey answers, That Christ was above the Law, and did more then the Law of
God required, but men fall short many degrees of what is required.

. 33. Nay the Doctor was understood in this sense by the Author of the Mixture
of Scholastical and Practical Divinity himself. For whereas his Theme had been
the All-fulness of habitual Grace in Christ, from page 230. to 256. he there
begins to draw out four Uses from that Doctrine so largely before handled. The
second whereof is a Use of Confutation of Doctor Hammond, thus, page 258.
Secondly, this point (of the fullness of habitual Grace in Christ) may serve for
Confutation of a passage in the learned Doctor Hammond against Mr. Cawdrey, to
wit, That Christ's Love of God, or habitual Grace, (for it were nothing to the
purpose, as the Doctor in his (...) and we also have already showed, to
understand it of any thing else) was capable of further Degrees. And for proof
of his Charge he quotes this very Section,. 4, 5. p. 222. And in this sense he
did oppose the Doctor all along in his Use of Confutation; witness this short
passage for all the rest, page 259. And the falsehood of such an assertion (to
wit that Christ's Love of God wa^ capable of Degrees) is evident from the point
here handled and confirmed, the absolute fullness of Christ's Grace, which by the
general consent of the Fathers and Schoolmen was such as that it excluded all
intensive growth. It was a sequel of the personal union, and therefore it was
from the very first moment of his Conception. The Word was no sooner made
Flesh, but it was forthwith full of Grace and Truth. His Love of God was
incapable of further Degrees, unto whom God gave not the Spirit, that is the
Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, by measure.

. 34. Indeed, as it had been nothing to that Authors purpose; and his Use of
Confutation had appeared absolutely groundless, to have understood the Doctor
in any other sense, so had it been nothing to the Doctors Argument also, if by
the Love of God all along in those Discourses he had understood any thing else,
then the several Acts of that divine Grace of holy Charity, which he said
consisted in a Latitude. For the question in the Treatise of Will Worship was,
whether that first great Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, etc. did oblige every man by way of Duty to the utmost height of
perfection possible in every Act of Grace and goodness, or to such a Sincerity
in the several Acts of this or that Virtue or Grace, that consists in a
Latitude and has Degrees? The Doctor asserted the latter, and Mr. Cawdrey
undertook to make good the legal obligation to the former. And therefore as it
had been a vain and fruitless attempt for the Doctor to have labored to make
good his Conclusion by instancing in that Act of Christ's Love, which every
Smatterer in Theology and the Schoolmen knows to be necessary, because it is
actus Comprehensoris: so it had been nothing to the Doctors purpose, because
this Act being necessary and flowing per modum emanationis, as they speak, it
could not come possibly under the power of a Command, or the notion of a Duty.
Because the Saints in Patria, that are Comprehensores, that see God face to
face, love him always to one height and fullness; because they always know and
enjoy him at that height they love, and therefore love him perfectly, because
they are now perfectly united to him; it can be no argument or pattern for us
men, that are now in via, to love God to that height, because we can love God
but to the height of our Knowledge of him. And as they love God necessarily and
naturally (as I may so speak) since their glorification, because therein
consists the height of Heaven's happiness; so we love God freely, and by way of
Duty, in order to that happiness: which Duty consists not in one indivisible
point and height in every act of habitual Grace, but in sincerity, that admits
of a Latitude of performance in the several Acts of Grace, as our Knowledge is
enlarged, and Occasion does require.

. 35. No other sense then can rationally be affixed to this phrase, the Love of
God, either in the Treatise of Will Worship, or the Vindication of it against
Mr. Cawdrey. Nor can any other sense be affixed on it in the Ectenesteron also.
For, if I have not miscounted, it is but 13. times to be met with in that
Treatise, and in most of them they are the words of Mr. Jeanes in his Use of
Confutation, and are taken up by the Doctor for a necessity of argument rather
then choice.

. 36. Besides, it being a vindication of himself from a false imputation in
that Use of Confutation, for a denial of the fullness of habitual Grace in
Christ, he knew it was not necessary so precisely to distinguish that phrase,
the Love of God, which the whole subject matter of that argument must needs
clear to be understood, as parallel and aequipollent to habitual Grace and the
Acts of it.

. 37. Besides, the Doctor in the very entrance of that Treatise,. 2, 3. had so
fully cleared his own and the Refuters meaning (saying expressly that the
Refuters meaning was this, that he had affirmed Christ's Love of God, meaning
thereby the habitual Grace of divine Charity, to have been capable of further
Degrees, so as that capacity of further Degrees is the denial of all fullness of
that habitual Grace already in him, and accordingly in that Treatise he makes
answer to that Charge) that no other sense could by any ingenuous man be
affixed unto that Phrase.

. 38. Add to this, that the Doctor expressly denies that he ever said these
words, That Christ's Love of God was capable of further Degrees. And now I shall
desire our Refuter to show me so much as the very subject of it, Christ's Love
of God, in terminis, either in the Treatise of Will Worship, or the Defense of
it against Mr. Cawdrey. The truth is, the Proposition is none of the Doctors,
and all that the Refuter pretends to is, that he rightly inferred it from these
words in the Account, That Sincere Account to Mr. Cawdrey's Triplex Diat: c. 6.
sect. 9.. 5.
Love is capable of Degrees, as appears (among other instances) from the
Example of Christ, more ardent in one Act of Prayer then in another: and
therefore in all equity must have no other meaning and signification, then what
the place from whence it is pretended to be deduced does admit of, which can be
no other then what we have given of it. And though the Doctor here acknowledge
that those other words not found in his Papers are yet not illogically inferred
from them, (viz. That Christ's Love of God was capable of further Degrees, more
intense at one time then at another;) yet he that best knew his own meaning
there expressly declares, that they only import, that Christ's Love of God (or
holy Charity in the general Notion, as he distinctly expresses (...). 12.
it,. 14.) had in its Latitude or Amplitude several Degrees, one differing from
another secundum magis and minus, all of them comprehended in that full
all-perfect Love of God, which was always in Christ so full and so perfect, as
not to want, and so not to be capable of further Degrees. Besides, that this
and no other could be his meaning, is evident from his instancing in that Place
(whence the Proposition is pretended to be inferred) in the different Ardency
of Christ in several Acts of Prayer, which is rather an Act of Religion then
Charity; And though it be founded in Charity and flows from it, yet Prayer,
that is Deprecation or Petition (such as that of Christ's then was) is rather
an effect of that Love of God which the Schools call Amor Concupiscentiae, a
love of God for our own sakes, then that which they call Amor Amicitiae, a love
of God purely for himself Vid. Durand. l. 3. Sent. d. 28 q. 1. art. 1. B.
and nothing else. Beseech God indeed we do to help us, because we believe he
is the fountain of all goodness, which makes the Act formally an Act of
Religion, and rather to be radicated in Charity, then formally and immediately
an Act of Love; the Effect and issue of Charity, rather then it.

. 39. Add to this, that the Doctor expressly says, that the Vide (...) 14, 15,
16, 18, 21, 22.
word Love in that Passage was to be taken by a Synecdoche generis, for the
Acts of holy Charity, and not for habitual Love.

. 40. And then he explains his meaning by an instance taken from the Refuters
own Confession, thus, The Death of Christ,. 22.
says he, was an higher expression of Christ's Love of us (of us, but for
God's sake) then his Hunger, etc. To this I sub join, That such as the
expression was, such was the Act of inward Love, etc. And so the same person
that loved sincerely, did also love and express that Love more intensely then
at other times. Love? but what? God, as the immediate Object? no; that was
neither the meaning of the Refuter nor the Doctor. But us he loved, and
expressed that Love to us, more in his Death then any other Act of holy Charity
and Love to us. An Act of Charity and Love of God this was without doubt which
he bestowed on us; but us in these Acts he loved immediately for Gods sake.

. 41. This will further appear by the several other Phrases he uses as
aequipollent to this of the Love of God: For sometimes, nay most commonly, he
rather uses the word Love absolutely, then the Love of God; sometimes he
expresses it by Graces; sometimes by Acts of virtue; sometimes in the Concrete,
thus, a sincerely-pious man, a true lover of God, etc.

. 42. I confess I have been over tediously curious in this part of the Reply.
But I conceive it necessary to show how beyond all possibility of defense this
Refuter is unjust, in affixing that other sense to the Doctors words which he
never meant, nor could possibly serve his turn. But so it was, that the Doctor
had so fully acquitted himself from the Use of Confutation, that nothing now
but Consequences and new-devised meanings of words and phrases would help him;
and he was forced of necessity to prevaricate, otherwise it had not been
possible to have found out a Medium to have confuted Doctor Hammond a second
time. And as the Reader will see a necessity of this Travel before the
Discourse is ended, so I doubt not but the ingenuous will therefore pardon it.

. 43. Well then, it being plain that this phrase, the Love of God, may be taken
generally and in confuso, as they speak in the Schools, and as it prescinds or
abstracts from this or that particular Act, or else specially, as it relates in
particular to the prime and most noble Act of Divine Charity, that is
immediately terminated in God; and it being as plain, that Doctor Hammond takes
it in the first sense, when he says that The Love of God, or the Acts of that
Love, do consist in a latitude, and, if we compare them one with another, are
more intense at one time then another; it now remains that I make good the
Assertion, for the full and absolute acquitting of the Doctor. Which I do by
these Arguments.

. 44. Where there is, and of necessity must be, a gradual rence, and more in
respect of the goodness of the Objects of the Habit of Charity or the Love of
God, there is, and of necessity there must be, also a gradual difference in
respect of the several Acts of this Habit of Charity or the Love of God. But
there is and must be a gradual difference, and more, in respect of the goodness
of the Objects of the Habit of Charity or the Love of God in Christ. Therefore,
there is and must be a gradual difference in respect of the several Acts of
this Habit of Charity or the Love of God in Christ.

. 45. The Major and the Minor are both Propositions that are perse notae, and
carry their letters of Credence in their forehead. But because we have met with
such an exquisite Schoolman, that, Souldier-like, he is resolved to dispute
every inch of Jeans page 17.
ground with us, I shall now, with the Readers patience, for the Refuters
satisfaction, prove them.

. 46. The Major then I thus Demonstrate. If Goodness be Vid. Suarez in 3. part.
Thom. tom. 2. disp. 38. sect. 1. p. 524. B. C.
the sole proper Object of the Will and the Affections of it, and Love be
nothing else but a Tendency to a union of the Will with the Object beloved,
then of necessity it follows, that where the greater Goodness is, either truly
or apparently, to be found in the Object beloved, there it is the more amiable
and lovely, and the Will is carried with a stronger inclination, a greater
Ardency of affection, and a proportionably gradual intension to the Goodness of
the Object, either real or apprehended. But so it is, that Goodness is the sole
and proper Object of the Will and the affections of it. Ergo. And hence it is
that the great Philosopher tells us in his Ethics, (...) Arist. l. 8. Eth.
cap. 2.. 3, 4.
(...). And again more clearly in the same Treatise, (...), Arist. l. 1. Eth.
c. 7.. 1.
(...). And again, Ibid. 2.
(...) etc. The sum and substance is this, That as whatsoever is good, is good
either absolutely in it self, or in order to something else; good either as an
End, or else as a Means in order to that end, whether it be absolutely such, as
the last great End of all, or in suo genere in this or that kind, in this or
that Art or Science or Faculty: so every man loves and pursues that which is
either thus good as an End, or a Means, in truth and reality, or else only in
show and appearance. And that as the good is either in it self or appearance
greater, so it is more eligible, more desirable in it self, and pursued by the
Will with the greater inclination, and stronger ardency of affection: and that
Happiness, because it is the last End of man, is therefore by all most
desirable, and most earnestly pursued, though they that follow after it do not
run all in the same, but most in several Paths.

. 47. And indeed if this were not so, it would evidently follow that God, who
is the great and only Good, were not to be beloved with an higher ardency of
affection, with a more intense Act of Love, then any other created, inferior,
finite good. And what then would become of that first and great Commandment,
and the second like unto it, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul, etc. and thy neighbor as thy self? God, who is
the first, the greatest Good, must still be loved with the most high, most
noble and most ardent Act of Love; and then our selves, and then our neighbors
as our selves.

. 48. And therefore the Schools do all, after the Mr. of the Sentences,
resolve, that Datur ordo in Charitate, and that this Ordo Charitatis cadit sub
praecepto. That there is not only a gradual difference in respect of Intension
in the several Acts of Divine Love, but that God himself has so commanded, and
it would be unreasonable and brutish in us not to observe it. And now, Sir,
though I have not read, scarce dipped into a quarter of them; yet having read
Lombard, and Thomas, and Scotus, and Ocham, and Durand, D'Orbellis, and
Cajetan, and Suarez, and Estius, and Bonaventure upon the point, and the matter
being so clear and evident in it self, and none found in these several Authors
quoted as Opponents in this controversy, I dare challenge you, in all your
great reading in the Schoolmen in Paul's Churchyard or the Library at Oxford,
to show me but one instance to the contrary. To give the Reader a Taste; and yet
I am ashamed to be forced to prove things as plain and bright as the Sun at
noon. Si attendatur gradus in Charitate secundum intensionem and remissionem
Actus volendi, Sic dicendum est, quod talis ordo est in Charitate, quia
intensius tenemur diligere Deum quam nos ipsos; et majus bonum debemus nobis
magis velle vel proximo, quam minus bonum; sic aequale bonum magisnobis quam
proximo, caeteris paribus. Et de Deo quidem, quod sit magis diligendus quam nos
ipsi, patebit in sequente quaestione. De aliis autem duobus probatur hoc ex
dictis Arist. 8. Eth. ubi dicit sic, Bonum simpliciter and amabile simpliciter;
unicuique autem bonum proprium. Ex hoc potest dupliciter argui. Primo sic;
Sicut simpliciter ad simpliciter, sic magis ad magis. Ergo magis bonum est
magis amabile, and maxim bonum est maxim amabile. Nunc est ita quod inter
bona quae nobis vel amicis optamus, est dare minus bonum, and magis bonum, and
maxim bonum; Ergo unum est magis alio amandum and magis optandum. Secundo,
potest argui ex altera clausula dicti Arist. Unicuique est amabile bonum
proprium. Sed quod est bonum mihi est magis proprium quam illud quod est
proximi: quia licet proximus sit alter ipse, non tamen est Ego ipse, sed alter.
Ergo aequale bonum debeo mihi magis diligere and optare quam proximo; and ita,
quod si ambo non possemus habere, plus debeo eum velle carere quam me: quod est
intelligendum semper caeteris omnibus existentibus paribus. Et sic patet primum
principale. So Durand, lib. 3 Sentent. d. 29. q. 2. art. 1. C. D. Onoc more.
Ratio diligendi alia ex charitate est bonitas Divina: primo quidem ut in se
existens, ac deinde ut ab aliis participata. Et quia in hoc est multiplex
gradus; ideo and in Actu dilectionis charitative est dare multos gradus Durand.
ibid. art. 1. ad primum. So again, Ad Tertium dicendum, quod ordo Charitatis
attenditur secundum Actum, prout tendit in objecta, inquibus invenitur
differentia bonitatis, and per consequens in ipso Actu gradus intensionis and
remissionis: nihilominus Charitas ipsa ante Actum dicitur ordinata, in quantum
per eam voluntas sic disponitur, ut cum opus fuerit exeat in Actum secundum
ordinem supra dictum. Durand. ibid. art. 2. ad 3m. It were vain to add more to
this purpose, seeing that all, for ought I find, who write on the Sentences
follow the Master, l. 3. Sentent. d. 29. and assert after him A. B. that, 1.
Datur ordo in charitate; and that 2. Ordine dilectionis Deum omnibus aliis
praeferendum esse, quem tenemur diligere plus quam nos ipsos; 3. quod quisque
se magis quam proximum diligere debeat; 4. quod propinqui prae aliis sint
diligendi, and illi magis inter proximos qui secundum carnis originem sunt
nobis propinquiores; 5. quod iste ordo Charitatis, seu differentia gradualis ex
part Actuum Charitatis, cadat sub praecepto. For this see Lombard. l. 3. Sent.
did. 29. per tot. Aquinas 3. Sent. did. 29. a. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7. Scotus l. 3.
d. 29. q unical Alexander Halensis, Bonaventure, Richardus, Valentia, Soto,
Petrus Navarrus, Capreolus are also quoted by H. Cavellus, as agreeing with his
Master Scotus. See also Durand. l. 3. d. 29. q. 1, 2, 4. Estius l. 3. Sent. d.
29.. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 26. art. 1. ad 3m. and q. 44. art. 8.
Cajetan, and the rest of the Commentators on the place.

. 49. And thus having cleared the Major, I come to the proof of the Minor.

. 50. And now if the infused Habit of Grace and holy Love in Christ were
specifically the same with that of Angels and men, of necessity also it must
have the same Object; and consequently also, if there be a gradual difference
in respect of the goodness of the Object there, it must of necessity also be so
in respect of the Objects of Christ's Love. And for this the Scriptures are
very evident. For as they testify that our Blessed Savior loved, Jo. 14. 31.
and honored, Jo. 8. 49. and did the will of his Father; so they as expressly
declare, that for us men and for our salvation he came down from heaven, and
that he so loved ^s, that he gave himself for us. And though he took not on him
the Nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham; yet he so loved those blessed
Spirits, as to become the head of all Principality and Power; and to reconcile
all things unto God, whether they Ephesians. 1. 10, 20. Colos. 1. 20. Suarez. in 3.
p. Thom. q. 19. art. 2. did. 42. sect. 1. p. 570. col. 1. E. and p. 572. col.
1. F. and sect. 2. p. 574. col. 1. F.
be things in earth or things in Heaven. And therefore the Schools determine,
1. Christum Dominum meruisse Angelis gratiam and gloriam, quae illis data
fuerit propter merita Christi; 2. Christum Dominum meruisse Sanctis Angelis
omnia dona gratiae, quae nobis meruerit proportione servata; exceptis iis quae
ad remedium peccati pertinent, electionem scil. praedestinationem, vocationem,
auxilia omnia excitantia, adjuvantia, sufficientia and efficacia, ac denique
omne meritum and augmentum gratiae and gloriae. And consequently he may be
styled the Sanctifier, the Justifier and Glorifier of Angels, though not
properly their Redeemer. And therefore it unavoidably follows, that there must
be a gradual difference in respect of the Acts of Christ's Love respecting God,
the holy Angels and Men, according to the gradual goodness to be found in the
several Objects, and according to that measure and standard that Gods Law
required. Quod erat demonstrandum.

. 51. It is true indeed, the Schools do rationally resolve, that there was not
the same order in the Acts of Christ's Charity or holy Love, as there is in
other men, who rightly love according to the state and condition of this life.
Nam Christus secundum animam fuit ab initio perfectus comprehensor, ideoque
ille dilectionis ordo qui Beatis, non qui Viatoribus competit, ei tribuendus
Estius l. 3. Sent. d. 32.. 5. Confer Aquin. 2. 2. q. 26. art. 13. in corp.
est. Atqui in Beatis totus ordo dilectionis accipitur ex sola conjunctione ad
Deum. Quare talem distinctionis ordinem in Christo ab initio fuisse fatendum,
quo unumquemque hominem and Angelum eo magis minusve diligeret, quo magis
minusve per justitiam Deo esset conjunctus.

. 52. There can be but two things possible (as far as I can foresee; and if
our Refuter can look further, I hope he will let us know it) returned in answer
to this Discourse.

. 53. First, that it is not one and the same Habit of Charity whereby we love
God and our neighbors as our selves; and therefore as the precepts are
several, so the Objects are diverse, and the affections of the Soul, that carry
it on to the love of God and our neighbor, are as different as the Objects
themselves are. And therefore though it be granted, that the several Acts that
flow from these severally distinct Habits do gradually differ in themselves in
respect of intenseness, according to the gradual distance of goodness in the
Object; yet it follows not, that therefore the Acts of one and altogether the
same Habit of Charity and holy Love do gradually differ also; which was the
thing to be proved.

. 54. Secondly, though it were granted that the Habit of Charity and holy Love
to God and our neighbors be one and the same Habit, yet a gradual difference
in the goodness of the Objects of this Love will not argue a gradual difference
of intenseness in the inward Acts of this Love, but only in the outward Acts
and Expressions.

. 55. If our Refuter shall make use of the first Answer, I must say to him,
that he has all the Schoolmen (at least all those that I have seen) for his
enemies. For they all unanimously resolve with the Master of the Sentences, who
herein follows Saint Austin, that the Habit of 1. August. lib. 8. de Trin. c.
8. ^ Petro Lombard. citat.

2. Augustine. lib. 1. de doctrina Christiana ca. 22. ibid. citat. Pet. Lombard.
lib. 3. Sentent: did. 27. C.


divine Charity, whereby we love God, and our Neighbors for God's sake, is one
and the same Habit. Ex una eademque charitate Deum proximumque diligimus, sed
Deum propter Deum, nos vero and proximum propter Deum. Vna est Charitas and duo
praecepta, unus Spiritus and duo mandata; quia alia Charitas non diligit
proximum nisi illa quae diligit Deum. Qua ergo charitate proximum diligimus,
says Lombard, eadem Deum diligimus. Sed quia aliud est Deus, aliud proximus,
etsi una charitate diliguntur, ideo forte duo praecepta dicuntur, and alterum
majus, alterum minus, vel propter duos motus qui in mente geruntur dum Deus
diligitur and proximus. Movetur enim men's ad diligendum Deum, movetur and ad
diligendum proximum; and multo magis erga Deum, quam proximum. For since the
Vide Estium l. 3. Sentent. did. 27.. 5. p: 92. col. 1. D. E. F.
unity and distinction of Habits arises from the Formal unity and distinction
in the Objects, it necessarily follows, that where two things materially
different, such as God and our Neighbors, are beloved for one and the same
formal reason and respect to be found in them, that the Habit of Divine Love
toward them must be one and the same. But now that infinite goodness, which is
alone found in God, is the first and most proper and immediate Object of Divine
Love, and this Habit of holy Charity carries the Soul on to love other things
but secondarily only, and in regard of the participation of that goodness which
infinitely shines in God. As for Gods sake we only love them, because they
share and partake of his goodness; so it is in order only to God, and his
goodness and glory, that this our Love aims. And therefore since we love our
Neighbors only for Gods sake, and his goodness shining in them is the sole
Object of our Love, it evidently follows, that though the material Objects are
different, yet the Habit of Divino Charity and holy Love is altogether one and
the same. And therefore says Aquinas, Dicendum est quod charitas, sicut
dictumest, est quaedam amicitia hominis ad Deum: Diversae autem amioitiarum
species accipiuntur quidem, uno modo secundum diversitatem finis -- alio modo
secundum diversitatem communicationum, in quibus amicitiae fundantur. Neutro
autem istorum madorum charitas potest dividi in plura; nam charitatis finis est
unus soil. divina bonitas. Est etiam and una communicatio beatitudinis
aetennae, super quam haec amicitia fundatur. Vnde relinquitur quod charitas est
simpliciter una virtus, non distincta in plures species. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 23.
art. 5. in Corp. So again, Dicendum, quod virtus specificatur ex objecto suo,
secundumillam rationem qua-principaliter in ipsam tendit: unde cum Charitas
diligat Deum principaliter, and omnia alia non diligit, nisi in quant^m sunt
Dei, constat quod ex Vnitate divinae bonitatis, quam charitas primo respicit,
unitatem respicit, and est una virtus. Aquinas, l. 3. Sent. d: 27. q. 2. art.
4. in corp. primae quaestionis. To this purpose may be seen Scotus, l. 3. d.
28. q. unica, and those that H. Cavellus there quotes, Estius l. 3. Sent. d.
27. 5. and the rest of the Commentators on the Sentences and the Sums.

. 56. Since then the Habit of Divine Love or holy Charity i^ one and the same,
both in respect of God and our Neighbors, it must of necessity follow, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self] As truly as thy self; sincerely, though
not without some inequality of degrees: as John 17. 21. Acts 3. 22. Assembly
Notes, Annot. in Matt. 22. 39.
that the several Acts of this Love, respecting God and our neighbors for Gods
sake, must differ in regard of height and intension, according to the variety
of Goodness to be found in the several Objects beloved. And therefore your own
Suarez in 3: part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 40. sect. 2. p. 549. col. 2. D.
Suarez will tell you, Verissimum est, Christum Dominum magis amare and velle
gloriam suam quam nostram, quia juxta Charitatis ordinem ita amare debet, quia
illud bonum and in se excellentius est, and magis conjunctum Deo and Christo.
And it is agreeable to the determination of Saint Austin, who in his book of
Christian Doctrine, expressly discoursing on this very Theme, tells us, August.
de doctrina Christiana, c. 27.
Ille just and sancte vivit, qui rerum integer aestimator est: ipse est autem
qui ordinatam dilectionem habet, ne aut diligat quod non est diligendum, aut
non diligat quod est diligendum, aut amplius diligat quod minus est diligendum,
aut minus vel amplius quod aeque diligendum est.

. 57. And so notwithstanding this Answer, our former Argument holds good, and
stand unshaken.

. 58. If our Refuter shall make use of the second, as sometimes in this, Reply
he referres to it (as when he says that nothing hinders, but that expressions
gradually different may flow from Acts of Love gradually the same;)

. 59. To this I return, that though some in Peter Lombards time did seem to
maintain, quod pari affectu omnes diligendi sunt, sed in effectu, id est, in
exhibitione obsequii, distinctio observanda sit, and did ground this their
assertion on some mistaken passages of Saint Austin; yet he and generally the
Schoolmen after him have resolved the contrary: and they have great reason and
authority on their side, as we have already demonstrated; and it were vain to
trouble the Reader with the repetition of what we have already delivered so
largely to this purpose.

. 60. But then secondly, suppose it were granted, as is pretended, that all men
are to be loved with the same equal affection, though our expressions and
outward observances may be different; yet this will not conclude, that
therefore God and our bours are so to be loved with the same equality of
affection as all other men are: and even these very men that referred this
order of Charity to the different outward respects to be showed to Parents and
Children, and Kindred and Strangers, did also maintain that God was to be loved
with an inward affection, answerable to his own goodness, and not only in hand
and tongue, but also in the heart. Deum vero (say they, as I find it in the
Master of the Sentences) tam affectu quam obsequii exhibitione ante omnia
diligendum.

. 61. And so I proceed to a second Argument. It cannot be denied, but that
there were in Christ, during the state of his Humiliation, those Acts of the
Will that the Schools call efficaces and inefficaces; such Acts of holy Love
that were complete and perfect in themselves, and in the issue and
accomplishment, and such other Acts of holy Love that were imperfect in
themselves, and also ineffectual in the event. The first are sometimes called
Absolute acts of the Will; the second are called conditionate. Quia Actus
efficax (says Suarez. in 3. p. Tho. tom. 1. disp. 38. sect. 1. p. 524. col. 1.
E. F.
Suarez) absolutus est in ordine ad executionem: est enim talis Actus
principium operandi, and solet explicari hac voce Volo. Actus vero inefficax
est complacentia quaedam seu displicentia, ut been explicuit Scotus in 2. did.
6. q. 1. Et dicitur Actus conditionatus, non quia ut est in voluntate
conditionem includat; id enim intelligi non potest, cum sit simplex quaedam
affectio, re ipsa adhaerens voluntati simpliciter and absolute: sed quia ex
part objecti conditionem quandam includit, vel implicit, quatenus fertur in
objectum sub una praecisa ratione consideratum, ac si esset separata ab aliis
conditionibus quae illius executionem impediunt; vel etiam interdum explicit
per intellectum considerata, and apposita condition ipsi Objecto, ut in 1. 2.
latius explicatur. Of these two Acts of Christ's Will and Affection the
Scripture affords us many clear and apposite instances.

. 62. Of the efficacious Acts of Christ's Will and holy Love we may find a
clear proof Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 10. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he
says, Sacrifice and burnt-offering thou would not, but a body have thou
prepared me. In burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin thou had no pleasure.
Then said I, Lo, I come, (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do
thy will, o God -- By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of
the body of Jesus Christ once for all. And this freewill offering of Christ for
our Redemption had been foretold by Esaias, c. 58. 7. Oblatus est quia ipse
voluit, as the Vulgar reads it; or as our Translation, He was oppressed and he
was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before his shearers is dumb, so opened he not his
mouth.

. 63. For the inefficacious Acts of Christ's Will and Affection we have also
clear proofs, Matthew. 23. 37. Luke 13. 34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would
I have gathered thy Children together as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not? As out of his abundant Love he came unto his own,
though his own received him not: so to testify his Affection, he now weeps,
that after all his care and pains, his preaching and miracles, their sins and
obstinate impenitency should render this his Love ineffectual. Another instance
we have of these inefficacions Acts of his Will, Mark 7. 24. And he entered into
an house, and would have no man know it: but he could not be hid. Our Saviors
prayer in the Garden, during his bloody Agony, gives us clear instances of
both. Mark 14. 35, 36. And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground,
and prayed that if it were possible the cup might pass from him. And he said,
Abba Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me:
nevertheless not what I will, but what thou will. And again and again he
prayed, O my father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless
not as I will, but as thou will, Matt. 26. 39. From these and other like
passages, the Fathers in the sixth general Council concluded against the heresy
of the Monothelites, and established the true doctrine of a twofold Will in
Christ, not contrary to themselves, but still subordinate the one unto the
other, at least in the final issue.

. 64. I shall not now enquire whether these Acts of Christ's Will and holy Love
did issue and proceed from him per modum naturae, or per modum rationis, as
they speak in the Schools, or both; that is, whether they were only the natural
weights and inclinations, and desires of the Will and Proprie non dicitur
operari Voluntas ut Ratio, nisi quando ex efficaci intention finis de mediis
deliberat: and quando hoc modo non operatur, semper Actus procedit ex naturali
pondere vel ipsius voluntatis, vel alicujus virtutis in ea existentis, ut
Charitatis, vel alterius similis; and ad hunc modum operatur semper illos actus
imperfectos. Suarez. in 3. p. Thom. disp. 38. sect. 2. p. 525. col. 2. F. Dicit
Thomas rationem fuisse in oratione Christi sensualitatis advocatam. Aquin. 3.
p. q. 21. art. 2.

Iidem actus qui sunt a voluntate ut natura, quatenus aliquo modo liberi sunt,
possunt dici esse a voluntate ut ratione. Deinde interdum potuit habere
Christus hos actus circa objecta quae non pertinebant ad proprium commodum, sed
vel ad amorem amicitiae, vel ad alias superiores and honestas rations: sic
enim potuit desiderare omnium salutem ex charitate, quamvis sciret non omnes
esse salvandos -- Similiter etiam Hilarious and Hieronymus exponunt appetivisse
Christum fugam mortis non solum ex inclinatione naturae, sed etiam propter
vitandam ruinam Judaeorum; quae etiam fuit expositio Originis l. 1. contra
Celsum: quae si non excludat affectum naturalem supra explicatum, sed praeter
hunc illum alium adjungit, neque impossibilis est, neque ullum habet
inconveniens. Ratio vero est, quia hi actus sunt honesti, and non repugnant
perfectioni Christo Domino debitae. Suarez. ibid. D. E.

Similiter tristitiam habuit Christus de perditione Judae and ruina Judaeorum,
adeo ut Hieronymus and Hilarious dixerint, magis doluisse Christum de morte sua
propter ruinam Judaeorum, quam propter suum incommodum: sed hoc etiam pertinet
ad portionem superiorem; erat enim opus insignis charitatis. Et ex his exemplis
facile constat ratio hujus conclusionis, quia hic etiam affectus est optimus
and honestissimus, and valde consentaneus statui Christi in carne passibili,
and ad satisfaciendum pro hominibus valde accommodatus. Suarez ibid. sect. 3.
p. 526. col. 2. B. C.


Habit of Charity, to his own self-preservation, without any deliberation, such
as is to be found in children before the use of Reason; or whether they
proceeded from him out of a deliberate consideration and pondering, not so much
of the now-impending evils, and the fury of his Fathers wrath, as the love he
bore to his own people the Jews, whose destruction and casting off he foresaw
would be the consequents of his death: though Suarez seems to me to have proved
the latter as well as the former. Sufficient it is to the present argument,
that since Christ was himself holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
that all his actions, thoughts, desires and inclinations were holy, just and
good, and issuing from that all-full and all-perfect Habit of Divine Love and
Charity in him.

. 65. From hence I thus argue:

Those Acts of holy Charity that were most perfect in themselves, were
gradually distinguished, and secundum magis and minus different from those that
were imperfect in the same kind.

But the efficacious Acts of Christ's Love and holy Charity were most perfect,
the inefficacious Acts of the same holy Love were imperfect. Ergo

These Acts of holy Love and Charity in Christ were gradually distinguished,
and secundum magis and minus different one from another. And consequently all
the Acts of his Love were not equally intense in themselves, and with the Habit
from whence they proceeded.

. 67. There can be no doubt made of the Proposition by any man that understands
the nature of Intension and Remission. Nor is the Minor less evident to any
that considers the nature of these efficacious and inefficacious Acts of
Christ's Will and holy Love. De actibus efficacibus voluntatis Christi, (says
Suarez,) Suarez in 1. p. Thom. disp. 38. sect. 2. p. 524. c. 2. A. B.
quod in illo fuerint perfectissimi, nulla est difficultas, aut dubitandi
ratio: constat enim per hos actus operatum esse omnia virtutis opera, and
divinae voluntati ac jussioni obsecutum esse, ac denique mortem ipsam
suscepisse. So again for those Acts which they call inefficaces, Scio nonnullos
authors non admittere hos actus imperfectos nisi in voluntate ut natura est,
etc. Suarez. ibid. p. 525. col. 1. F.

Voluntas seu desiderium inefficax Christi non semper habuit effectum, seu
impletum fuit -- Et ratio ex ipsis terminis constat, quia si actus est
inefficax, non est cur semper habeat effectum; imo tunc tantum per hujusmodi
actum Christus aliquid volebat, quando simpliciter nolebat illud fieri, sed
potius contrarium. Suarez ibid. sect. 4. page 530. col. 1. D.

. 68. Secondly I thus argue:

That Act of Christ's Will whereby he laid down his life for his sheep, was
more high and gradually intense then those other Acts of his Will when he
prayed for a removal of the bitter cup of death, if it had been possible, or
then the other Acts of his will and endeavor of the Jews conversion by his
three years preaching and miracles among them.

But these were Acts issuing from the Habit of Divine Charity and holy Love in
Christ. Therefore

Some Acts that issue from the Habit of divine Charity were more high and
gradually intense then other Acts of the same Habit.

. 69. From whence further it seems (to me at least) most unavoidably to follow,
that though by that prime fundamental law of Divine Charity we are bound to
love God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our mind; yet this
only obliges us to love him so, as to prefer nothing before or above him, so as
in every Act we desire nothing but what is holy, just and honest, and quoad
specificationem, as they speak, conformable to his holy Will, as himself has
revealed in his holy laws and precepts, and what also tends to his honor and
glory; and not in every Act pro hic and nunc and quoad exercitium, as they
speak, to the most high, most noble and intense degree of holy Charity. For
otherwise I see not how these inefficacious conditionate desires of our Blessed
Savior can be excused from the breach of this Law, because they had neither
the most noble immediate material Objects, nor were so gradually intense as
other Acts of holy Charity were. And yet most assured we are, that all his
desires and inclinations, as well as his actions, were holy, just and good, and
conformable to Gods Will, and were the true and genuine fruits of the Habit of
Divine Grace. But now most certain it is, that though he came into the world
for none other end then to reconcile the world unto his Father by his Death,
though he had received an express command from him, and also voluntarily
contracted and covenanted with him, to perform it, and though it was in it self
the most high and transcendent Act of holy Charity to his neighbor imaginable;
yet for all that he truly and really, and not in show and complement only,
declined the bitter cup, though still with submission to Gods will. For first,
he prayed not only prolixius, but intensius also, as shall in due place be
proved; he prayed thrice, and he prayed also more Ardently then at other times,
for the removal of this bitter Cup: the apprehension of the approaching torment
and the horror of his Fathers wrath made his soul sorrowful even to Death, and
it cast him into such an Agony, that he sweat great drops of blood through his
clothes down to the ground: so sad and so grieved he was, that an Angel was
sent to comfort and support him against the present conflict and approaching
torments; which he did by proposing the joys set before Proprius and (ut ego
existimo) magis ad rem exponitur, Angelum confortasse Christum proponendo
rations quae possent ejus tristitiam lenire, and inferiorem partem confortare,
unde non fit Angelum docuisse Christum: non enim propterea ad illum eum
sermonem habuit, quia Christus eas rations ignoraret, vel illas per se
considerare non posset; sed quia it a per rationem superiorem illas
considerabat, ut nullum inde solatium communicari permitteret inferiori parti,
ut and magis constaret veritas Passionis ejus, voluit Angelico ministerio
rations illas proponi, and quasi in memoriam revocari. Et hoc modo dicitur
Angelus quantum in se erat confortasse Christum, quanquam ipse neque illud
consolationis genus acceptare visus sit, statim enim factus in Agonia prolixius
orabat. Et hanc expositionem magis indicat D. Thomas hic, quam ex Beda refert,
Luc. 22. sed and etiam Hieronymi Dialogo 2do. contra Pelagianos, Hilarii lib.
10. de Trinitate, Cyrilli Alexandrini Epist. 9. Damasceni l. 3 de Fide, c. 20.
Bernardi sermon 1. de Sancto Andrea, Suarez. in 1. par. Thom. q. 12. art. 4.
in Commentar. p. 398. col. 2. B. C. Vide Jansen. Concord. in loc. H. Grot. in
Annot* in loc.
him, the short and fading sharpness of those bitter torments, Gods glory, and
the enlargement of his own Dominion over men and Angels, and the freeing and
the reconciling of a world of sinners unto God his Father. Not that he himself
was ignorant of them, or did want a monitor now to mind him, and bring them to
his present consideration; but only that his superior intellectual part did so
wholly now affix and dwell upon them, that he would not suffer any comfort to
be thence administered to the inferior faculty, that now did naturally and
therefore innocently abhor these cruel sufferings. And hence it was, that so
the truth of his humane nature and sufferings might appear, that he made use of
an Angels ministry and support to strengthen him. As therefore the inferior
sensual part in him did truly, because naturally, abhor and dread the
approaching torments as destructive to it is Being; so our Blessed Savior did
innocently, because naturally, in compliance with these apprehensions, desire
and pray for a removal of them, though still with a submission in the superior
part of these desires to his Fathers will. Nor was there here (as shall in due
place more fully be declared) any repugnance or contradiction of the inferior
faculties to the superior, or of his sensual will to God his Fathers. Vide
Suarez in 3 p. Thom. infra citat.
For 1. though the apprehension of the approaching torments was never so great,
yet he did but only desire the removal of them, not absolutely, but
conditionally, and with submission to his Fathers will. And 2ly, the inferior
faculties were no whit repugnant to the superior, but yielded patiently to
it is dictates. And therefore 3ly, he absolutely submitted himself to God his
Fathers will and pleasure. And then 4ly, God himself was pleased, thereby to
testify the truth of his humane nature, that these desires should naturally
and innocently express themselves in them, for our instruction and guidance in
such cases. All which in every part shall be fully demonstrated in due place.

. 70. From all which thus considered I thus argue:

That if our Savior did truly and innocently, because naturally, desire the
removal of that bitter Cup, though with submission to his Fathers will, even
when so high an Act of divine Charity as the reconciling of the world to God by
his death lay before his eyes, and his Father had given him a command to
perform it, and he himself came for no other end into the world then to make it
good; then he might as innocently have endeavored by all lawful means his
self-preservation, upon supposal that no such Covenant had been made, nor
particular command given, and God had left it freely in his power either to
reconcile the world to him by his death, or to endeavor by just and innocent
ways to save himself. For plain it is from Scripture, that before his hour was
come which the Father had appointed for this work, when the Jews took up
stones to stone him, he withdrew himself, to leave us an example what we might
lawfully do in such cases. And hence it is, from the Authority of this great
example, that though Martyrdom be the highest and most sublime Act of
Christian Charity, yet all men that profess the name of Christ are not by
virtue of that first great fundamental law of divine Charity, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and all thy mind,
obliged in a time of Persecution to offer themselves to fire and faggot, but
lawfully may embrace a lesser good, and follow a less noble Act of Charity,
consisting in a lawful endeavor of their own preservation, even when an
occasion offers of glorifying God by their suffering death or persecution for
his names sake. Otherwise Saint Paul had sinned, when he was let down from the
wall in a Basket. otherwise the Martyriani, that so eagerly coveted Martyrdom
for Gods honor, had been the best of Christians, and are unjustly branded with
the name of Heretics; and Tertullians Book against flight in time of
Persecution had not deserved the mark of Montanism; and Cyprian and great
Athanasius had not received the name of Saints, but had been enrolled amongst
Apostates.

. 71. From all which it seems to me clearly to follow, that (as the Doctor
asserts) sincere Love in the Habit is capable of Degrees in the several Acts,
either in one man at several times, or in two men at the same time, and so both
may obey that first great Precept of Loving God with all the heart, in respect
of some several Acts that are gradually different. For though that Act that is
less intense is comparatively less perfect, yet is it not therefore so far
faulty or in vitio: because God commands sincerity of our Love, which is
capable of Degrees in the several Acts, as occasion offers, and not always pro
hic and nunc the highest and most noble Act of holy Charity, as appears by
these so great examples.

. 72. If it here be said, that our Savior prayed for a removal of this bitter
Cup with submission to his Fathers will, which alters much the Case:

. 73. I grant he did so; but then I further argue, that if it had not otherwise
been lawful (praescinding still from Gods decree in the present case) but the
great fundamental law of Charity (without any other express and positive
command of Gods, for the laying down his life) had obliged him to it, he could
not have been excused, though he did desire the removal of it with Vide Hooker.
Ecclesiast. Pol. l. 5.. 48. p. 280.
submission to his Fathers will. For what I may not lawfully perform and do as
in it self considered, that I cannot lawfully desire and pray for, though with
submission to Gods will. For shall I pray to God to bless me in an unlawful
Act, suppose of Murder or Adultery, because I desire it only with submission to
Gods will? They must be only innocent, holy things we must ask and pray for
from the most holy God; and still we must ask them too with a submission to his
holy will and pleasure.

. 74. And as this was all the Doctor aimed to prove by that instance of our
Saviors greater Ardency in this Act of prayer then in another; so we shall
have anon occasion to clear and further vindicate that instance.

. 75. I might in the third place demonstrate this Truth from the consideration
of the gradual difference, in respect of intension, between the necessary Acts
of holy Charity in Christ, and those Acts to which his Will had a most absolute
freedom. For most certain it is, that in the prime and most noble Act of
Divine Charity, that was immediately terminated in God the only good, he did
love necessarily, and to the utmost height of intension imaginable, and he did
always so love him; nor could he possibly do otherwise, because being always
Comprehensor, as they speak, he perfectly knew him, and his Love must of
necessity be exactly commensurate to his Knowledge. For even the great
Philosopher by the light of Reason could discover, that Summum bonum and finis
ultimus necessario amatur. And then as certain it is, that in other Acts of
holy Charity he did not love necessarily, but freely, and his Will had an
absolute freedom in them, and by reason of this freedom and liberty in the
performance of the Acts, he was capable of meriting by them. And for this our
Refuter himself says, that if you please, you may see further in Suarez in
tertiam partem Thomae, did. 39. Jeanes Reply to the Ectenesteron, p. 39.
sect. 4. where the question is debated, Quomodo voluntas Christi ex
necessitate diligens Deum, in reliquis actibus potuerit esse libera. But
because our Refuter has mistaken that Author, and he will give us a fitter
opportunity of handling this Argument, I shall defer the further prosecution of
it till that Section.

. 76. And so I come at last to the examination of the Assumption of your
monstrous Syllogism. It is this.

But now this Objection is urged by you against the perpetual All-fulness and
perfection of his actual Love, the inward Acts of his Love. For it is brought
to prove that the inward Acts of Christ's Love were more intense at one time
then at another; and a greater intension presupposes remission and
imperfection; for intensio est eductio rei intensae de imperfecto ad perfectum,
as Aquinas very often. Ergo.

. 77. Before I come to consider the strength of this Assumption, it will not be
amiss to mind the Reader of a known distinction, to avoid all Cavils for the
future, by reason of a Term therein that may be ambiguously construed, and it
is the Term Actual Love.

For sometimes it is taken for that which is opposed to Habitual Love; and then
it denotes the Operation and the Acts of Love, and is no other then that which
they call Actus secundus in the Schools, or that Love which is in Actu secundo.

And then secondly, it is sometimes taken for that which is opposed to
potential Love, to that which is yet incausis and in fieri, as they speak, and
not in esse; and then it denotes only the existence of Love, and it is the same
with the Habit of Love, and that which they call Actus primus.

. 78. If now the term Actual Love be taken for that Love which is only in Actu
primo, and has a being in the Soul, it is granted that such an all absolute
fullness of Love was actually still in the Soul of Christ, because this is no
other then the actual abode of the habitual fullness of holy Charity and Grace
in Christ. But then this is nothing to the purpose, it having never been
brought into Controversy by the Doctor, but always granted and allowed.

. 79. But if it be taken in the first sense, as our Refuters words import, as
it denotes the inward Acts of Christ's Love, most certain it is that there was
not in him a perpetual All-fulness and perfection of his actual Love, so as the
Acts and Operations of Grace were either intensively or extensively still
commensurate to his habitual Love.

. 80. This is it which our Refuter asserts in opposition to Doctor Hammond. And
now that he is most grossly mistaken in it will appear, First, if we shall
consider the Subjectum quod, as they call it, of this Habit and the Operations
of holy Charity, the Subject wherein they are seated, Christ. For though the
Habit of holy Charity was always in him in its height and perfection from the
first moment of Conception, as congruous to the hypostatical union, and flowing
from it; yet there must be an intermission and cessation in the Subject, at
least of some Operations and Acts of this Grace. For we read that Jesus slept,
and his humane nature did require it as a necessary support of Matthew. 8. 24.
it. And therefore since some Acts of Virtues and Graces can be only performed
by us when awake, there must be an intermission and a cessation of them at
least when he slept, which cannot possibly be said of the Habit of holy
Charity, which was in him in full perfectness, whether sleeping or waking.

. 81. Secondly, if we shall consider the Object of divine Charity, there was
always an habitual application or inclination in Christ our Blessed Savior to
all the Objects of divine Charity, and that according to that order and degree
of goodness to be found in them: but there could not be an actual application
of the Will always to all the several Objects of divine Charity, because being
finite in his humane nature, by that finite humane Will, howsoever perfected
and advanced by the infused perfection of habitual grace, he could not possibly
apply himself to an actual embrace of so many and different Objects, at one and
the same moment and instant of time.

. 82. Thirdly, if we shall consider the several Acts themselves, they were so
many and infinite for number, so different for variety, we shall find it
impossible that they should be all performed at once, though there was always
and in every instant of time an habitual disposition and aptitude to the
performance of any or of all of them successively, as himself should best think
fit.

. 83. If it be here replied, that though the actual Love of Christ could not be
in him in its utmost extent and latitude, though he could not perform all the
Acts of divine Charity at one and the same moment, to which he had always an
habitual inclination; yet this nothing hinders but that whenever he did
perform any Act of holy Charity, that Act of holy Charity must be as
intensively perfect as the Habit from whence it issues, and this was all that
you intended in this Objection.

. 84. To this I answer, That as we have already demonstrated the falsehood of
this Assertion, so were it now granted, yet this would not serve the turn at
present. For since by this answer it is granted that all the Acts of this Habit
in their utmost latitude and extent cannot be performed at once, it necessarily
follows, that those Acts that may pro tempore be suspended, and not have a
being, without a derogation from the all-fulness of his habitual Love, may also
have a being less intensively perfect then the Habit or then other Acts of the
same Love, without any derogation from the perpetual fullness of this habitual
Grace. For plain it is that these Acts and Operations of divine Grace and holy
Charity are not all in individuo the necessary issues of the Habit, as those
Properties and Accidents are that flow from their Causes by way of emanation,
and necessity of nature, as the light from the Sun; but are the free effects of
the Will and Habit of Grace from whence they flow, and therefore are
extrinsecal and contingent to the nature and being and gradual Perfection of
the Habit. For since, as Porphyry tells us, Accidens commune est, quod potest
adesse and abesse sine subjecti interitu, if any one Act may be totally and in
respect of all Degrees absent, and not have a being, without derogation from
the Perfection of the Habit, the same may in 2, or 3, or 5 Degrees of
Perfection be also absent; since if the whole be accidental to the Habit, much
more must every part and degree be accidental to it also.

. 85. And therefore I see not what disadvantage can accrue to the Doctor, if
this your Assertion be granted as you have laid it down in Terminis. For we
have already demonstrated, that some Acts of Christ's Love were not so gradually
intense as others were: we have also seen it proved by Scripture, and Reason,
and the Authority of Fathers and Schoolmen, and Mr. Jeanes and his own Ames
among the rest, that Christ did truly and really increase, and not only in the
opinion of men, as well in actual Knowledge and Grace as he did in Stature,
though the Habit was always at the height and perfection. Indeed I see not how
a true and real increase in the gradual Perfection of the Acts and inward
Operations of Wisdom and Grace can any more derogate from the all-ful
perfection of the Habit of Grace, then a true and real increase and growth in
his Stature could any ways derogate from the truth and full perfection of his
humane nature or Manhood. For though a greater intension presupposes remission
and imperfection, and though intensio est eductio rei intensae de imperfecto ad
perfectum, as Aquinas often; yet if the Habit be full and perfect, and
incapable of any diminution or increase, the gradual increase and perfection in
the Acts will no more conclude the real growth and increase of the Habit, then
our Saviors growth in his Stature did conclude a growth in the perfection of
his Manhood. As his humane nature was complete and perfect in his Infancy,
though his Stature were now in growth; so the Habits of Wisdom and Grace were
then also perfect, though his actual Wisdom and Grace were now capable of
addition and growth, as his Stature was.

. 86. And therefore for a period of this Section, and the full acquitting the
Doctor from the least suspicion of this Charge, I must again mind our Refuter
of that known distinction in Scheibler which he borrowed from Scaliger. And it
is this; That as Habits are either infused or acquisite, so the Acts and
Operations belonging to them are either praecedaneous to the Habit, and
effectually concur to the production and accomplishment of it, or else they
are such as are subsequent, and flow from it now complete and perfect, as
Effects from their Cause. Though then an intensive perfection and growth in
those Acts and Operations that praecede, and effectively concur to the
production of the Habit, argue also an intensive growth in the perfection of
the Habit to be acquired, and Aquinas his Rule does hold true in them: yet the
Habit of holy Charity in Christ being not an acquired but an infused Habit, and
always from the first moment perfect in its utmost intension, the Rule holds
not, but an intensive growth and gradual difference in the Acts here argues
only an innocent liberty of the Will, whose free effects they are, and no
intensive growth in the Habit at all. For that being already full and perfect,
and seated in the Will, and effectively concurring with it to the production of
these Acts and Operations, it may, if it be not otherwise ab extrinseco
determined, either instantaneously produce the Acts in this or that degree
perfect, or else may successively augment them in gradual perfection. I shall
give you a reason in part borrowed from Aquinas. For the gradual Perfection of
these subsequent Acts depends not so much upon the Perfection of the Object, as
the liberty of the Will, and the gradual difference in the virtue and efficacy
and Conatus of the Agent, praecipue (as he says Aquin. l. 3. Sent. d. 29. q.
1. art. 2. ad 3 m:

Dicendum quod omnis actus oportet quod proportionetur and objecto and agenti:
sed ex objecto habet speciem, ex virtute autem agentis habet motum suae
intensionis. Sicut motus habet speciem ex termino ad quem est, sed intensionem
velocitatis habet ex dispositione mobilis, and virtute moventis; sic ergo
dilectio speciem habet ex Objecto, sed intensionem habet ex part ipsius
diligentis: Objectum autem charitativae dilectionis Deus est, homo autem
diligens est. Diversitas ergo dilectionis quae est secundum charitatem, quantum
ad speciem, est atte^denda in proximis diligendis secundum comparationem ad
Deum, ut scil. ei qui est Deo propinquior majus bonum ex charitate velimus,
etc. -- sed intensio dilectionis est attendenda per comparationem ad ipsum
hominem qui diligit, etc. Aquin. 2. 2ae, q. 26. art. 7. in Corp.


) in actibus animae, quae non necessario secundum totum suum posse agit. Sicut
naturalia non mensurantur ad Quantitatem objecti tantum, sed ad efficaciam
agentis and conatum in agendo. Vnde non melius videt qui majorem rem intuetur,
sed qui clarius videt. I have already made this plain by familiar instances in
the Lutenist, and Painter, and Preacher, who do not always operate to the
perfection of the Habit, but according to the liberty of their own good will
and pleasure, and as occasion requires. And therefore this Maxim of Aquinas is
misapplyed by our Refuter. For it is only true and to be understood of those
Qualities that are intended by successive and Physical alteration, but in
others it holds not: Suarez. Metaph. disp. 46* sect. 3. 15.
Nam Lumen subito fit secundum aliquos gradus intensionis, says Suarez, and
voluntas nostra subito prorumpere potest in ferventem and intensum actum
amoris. For (not to speak of Agentia naturalia instantanea) Ibid.. 16.
Agentia libera, quatenus talia sunt, non agunt quantum possunt, (says the
same Suarez) sed quantum volunt. Where then Intensio est eductio rei intensae
de imperfecto ad perfectum, according to Aquinas, there the Succession in this
gradual increase and growing on to Perfection arises either 1. from the
distance which is between the Agent and Patient; or 2ly, from the resistance of
the Subject by reason of some contrary Quality or other disposition
withstanding the introduction of the present from; or else 3ly, by reason of
the limitation and imperfection of the virtue and force of the Agent, as
Suarez. Metaph. disp. 46. sect. 3.. 16, 17, 18. Suarez. Metaph. disp. 46. sect.
4.. 14.
Suarez has at large proved. And this is only to be found in natural and
Physical alterations that are successive. At vero si Agens sit liberum, potest
pro sua liberate applicare vim suam ad magis vel minus agendum; and
consequently may either successively increase this gradual perfection in the
Acts, or instantaneously produce them either more or less perfect, according to
his own will and pleasure, and the perfection of the Habit.

. 87. And thus the Proposition and Assumption being both manifestly proved to
be so monstrously false or impertinent in the whole, and all the several parts,
the Conclusion cannot possibly concern the Doctor: and therefore I shall leave
it to our Refuter to make the best of it. And so I proceed to the next Section.

SECTION 14.
The Doctors discourse here only ad hominem. The Refuters Reply grants all that
the Doctors Argument aims at. Where the degrees of any Quality, particularly
the Love of Christ, are for number multiplied in the same Subject, there the
Quality, particularly the Love, is more intense. Proved. This inferrs not
Intension to be a mere Coacervation of homogeneous degrees. The Refuter reaches
not the Doctors meaning. The Doctor argues from the Effect to the Cause. The
reasonableness of the proof. The only way to conclude the fervor of the inward
devotion by the outward performance. Length and continuance in Prayer an
argument of high Zeal. Suarez and Hurtado 's discourse concerns not the Doctor.
The Refuters ignorance notwithstanding his confidence. Quantitas virtutis,
molis. No absurdity in the Doctors Discourse, if (as the Refuter falsely charges
him) he had concluded a greater Ardency in Christ's Devotion, from the
multiplying of the several acts of Prayer. Continuance in Prayer a
demonstration of fervor. Frequent repetitions of the same words in Prayer an
argument of an heightened fervor of Spirit.

Doctor HAMMOND.
. 30. BUt now to this he is pleased to frame answers, (though I hope his
Doctrine of the fullness of habitual Grace be no way concerned in it) and to
these I shall briefly attend him as my last stage.

. 31. And first, says he, the Vulgar Translation renders (...) prolixius; and
if this version be good, then there is no place for the Doctors Objection.

But though I seek no advantage by that vulgar reading; yet thinking it a duty
of reverence to that Version to take leave civilly of it whenever I depart
from it (wherein I have the suffrage of Protestants as learned in both the
Languages, Paulus Fagius praefat. in verse. Chal. paraph. in Pent.
Hebrew and Joh. Boys Eliens. vet. Interpt. cum Beza collat.
Greek, as any) and that I may to the utmost observe the Refuters steps, I
shall not utterly reject it.

. 32. It Is certain (...) does primarily signify extension, and that properly
belongs to length, and so the Comparative (...) to a greater degree of that
length. And if it be granted that it so signifies here, there will yet be place
equally for my Conclusion.

. 33. For in every Act of Prayer, be it but the shortest ejaculation sent out
by Christ, I suppose (and my Refuter must not doubt of it) that there was some
degree of Ardency or intension. And then sure, according to the multiplying of
those Acts lengthning that Prayer, there must still in Christ (I say not in
every one of us) be a proportionable multiplication of those Degrees, and so
parallel to a greater length, a greater Intension.

Thus far the Doctor.

. 1. But before I come to the Refuters answer, I must here admonish the Reader,
that this Discourse is only ad hominem, and proceeds a datis, sed non
concessis. And so if the Doctor should have been mistaken in this Personal
address, yet it makes nothing at all to the present Controversy. For we shall
demonstratively prove anon, that our Savior did not only in this his Agony
pray prolixius, as the Vulgar, but also intensius more earnestly, as our
Translation renders it.

. 2. This being premised, I come now to consider Mr. Jeanes his reply. Thus
then he;

JEANES.
THe answer here is very easy and obvious: the intension of the Degrees of the
inward Acts of Christ's Love of God may be said to be greater, either in regard
of the number, or in respect of the intensive Perfection and excellency of
those Degrees: according to the lengthning of Christ's Prayer there is a
multiplying of inward Acts of his Love, and proportionably a multiplication of
the Degrees of his Love, and consequently a greater intension of those Degrees
in regard of their number, but not in respect of their intensive Perfection or
excellency.

. 3. To this I answer, that either our Refuter speaks arrant Consonat autem
sensui and rationi, ut forma quae intenditur and remittitur gradualem
perfectionis latitudinem habeat, ita quod and Calor and esse Caloris and esse
ejusdem latitudinem hujusmodi habeat: and cum de minus calido, puta ut duo, fit
magis calidum, puta ut quatuor, non corrumpitur praecedens Calor, sed abjicitur
solum actualis Terminatio Caloris ad gradum ut duo, and pervenitur ad actualem
terminationem Caloris ad gradum ut quatuor, sic enim salvatur motus de
affirmato in affirmatum absque form corruptione; sicut in vero motu augmenti,
cum Socrates de tripedali fit quadrupedalis, non abjicitur praecedens
quantitas, sed solum actualis terminatio quantitatis ad tripedalem mensuram,
and pervenitur ad actualem terminationem quadrupedalis mensurae ejusdem
quantitatis; and propterea non remanet tripedalis in actu sed potentia. Et
similiter non remanent praecedentes gradus Caloris in actu sed in potentia,
etc. -- nec refert utrum hoc fiat per motum, ut cum aliquid magis calefit, vel
per mutationem, ut cum aliquid magis illuminatur; utrobique enim est eadem
ratio in intrinsecis, etc. Charitas quoque eodem modo intenditur, a Deo tamen
effective; ita quod non corrumpitur praecedens charitas, nec nova adven^^, sed
quae erat terminata ad tertium, terminatur ad quartum vel sextum gradum
actualiter. Cajetan. in. 2. 2. q. 24. art. 4.
nonsense, or else he grants all that the Doctors Argument drives at. For if
the intension of the Degrees of the inward Acts of Christ's love of God may be
said to be greater in regard of the Number, they must of necessity be greater
in respect of the intensive Perfection and excellency of those Degrees; and if
(as he grants) according to the lengthning of Christ's Prayer there is a
multiplying of inward Acts of his Love, and proportionably a multiplication of
the Degrees of his Love, and consequently a greater intension of those Degrees
in regard of the Number, then of necessity there must be an augmentation in
respect of their intensive Perfection or excellency. For though one Degree,
precisely and abstractly considered, is not more intensively perfect then
another; yet where two Degrees are multiplied in the same Subject, they are
greater and more intense in concreto then one is; and three Degrees of the same
Quality in the same Subject are more then two, and so till men come to the
highest that the Subject is capable of. As for instance, suppose we Water
actually cold applied to the Fire. There is at first, suppose, one Degree of
Heat introduced into the Water, and successively another, and so another; every
addition of a new degree of heat makes the water more intensely hot, and yet
for all that, no one of those Degrees precisely and abstractly considered is
more intensively perfect then the other. But this will be more evident by a
familiar instance of the intension of Light. Suppose we then for the present a
Room enlightened by one Candle; if another of the same equal brightness, and so
another, and another, to seven or eight, be successively brought into the same
Room, by the multiplication of these lights the light of the Room is
successively intended, as is evident to the sight: And yet one Candle upon the
present supposition is of the same equal brightness with another. And though
the lights do all severally flow, and continue distinct, as will appear by the
several shadows that every one of these casts; yet the whole light of the Room
is more gradually perfect and intense. And therefore it clearly follows, that
where the Degrees of any Quality are for number multiplied in the same Subject,
there the Quality is more intense, and a Quality of three or four degrees is
more gradually perfect then a Quality of one or two only; and yet one Degree
precisely and abstractly considered is not of more intensive perfection then
another, as the light of the several candles, when compared one with another,
are equal in perfection, because they are supposed to be all of an equal
brightness.

. 4. Nor will this infer (as he afterward charges upon the Doctor) Intension
to be a mere Coacervation of many homogeneous Degrees of the same likeness (an
absurdity justly refuted by Suarez and others) but only a praecisive, mental
designation of the Suarez Metaph. disp. 5. sect. 8. 21, 22, 23. and disp. 46.
sect. 1, 3.
several degrees that of themselves compound and integrate the same numerical
Form. So the Astronomer thus divides his Circles into Degrees and Seconds, etc.
and the Land measurer designs so many Acres, or Perch, or Yards, or Feet,
where yet there is no real separation of parts thus designed, but all are still
continued and united in the whole. And the truth of this Doctrine may be seen
in the same Suarez, and in the very place Suarez. Metaph. disp. 46. sect 1:.
38. Vide eundem ibid. per. tot. and sect. 3. ibid.. 12, 13.
quoted by the Refuter. Secundo, dicendum (says he) latitudinem entitativam
qualitatis intensibilis non esse meram Coarcervationem plurium graduum ejusdem
qualitatis omnino similium, sed esse quandam Compositionem per se talium
partium seu graduum, quorum unus natura sua supponit alium, ratione cujus
subordinationis unus dicitur primus, and alius secundus, tertius, etc. ita ut
primus and secundus non solum distinguantur, sicut duo primi gradus existentes
in diversis partibus subjecti, sed quia etiam sunt natura sua primus and
secundus, and sic de caeteris.

. 5. But he goes on to give us a Reason of his Assertion.

JEANES.
FOr in Christ let them be never so much multiplied, they may be and still are
of an equal intensive perfection and excellency, one is not more intense then
another: and so if this reading be retained, there will be no place for your
Conclusion, That the inward Acts of Christ's Love are more intense at one time
then at another, unless you will make Intension to be a mere Coarcervation of
homogeneous degrees, (i. e.) degrees altogether like: the absurdity of which
you may see in Suarez Metaph. disp. 46. and Pet. Hurtado de Mendoza de Gener.
and Corrupt. disp. 5.. 6.

. 6. For answer, I desire to know what is the Antecedent to these Relatives
(them) and (they.) If you mean the Acts of Christ's Love, and say, Let the Acts
of his Love be never so much multiplied, these Acts may be and still are of an
equal intensive perfection; I reply and say, If the Degrees of his Love are in
number multiplied as the Acts are, there must be a growth in their intensive
perfection, and the last Act, which has the greater number of degrees in it,
will be gradually more perfect then the former.

. 7. But perhaps he considers those several Acts, and the several degrees of
them, to be so many discrete Quantities, and though they are still multiplied
and increased in number, yet they be several distinct Acts of the same gradual
height; as twenty shillings successively added one to the other, though they
make a greater sum of money, yet they grow not into one piece by this
multiplication, but are all still distinct shillings, of an equal value, stamp,
and bigness, and weight. But then how this fails in the multiplication of the
degrees of Quality in the same Subject, may appear not only from Suarez in the
very place by him cited, but also from the former instance, Vide Suarez.
Metaph. disp. 5. sect. 8.. 11.
where the whose light of the room is gradually intended by the addition of a
new Candle, though the light of every Candle continues distinct, as appears by
the several shadows that every one casts. And then I must also tell him, that
by this Position he must unavoidably fall either upon the same Absurdity which
he charges upon the Doctor, in making Intension to be a mere coacervation and
heaping up in the same Subject of many Degrees altogether alike; or upon
another as gross, in placing many Accidents of the same kind, and only
numerically distinct, in one and the same Subject, at one and the same time.
The falsehood of which assertion, together with the former, as the same Suarez
has showed in one and the same Section; so Reason it self, at the very Suarez.
ibid.. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
first proposal, is able to discover, that it is equally impossible for many
Acts of the same kind and degree of Ardency to be in the same Subject at one
and the same time, without any formal union in themselves, but continuing still
distinct, as for many other individual qualities of the same kind and degrees,
suppose of heat or cold, or whiteness, and the like, to be in the same Subject,
without compounding and making up a more intense and perfect Quality of the
same kind, wherein the several degrees shall be united.

. 8. But be this how it will; plain it is, by what follows in the Refuter, that
he does not reach the Doctors meaning, and the force of his Argument. For the
Doctor concludes and argues from the Effect to the Cause, thus; Where the zeal
is true and real, and not personate and counterfeit, (as in Christ without
doubt it was most true) there a multiplication of the outward Acts of Prayer,
and a longer continuance in them, argues a greater Ardency of inward affection
and true zeal: and for the truth of this Assertion I appeal to the practice of
the whole world. Sed respondet Aquinas, 2. 2. q. 134. art. 4. Secundum ea quae
exterius aguntur, accipi debere spiritualem statum in homine per comparationem
ad Ecclesiam: quia nos non scrutamur corda, sed videmus ea quae patent. Vt
concedam, oportere nos de statu interno judicare per ea quae extrinsecus
aguntur; respondebo, me igitur secundum judicium Charitatis aestimare illum
esse in statu spiritualis profectionis, quemcunque videro proferentem fructus
justitiae and Sanctitatis, etc. Davenant. de Justit. Actual. c. 41. p 472. Vide
Hookers Ecclesiast. Pol. l. ^. 32.
For since the Devotion and Religion of the heart is an immanent Act of the
Will and Understanding, it is impossible to discover it but by the outward
performance. And no argument more common to guess at the inward Devotion among
men, then by this continuance in Prayer, and multiplication of outward Acts.
For let me appeal to our Refuter himself; does he not commonly guess at the
greatness and Ardency of the Preachers zeal and Devotion by the length of the
Prayer? and is not he commonly accounted most devout that prays longest? Is it
not the custom of Hypocrites to continue long at their Devotions, to gain the
Reputation of the most ardently zealous? Otherwise the Mark 12. 40.
Pharisees had in vain for a pretense made long prayers. But the people, that
could not discern the heart, guessed at the height of the inward Devotion by
the outward lip-service and the continuance in that. This Pharisaical practice
of Hypocrites shows us what are the best ways to guess at the Ardency of their
Devotion who are sincerely Religious. For the Hypocrite counterfeits and
personates that which he is not, and desires to appear religious in show, and
the outward performance of those that are truly devout; when he is only a
vizor, a shadow, a Picture, and not the thing he seems to be. And now from the
multiplication of these Acts of Prayer, from the continuance in his outward
performances, the Doctor argues and concludes the heightning of his inward
Ardency and Zeal, since no better argument we can have of the inward Ardency of
any man's Devotion, then by his outward prolixity and continuance in Prayer.

. 9. And so, if this reading be retained, whatsoever our Refuter says to the
contrary, there must of necessity be a place for the Doctors Conclusion, That
the inward Acts of Christ's Love are more intense at one time then at another,
though he make not intension a mere coacervation of homogeneous degrees, (i. e)
degrees altogether like. And though Suarez Metaph. disp. 46. and Pet. Hurtado
de Mendoza de Generat. and Corrupt. did. 5. 6. (two very acute Authors, I
grant) have showed the absurdity of this Position; yet this can in no respect
reach the Doctor For Vide Suarez. Mot. disp. 5. sect. 8. 21, 22. and disp. 46.
sect. 3.. 15, 16, etc.
they both speak of intension and remission of Qualities produced by successive
and physical alteration; not of those that are produced by instaentaneous
motion, as Light, nor of those that are produced by the free and voluntary
operation of the Will, where the Acts are more or less gradually perfect at
once, or successively, according to the good pleasure of the Will, as that is
Vide ibid.. 20, 21, 22.
pleased more or less vigorously to act, as we have in the last Section
demonstrated. But you have given us frequent indications, that if you quote any
thing out of a Metaphysician or a Schoolman, be it never so wide from the
purpose, it is a good argument against Doctor Hammond, because he is a Critic.
But, Sir, to show you further that Suarez and Hurtaedo's discourse does not any
way concern Dr. Hammond. For does he not say expressly, that according to the
multiplying of those Acts lengthning that Prayer, there must be still in Christ
(I say not in every one of us, who, God knows, do often play the hypocrites) a
proportionable multiplication of those Degrees, and so parallel to a greater
length a greater intension? What could possibly have been said in a few words
more or clearer to the purpose? And therefore our Refuter was either grossly
ignorant, or wilfully perverse, to mistake his meaning, as if the Doctor had
only talked of a multiplication of the inward Acts in number, according to the
outward Prayers, as the superstitious and ignorant do count their Devotions on
their Beads; and so from a greater number of Prayers, and outward and inward
Acts of Devotion, numerically distinguished, and multiplied, he had concluded a
multiplication in the Degrees of his Ardency, and an intension in his Zeal by a
Coacervation of homogeneous degrees, no more united in the same Subject then
discrete Quantities continuing still discrete are united in themselves. For now
having cited Suarez and Hurtado against this absurdity, he goes on most
triumphantly.

JEANES.
SIr, here I am very confident that you presumed very much on my ignorance,
otherwise you would never have gone about to have imposed upon me so poor and
sorry a sophisme as is in the equivocation of the word Greater, which is easily
discovered by a Fresh-man. For that you your self should be ignorant of such an
ordinary Homonymy, I am loath to harbor such dishonorable thoughts of your
abilities in Philosophy as to imagine.

. 10. Well, Sir, notwithstanding your Confidence, I doubt not but I have
evidenced that you are ignorant enough. And you are still so unhappy, as to
discover your weakness most, when you cry up your own skill and parts and
knowledge highest. For where, where is the Sophisme and Equivocation of the
word Greater? Does not every Fresh-man know that there is Quantitas virtutis,
as well as Quantitas molis? And do we not say of a Man ordinarily, that he is a
man of Great Virtues, or Knowledge, or Vices, as well as of great Bulk and
Stature? The Doctor thought, Sir, he had writ to a Scholar, one that could have
understood sense and reason, when it was urged. And without Sophisms and
Equivocations he most solidly and rationally concluded (as all men in the world
do) a greater measure of intension, a higher ardency in the inward Devotion of
our Savior from the length and continuance in the outward Devotion. He dreamed
not that any man should be so ignorant as to understand him otherwise, and to
think he spoke of a greatness of number and Quantity only, when he meant it of
a greatness of Quality, and a gradual increase in intensive Perfection. But by
this it appears what honorable thoughts you harbor, not only of the Doctors
abilities in Philosophy, but of his Ingenuity and Sincerity, and Integrity also
in Morality.

. 11. But, Sir, since I find you to be a man of so great parts, I am content to
sport an Argument with you. Suppose we then that the Doctor concludes a greater
Ardency in Christ's Zeal and Devotion from the multiplying of the several Acts
of Prayer, what absurdity will then follow? For does not the Scripture expressly
say that he prayed the same words thrice? and in order to this (as Jansenius
has rightly ordered it in his Catena, or Concordance) does not S. Luke add,
that being in an Agony he prayed (...) more ardently? Is not this greater
Ardency (...), i. e. Duest plicatio, iteratio vocis statim subiens priorem,
familiaris Tragicis In magnis affectibus ea utimur; significat enim
perpetuitatem repraesentationis. O Misis, Misis! Ah Corydon, Corydon! hoc ex
natura tra^tum est: etenim animalibus d^tus est motus ad fugiendum and a^
consequendum. Igitur quae unico motu, puta saltu, appetitum locum nequeunt
adipisci, cursu, qui est motus frequens, supplent. Jul. Scaliger Poet. l. 4. c.
29. Vide Quintilian. Institut. l. 9. c. 3. p. 425. l. Gerard. Vossi. Institut.
Orator. part. 2. l. 5. c. 3. et ejusd. Part. Orat. lib 4. c. 13.
rightly inferred from his repetition and multiplication of the same words and
Prayer thrice? For have you not heard of those Rhetorical Schemes, where the
same word or words are repeated? And are not these repetitions by the Masters
in that Art accounted as arguments of the vehemence or aggrandation of the
inward affections? When the 1 Kings* 18. 26.
Priests of Baal cried out from morning to noon, O Baal hear us, did they not
express their inward false zeal to their Idol, by repeating still the same
prayer? When the Matthew. 6. 7.
Gentil^s used Repetitions in their prayers, our Savior did not condemn those
repetitions, as if they could not be arguments and testimonies of their inward
zeal and Devotion, but because they expected to be heard for their very much
babbling. Continuance then in prayer, and repetitions of the same words, may be
arguments Nec prohibet longas Christus orationes, qui alibi perpetuas
imperavit, sicut and D. Paulus; neque loqui cum oramus, neque repetitionibus
uti, cum and ipse orando locutus sit, and ter eundem sermonem repetiverit
infra: sed prohibet eo animo multum loqui, ut hominibus been orare videamur (de
hoc enim agebat) and existimantes facilius Deum multa quam pauca auditurum
verba, ut statim exponit, Putant enim quod in multiloquio suo exaudiantur.
Maldonat. in loc. Vid. H. Grotium, alios in locum, praecipue Luc Brugens. and
Jansenium. Vid. Augustine. epist. 121. ad Probam viduam de orando Deo, cap. 8,
9, 10.
of a great Ardency in those that are truly zealous and religious, as appears
by the example of our Savior and S. Paul, and the whole world of Christians.

. 12. For first, as to continuance in prayer; did not our Blessed Vid Hookers
Eccles. Pol. l. 5:. 32.
Lord evidently demonstrate the vehemence of his intension and ardor of his
soul, when he continued Luke 6. 12:
whole nights together in prayer? When Nehemiah 8. 3.
Ezra continued reading the Law from morning till noon, and the people
patiently continued in their Attention, was it not an evident argument of a
high and advanced Zeal and Devotion in both? When Act. 20. 7.
S. Paul prayed and preached to the Disciples, and continued his speech till
midnight, he gave as evident a demonstration of a strong desire of their
instruction, as Eutychus, by his sleeping at the Apostles Sermon, did argue the
dullness of his zeal, and the want of attention. You know the Luke 18. 1, 2.
Parables of the importunate Widow, and the Luke 11. 5, etc.
Friend that would not be satisfied with denyals. They were spoken to this end,
to teach us that men ought always to pray, and not to faint. But then Effectus
exterior non pertinet ad charitatem, nisi in quantum ex affectu procedit in quo
primo est charitatisactus. Aquin. l. 3. Sent. d. 29. q. 1. art. 2. in Respons.
in corp. Totum opus externum nullius momenti est apud Deum, nisi quatenus fluit
and pendet ab interno actu debito and imperato, uti docet Apostolus 1 Cor. 13.
3. Davenant. de Just. Act. c. 42. p. 481.
Perseverance in prayer, and a multiplying those Acts, are therefore only
acceptable to God, because they are the fruits and indications for Matthew. 12.
33.
a good tree is known by it is fruit, says our Savior) of true fervor of
Spirit, and sincerity of the heart. The more we can patiently continue in this
exercise, the greater is the fire of holy Love; as the Iron the more it has of
fire in it, the longer it continues hot. Though the Apostle bids us to 1 Thessalonians.
5. 17.
pray without ceasing, and our Savior says to us, Luke 11. 9. Matt. 7. 7.
Ask and it shall be given, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you: yet it is not the copiousness of our tongues in prayer, nor
our continuance in our Prostrations, till we have made our knees hard as a
Camels are, as it is reported of the Sister of Greg. Nazianzen, as I take it,
or till we have worn our own shapes and effigies in the Pavement, as they say
S. Jerome did, but only the Suppono ex 1. 2. q. 20. and 21, proprium and
formale meritum esse in actu elicito a voluntate: actus vero externos per se
non addere meritum actui voluntatis, neque esse formaliter and intrinsece
meritorios, sed solum per extrinsecam denominationem ab actu meritorio
voluntatis, a quo imperantur, and extrinsece seu moraliter informantur, sicut
etiam ab illo denominantur liberi and studiofi. Suarez. tom 1. in 3. p. Thom.
disp. 39. sect. 2. p. 540. c. 8.

Vid. Luc. Brugens. in Matt. 6 8.


truth of our Affection, the sprightliness of our zeal, and the piety of our
minds, that God does accept of. One single sigh and ejaculation, one, Luc. 18.
13.

Nihil interest ad perfectionem and meritum, quam multa aut quam magna opera
externa faci^s, sed quanta fide and charitate interna feceris. Verbi causa, non
est in perfectiori statu aut magis meritorio qui sapius jejunaverit, qui plures
and longiores orationes Deo obtulerit, qui pauperibus plura largitus fuerit,
quique in caeteris operibus externis excelluerit; nam in hisce omnibus
Pharisaei vicorunt discipulos Christi: sed is in perfectiori statu reputatur,
qui praecellit interna fide, charitate, pietate, atque externa opera exercet
prout charitatis ac prudentiae lex dictaverit. Nam (ut loquitur Schola)
quorumcunque actus interiores sunt ejusdem rationis and intentionis, eorum
merita sunt aequalia. Davenant. de Justit. Actuali, c. 41. p. 476, 477.


Lord have mercy on me, from the mouth of an humble Publican, is more pleasing
to his ears then a prayer of eight and forty hours long (and such a one we
read of in Ecclesiastical story) that proceeds from Superstition and a vanity
of mind. And yet God accepts of the Fruits for the goodness sake of the Tree
from whence they spring. And even the multiplied Acts of Prayer are more
valuable in his sight, when they come from true zeal and integrity of Spirit,
and not from hypocritical pretenses and customary Profession. As our overquick
dispatch in so important a duty would give the world occasion to suspect we did
but little value that service, wherein so little time is bestowed: so
continuance in prayer, and the multiplying the Acts of it to a greater degree
of length (as also standing, kneeling, and prostration on the face) have been
all the world over approved of as marks of Devotion; and they are not only
justified by our Saviors practice, but God Almighty has declared his
acceptance of them, for the devotions sake from whence they spring, and where
they are not hypocritical and counterfeit. And hence it was that the Primitive
Christians called their Vide Tertul. l. de Orat. c. 14. p. 155. A ex edit
Rigalt. Confer l de Jejuniis, c. 1 page 701. C etc 2. p. 702. A. etc. 10. p.
708. A. D. etc. 13. p. 7 11.
Wednesdaies and Fridaies Fasts and Humiliations, Dies stationarii, and their
Devotions stationes, because not only they continued in them till * three in
the afternoon, but performed them constantly also Vide H Grotium in Annotat. ad
Matthew. 6. 5. verbo (...), p. 140* Confer quae vir doctissimus annotavit ad cap.
18. Luca, verse 11. (...), ut and quae habet ad cap. 3. Act. Apost. verse. 1.

And therefore the Judicious Hooker renders the place in Tertullians second
book ad uxorem, c. 4. p. 189. C. Si statio facienda est, Maritus de die
condicat ad Balneas, thus, If her presence be required at the time of Station,
or standing Prayer, he charge her at no time but that to be present with him
in his Baths. Hooker Ecclesias. Pol. l. 5.. 41. p. 264.


standing. Their giving no ease to the body in their public prayers, and their
perseverance and continuing in it, were fruits and effects and arguments of the
Primitive Devotion. And is it not usual with us upon public days of
Humiliation to have 3 or 4 Preachers, and as many to pray, for the service? And
are not we willing by these multiplied Acts of Devotion, and our whole days
continuance in them, to testify the deep sense of our humiliation, and the
sincerity of our Repentance, and the utmost height of our Devotion? We truly
guess at the strength and quickness of the Bow, and the vigor of the Arm that
draws it, by the further flight of the Arrow.

. 13. But then, as in those who are truly pious, the multiplying of the Acts of
Prayer, and a longer continuance in the performing that duty, does argue a
greater Ardency of Devotion; so 2ly, the frequent repetition of the same words
does much more express the inward fervor of the Spirit. As the multiplying of
Circles in a Pond or River, or the continued revolutions in a Wheel or Top, do
argue the more violent descent of the Stone into the water, and the strenger
violence and force impressed into the Wheel or Top. And therefore we read that
our Savior in his bloody Agony did not only pray thrice, and so prolixius, but
also the same words, and therefore in respect of them both intensius also. When
Beggars would express their utmost earnestness, and the violence of their
desires of a relief of their wants, they redouble their Petitions in the same
language; and it had not been taken up for a Custom among the men of that
trade, if there had not been an argument and evidence of truth it it all the
world over. When blind Bartimaeus and his fellow-begger understood that Jesus
passed by, they lift up their voices and cried, still Mark 10. 46. Luc. 18. 35.
Matthew: 20. 30. Quo magis turba obstrepebat, tanto vehementius caecus clamabat,
eadem iterans sancta improbitate, declarans hac ratione ardens desiderium, and
invictum fidei robur, etc. Jansen. Concord. Evangel. cap. 105. p. 741. col. 2.
C. D. Vide Luc. Brugens. in Matt. c. 20. ver. 1. 2. and H. Grot. ibid.
redoubling the same words, Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on us. And
when the Company reproved this practice of the Beggar in them, the Text says,
they cried the more earnestly, saying the same words. And our Savior, that as
well knew the fervor of the heart as the noise and language of the tongue, did
rightly measure the inward Devotion of the Spirit by their outcries and
redoubling of their Prayers. Even he himself, to express his inward grief, and
earnest longings after the comfortable influence of the Godhead now restrained,
cries out upon the Cross, My God, my Matt. 27. 46.
God, why have thou forsaken me?

. 14. As then the Doctor did truly and most demonstratively conclude and argue
an increase of the inward fervor and ardency of our Saviors Devotion, from
the multiplying of the exterior Acts of Prayer, and so from a greater length in
them did infer, by way of Proportion, a greater intension in the inward Acts of
his Love and Zeal and Devotion: So shall I also as firmly and as evidently
conclude this aggrandation, and more then ordinary intenseness, in the inward
Acts of his Devotion, by his more then ordinary use and repetition and
redoubling of the same Prayer.

. 15. Our Refuter then did either ignorantly or wilfully mistake the Doctors
meaning. For he never took a number for a single Quality, nor argued the
gradual increase of Christ's ardency from the multiplying of so many several
Acts of Prayer of the same gradual perfection, all numerically distinct. For
though Children and Fools mistake a Posy for a single flower, yet Wise men
know it is a bundle. And so I proceed to the next Section, wherein the Doctor
further evidences his Assertion, upon that supposal that the vulgar reading of
place were to be approved, as our Refuter would have it.

SECTION 15.
The pertinency of the Doctors Argument, and impertinence of the Refuters
Charge. The Doctors Argument a Posteriori from the necessary relation between
the work and the reward. Not understood by the Refuter. The outward work more
valuable in Gods sight, for the inward Fervor and Devotion. The Refuters
Petitio principii. Works in a Physical sense what, and what in a Moral. The
Refuters discourse of the infinite value of Christ's merit arising from the
dignity of his person. Nothing to the purpose. The dignity of a moral Action,
according to the Physical Entity of the Act, or according to the dignity of the
Person performing it. The Actions of Christ in regard of his Person infinite in
value. Not so in regard of their substantial Moral goodness. Proved: and
acknowledged by our Refuter's own Suarez. Consequently in this regard they
might exceed one another in Moral Perfection. The Doctors Argument that it was
so in Christ. The appositeness of the Proof. The Scriptures say the same.

Doctor HAMMOND.
. 34. THis is clear, and I need not add what else I might, the very
multiplication of more Acts of any Virtue supposing it equally sincere in the
Habit (and such is the length of Prayer when it is in Christ) is more valuable
in the sight of God, and that argues it more excellent then the smaller number
of those Acts would be, and proportionably more abundantly rewarded by him who
rewards every man, not only according to the sincerity of his heart, but also
secundum opera, according to the multiplied Acts or works, the more abundant
labor proceeding from this sincerity. And so that will suffice for his first
answer.

. 1. To this our Refuter returns;

JEANES.
FIrst, this is an utter Impertinency unto that which is in debate between us,
etc.

. 2. Grande crimen, Caie Caesar, si probetur! But what if it appear in the
issue most evidently to prove the Doctors Position? will not then our Refuter
betray as great Ignorance as Impertinence in this Rejoinder? And now to show
the Appositeness of the Proof, I must tell him what either he knows not, or
will not observe, That the Doctor again argues a posteriori, from the Effect to
the Cause, and the necessary relation between the work and the reward. His
argument is founded upon a maxim of distributive Justice, not expressed, but
supposed and intimated, Vide Suarez. 3. p. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 39. sect. 1. p.
537. col. 1.
and it is this; Where the reward does proceed of debt, as in Christ certainly
it did, and is properly wages, there must be a proportionable increase of the
reward and the work. And therefore 1 Timothy 5. 18.
since the labourer is worthy of his hire, and Genesis 18. 25.
God the Judge of all the world must needs do right; we may most evidently and
demonstratively prove the gradual increase in the perfection of any Act of
virtue, from a proportionable increase in the reward that he gives; because, as
the Scripture testifies, he rewards every man not only according to the
sincerity of his Matthew. 16. 27. 2 Cor. 5 10.
heart, but also secundum opera, according to the multiplied Acts or works, the
more abundant labor, as the Doctor says truly, proceeding from this
sincerity. For it is this inward heart-devotion that God alone regards; this,
this is the thing that gives life and vigor to the outward work, and makes it
acceptable in Gods sight: and if this go not always with the outward Act or
work, God looks upon it as the sacrificing and cutting off the neck of a dog,
and pouring the blood of a man upon his Altar. But then because the outward
works are the fruits and effects of the inward Devotion, and ordinarily as
these are more noble, so also is the Love and sincerity more strongly
increased, God, for the inward Fervours sake, does reward men secundum opera,
according to the multiplied Acts or outward works.

. 3. Well then, if the very multiplication of more outward Acts and works (for
such only the Doctor means) of any virtue be more valuable in the sight of God
(as without doubt they are) who rewards every man according to his works, and
this because the more abundant labor in the outward Act proceeds from the
greater fervor and intenseness of the inward Act, which alone gives life to
it, it will evidently follow, that the length of Prayer (the outward Oraizon he
means) in Christ is more valuable in the sight of God (as the work is in it
self considered, and without relation to the Person that does it; for of the
work in it is own nature considered the Doctor speaks, as appears by the whole
current of his discourse) and that must needs argue it more excellent (in
regard of the intensive Perfection of the inward Act, which is that alone which
God values) then the smaller number of those Acts would be. And this as it
clearly proves the Doctors Assertion, so it was the whole he aimed at in this
argument.

. 4. But our Refuter will give us his reason why he does charge it with
impertinency.

JEANES.
FOr suppose that the very multiplication of more inward Acts of any virtue in
Christ is more valuable in the sight of God, and so more excellent then the
smaller number of those Acts would be; yet this supposition will never bring
you to this conclusion, That one inward Act of Christ's love of God may be more
intense then another: and my reason is, because in all these inward Acts of
Christ's love of God (and we may say the same of the inward Acts of other
virtues and graces) there may be no gradual dissimilitude.

. 5. But why, I pray Sir, may or must there be no gradual difference of the
inward Acts of Christ's love of God, or holy Charity, and other inward Acts of
other virtues and graces? Good Sir, give us a proof of this. Is it therefore an
irrefragable demonstration, because you usher it in so gravely with a Because,
and this is my reason? But, good Sir, know you not that this is still Petitio
principii, and the Controversy between you and the Doctor? And do you not
prove still idem per idem, thus, The inward Acts of Christ's Love are not
gradually different, or, which is all one, they are gradually the same; my
reason is, because in them there may be no gradual dissimilitude? If this be
not (...), I know not what your great Master Aristotle means.

. 6. How the Doctors supposition has inferred his Conclusion has already
appeared, and the folly also of what you have urged against it. But it is no
wonder that you argue so absurdly, when you understand not the Discourse you
undertake to refute. For, Sir, the Doctor does not argue from the
multiplication of the inward Acts, as you suppose him, but from the
multiplication of the outward Acts or works, and from the greater reward that
attends them, he concludes the more noble and intensive Perfection of the
inward Act from whence they flow; as the more abundance of fruit argues the
rich vigorousness and plenty of the vital sap of the Tree, and the less argues
either the unseasonableness of the year, or the decay of the Stock. For you
your self have told us that works signify those that are outward; how
properly, has already been showed in the sense you spoke of it. The truth is,
that works in a Physical consideration never signify the Elicite Acts of the
Will, but the issues and Effects of them, whether inward or outward; whether
immanent, as in a Syllogism purely mental, or trunsient, as in the imperate
Acts of the Will: though certain it is, as we have showed, that the inward and
outward Act both concur to the essence and constitution of a Moral work or
Action.

. 7. But he goes on as gravely as if his words were all Oracles.

JEANES.
A Great part of the Schoolmen will tell you, that the moral virtue of one
single Act of any virtue in Christ was infinite, and in the multiplication of
more Acts there is but an infinite value: now one infinite cannot be greater
then another infinite in the same kind wherein it is infinite; and hereupon
they conclude that the multiplication of Acts makes nothing in Christ unto an
intensive addition of value. The value of one Act is intensively as great as
that of more Acts. The first Act of Christ (says Albertinus) habet totam
latitudinem intensivam valoris moralis, etsi non adaequet totam latitudinem
extensivam, Corol. tom. 1. 150. n. 61. And of this you have a reason p. 145.
this Act is a persona divina, tanquam a forma intrinseca; quae in trinsece
denominatur operans ab ipsa operatione quae est in humana natura, and ut sic
est illimitabilis a conditionibus Actus. Unto Albertinus I shall subjoin
Suarez, who speaks to the same purpose in 3am part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 4.
sect. 4. page 94. Plura opera Christi sunt quidem extensive pluramerita;
intensive tamen non est plus valoris in multis quam in uno: ut, si essent
plures Calores infinite intensi, essent quidem plures, non tamen efficerent
unum intensiorem. Et pari ratione, si in uno opere Christi, quod successive per
parts fiebat, parts cum toto comparemus, intensive tantus valor erat in
qualibet part sicut in toto opere, and in uno momento sicut in longo tempore,
quia forma, a qua erat valor, tota erat in toto, and tota in singulis partibus.

. 8. But what if all this Discourse do now prove to be nothing at all to the
purpose, and that Suarez and Albertinus are brought in to tell the Doctor that
which he knew better then our Refuter? For if he had so pleased he might have
found this Doctrine, of the infinite value of Christ's Merits, because they
were the merits of an infinite person, even in the Practical Doctor Hammonds
Pract. Catechism, l. 1. sect. 1. p. 5. sect. 2. p. 11. 12. and 19. 20, 24, 25,
l. 5. sect. 2. p. 281.
Catechism. For how else should the Doctor ground that Doctrine, of Christ's
tasting death for every man, which is charged upon him as Arminianism, when yet
it is the very words of the (...). Heb. 2. 9.
Scripture, and the Churches Catechism, that was published before Arminius was
born? His death and sufferings being but finite, must receive a proportionable
value to a world of sinners only from the dignity of his Person, as the Doctor
in his Writings has declared, before you ever put him to School to Albertinus
and Suarez.

. 9. And therefore that I may show that this whole Discourse of the Refuter is
besides the purpose, it will be necessary to consider, that the Dignity of a
Moral Action may either be considered according to the substance of the Act,
and the gradual perfection of it, according to the Physical Entity and real
goodness in it, or according to the moral value that accrews unto it from the
dignity and worth of the person that performs it. The same Action may in the
same height, and degree, and perfection of Real goodness be performed by a
private Subject which is performed by a Prince in State, or a Judge upon the
Bench; and yet it has nothing of that legal and civil value as the other has,
because it is the Action of a Subject.

. 10. If therefore the Acts of Christ be considered according to the moral
value that arises from the Person that performs them, the merit of them is
infinite, because they are the Acts of a Divine Person. Actiones enim (says
Suarez excellently) per se sunt suppositorum: and ideo substantial is dignit as
and Suarez. in 3. p. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 4. sect. 4. p. 43. col. 1. A. B. D.
perfectio ipsius Personae semper per se confert ad valorem and dignitatem
ipsius operis, quia in suo genere semper influit in illud. And therefore the
Action performed by such a Person is called Theandrica, the Action of God-man.
And hence is it, that one Action of Christ in this respect cannot be of greater
value then another, but all of necessity must be equal, because the value of
every one of them is infinite; and therefore the multiplying of their number
may make them extensively more, yet intensively there can be no more of value
and merit in many then in one, because that which is infinite in value can in
that respect be but one, and no more, and of the same equal perfection still,
because it can be but infinite.

. 11. But then, if we shall consider these Acts of Christ that flowed from the
Habit of Divine Grace in him according to the proper and intrinsic goodness
that really is in them, they may be different in themselves, and one may be
more perfect in respect of gradual intension then another. And therefore
Suarez. in 3. p. Thom. disp. 4. sect. 4. p 45. col. 1. E. F. tom. 1.
Suarez acknowledges even in that very Section you quote, valorem hunc qu^m
habet actus in ordine ad meritum esse quid distinctum a reali bonitate quae est
differentia ipsius actus prout constituitur in esse virtutis, vel illi aliquo
modo intrinsece inhaeret -- hic ergo valor non dicit physicam entitatem
inhaerentem actui, sed supponit illam, and aliquas etiam denominationes
extrinsec as, ut libertatem, and habitudinem ad talem personam, and consistit
in morali quadam ratione and aestimatione ipsius actus: hac igitur ratione
quamvis omnes Actus Christi in se fuerint finiti in entitate, atque adeo in
bonitate morali intrinsece inhaerente, nihilominus potuerunt esse infiniti
valoris moralis ex personae dignitate provenientis. He had before determined,
Ad hunc moralem effectum Suarez in 3. p. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 4. sect. 4. p. 44.
D. E. F.
non oportere fingere proprium influxum physicum ipsius Personae per se ipsam
in actiones humanitatis distinctum ab illo quem habet per ipsam humanitatem,
ita ut ipsa divina personalitas sit aliquo modo principium aut ratio operandi
tales actiones. Hoc enim nec Philosophicum est; quia licet actiones sunt
suppositorum, tamen personalit as neque est ratio agendi, neque formale
principium actionum: neque Theologicum; quia personalit as divina, ut sic, non
est operativa, seu ratio operandi ipsi Personae, sed haec est Divinitas per
intellectum vel voluntatem; tum etiam quia illa personalitas supplet in
humanitate Christi munus personalitatis propriae, and ideo physice non aliter
ad actus concurrit quam concurreret propria. Concurrit ergo terminando and
sustentando ipsam naturam, and ex hoc fit ut non natura, sed ipsa persona
ineffabiliter composita, sit quae principaliter operatur: Et hoc satis est ut
per seipsam sanctificet tam ipsam naturam quam actus, and conferat illis
valorem and dignitatem. Hinc -- dicitur non esse parem rationem de limitatione
actus in esse entis, and in valor morali: quia actus habet proxime totam
entitatem suam physicam a principio agendi, and in principio agendi, si
immanens sit; valor autem moralis immediate sumitur ab ipsa persona operante,
quatenus moraliter informat ipsos actus, and denominat illos divinos.

. 12. And therefore the actions of the humane Nature, though performed by a
Divine person, being in their own Physical entity finite, and consequently so
also in respect of that moral goodness that is intrinsecally inhaerent in them,
nothing hinders but that one in this respect may be better and more intensely
perfect then another, as well as one grief and torment which he suffered was
greater then another. And therefore the same Suarez, even in that very Page and
Column, and in the. immediately preceding that passage that our Refuter has
quoted, Suarez. in 3 m p. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 4. sect. 4. p. apud me 46. col.
1. A. B.
expressly says to this purpose: Primum omnium fatendum esse opera Christi
fuisse inaequalia in propria bonitate intrinseca and essentiali, vel realiter
inhaerente ipsi actui: quia, ut dictum est, tota haec bonit as erat sinita,
poterat ergo esse major and minor, and aliunde unum opus Christi erat melioris
Objecti quam aliud, and unum intensius alio, and sic de aliis circumstantiis,
ergo erant vel poterant esse inaequalia in hac bonitate. And will not every man
think that our Refuter was a man of great Judgment and Parts, and fit to quote
Suarez against Doctor Hammond? But I rather think he was misguided by some
Notes, and that he never consulted the Authors he quotes, but took them upon
trust: otherwise methinks it is impossible he should be so strangely deceived.

. 13. Well then, it being so clear and evident in it self, and so acknowledged
by our Refuters own Suarez, (for Albertinus I have not by me) that though every
Act of Christ in respect of the Person that performed it was of infinite, and
so of an equal intensive value, yet in respect of the real entity and substance
of the Act and the Moral goodness inhering in it it was sinite, as the Humane
nature it self wherein it was performed, nothing hinders but they, being
finite, might exceed one another in gradual perfection and intenseness, and in
that moral goodness that was intrinsecally inherent in them.

. 14. Seeing then that nothing ab intrinseco hinders but that this might be so,
the Doctor now, like a rational man and a Scholar, here brings his Medium to
prove that de facto it was so.

. 15. And as the subject matter of the present discourse was only the moral
goodness and different gradual perfection in the Acts of this habitual Grace,
so he makes use of such Medium's that properly concern that Subject. The Moral
value arising from the Dignity of the Person that performed it, would make
nothing to the purpose. And therefore, though he knew it as well as our
Refuter, yet being loath, contrary to the laws of Art and Method, transire a
Genere ad Genus, he would take no notice of it, but keep close to the present
argument.

. 16. And proved his assertion he has by a very clear and apposite medium, his
Argument rightly proceeding from the Reward to the Work.

For though all the Actions of Christ, as weighed in the scale of Merit, at the
great Tribunal were valued (actually valued I say) according to the dignity of
the Person, and not the finite goodness really inherent in the Acts; yet
nothing hinders but even the gradual perfection in the Acts themselves, and
their multiplied numbers and works, as they may and were by God considered in
themselves, so, a^ thus in and by themselves considered, they may be more or
less valuable, and so might be capable of a greater reward, though de facto
they were not so valued, but according to the dignity of the Person. And
therefore nothing hinders but from this different valuableness of the goodness
of the outward Acts, the sincerity and intenseness of the inward Acts might be
collected. For most plain it is, that the Scriptures tell us that God rewards
every man according to his work. And therefore if God de facto thus proceed in
the rewarding of the Acts of all other men, the Acts and operations of the
virtues of Christ, as considered according to their own real and intrinsic
goodness, might be valuable also in his sight. For why that Moral goodness
intrinsecally inherent in the Act, and a qua, as Suarez tells us, Actus dicitur
bonus moraliter and actus virtutis, should not in the Actions of Christ be
valuable in Gods sight, I see no reason, since it is so in respect of all other
men besides. And this was that which the Doctor alone aimed at. For this is all
that he says, The very multiplication of more Acts of any virtue, supposing it
equally sincere in the Habit (and such is the length of Prayer when it is in
Christ) is more valuable in the sight of God, and that argues it more excellent
then the smaller number of those Acts would be.

. 17. And if I be not very much deceived, the Scripture speaks very agreeably
to this purpose. For it tells us expressly that, Romans 5. 8.
God commends his love toward us, in that whilst we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us. And is it not the commendation of Christ's Love, that he Gal. 2.
20.
loved us, and gave himself for us? And if, as our Savior himself testifies,
Joh. 15. 13. Vide Bernard. in Sermon. Feriae 4. hebdomadae ^ tae. Joh. 10. 15.
17. Addo quarto, si considerentur opera Christi ut erant sub divina
ordinatione, and sub relatione illius operantis, plus meruisse vel satisfecisse
toto vitae suae tempore quam singulis operibus, and aliquid effecisse seu
obtinuisse uno tempore and non alio, etc. -- Ex hoc enim intelligitur quinto,
quamobrem redemptio nostra passioni and morti Christi specialiter tribuatur,
cum non per solam illam, sed per omnia opera quae in vita mortali Christus
operatus est, nobis meruerit, and pro nobis satisfecerit. Ratio est, etc. Vide
ampl. Suarez. in tert. part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 1. sect. 4. p. 50. col. 1. F.
and col.... A. B. C. and immediately after it follow the words cited by the
Refuter against the Doctor.
that greater love has no man then to lay down his life for his friend, then it
must be the most transcendent Act of love in Christ to die for his enemies. And
that so it was valuable and accounted in Gods sight, seems evident to me from
that saying of our Savior, who tells us that therefore does his Father love
him, because he laid down his life for the sheep.

. 18. But the Doctor seems not much to insist upon this argument (for in the
Introduction to it he says, I need not add what else I might) and therefore I
shall forbear the further prosecution of it, and go on to the next Section.

SECT. 16.
The second part of the Refuters second answer. The distinct Confession of all
the Doctor pretends to. The English translation of (...) (more earnestly)
justified. The Refuter's Nonsense. What Ardency in Christ it was that was
heightened Luke 22. 43. Comprehensor, Viator what. In what state, whether of
Comprehensor or Viator, Christ was in a Capacity to pray, as that signifies
either Petition, Deprecation, or Thanksgiving: and this whether only for
others, or also for himself. Of Prayer, and the several kinds. Whether though
Christ were in a capacity thus to pray, yet being God, that was able of himself
to accomplish whatsoever he might desire as Man, it was expedient for him to do
so: and whether God had so determined. What things Christ might and did pray
for, both for himself and others. Mr. Hooker commended. Whether Christ did in
truth and reality, or only in show, pray for a removal of that Cup which he
came on purpose to drink. Whether these Prayers and Desires were not repugnant
to Gods Decree, and the end of his coming into the world, and his own
peremptory resolution to drink it. How those desires for a removal of this Cup
might be advanced, notwithstanding his readiness and resolution to drink it.
How Christ's Ardency in Prayer for a removal of this Cup might be increased
above what it either was, or there was occasion for, at other times. Of the
greatness of his Agony and bloody sweat. How his Zeal in Prayer at this time
might be advanced, without derogation from the fullness of his habitual Grace,
the impeccability of his Soul, and the uninterrupted happiness of it, and
perfect Love as he was Comprehensor. Strictures on the former part of the
Refuters second Answer.

Doctor HAMMOND.
. 35. But, then, 2ly, says he, suppose we stick unto our own translation; yet
the place may fairly be so interpreted, as that it may no ways advantage the
purpose of the Doctor: for (...) more earnestly, may be considered in reference
either to the Object unto whom he prayed, God, or the matter against which he
prayed, the evils with which he conflicted in his agony.

First then, he did not in his Agony pray more earnestly then at other times,
if we consider his Prayer in reference unto the Object unto whom it was, God.
The religion and inward worship of his Prayer was for Degrees always alike
equal. His trust and dependence upon God, love of zeal and devotion toward
God, from which all his Prayers flowed, were not at one time more intense then
at another.

But now 2ly, he prayed more earnestly in his Agony then at other times, in
regard of the matter against which he prayed, the evils which he encountered
with, which if they were not greater then those that he deprecated in the
former prayer, v. 42. yet at least they made a greater impression upon his
humane nature, for they put him into a bloody sweat. Being in an Agony he
prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were drops of blood falling down
to the ground.

. 36. These are the words of his second answer, and they are in the second
part, the very distinct confession of all that I pretend in this matter (and
therefore I need not make reflections on the first part of them:) for
whatsoever or how great soever the occasion of the increase of his intension
was (which I am willing to believe proportionable to the degree of the
intension, a very weighty occasion that thus inflamed his Ardency) yet still
it is confessed; that on this occasion he now prayed more earnestly then at other
times, that which now approached made a greater impression on his humane
nature; which what is it but a proof of the point by me asserted, that Christ
himself was more ardent in one Act of prayer (this in his Agony) then in
another?

. 37. As for the greatness of the occasion, so profestly great as to cast him
into that prodigious sweat, falling (...), as it were drops of blood, that may
testify, but it cannot prejudge the ardency which was occasioned thereby.

. 38. 'Twas not in Christ (he will easily suppose with me) as it is often
discernable in many of us, that those which really have no sincerity of love or
zeal to God, can yet, like the Mariners in the Tempest, by some pressing fear
or danger be awaked to, but formal and, be they never so loud, hypocritically
zealous prayers.

. 39. The Ardency in Christ was sincere ardency, accompanied with acts of love
and trust of the same temper, and the heightning it (...), was an addition of
Degrees to that Act of Ardency, and so of prayer, and proportionably of love
and trust in God, above either what there was, or what there was occasion for
at other times.

. 1. To this our Refuter does reply very much, and yet not a word to the
purpose: which that I may clearly demonstrate, I shall follow him step by step.

JEANES.
1. FIrst, you pretend in Sect. 21. of this your Reply, that the inward acts of
Christ's love of God were more intense at one time then another. Now this is
not contained expressly, nor can it by any Logic be inferred from the words of
the second part of my second answer, that he prayed more earnestly in his Agony
then at other times, in regard of the matter against which he prayed, etc. and
therefore this second part of my second answer is not the very distinct
confession of all that you pretend in this matter; and therefore
notwithstanding them, you must make reflections on the first part of my answer,
or else you will never reply thereunto.

. 2. To this I answer, that what our Refuter says the Doctor pretends in his
21th. Section is an undeniable Truth, and not only the Doctor, but I also after
him have most clearly demonstrated, that the Inward Acts of Christ's Love of
God, or the all-full and perfect Habit of Divine Charity, were more intense at
one time then at another; and then further I have proved, that of necessity
they must be so; and this I have further confirmed by evident clear testimonies
from some of the prime Schoolmen, ancient and modern. And if the Doctor never
pretended to no more then this in any part of his writings, then I must tell
you, Sir, that if this Proposition also may be Logically inferred from these
words of your second Answer, although it be not there expressed, then the
Doctor most rationally asserted that this second part of your second answer was
the very distinct confession of all that he pretended in that matter, and
therefore he neither then had, nor shall hereafter need to make any reflections
on the first part of your answer, because his reply is very solid and
sufficient without it. And yet, Sir, by the way, give me leave to tell you,
that I may, to gratify you, make some reflections on it before you and I part.

. 3. And now that I may clearly prove that this assertion of the Doctors is
most rationally and logically collected from the words of the second part of
your second answer, it will be necessary that I first prove and justify the
truth of our Translation, from whence the Doctor first collected that truth
which has since been questioned by you. The words are Luke 22. 43. And being in
an Agony (...), he prayed more earnestly. So our Translators.

. 4. It is true (and the Doctor has granted it) that (...) does primarily
signify extension and length, and therefore the Vulgar and Erasmus do here,
according to the original signification, render it prolixius orabat. But then
it is as true, that by a Trope (...) does also signify ardency and fervor:
and in this sense it is twice used in Saint Peter; (...), 1 Pet. 4. 8. And
above all things have servent Charity among your selves; so again 1 Pet. 1. 22
(...), see that ye love one another with a pure heart servently, and
accordingly the Vulgar also reads it there, ex cord invicem diligite
attentius. And Beza in both places intensam and intense. The word then being in
Scripture indifferently used to signify fervor and intens ness, as well as
length and extension, and so equally serving both Translations, we must by
other arguments then what the Grammatical notion of the word affords, enquire
the meaning of the word (...) in this place.

. 5. The Evangelist was now describing the greatness of our Saviors present
Agony, and he does it, as Quarto, amplificatur anxietas illa ex effectis
^^tbus, Corroboratione per Angelum, v. 43 Precationis intensione, v. 44 and
Sudore sanguineo.
Piscator well observes, by three most remarkable instances. So great it was
that, first, an Angel was sent to comfort him; and secondly, so great it was,
that he prayed more earnestly then formerly; and 3ly, it cast him into that
strange and prodigious sweat, falling as it were drops of blood through all his
clothes to the very ground. He but a little before had made use of a far
longer prayer Joh. 17.
for his Disciples and the Church then now he did, and he had also continued
far longer at his Devotions then now: for the same Saint Luke before Luke 6.
12.
tells us, that he spent whole nights in Prayer. But as he never had the like
horror and anxiety and dread, so he never prayed so earnestly. The greatness
of the occasion did now heighten and advance his ardency and vehemence of
Spirit. And therefore the Apostle Heb. 5. 7. takes notice of this more then
ordinary fervor, who in the days of his flesh (says he, when the greatness
of his Agony, and sufferings, and terrors, did as well testify the frailty as
the truth of his humane nature) when he had offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard in that he feared, or for his Piety, the greatness
and the Ardor of it, as some; or delivered from that he so greatly feared, as
others. Howsoever it be understood in this part, yet certain it is, this strong
crying and tears can refer to no other then this that he made in the garden,
when he cried out, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. For we
read but of 2. prayers or 3. at most that he made upon the Cross: the first was
for his Enemies, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do; and 2ly
when he was now upon giving up the Ghost, Father, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit; which though he powered crying with a loud voice, yet the scene of his
bloody bitter torments and sufferings being now ended, and the Consummatum est
already pronounced, it was an argument of his voluntary yielding up the Ghost,
not at all of his fear and dread. And then thirdly, as for his Deus meus, ut
quid dereliquisti me? vox est nec ignorantiae, nec diffidentiae, nec querelae,
sed admirationis tantum, quae aliis investigandae causae ardorem and
diligentiam acuit. Hug. de Sacrament. l. 2. part. 1. c. 10. as I find it cited
by Hooker.
crying out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? it was rather an
expostulation, and a prayer to be delivered and supported and comforted in the
midst of his afflictions, then to be freed and delivered from them; if it were
not also, as some learned men think, a Memento to the Jews, to take notice
that he was that Messiah, that Person whom David had foretold of in that Psalm,
the beginning whereof he now repeated, if he said it not throughout, as some
very learned men conjecture. If they would but call to mind that Psalm of David
that began with, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and well consider
it, they might now see the Prophecy so exactly fulfilled in every minute
circumstance, as if the Penman had rather been an Historian then a Prophet,
and rather related what he now had seen done, then foretold it as future. Add
to this, that Saint Matthew and Saint Mark have both left upon record the very
Prayer verbatim that our Savior used. And that is so short, that it makes but
one verse; and this Prayer he used twice, if not thrice; for again he went
away, says Saint Mark, and prayed and spoke the same words. And therefore
Jansenius, to preserve the Reputation Mark 14. 39. Lucas trinam Christi
orationem, quasi uunam, eo quod idem semper petebatur, complexus est; unde
dicit eum factum in Agonia prolixius orasse. Prolixius enim orasse dicens, tres
illas orandi vices, quae sigillatim alii duo Evangelistae prosecuti sunt,
complexus est, etc. quod ergo Lucas dicit Dominum factum in agonia prolixius
orasse; Mattheus and Marcus sua narratione expressius extulerunt, prolixius
enim orasse docent, quia ter eum orasse testantur. Jansen. Concord. c. 137. p.
990. col. 1. 2.

(...)] Solennis numerus itaerandarum precum quoties quid majus acciderat; unde
Paulus, 2 Cor. 12. 8 (...). H. Grot. Annot. in Matthew. 26. v. 44. p. 482.


of the Vulgar Translation, when he found it on record that our Saviors prayer
was so short, referres this prolixius of the Vulgar to his thrice saying the
same Prayer; as if he had prayed longer then ordinary, because now he prayed
oftener. But then the lengthning of his prayer, in this sense, is so far from
prejudging, that it rather argues and concludes the greater vehemence and
fervency in his Prayer; since continuance in Prayer, and repetition of the same
words, is an evident fruit and certain Argument of the greater ardor and
vehemence of affection, as has already been declared. Add to this (what the
most excellent Grotius has observed upon the place) that Augescente dolor
intendebat vim precationis, gestu quoque id ipsum exprimens; nam ante genua
flexerat, nunc toto corpore in terram procumbit, ut ex Matthaeo and Marco
diximus: eo autem situ corporis orare viri sancti solebant in extrema
necessitate. Quare errant qui hic confundunt (...), i. e. (...), and (...), aut
(...), i. e. (...), hoc enim est (...). H. Grot. in loc.
the very posture he now made use of does argue a more then ordinary vehemence
and zeal and intenseness. For before he prayed kneeling, but now he falls
prostrate and flat upon his face; which as it is an argument of the most deep
and profound humiliation, so it is an effect and symptom of the most vehement
Ardour and fervency in Prayer. And therefore says Grotius on the place,
Augescente dolor intendebat vim precationis, gestu quoque id ipsum exprimens.
And the accurate Beza in loc.
Beza, though the Vulgar and Erasmus read prolixius, says, by way of
correction of this reading, Ego vero malo ad ipsam orationis qualitatem refer
tum hoc loco, tum alibi: and consequently in his Version he renders it
intensius orabat. With him agrees Piscator, and he gives his reason, as we have
seen; and accordingly the French, the Dutch, the Spanish, the Italian do all
render it as they do. And thus we have both Reason, and the consent of the most
eminent modern Translations, and three of the best literal Expositors, all
concurring with our Translation to the justifying of Doctor Hammond. And
therefore if it be true, as without doubt it is, that our Savior was now more
ardent in Prayer then formerly, I doubt not but with as great evidence and
clearness to infer from it the Doctors assertion of a greater intenseness in
this Act of Charity then at other times. For if Ardency in Prayer be an high
Act of Piety and Devotion (as without doubt it is, since the Apostle charges us
to be fervent in Jam. 5. 16. Ephesians. 6. 18. Colos. 4. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 7.
prayer,) and that be an Act of Divine Charity and holy Love; then it will
evidently follow (and our Refuter must not deny it) that if this Ardency of our
Savior was, in this his Agony, so heightened and inflamed, that now he prayed
more earnestly (then formerly without doubt, for the Comparative imports more
degrees then the Positive with which it is compared) then this inward Act of
Christ's Love and holy Charity at least was more intense at one time, then
another: and consequently, if our Refuter grant the one (as plainly he does in
the words of his second Part of his second answer,) he must of necessity grant
the other, as the Doctor had inferred; quod erat demonstrandum.

. 6. But he thinks he has sufficiently prevented this sequel by that which he
has added in this Reply, as also he had done in the words of the second part of
his second answer. For he says

JEANES.
2. THat the Ardency of Christ was a sincere ardency is not doubted of: all the
question is, what ardency it was in Christ that was heightened.

. 7. Sir, you whose reserches are so curious, that you can find knots in
Bul-rushes, and write nothing but Quodlibets, may question any thing: you may
doubt whether it be day when the Sun is in its Zenith; you may make the world
believe Doctor Hammond understands not the import of his own mother tongue. But
they who will not be wilfully blind, and complain for want of light in the
midst of the Sunshine, may with half an eye see what Ardency it was in Christ
that was heightened. For, says not the Evangelist expressly, that being in an
Agony (...), he prayed the more earnestly? If in Grammatical construction the
word (...) can agree to nothing but (...), and being an Adverb of comparison
denoting more Degrees of intenseness, and agreeing with a verb Active of
Prayer, of necessity it must denote that the Ardency which was now in this
Agony heightened, was an Ardency in the Act of Prayer, and being resolved into a
Logical Proposition, it is only this, That Vide Hookers Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 48.
p. 279 toward the end.
the Ardency of the inward Act of Christ's Prayer and Devotion was now more
gradually intense then before.

. 8. But now since he is so Eagle-eyed, that without the help of Scheiner's
Tubus Opticus he can discover spots in the Sun, no wonder it is that he goes on
thus profoundly.

JEANES.
-- There was, as I plainly intimated in my Answer, a two fold Ardency in
Christ's prayer, one regarding God, unto whom he prayed, and this was seated in
the Acts of Love and trust, tanquam modus in re modificata; another respected
the matter against which he prayed, and the res modificata of this ardency was
the acts of fear of and grief for those evils with which he encountered.

. 10. You have said, Sir, and you might have replied with as much p^mp and
astonishment to your vulgar reader, that this Ardency might have been taken
either Archipodialiter or Reflexive, and as much to the purpose you had spoken,
and as well it would have been understood.

. 11. For to dispell the Clouds that hang about your discourse, and to draw the
Curtain from before your mysterious Ompha, that makes your ignorant Votaries to
admire it with such Religion and reverence; in plain English it is only this.
There was a twofold Ardency or intension in the inward Acts of Christ's Prayer:
the one was an intension or gradual heightning of the inward Acts of Christ's
Love and Trust in God, to whom he prayed; the other was an intension or gradual
advancement of the inward Acts of Fear and Grief, for the Evils with which he
encountered. And now that I may not seem to wrong you, I shall demonstrate that
this was your meaning, and no other, if you your self did understand what you
meant when you set pen to paper.

. 12. To what can you understand by the Ardency of Christ regarding God, unto
whom he prayed, Est aliquid in rebus quod neque res ipsa est, neque alia res,
neque prorsus nihil; sed medium quid inter rem and nihil. Atque illud solet
appellari modus rei. Ex. gr. gradus qualitatis non est qualitas, neque etiam
omnino nihil est; sed est modus qualitatis. Itaque cum qualitas intenditur aut
remittitur, non fit alia qualitas, sed fit qualitas alius modi. Et cum qualitas
aut alia aliqua res ista ratione mutatur, dicitur modaliter distingui a seipsa:
sic calor in primo gradu distinguitur a seipso in secundo aut tertio gradu, and
manus explicata a seipsa contracta. Burgersdic. Log. l. 1. c. 21. theor. 5. 1.
p. 96. Vide Suarez. Metaph. disp. 46 sect. 1.. 35.
which was seated in the Acts of Love and trust, tanquam modus in re
modificata, but only the heightning and gradual advancement of the Acts of love
and trust in God? For is not ardency or intension the modus of Love and Trust,
that are the things modificated by this intension or ardency? Can modus in re
modificata signify any thing here but the gradual heightning and intenseness
of his Love and Trust? And what else can you mean by that other Ardency, which
respected the matter against which he prayed, but a gradual heightning of his
Fear and his Grief, which gradual heightning was the modus of the res
modificata, the Acts of Fear and of Grief for those evils with which he
encountered? For gradual intension, without doubt, is nothing else but the modus
of the same numerical Quality that is intended; because intensio (as your own
Master Scheibler. Metaph. l. 2. c. 8.. 204.
Scheibler will truly tell you) formaliter consistit in co, quod est ejusdem
formae eductio ulterior e potentia subjecti; and consequenter est per majorem
radicationem ejusdem formae in codem subjecto, quae major radicatio fit per
unionem plurium graduum ejusdem formae in subjecto. Nor will the word Ardency
help you any whit. For Ardency, precisely and in abstracto considered, is
nothing else but the vehemence and gradual heightning of any thing whatsoever
that is capable of gradual intension, and is the very same with Zeal; and as
that comes from the Greek word (...), so the other comes from the Latin word
Ardeo, both which signify to burn, and be inflamed* Zeal then and Ardency
being properly nothing else but the heightning and gradual intension of any
thing (and therefore we read of a zeal for God and a zeal for Satan, a zeal
for good and a zeal for mischief: and hence it is that the Apostle tells us,
Gal. 4. 17, 18.
That it is good to be zealous in a good thing; intension and Zeal and Ardency
being either good, or bad, or indifferent, as the Qualities are that are
modificated and intended by them) consequently they must be, when in abstracto
expressed, understood always according to the subject matter that is treated
of, and with respect to the thing that is intended and heightened by them, which
here can be nothing else but the Acts of Love and the Acts of Trust, the Acts
of Fear and the Acts of Grief. And is not this arrant nonsense now even to the
most ordinary understanding? For first are the inward Acts of Love and trust
both one and the same? Is not Trust in God an Act of Confidence and
well-grounded Hope? and is not that as well a distinct Theological grace from
Love and holy How and in what sense Hope and Trust in God might be in Christ,
Vide Aquin. 3. p. q. 7. art. 4. Suarez in Commentar. ad loc. tom. 1. p. 296,
297. and the other Commentators on the question in Thomas, Estius lib. 3. Sent.
d. 26. 8. p. 88. col. 1. C. D. E. F. Pet. Lombard. l. 3. Sent. d. 26. C.
Durand. ibid. q 3. art. 2.
Charity, by infusion seated in the Will, as Love and Hope are two distinct
passions, naturally seated in the inferior Faculties? Nay are not Fear of Evils
impending, and Grief for Evils now suffered, two distinct Passions, both
naturally seated in the inferior sensual Part, and as truly distinct in
themselves as the Passions of Grief and Fear? Why then did you not rather say
there was a fourfold Ardency in Christ's Prayer, an Ardency of Love, and an
Ardency of Trust in God, an Ardency of Fear of the Evils now impending, and an
Ardency of Grief for the Evils he now labored under? Nay might you not, with
as equal reason, have said, there was a manifold Ardency in Christ's Prayer, an
Ardency of the inward Acts of Obedience, of Religion and Piety, of Patience and
Fortitude, and love to God and our Neighbors, of Justice and Mercy, and all
other Christian Graces? For all these were as truly in Christ at the time of
his bloody Agony and conflict, as an Ardency of Love and Trust, and an Ardency
of Fear and Grief, and were all as much the Ardency of his Prayer as these that
you have named. For fervency in Prayer (the inward Acts I mean) is an Act of
Religion; and though it be rooted and founded in Charity, yet it is not
formally but effectively only an Act of Love, and shall, with Faith and Hope,
and all other Christian Graces, cease, when Charity shall last unto eternity.
The Saints in heaven do now no more pray for themselves then they can suffer or
want. And then for the heightning of his Fears and Griefs, these were the
natural issues of the inferior sensual Part of his Soul, and the Passions there
implanted, whose natural motions he would not now hinder, to testify as well
the infirmities, as the truth of his Manhood. And though the heightning of this
Fear and Grief in the inferior Part of Christ's soul were the Causa (...) the
inward moving Cause, as the present and approaching growing Miseries and
Afflictions were the Causa (...) the outward moving cause of the Ardency of the
inward Acts of his Piety, Devotion and Prayer; yet the Cause and Effect being
really distinguished, impossible it is that the Ardency of Christ's Fear and
Griefs should be the Ardency of his Prayer. It is true indeed that there was a
most heightened Ardency of the Acts of Piety and Patience, Magnanimity and
Fortitude, and all other Christian Graces, as well as an ardency of Love, and a
heightning of Fears and Grief in Christ, when in his bloody Agony he prayed:
but these were not the ardency of his Prayer. The ardency of all these several
Acts were all now in the same subject Christ: but then though one Accident in
concreto may be predicated of another disparate Accident, as when we say of
milk, this white is sweet; yet in abstracto they cannot, for this whiteness is
not sweetness.

. 13. And therefore when in the application of what you call your second
answer, you say,

JEANES.
I Readily grant the heightning of this latter ardency, so that there was in
his Agony an addition of degrees unto his fear of and grief for those evils
against* which he prayed, above either what there was, or what there was
occasion for at other times: but as for the former ardency regarding God, and
placed in the inward Acts of his love of God, etc. that was incapable of
further heightning; for his actual love of God was in termino, as they say, was
always at the highest, and most intense:

. 14. You herein speak nothing to the purpose. For Christ's Fear and Grief were
natural Passions, and the heightning them in his Agony was but the heightning
of the Acts of those Passions: but the Ardency in Christ's Prayer was the
heightning of an inward Act or Acts of Piety and Devotion, which were not Acts
of Nature, but of Grace, and the Habit from whence they issued was one of those
Vide Suarez. in 3. p. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 20. sect. 1. p. 303.
septem dona Spiritus Sancti, as the Schools call them, that the Esa. 11. 2, 3.
Prophet had foretold should be infused into his Soul by God. And then though
his Actual Love (that most high and transcendent Act of Love, you mean, that
was immediately terminated on God as it is next Object) were always in termino
(as Christ was by virtue of the hypostatical union Comprehensor, as they call
him in the Schools;) yet this nothing hinders, but that the fervor and ardency
in the inward Acts of Prayer and Devotion might now be heightened. For the
Schools when they determine that question, utrum conveniens fuerit Christum
orare, do always consider him at his prayers in the state of a Viator, in
which state he might truly Vide Estium l 3. Sent. d. 26.. 1. p. 88. C. D. E. F.
Suaresium, alios supra citat.
pray, as well as he might be miserable, or want the exaltation of his Humane
nature, which he attained not till after his Ascension. For being considered as
Comprehensor, as it was impossible for him to want any thing, so he was not in
a state and condition to receive any thing by way of advance from the good hand
of God, no more then the Saints and Angels now in heaven, or he himself can
since his Session at the right hand of God. (We shall instantly clear this for
the Readers understanding.)

. 15. And therefore what is your grant of the heightning the ardency of Christ's
Fears and Griefs in his Agony, and the denial of the heightning of that high
and most transcendent Act of his Love of God, which is Actus comprehensoris,
and not a free, but a necessary Act, and therefore always in Summo? Is this
denial or that concession any thing material to the Ardency of Christ's Prayer,
which the Evangelist tells us was now heightened? Grief and fear may be Causes
and advancers of Piety; but then they are not it. Nay differ as much they do,
as Grace and Nature, as Habits and Passions: and therefore the heightning Vide
Suarez. Metap. tom. 2. disp. 46. sect. 3. * 4. Vide Aquin. 1. 2. q. 52. art. 1.
of the Acts of the one cannot possibly be the formal heightning of the Acts of
the other; since Intensio est eductio unius and ejusdem formae secundum
diversos gradus seu parts ejus, ex quibus forma per se una componitur, and quo
magis integra ^fficitur, eo magis radicari in subjecto dicitur, as Suarez, who
as well as any man knew what belonged to such speculations. Where the
Evangelist says, that Christ being in Agony did pray more earnestly, you say
to this, that indeed he grieved and feared more greatly then before, but his
love of God as he was Comprehensor was always in termino, and at the utmost
height. If this be not to answer a baculo ad angulum, then I know not the
meaning of the Proverb.

. 16. But, Sir, speak roundly and to the purpose. Was the Ardency of Christ's
Prayer now more intended in his Agony? or was it not? If it were not, then tell
us plainly what the Evangelist means by his (...). If you cannot render it
better then our Translators, and Beza, and Grotius, and Piscator, and the
French, Dutch, Italian and Spanish Translations have done, and it signify
here, that he prayed the more earnestly; then deal ingenuously, and acknowledge
your mistake. Confess, what you cannot possibly deny, that Christ was now more
intense in this Act of Prayer then before in other Acts. And then ask the
Doctor forgiveness for the abuse of his good name, and make the world amends by
a public recantation. Do not eat your own words, but stand to what you have
granted. Acknowledge, what you must, that Christ prayed more earnestly in his
Agony then at other times, in regard of the matter against which he prayed. The
greatness of his present and approaching sufferings was such, that it
proportionably heightened his prayer for the removal of them, if it had been
possible. One deep, I must tell you, did here call upon another; and a time of
great Affliction is a season for more then ordinary Devotion. The Fathers and
Schoolmen will tell you, that in this heightened Devotion at Vide Hookers
Ecclesiast. Policy, l 5.. 48. per tot.
this time our Savior did read us his Disciples a lecture, and teach us our
Duty in such cases by his own great example. As there may be a more weighty
occasion for the heightning of our Devotion, so it is our duty then to heighten
it. And as this was all that Doctor Hammond pretended to, so the whole world of
Readers will judge that the words of your second part of your second answer do
acknowledge it.

. 17. For that that Act of Christ's Love regarding God, which was always in
termino, was not, could not be that Act of Prayer and Devotion that the
Evangelist and the Doctor spoke of, will be evident even from your own proof
and Argument. For you say it was Actus Comprehensoris, and in termino, as they
say, and because it was a necessary Act, it was always at the height. Now the
Act of Prayer and Piety and Devotion in Christ was Actus viatoris, and
meritorious in it self, Suarez tom. 1. in 3. p. Thom. disp. 40. sect. 3. p:
542. col. 1. A:
and consequently free. For ut Actus sit meritorius, says Suarez, requiritur
ut sit bonus, liber, and in persona grata in Via existente. And therefore
nothing hinders but that it might be heightened in him, according to the
greatness of the occasion, if Gods law did so allow, which was the ground of
the Controversy, and must by other Medium's be disproved then this of our
Refuter, unless he is resolved to beg the Question. Nay the same Suarez will
tell us not only that our Savior did merit by this Act of Devotion, but that
it is distinct from the Acts of Charity in it is true and proper notion. Dico
tertio, meruisse Christum per Actus omnes virtutum infusarum, quos libere
exercuit, est certissima; sic enim meruit per Actum Obedientiae, ut testatur
Paulus, and per Actum Religionis, ut Orationis, etc. and ad eundem modum meruit
per Passionem suam, quatenus illa erat Actus Charitatis Dei and proximi, and
Religionis (erat enim Sacrificium quoddam) and misericordiae, justitiae, and
obedientiae, ac fere virtutum omnium. Et ad eundem modum philosophandum est de
omnibus Actibus Christi. So Suarez.

. 18. And now, though this be sufficient to satisfy the utmost pretenses of
the Refuters Discourse; yet because I am unwilling altogether to spend time in
the unprofitable discoveries of another man's mistakes, whilst the Reader,
through a Cloud of dust and smoke that Contention has raised, remains
unsatisfied in the m^ in business and ground of the Controversy; I shall now
digress from the Refuter, to explain the nature of that Ardency in our Saviors
Prayer which the Evangelist testifies was now in his Agony heightened. And as
those that have a great leap to take do proportionably go back, that they may
return with the stronger violence and force, to carry themselves over; so shall
I. For in demonstrative discourses, not only the great Philosopher, but
Experience also teaches, that the most instructive way, though perhaps the more
tedious, is to proceed from Principles more remote and plain to Deductions more
obscure, as Euclide has done in his Elements of Geometry. The steps then that I
shall go by are these. 1. I shall enquire in what state, whether of
Comprehensor or Viator, Christ was in a capacity to pray, as that signifies
either Petition or Deprecation or Thanksgiving; and this whether only for
others, or also for himself: 2ly, Whether though he were in a capacity thus to
pray, yet being God, that was able of himself to accomplish whatsoever he might
desire as Man, it was expedient for him to do so, and whether God had so
determined: 3ly, What things he might and did pray for, both for himself and
others: 4ly, Whether he did in truth and reality, or only in show, pray for a
Removal of that Cup which he came on purpose to drink: 5ly, Whether these
desires were not repugnant to Gods decree, and the end of his coming into the
world, and his own peremptory resolution to drink it: 6ly, How these desires
for a removal of this Cup might be advanced, notwithstanding his resolution and
readiness to drink it. From these Premises rightly stated, I conceive it will
not be difficult to show, how our Saviors Ardency in this Prayer might be
advanced above what it either was, or indeed there was occasion for at other
times; and this without any derogation either from 1. the Fullness of his
habitual Grace, ^. the Impeccability of his Soul, or 3. his perpetual and
uninterrupted happiness of it, or the height of that Actual Love of God which,
as he was Comprehensor, was always in termino and most intense.

. 19. To begin then with the first. And for this it will be necessary to
consider, that the Schools determine, That Christ, during the state of his
Humiliation, was both Dicendum quod aliquis dicitur Viator, ex eo quod tendit
in beatitudinem; Comprehensor autem dicitur ex hoc, quod jam beatudinem
obtinet, secundum illud 1 Cor. 9. Sic currite ut comprehendatis, and Phil. 3.
Sequor autem ut quo modo comprehendam. Hominis aute^ beatitudo perfecta
consistit in anima and in corpore. In Anima quidem quantum ad id quod est ei
proprium, secundum quod men's videt and fruitur Deo. In Corpore vero, secundum
quod Corpus resurget spirituale, and in virtute and gloria and incorruptione,
dicitur 1 Co. 15. Christus aute^ ante passionem secundum mentem plene videbat
Deum; and sic habebat beatitudinem quantum ad id quod est proprium Animae: sed
quantu^ ad alia, decrat ei beatitudo; quia and anima ejus erat passibilis, and
corpus passibile and mortale. Et ideo simul erat Comprehensor, in quantum
habebat beatitudinem propriam Animae; and simul Viator, in quantum tendebat in
beatitudine^ secundum id quod ei de beatitudine deerat. Aquin. 3 part. q. 15.
art. 10. in Corp. Vide eund. ibid. q. 11. art. 2. in Corp. Estium l. 3.
Sentent. did. 16.. 2. Suaresium, Cajetanum, and caeteros Commentatores in
Thom. loco suprae citato.
Comprehensor and Viator. Now a Comprehensor is he that enjoyes the fullness of
Happiness, which state the Apostle points at 1 Cor. 9. 24. when he says, Sic
currite ut comprehendatis, So run that ye may obtain; and a Viator is he that
is yet in the way that leads and tends to happiness, which state the Apostle
points at Phil. 3. 12, 13. Sequor autem, si quo modo comprehendam, But I so
follow, if by any means I may obtein. The one is in possession, the other in
the way to happiness. Now as Man consists of a Body and a Soul, so the
perfection of his Happiness is lodged in both these. The Soul is perfectly
happy, inasmuch as in the supreme and noblest part, the Mind and Understanding,
it sees and enjoyes God. The Body is then perfectly happy, when it shall be
raised a spiritual body, and advanced to a state of Power and Glory and
Incorruption, and Mortality shall be wholly swallowed u^ of Life. Now Christ,
by virtue of the hypostatical union, had a full sight and all-absolutely
perfect Fruition of God, from the first moment of his Conception, in the
sovereign part of his Soul, the Mind, and so was Comprehensor. But then in
respect of the inferior part and Faculties of the Soul, wherein he was subject
to natural infirmities and Passions as men are, and in regard of his Body, that
as yet was passible and mortal, he was not yet possessed of Happiness till
after his Death and Passion: But now Christ being raised from the dead, dies
no more, Death has no more dominion over him. And consequently, till his
Resurrection Romans 6. 9.
and exaltation at the right hand of God, in respect of these he was only
Viator.

. 20. Christ then in this state taking upon him the form of a servant, was
obliged to the most high and noblest piece of Service, that consists in the
religious worship and veneration of God. And therefore when the Devil tempted
him to fall down and worship him, he says, Get thee behind me, Satan; for it
is Matt. 4. 10.
written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
There is the Duty. And to the Samaritans he John 4 22.
said, Ye worship what ye know not, but we worship what we know: for salvation
is of the Jews. There is the Fact and accomplishment.

. 21. Now there are two more principal Acts of Religion, to which the rest may
be reduced, Sacrifice and Prayer. Not to speak of the first, because it
concerns us not at present; Prayer may be taken either more generally, as it is
according to Damascene Damascen. l. 3. Orthod. fidei, c. 24. in principio.
Ascensus intellectus in Deum, for any inward Act of the mind whereby the Soul
is elevated and mounts up to God, by contemplation, meditation, devotion, and
the like: or else more specially and properly, as it is according to Aquin. 2.
2. q. 83. art. 1, 2. and 3. p q. 21. art. 1. in corp.
Aquinas Explicatio propriae voluntatis apud Deum, ut eam impleat, Oration non
est nisi quaedam explicatio voluntatis apud Deum, ut suppl^at indigentiam, quam
per nos ipsos supplere non possumus: Durand. l. 3. Sent. did. 17. q. 2. art.
^. p. 185. 4.

Oration est Actus inferioris deprecantis superiorem ut se adjuvet, unde est
Actus indigentis open alterius, cui cultum and reverentiam exhibet, and ideo ad
religionem pertinet. Suarez. in 3. p. Tho. q. 21. art. 1. in Commentar p. 588
col 2. E.

Est oration quaedam hominu^ cum Deo communicatio, qua Sanctuarium coeli
ingressi de suis promissis illum coram appellant; ut quod verbo duntaxat
annuenti crediderunt, non esse vanum, ubi necessitas ita postulat, experiantur.
Calv. Institut. lib. 3. c. 20.. 2. Quando vero hunc esse orationis scopum, ut
erecti in Deum animi ferantur tum ad confessionem Laudis, tum ad opem
implorandam, ex eo intelligere licet primas ejus parts in mente and animo
positas esse, vel potius Orationem ipsam esse proprie interioris cordis
affectum, qui apud Deum, cordium Scrutatorem, effunditur and exponitur. Calv.
ibid.. 29.


an Act of the Soul, whereby we supplicate and beseech God, whom we reverence
and worship, for a supply of our wants; which we our selves are not able to
attain to, but only by his assistance and bounty, in whom is all fullness.

. 22. But then, though this be the proper genuine signification of Prayer, yet
Etsi autem Oration proprie ad vota and preces restringitur, tanta est tamen
inter Petitionem and Gratiarum actionem affinitas, ut commode sub nomine uno
comprehendi quea^t. Na^ quas Paulus enumerat species, sub prius membrum hujus
partitionis recidunt. Calv. ibid.. 28.

Vide Aquin. 2: 2. q. 83. art. 17. Suarez. in 3. p. Thom. q. 21. art. 4.
distinct. 45. sect. 1.


such is the affinity between Prayer and Thanksgiving, that as they usually and
most decently go together, so they are commonly comprehended under the same
common name of Prayer. Of Prayer in this notion, the Apostle and the Schools
from him reckon up four kinds, 1 Timothy 2. 1. Haec and alia nomina quibus preces
distinguantur, reperies in libro de morte Mosis. Vide H. Grot. Annot, posthum.
in 1 Timothy c. 1. ver. 1.
First Supplications, which the Apostle calls (...), and the Rabbis (...), and
are Deprecations, or prayers for the removal of Evils, whether corporal or
spiritual. Secondly, Prayers, which the Apostle calls (...), and the Rabbis
(...), and these are for the procurement of Good things for our selves.
Thirdly, Intercessions, which he there calls (...), and the Rabbis (...),
which are either for the suspension of Judgments, or obteining of Blessings
for others. Fourthly, Giving of thanks, which the Apostle calls (...), and the
Rabbis (...), that are in an humble acknowledgement and gratulation offered up
to God for the Benefits we or others have received. Of all these the Scriptures
afford us frequent Instances.

. 23. Now if we take Prayer in the first sense, according to Damascen, for an
assent of the Soul to God by Contemplation, Meditation, Devotion, and the like,
there is no doubt but thus it was most super-excellently in Christ. Si hoc modo
sumatur Oration, non est quod disputetur, an in Christo fuerit, cujus anima
perfectissima contemplatione in Deum ferebatur, non solum per beatam
fruitionem, sed per Scientiam etiam infusam* and liberum charitatis actum, ut
in superioribus tractatum est. Suarez in 3. p. Thom. did. 45. sect. 1.
His Soul, winged with Contemplation, still constantly lodged it self in the
bosom of God, whom he so perfectly saw, so perfectly enjoyed, and so perfectly
loved. The only doubt is, that since Christ was from the first moment of his
Conception perfectus Comprehensor, in full and perfect possession of heaven
happiness, and the clear sight and enjoyment of God, whether he may with any
congruity be said to pray, as that properly signifies an Act of the Soul either
requiring aid and asstance from God, for the supply of those things we stand in
need of, or returning Thanks for that supply. For Christ being truly (...),
perfect God as well as Man, he could neither have a superior to reverence, nor
have need of assistance, because he was Almighty, and the Sovereign Lord of all
things. And being also in the humane Nature perfectus Comprehensor, he enjoyed
the fullness of heaven happiness, which excludes all wants and all sorrows. And
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the
former things are passed away, Rev. 21. 4.

. 24. To this I answer, from Aquinas, that if Christ were only God, or though
he had two natures, yet if he had but one Will, which was divine, as the
Monothelites phansied, then it neither Si in Christo esset una tantum voluntas,
scil. divina, nullo modo competeret sibi orare, quia voluntas divina per
seipsam est effectiva eorum quae vult: secundum illud Psalmi 134. Omnia
quaecunque voluit Dominus fecit. Sed quia in Christo est alia voluntas divina,
and alia humana, and voluntas humana non est per seipsam efficax ad implendum
quae vult, nisi per virtutem divinam; inde est quod Christo, secundum quod est
homo, and humanam voluntatem habens, competit orare. Aquin. 3. part. q. 21.
art. 1. in Corp. Vide Cajetan: Suaresium, commentator. in loc. and alios, and
Suarez. ibid. disp. 45. sect. 1. Durand. l. 3. Sent. d. 17. q. 2. art. 1.
could be needful, nor proper and convenient for him to pray. For, as God has
no superior to reverence, so has he no need of any helper or assistant. His
will is absolutely all-powerful, and therefore says David Psalm. 134. 6.
Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the sea,
and all deep places.

. 25. But then Christ being also perfect man as well as God, and endued with a
humane will and understanding essentially consequent to that Nature, which of
it self is not able, without the assistance of God, to perform what it may
rationally desire, and being as Man of a nature truly passible and mortal, and
whose Soul also, in the inferior part, was subject to Passions and
infirmities, as well as his body before his Resurrection (in which respect he
was not yet possessed of heaven happiness, but a necessity there lay upon him
first to suffer, and then to enter into his glory;) in this state and condition
he might with convenience, and without any derogation from the Perfection of
his divine nature, or the heaven happiness of his Soul (which he enjoyed as
Comprehensor) not only pray to God for his assistance, but bless and magnify
him for it. As Comprehensor indeed, and one already fully possessed of heaven
happiness and the sight of God, there was no reason he should pray, since in
this he could not want, but was already perfectly possessed of whatsoever he
was capable of: But then as he was yet in some respects truly in the state of a
Viator, one subject to miseries and infirmities and bodily wants, and not yet
possessed of that glory and those Heb. 12. 2.
joys set before him, and therefore being a frail man well as an allpowerful
God, that not only might, but did truly stand in need of Gods aid and
protection, and having also a humane will, that naturally and innocently
prompted him on to desire those things he stood in need of, and yet by that
will of it self, without Gods assistance, was not able to accomplish his
desires, pray he might for Gods assistance, as also praise him for it, as well
as he might also stand in need of Gods assistance.

. 26. But what though Christ as man were in capacity to petition at the Throne
of grace for those things which as man he might need, and was not able to
perform, will it therefore follow that as man, being also God, it was fit for
him to pray? For all things are lawful for me, says the Apostle, yet all
things are not expedient.

. 27. To this I answer, that whether we consider his transcendent love to God,
or his particular necessities in the humane nature, or his Charity and Love to
man, for whose sake he became man, there could nothing be more decent, or that
could better become him. For first, if we shall consider his present state and
condition, as now he was in the form of a servant, obliged he was in duty to
give God that Religious homage and Reverence which the Creature could pay to
his Creator, such worship and veneration that was due to the most high God that
hears prayer, unto whom all flesh shall come, Psalm. 65. 2.

Secondly, If we consider his transcendent and superlative Love to God his
Father, that would still prompt him on by this best and noblest Act of worship
to magnify him; since it is impossible but we should endeavor, as much as in
us lies, the advancement of their honor whom we truly love and affect.

Thirdly, If we shall consider the natural law of Charity, that obliges us to
endeavor by all lawful ways the relief of our wants, the ease of our miseries
and the advancement of our happiness, that would also engage him to Prayer,
that is the best means to procure them at his hands that is the Father of
lights, from whom every good and perfect gift proceeds.

Fourthly, If we shall consider the Religious Piety and transcendent goodness
in the Act of Prayer it self, that gives to God the honor due unto his name,
that magnifies him in his best and noblest attributes of Knowledge, and Power,
and Mercy, and Goodness, and Justice, and Faithfulness, that owns him as the
Author and fountain of all good, the father of Mercies and the God of all
consolation; there could be no Act more becoming him that was so every way
holy, and so abundant and fruitful in every good work. And therefore says God
in the Prophet, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

Fifthly, If we shall consider the great end of his coming into the world,
which was to work out our Salvation, we shall find it fit and expedient he
should accomplish it by all ways whatsoever; not only by satisfying Gods
Justice, and meriting our Salvation, but also by his Prayers and Intercession,
and leaving us an example in all the noblest Acts of Virtue, and instructing us
in the way and means how we should behave our selves in this part of divine
worship, and also how we might procure a supply of our wants from him who alone
is able to relieve and help us.

. 28. And therefore no wonder, since it was every way so fit and expedient for
Christ to pray, that God himself did also decree and ordain that he should use
it, not only for our example. and an exercise of virtue, but also as a
necessary means for a procurement of those blessings which it was fit he should
desire.

. 29. For though as God he was able to effect all things (and therefore when
Martha, that esteemed him only as a man, though a holy Prophet sent of God,
said unto him, Lord, if thou had been here my Brother had not dyed: But I
know that even now whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee; He,
to instruct her in the truth of his Godhead, and that he had Vide Chrysostom.
homil. 61. in Joann.
no need to pray, as Elijah and Elisha did for those they raised, but could
restore him by his own power, says unto her, Thy Brother shall rise again. And
when she yet understood him not, he said unto her, I am the resurrection and
the life, etc.) and though as man, being Comprehensor in the superior part of
his soul, he saw all things in verbo, by virtue of the hypostatical union, that
God had decreed should come to pass, at least all things whatsoever that
concerned himself in the state of humiliation, and the work of our Redemption
(And therefore he prays, Father, I thank thee that thou have heard me, and I
knew thou hear me Joh. 11. 41, 42.
always. But because of the people which stand by Chrysostomus homil. 63. in
Joan. and Euthymius ibi, and Ambrosius lib. 4. de Fide, c. 3. ita exponunt illa
verba quae Christus subjunxit, [Ego autem sciebam quia semper me audis] ut illa
ad divinitatem Christi referant: unde ita exponunt, Gratias tibi ago, non quia
indigeam precibus coram te, scio enim unam voluntatem me tecum habere, ideoque
semper velle quod ego volo; sed propter Populum qui circumstat, etc. Et
Theophylactus advertit Christum antequam orasset vel aliquid petiiss^t dixisse,
Gratias tibi ago quia audisti me; quia enim non opus habebat oratione, non fuit
Oration audita, sed voluntas i^pleta: and hoc fuit Christum exaudiri juxta
Phrasin Scripturae, jux^ae illud, Desiderium pa^^^um exaudisti, Psalm 6. et,
De^^^^^ium meum audivit Omnipotent. Suarez. in 3. p. Thom. disp. 4^. (...) 1.
p. ^93. col. 1, 2.

Vi(...). 3. part. q. 21. art. 3. in Corp.


I said it, that they may believe that thou have sent me; where, we see, as
Theophylact well observes, that he gives thanks before he prays or asks any
thing:) yet for all that, God in his all-wise providence had decreed and
ordered, that as he should want somethings, to testify the truth and frailty
of his humane nature, so as man now in the state of a Viator, and Candidate of
immortality, as Tertullian phrases it, he should procure a supply of them by
Prayer, and not without. And this to testify in that nature his submission and
obedience, and dependence upon God, his Piety and Patience and holy Love and
Charity, and to leave us his own great example in these so holy Christian
graces. As then there was an oportet and a necessity lay upon him, first to
suffer, and then to enter into his Glory, because God and so foreordained, and
manifested this his decree by the Prophets, that he should thus open the way
for us, and le^^^ us himself into his glory: so necessary it was, that he
should pour out the desires of his Soul in Prayer, because God had ordained
that his Prayers should be the means to accomplish his desires. And therefore
though he foreknew they should certainly come to pass, yet notwithstanding he
prayed, because he also foreknew that his Prayers were to be the necessary
means to effect them. As therefore we read in the second Psalm that God says
unto his Son, Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine Psalm. 2. 8.
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession: Joh. 17.
1, 2.
so we read in Saint John, that our Savior prays for that which God did
promise in the Psalm, Father, says he, the hour is come, glorify thy Son,
that thy Son may also glorify thee. As thou have given him power over all
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. And
the event has declared that God has made good his promise, and answered his
Sons prayers. For we see he has his dominion from sea to sea, and from the
river unto the ends of the earth: And bless God we do Psalm. 72. 8.
that we are a part of it. No defect then was there in his Person, as if he of
himself were not able to supply whatsoever his humane nature should need, and
therefore must procure them by Vide Suarez. tom. 1. in 3. p. Thom. disp. 45.
sect. 1. per totum.
Prayer; but only that God for congruous reasons, respecting his own glory and
our advantage, was only pleased he should so procure them, as Non defuit Deo
alius modus possibilis redimendi genus humanum, sed nullus fuit hoc
convenientior. Vide Augustine. de Trin. l. 13. cap. 10. Davenant. Exposit. in
Col. c. 1. ver. 20. p. 104.
dye he did for our Redemption; not for want of other sufficient means to
procure our salvation, but that God for great reasons (which the Fathers and
the Vide Durand. l. 3. Sent. did. 17. q. 2. p. 185. B.
Schoolmen have observed) had so decreed. Christ then, as Christ, had no need
of Prayer, because by reason of the dignity of his Person, he was able to
perform whatsoever he pleased without it. And even in his Humane Nature de
facto he had a power of working miracles by his word and command, without any
necessity of Prayer. But then though, simply and absolutely speaking, Christ
had no necessity of Prayer; yet ex hypothesi and in sensu composito, as they
speak, and upon supposal of Gods decree, he could not do many things as Man,
but by Prayer.

. 30. Since then God had so decreed, because Christ as man, in the state of a
Viator, was not only capable, but it was well beseeming him to pray, the
Scriptures give us frequent instances of his Prayer, in all the several kinds
of it, both for himself and others.

. 31. But then it is to be understood with this difference, as Vide Durand. l.
3. Sent. did. 17. q. 2. art. 1. p. 185. A.
Durand has well observed. For himself, he prayed for corporal Blessings only,
or the removal of corporal Evils: but when he prayed for others, he as well
petitioned for spiritual as corporal Blessings, and the removal of temporal and
spiritual Judgments and Afflictions. For prayer being only for the supply of
some want, since he himself could not be defective in any spiritual blessing,
in whom the fullness of habitual grace and the fullness of the Godhead did
constantly dwell, that as Comprehensor, in the noblest part of his Soul enjoyed
the fight of God, and the fullness of heaven happiness, there was no reason he
should pray for what he did not, could not want. As therefore in the inferior
faculties of the Soul he was subject to Passions and Infirmities, and was of a
body frail and passible and mortal, so for that only he prayed. But then other
men, for whom he prayed, being as well defective in spirituals as temporals, he
indifferently prayed for both in their behalf.

. 32. To make this evident from the Scriptures. First then, give thanks he does
to God his Father, for the raising dead Lazarus at his intercession and
groaning in the Spirit, Joh. 11. 41. And praise God he does, that he had hid
the doctrines he preached from the wise and learned, and revealed them to
babes, Mat. 11. 25. Pray he does for St. Peter, that his Faith fail not, Luke
22 31, 32. And pray he does for his Apostles and the Church, that God would
keep them from the evil of the world, and that his joy might be fulfilled in
them, and that they might be sanctified through the truth, Joh. 17. 15, 16.
Pray he does for his own most glorious exaltation and the enlargement of his
kingdom, Joh. 17. 1, 2. And he looks up to heaven, and he blesses the Fishes
and the loaves that he brake for a temporary repast, Mark 6 41. So also at his
last supper, when he took bread he gave thanks, Luke 22. 19. On the Cross he
prays for his crucifyers, Luke 23. 34. And in his bloody Agony in the garden,
he prays for a removal of the bitter cup of his sufferings and death, Luke 22.
42. And of this strong crying and tears the Apostle takes notice, Heb. 5. 7.

. 33. And hitherto all is clear and plain. But now we are fallen upon a
difficulty indeed. For it is not easily understood how Christ should so
earnestly pray for a removal of that Cup which he came on purpose to drink off.
For had he a promise to be heard in this particular also? If he had, since God
is faithful in his promises, why was it not then performed? And if he had not,
why then does he pray, where he had no assurance of the grant of his request,
shall I say? or rather where he was assured it must be denied? Or shall we say
that God decreed that he should pray for a removal of that cup which he had
also preordained should be drank off notwithstanding?

. 34 This difficulty is very largely and solidly handled by the most
incomparably judicious Hooker, which might justly supersede Hookers Eccl. Pol.
l. 5.. 48. Plin. Not. hist. l. 35. c. 10. mihi. page 343.
all after endeavors even of the most accomplished pen, much more any slender
performances of mine. For it is with his writings as it was with Apelles
Pictures: Those that were finished by him, and received his last hand, are
inimitable; and the other he left unfinished, are not possibly to be perfected,
there being none equal to himself but himself.

. 35. Howsoever, because it is not easy to unfold the nature of that Ardency
in our Saviors Prayer, and how it might be heightened, without it, and because
that learned man has there treated of this argument to a far different purpose;
I shall therefore again attempt it. And in this very difficult Passage, I shall
carefully steer by that Chart and Compass which that judicious hand has drawn,
taking in the Observations of the Schoolmen, to supply those defects which his
Argument in that place did not engage him to treat of.

. 36. For answer then to this Difficulty, most certain it is

1. That Christ did pray for a removal of that Cup which he tasted
notwithstanding, and consequently had not a promise that the Cup* should be
removed, because it was not effected.

2. Most certain it is, that notwithstanding God had decreed that he should
taste of this Cup, yet he had also decreed that Vide Suarez. tom. 1. in 3.
part. Thom. disp. 38. sect. 4. p. 528. col. 2. D. F. etc. and disp. 37. sect.
4. p. 518. col. 2.
Christ should pray against it, otherwise it had been absolutely impossible
that it should have come to pass.

3. Most certain it is, that as God had decreed he should suffer for our
Redemption, and therefore gave him up for us all, so Christ also knew the
Decree, and had also voluntarily contracted with God his Father for the
Performance of it. And therefore when he comes into the world for this
purpose, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have
thou prepared me. Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 10.
In burnt-offerings and sacrifice for sin thou had no pleasure. Then said I,
Lo, I come to do thy will, O my God. -- By the which will, as the Apostle
adds, we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all. And this he perfectly knew in all the minute circumstances, not only
as God that had decreed them, and a Person that was a Party in the Covenant,
but also as Man. For being Comprehensor in his Soul, Vide Suarez. in 3. part.
Thom. tom. 1. disp. 26. sect. 1, 2, 3, etc.
by virtue of the hypostatical union, he saw all things clearly in verbo, and
the glass of the divine nature, as they call it in the Schools; and moreover,
as Viator, he had also Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 25. sect. 3.
Joh. 18. 4.
an Infused Habit of knowledge, whereby he perfectly knew all things, at least
that concerned himself, in the whole course of his Ministration during his
abode here on earth. And therefore the Scriptures expressly tell us, that he
knew all things that should come upon him: and accordingly we find that he
foretold his Death, the time, the persons, the Actors, and the manner and the
place, and every minute circumstance of it. Nor can it be said, that his
sufferings had so clouded and darkened his understanding, that for the present
he forgot it; since none of the Evangelists, in recounting his unspeakable and
unknown Torments, as the Greeks call them in their Liturgy, mention any such
defect; and impossible (...).
it was he should forget the peremptory determination of his Father, and his
own unchangeable purpose most willingly to undergo it. Besides, his pronouncing
the Consummatum est upon the Cross, when the whole Scene of his sufferings, in
all the parts and circumstances of it, was now finished, shows that not any
thing was forgotten by him, even in the very height of his sufferings. And
therefore we find in S. John, c. 12. v. 23, 24, etc him answering and saying to
his Disciples in a public audience, The hour is come that the Son of man
should be glorified. Verily, verily I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall
into the ground and dye, it abides alone; but if it dye, it brings forth
much fruit. He that loves his life shall loose it; and he that hates his life
in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal. If any man serve me, let him
follow me, and where I am there also shall my servant be: If any man serve me,
him will my Father honor. Now is my Soul troubled, and what shall I say?
Father, save me from this hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour
Father, glorify thy name. And he adds, verse. 31. Now is the Judgment of this
world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up
from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This he said (as the Apostle adds)
signifying what death he should dye.

. 38. For the resolving this doubt, and reconciling the seeming Vide Aquin. 3.
part. q. 18. art. 1. and Suarez. in Commentar. and ibid. disp. 37. sect. 1.
Estium l. 3. Sent. did. 17.. 1. and alios ibi.
Contradictions, know we must, as Christ was God man, so two wills he had,
answerable to his two natures, though his person were but one. And both these,
his divine and humane will, were as distinct as his two Natures. For the Will,
whether of God or of Man, belongs to the Essence or nature of both, and
consequently is not a Personal propriety, but a Natural attribute and Emanation.

. 39. Christ then, as God, must of necessity will the same, whatsoever his
Father did, because though the Persons in the Trinity be distinct, yet the
Nature is the same, and the divine will but one in all the three Persons. And
then as for his humane will, all the works and operations of that were still
subject to the will of God, and still most exactly conformable to his holy laws
and precepts and secret decrees. And therefore he says John 4. 34. My meat is
to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. In the volume of
the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea thy law
is within my heart, Psalm. 40* 7, 8.

. 40. But now as every man else, so the Schools also observe Vid. Aquin. 3.
part. q. 18. art. 6. and 1. part. q. 41. art. 2. and q. 79. art. 9. and 1. 2.
q. 74. art. 7. Suarez in 3. part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 38. sect. 2. Estium l. 3.
Sent. d. 17.. 2. and the Schoolmen generally on this distinction, and those
other places in the Sums.

Vide etiam Aristot. l. 3. Eth. c. 2 ubi spontaneum seu voluntarium ad plura
extendi docet quam Electionem; Est enim, inquit, cum pueru and animalibus
caeteris nobis commune.

Adhuc tertio dicitur voluntas naturalis, ut elicit actum conformem
inclinationi naturali, quae semper est ad commodum: dicitur autem libera, in
quantum in potestate ejus est ita elicere actum oppositum inclinationi sicut
conformem, and non elicere sicut elicere. Scotus l 3. Sent. aist. 17. q. 1. 3.
p. 127. col. 2.

Est enim voluntas naturalis non re sed ratione diversa a voluntate rationali,
quatenus videlicet non per modum naturae movetur; velut dum naturaliter refugit
ea quae sunt naturae contraria, and secundum se mala, ut mortem, cruciatus, and
hujusmodi. Estius l. 3. Sent. d. 17.. 3 p. ^0 col. 1. E. Vide Durand ibid. q.
1. art. 1.


of Christ, that his Will had a twofold operation; the one natural and
necessary, which moving according to the order and necessity of nature, does
simply and without deliberation desire whatsoever is in it self good, and
decline from and abhor whatsoever is hurtful: And therefore they call this
Voluntas ut natura, and Voluntas sensualitatis, a willingness of nature, and a
sensual inclination.

. 41. The other rational and deliberate, whereby it follows and embraces those
things as good, which the superior faculty of the Soul, the Mind and
Understanding, upon due pondering and consideration, preferrs as good to that
end which we simply and absolutely desire, though otherwise never so
burdensome. This they call Voluntas ut ratio, and Appetitus Rationalis.

. 42 For instance, The Will desires the End absolutely, but the Means in order
to that end. The Physician affects not the Scorpion and the Vi^er, but only for
his antidote and medicine. Though the stomach loathes the Potion, and the flesh
trembles at the Application of the Caustic; yet Reason conquers Nature, and
the sickman -- (...) with a kind of unwilling willingness submits to the Cure,
which in health he would as much abhor as now he does his Disease. Though his
Judgment tells him, the Medicine is for his recovery; yet Nature cannot choose
but express her reluctance, even when it is applied. And therefore the great
Philosopher tells us, (...), that they are a kind of mixed actions; and though
in order to the end that now Reason preferrs, they are willingly Vide Aristot.
l. 3. Eth. c. 1.. 3. per totum. Vide H. Grot. Annot. in Matt. ca. 26. ver. 39.

Voluntas autem simpliciter hominis est rationis voluntas: hoc enim absolute
volumus, quod secundum deliberatam rationem volumus. Illud autem quod volumus
secundum motum sensualitatis, vel etiam secundum motum voluntatis simplicis,
quae consideratur ut natura, nonsimpliciter volumus, sed secundum quid, scil.
si aliud non obsistat quod per deliberationem rationis invenitur. Vnde talis
voluntas magis est dicenda Velleitas qua^ absoluta Voluntas; quia, scil. homo
hoc vellet, si aliud non obsisteret. Aquin. 3. part. q 21. art. 4. in Corp.
Vide Cajetan: in loc.


embraced, yet (...), no man would willingly choose them for their own sakes.

. 43. The Schools do well distinguish these several Acts of the Will, and the
one they call Actus voluntatis efficaces and absolutos, Vide Suarez: in 3.
part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 38. sect. 2.
the other inefficaces and conditionatos. We have already given the reason from
Suarez. In the one Nature expresses her present sense and apprehension: in the
other, her Reason and Judgment, that looks beyond the present, which Sense
cannot attain to.

. 44. Now these two Operations of the Will being supposed to be as truly in
Christ as in all other men, it will not be difficult to show how at one and the
same moment, he might both tremble and stand amazed at the apprehension of his
approaching Sufferings, and yet most willingly submit to them; he might both
ardently, and now more intensely, pray for a removal of the bitter Cup, and yet
most earnestly long to taste it; pray most sincerely to his Father against it,
and yet pray that his Fathers will might be fulfilled notwithstanding his
Prayer: and all this without any clashing or Opposition between his own desires
among themselves, or the least Repugnance to Gods Laws or Decrees, or the least
derogation to his own superlative Love and Charity to Mankind, whom he came to
purchase with his blood. And therefore God might most justly preordain, that
all this should be done by Christ, notwithstanding any seeming contrariety to
be found in it; and Christ, notwithstanding he knew his Father had decreed he
should drink up the very dreggs of this bitter Cup, might pray for a removal of
it, if it had been possible.

. 45. To clear this.

First then, as to the matter of fact, I suppose it most evident from the
Scriptures, That our Savior, at the very apprehension of his approaching
Torments, was possessed with such astonishment and terror, that he not only
prayed thrice, but more earnestly also, for the removal of this Cup, and in his
agony he fell into a bloody sweat, so that an Angel was sent to comfort him.

2. That he so willingly and cheerfully submitted himself to death, that for
the joy set before him he endured the Cross, and despised the shame: and though
he was oppressed and afflicted, yet Heb. 12. 2.
opened he not his mouth; but brought he was as a lamb to the slaughter, and as
a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so opened he Esaias 53. 7.
not his mouth.

. 46. As much willingness is here as can possibly be imagined, and yet as much
dread and astonishment as could seize on flesh and blood. But yet here is no
opposition, no tumult, and thwarting between the superior and inferior
faculties and desires; but only two several and distinct inclinations, the one
avoiding death as abhorrent to nature, because destructive to its present
being, the other accepting it, as most rationally to be embraced for the
Redemption of the world. Two disparate Acts of the will indeed they are, but
not contrary, and the repugnance between them is only in show, and not in
truth. For the great Aristot. l. 2. de Sophist. Elench. c. 5. circa medium,
apud me page 435. A.
Philosopher has told us that all Opposition, that is really such, must be
(...). Vide Luc.

Brugens. in Matt. c. 26. verse. 39.

Dicendum quod contrarietas non potest esse nisi Oppositio attendatur in eodem
and secundum idem: si autem secundum diversa and in diversis existat
diversitas, non sufficit hoc ad rationem contrarietatis, sicut nec ad rationem
contradiction^^; puta, quod homo sit pulcher aut sanus secundum manum and non
secundam pedem. Aquin. 3. part q. 18. art. 6. in Corp.

Between these desires and resolutions there was a diversity, but no
contrariety; a subordination, but no repugnance or resistance. There was no
contrariety, because they were not in respect of the same circumstances; for
Death as Death is to be avoided: neither did superior Reason ever dislike the
judgment of the inferior Faculties, but showed further and higher
considerations, where it was to be accepted and embraced. There was no
repugnance or resistance, because one yielded to the other. For as -- the sick
man considering the Portion -- to be bitter -- declineth it while he stays
within -- that Consideration; but when he casts his eyes further -- on the
happy operation, -- he willingly accepts it -- So Christ considering Death as
in it self evil, and contrary to nature, while he stayed within the bounds and
confines of that consideration, shunned and declined it; and yet as the means
of man's Salvation joyfully embraced it, accepting that he refused, and refusing
that he accepted. Field of the Church, l. 5. c. 18. p. 452. Edit. Oxon.

Ad hoc ergo quod sit contrarietas voluntatum in aliquo, requiritur primo
quidem quod secundum idem attendatur diversitas voluntatum. Si enim unius
voluntas sit de aliquo fiendo secundum quanda^rationem universalem, and
alterius voluntas sit de eodem non fiendo secundu^ quandam rationem
particularem, non est omnino contrarietas voluntatum: puta, si Rex vult
suspendi Latronem propter bonum publicum, and aliquis ejus consanguineus nolit
eum suspendi propter amorem privatum, non erit contrarietas voluntatis, nisi
forte in tantum se extendat voluntas hominis privati, ut bonum publicum velit
impedire ut conservetur bonum privatum: tunc enim circa idem attenditur
repugnantia voluntatum. Secundo autem requiritur ad contrarietatem voluntatis,
quod sit circa eandem voluntatem: si enim homo vult unum secundum appetitum
sensitivum, non est hic aliqua contrarietas, nisi forte appetitus sensitivus in
tantum praevaleat, quod vel immutet vel retardet appetitum rationis; sic enim
ad ipsam voluntatem rationis perveniret aliquid de motu contrario, etc. Aquin.
3. part. art. 6. in Corp.

In hoc articulo explicat (Aquinas) hanc diversit atem non fuisse talem, ut
veram oppositionem aut contrarietatem induceret, aut inter voluntatem divinam
and humanam, aut inter voluntatem humanam and appetitum sensitivum inter se;
quia illi diversi motus harum voluntatum, quamvis interdum circa eandem
materiam versarentur, sub diversis tamen rationibus; and ita erant moderati and
inter se compositi, ut unus alium minime impediret. Suarez. ibid. in Comment.
ad loc.


If therefore it appear that any of these conditions be wanting, and the
seeming repugnance be not in the same thing, and after the same manner and
respect, and in the same time, there will be no real clashing or opposition
between them. And confequently, if it may be demonstrated that in Christ these
seeming contrary volitions, 1. did arise from different principles, the divine
and humane will of Christ, and the superior rational appetite, and the
inferior sensual desires and natural inclinations, and 2ly, that they were
also grounded upon different respects and aims, and 3ly, that they did neither
thwart and cross one another in their several proper motions and inclinations,
nor in the event and issue; there will be found a most exact harmony and
consent even in this apparent discord. To prove this by parts.

. 47. First then, I ask, Why may not Christ have contrary desires in contrary
respects about one and the same thing, yet without any repugnance in the Acts
themselves? For may not the Judge on the Bench (and it is storyed of Aelian.
Var. Hist. l. 13. c. 24. Valor. Maximus l. 6. c. 5. Extern. 3.
Zaleucus) out of zeal to Justice and the Laws most innocently will the
execution of his Son, a Malefactor, whose pardon or Reprieve out of a fatherly
affection he may as innocently desire? What opposition yet is here? And the
Judge may execute that Son, whom the Father would spare, if the laws would
permit. But then indeed if one desire proceed so far, as to thwart and oppose
the other, that it cannot be accomplished, as in the case of Zaleucus, where
his natural affection would not suffer the sentence to be fully, according to
the letter and tenor of the law, put in execution, there is truly an
opposition, because it is circa idem, about one and the same thing, and the
desires cannot now be reconciled and stand together.

But then it was not so in the desires of our Blessed Savior. Abhor death
indeed and Torments he did, as terrible in themselves; but then he willingly
embraced them as the means God had appointed for the salvation of the world.
And we need no instructions to fear what is destructive to our welfare and
being; for Nature instantly suggests it without any deliberation. But if Reason
teach us against the Motions of Nature not to fear, and the Will follow the
dictates of the Understanding, notwithstanding the dreadful apprehensions of
sense, and so masters Nature, that it makes it willing to yield (even against
her own preservation) and to suffer for a far nobler end that Reason proposes,
here is no opposition. The desires indeed are diverse, For the sense of Nature
and inferior Reason presented the ignominy of the Cross unto him as they are
in themselves evil, without the consideration of any good to follow, and so
caused a desire to decline them, expressed in the prayer he made: but superior
Reason considering them with all circumstances, and knowing Gods resolution to
be such that the world should thereby he saved, and by no other means,
persuaded to a willing acceptance of them. Field of the Church, l. 5. c. 18.
page 452.
and issue they do from different respects and considerations; but then they
are not repugnant in the event, because the inclinations of the one hinder not
the prosecution and accomplishment of the inclinations of the other. If Christ
then had not been afraid of death, we might have doubted whether he had been
truly flesh and blood: but when, notwithstanding the dreadful apprehensions of
Nature, we see him patiently and cheerfully submitting to it, we now magnify
his Love, that was stronger then death. Consider we then Death in it self, and
Nature teaches Christ to shun it. And if now it had not been Gods peremptory
Decree, that he should suffer at this time for the Redemption of the world, at
this time as innocently he might, according to this natural instinct, have
declined it, as we read that he did before that his hour was come. But then
consider we death as a means to procure the salvation of the world, and Piety
and Mercy and his Transcendent Philanthropy raises in him a most earnest
longing and desire to embrace it. If then 1. he had out of a natural instinct
abhorred Death, and out of the same natural instinct had embraced it; or 2ly,
if the desires of Nature had withstood and hindered the dictates of Reason and
Grace (as oftentimes they do, even in the very best of men, by reason of our
inbred corruption;) then there had been truly an opposition in his desires, the
Repugnance had been in the same respect and the same thing.

. 48. We see here then Nature and Sense, Reason and Grace in Christ all
innocently employed about one and the same Object, and in all amicably working
without any opposition according to their proper Motions and Inclinations:
Sense and Nature innocently express, what they might as innocently embrace, if
God had been so pleased, and Grace and Reason had not proposed a far more
noble end then self -preservation now simply and absolutely to be prosecuted,
though with the dolorous sufferings of Sense, and the present ruin of Nature.
We see also Grace and Reason induce the will of Christ freely and cheerfully to
conform it self to the will of God, in making use of those means which were
grievous to Sense, and destructive of Nature, for the attaining that end, which
was of so high concernment as the salvation of the world, which now ex
hypothesi and upon supposal of Gods Decree could not otherwise be accomplished.

. 49. And therefore if secondly we shall compare the will of God, or the divine
and humane will of Christ, we shall find no opposition in them neither. For two
may have contrary desires in different respects without any repugnance or
thwarting in either of their Wills, unless the desires of the one go so far as
to endeavor or actually cross the accomplishment of the inclinations of the
other: and then the Contrariety lies in respect of the same volition. We read
that Saul, in regard of his oath, condemned 1 Samuel 14. 44, 45.
his son Jonathan to death for tasting a little honey contrary to his command;
and the People, in regard of the great deliverance God had that day wrought by
Jonathan, were grieved that he should be put to death. As yet there was no
repugnance. For Jonathan, notwithstanding the peoples sorrow and unwillingness,
might have dyed. But when they in prosecution of their desires go so far as to
hinder the execution of Readiness purpose in the death of Jonathan, here was now
an opposition and contrariety about the same volition. But now it was not so in
Christ. For the will of God was, that Christ should suffer death, not as
destructive and grievous to Nature, but as a means of the Redemption of the
world; and the will of Christ, though death were repugnant to Nature, patiently
submits to death in order to that end. Here then upon Christ's part there was
no opposition to the will of God. Nor was there on the other side any
repugnance in respect of the Divine will to the Humane, or of that with it
self. For the will of God and the superior faculties of Christ's Soul did not
at all hinder or trash the desires and motions of Nature. Highly pleased God
was, since Christ was truly Man, endued with Sense as well as Reason, that both
Nature, Vide Field Of the Church, l. 5. c. 18. p. 452. infra citat.
Sense and Reason in him should all move in their proper spheres without any
interruption, according to their several propensions and inclinations. And
therefore though there may appear a difference in the material Object, and one
desired one thing, and another desired another, as appears by that of our
Saviors prayer, Non sicut ego volo, sed sicut tu, yet not as I will but as
thou will; yet in the formal Object there was never Dico secundo, per Actum
inefficacem interdum voluit humana Christi voluntas quod absolute and
simpliciter Deus nolebat; semper tamen hujusmodi Actus erat conformis Divinae
voluntati tanquam Principio and Regulae, and ideo simpliciter illae voluntates
nunquam fuerunt contrariae. Tota haec conclusio est certa and communis
Theologorum in 3. distinct. 17: ubi Ricardus and Bonaventura art. 1. q. 3.
Alens. 3. part. q. 15. memb. 1. art. 2. and colligitur ex omnibus Conciliis and
Sanctis citatis. Et prima quidem pars conclusionis de diversitate in materiali
Objecto satis constat ex illis verbis saepe citatis, Non sicut ego volo, sed
sicut tu, and ex dictis supra de his Actibus inefficacibus. Secunda vero pars
de formali seu affectiva concordia facile etiam patet, quia etiam isti Actus
inefficaces erant in suo genere honesti and boni: unde Divina voluntas volebat
ut humana illos efficeret, and ipsa humana voluntas ex perfecta ratione and
deliberatione illos in se admittebat, ut in hoc etiam Divinae voluntati
obsequeretur: and ita non solum in hoc erat conformitas inter Divinam and
humanam voluntatem, sed etiam inter inferiorem and superiorem partem ejusdem
voluntatis. Et hinc facile etiam ostenditur ultima pars, and ex^lud^tur
contrarietas inter voluntates Christi. Nam haec esse non potest, ubi ratione
volendi est consensio voluntatum, neque ubi una voluntas nihil vult nisi quod
alia vult ipsam velle. Ac denique, quia Contrarietas saltem requirit, ut quod
alteri sub aliqua ratione placet sub eadem alteri displiceat; vel illud idem
quod una voluntas efficaciter vult, altera absolute nolit, quia nisi adsit haec
repugnantia, voluntates non se impediunt, neque una alteram excludit, quod est
de ratione Contrariorum: Ostensum est autem non fuisse in Christo actus hoc
modo oppositos seu repugnantes. Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. disp. 38. tom. 1.
sect. 4. page 592. col. 1. C. D. To this add what Aquinas has delivered to
this purpose, in the place already cited in the close of his Answer in Corpore.
any difference, but a most exact harmony and agreement.

For even these natural desires and inclinations of Sense were still
conformable to Gods will as their Principle and Rule. And though God had simply
and absolutely decreed they should not take effect, so as to hinder the motions
of Grace and inclinations of Reason; yet decreed he had they should express
themselves in Christ in an inefficacious wish and desire, to testify Natures
apprehensions, and the frailty of flesh and blood, even in the highest
advancement of Grace that flesh and blood is possibly capable of, and to leave
us an example and instruction in such cases. Though the hand shake and tremble
when it takes the deadly Potion; yet sinful we are not, because we are frail.
If notwithstanding the dread and horror at the apprehension of present
Torments, we patiently submit to Gods will, and cheerfully drink the bitter
^otion, that will as well testify the enlarged greatness of our Faith, and
Patience, and Charity, as it will do Vide Estium l. 3. Sent. did. 17.. 3. p.
50. col.. 1. A. B. C. D.
our infirmities that naturally and necessarily encompass Flesh and Blood.
These inefficacious desires and wishes of Nature, so long as they continue
such, are in their own kind good and honest, and the issues of Nature, which is
the good work of God. And therefore God decreed that Christ should express
them, though still with a submission and conformity to his own will, that had
absolutely decreed against their fulfilling. And the humane will of Christ,
upon just reason and deliberation, did not hinder these inclinations of Nature,
but suffered them to express themselves in him in bedience to the will of God.

. 50. And therefore hitherto we find a most exact harmony and agreement between
the will of God and the will of Christ, even there where most they seemed to
clash, as also a perfect concord between the inferior Sensitive part and the
superior Rational part of the same Will.

. 51. No contrariety then there can be in the Acts of Christ's divine and humane
will, where there is a consent of them both in the ground and reason of
willing, and where the one does never desire any thing but what the other does
approve of, and wills that it should desire. And since the Nature of Opposition
does require at least, that 1. what in one respect is grateful and pleasing to
one, should in the same respect be also displeasing to the other, or 2. that
what one does simply and efficaciously desire, the other should as absolutely
and peremptorily oppose; most evident it is, that as the natural and rational
will of Christ had no such repugnance and opposition in their several Acts
among themselves, nor they with the divine will, nor the divine with them,
there could be no true opposition or repugnance between them. Gods will was the
sovereign Rule and Law for Reason here to sail by, and that guided the
inclinations of Sense and Nature still by that Chart and Compass. That ruled
and guided Sense and Nature still moving quietly and regularly in their own
sphere, and did so perfectly govern and direct all according to the will of
God, that neither was Reason at any time disturbed or thwarted in its motion,
nor did Sense and Nature move further or otherwise then as Gods law, and Grace,
and Reason saw fit. Ad dictorum intelligentiam adhiberi potest Similitudo de
sphaera prima coelesti and orbibus inferioribus, qui quamvis motu suo tendant
in oppositum, non tamen Primi mobilis motum impediunt seu retardant, sed potius
ipsorum motus temperaniur motu primi, quia similitudine adsimile propositum
utitur Philosophus, l. 3. de Anima. Estius l. 3. Sent. did. 17.. 3. page 50.
col. 1. E. F.


. 52. We may make this plain by a familiar instance. We are taught in
Astronomy, according to the Hypothesis of Aristotle and Pt^lemy, that the
inferior Orbs have a twofold motion, the one Natural and Intrinsecal, arising
from their Forms or Intelligences, which is from West to East, which they call
Periodical, and is finished in that set period of time as Nature has appointed;
the other adventitious and Extrinsecal, arising from the Rapture of the Primum
mobile, and tends to the direct contrary points, from East to West, and is
called Diurnal. Now as every Sphere, according to its proper motion, tends from
West to East to the finishing of its course and Period, and yet is carried
about by daily constant turnings of the Primum mobile from East to West; so
neither does that in its periodical motion, though to opposite points, hinder
or retard the daily motion of the Primum mobile, nor yet is hindered by the
Primum mobile's motion in the prosecution and finishing of its own course and
stage, but one constantly overrules, and the other as constantly obeys, and
has its motion tempered and guided by the motion of the first. This may also be
explained upon the Hypothesis of Copernicus in the triple motion of the Earth.
But the most ingenious Galileus has helped us with an instance in Nature beyond
all exception. And it is in the Motion of a Ship or Gallion under sail, where
all the Motions of Bodies under deck are so attempered and governed by the
general Motion of the Vessel, that they move as regularly either upward or
downward, backward or forward, as if the Ship lay fixed in the harbor or at
Anchor.

. 53. And this will plainly appear in Christ, if we consider the manner of his
speech and prayer. In S. John thus we read, Joh. 12. 27.
that he says, Now is my Soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me
from this hour, but for this cause came I unto this hour. So again in the very
midst of his bloody Agony, O my Matt. 26. 39.
Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I
will, but as thou will. And again, O my father, if this Verse. 42.
Cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done. Here
indeed we have the inefficacious desires of Nature Vide Estium loc. supra
citat. col. 1, 2.
petitioning for a removal of that bitter Cup, as so formidable to Flesh and
Blood; and yet Reason and Grace so overruling Nature, that it is with a
submission of it self and its desires to the will and pleasure of God. And then
we have the rational will and inclination absolutely and effectually decreeing
and resolving to submit to the will of God, whatsoever Terrors and Torments
Vide H. Grot. in Mat. c. 26. v 39 p 459. Dices, hi actus, volo and nollem,
quamvis non sint simpliciter contrarii, tameu ut versantur circa idem Objectum
materiale sunt aliquo modo repugnantes, Et unus potest alium saltem ex part
impedire, seu retardare, etc. Respond^tur, proprie nullam fuisse repugnantiam:
hujusmodi enim actus tunc habent illum modum repugnantiae, quando alter eorum
est praeter rationem and deliberati nem voluntatis; quando vero ipsemet actus
inefficax est ab ipsamet voluntate p^aeordinatus and deliberatus, non potest
ipsamm^t voluntatem retardare vel impedire ex cujus deliberato consensu oritur,
-- praesertim quia, cum omnes isti actus essent ex divina ordinatione, and
omnes honestissimi, ^ulla inter eos poterat esse propria contrarietas aut
repugnantia Suarez. tom. 1. tert. part. Thom disp. 38. sect 4 p. 529. col. 1. 2.
death shall carry with it. Christ then did (...) simpliciter, as they speak,
simply and absolutely submit to death, as he saw God had absolutely determined
he should suffer it, and as Reason did propose it as the only means to procure
the salvation of the world: and abhor Death he did, not as God had decreed he
should suffer it for the Redemption of the world, but only (...), and secundum
quid, as they speak, as destructive to Nature, and most grievous to flesh and
blood as precisely and by its self considered, without relation to the end
which God had appointed, which Sense could not judge of.

. 54. And now if it here be said, that these two Acts of the will, volo, and
nollem, I will, and I would not, though they are not properly and simply
contrary, yet as they both respect the same material Object, they are in some
regard opposite, and one may in part hinder and retard the motion of the other,
and therefore there may be some kind of reluctance, some kind of unwilling
willingness in Christ, and the Acts of his will:

. 55. To this I answer, that though it may be, and ordinarily it is to in all
other men, yet it was not so in Christ. For those Acts of the Will are then
only in this respect opposite and tras^^ng one another, when one of them
proceeds (as Suarez expresses it) praeter rationem and deliberationem
voluntatis; ^ut when the inefficacious Act and desire of Nature is ab ipsamet
voluntate praeordinatus and deliberatus, is foreseen and preordained, and still
guided by the deliberation and counsel of the Rational Appetite, it cannot at
all hinder or retard in the least the rational desires of the Will, because
they proceed and spring up in Nature only by its good will and deliberate
consent.

. 56 And therefore thirdly, since there is found no contrariety and opposition
between the natural and sensual and rational desires of Christ's humane will,
and all are conformable to his divine will, and since all were most just and
honest in themselves, and the issues of Nature and Reason and Grace, which are
the works of God, no wonder it is that now God should preordain that all these
should work according to their proper Motions and inclinations, since hereby
God is glorified, and the truth of Christ's humane Nature declared, and his
Patience, and Meekness, and Courage, and Mercy, and Piety, and Love both to God
and man so highly magnified.

. 57. And then fourthly, Christ might as innocently express these natural
desires in Prayer to God, and petition for a removal of them, so far forth as
they were burdensome and dreadful to Nature, with submission to Gods will, and
a resolution patiently and freely to submit to what God has otherwise resolved
Vide Hookers Eccl. Pol. l. 5.. 48. page 283, 284.
and appointed. For what I may lawfully desire, that I may as lawfully pray for
with submission to Gods will, so far and according to the respects as I may
desire it. As then these inclinations of Sense dreading death were the issues
of nature; so Reason might be the Christus oravit secundum sensualitatem, in
quantum sci Oration ejus exprimebat sensualitatis affectum, tanquam
sensualitatis advocata, etc. Aquin. 3. part. q. 21. art. 2 in corp. Vide
Cajetan. ibid. in Comment. ad art. 3. Oration potest esse alicujus dupliciter;
uno modo sicut proponentis, alio modo sicut ejus pro quo proponitur. Primo modo
Oration non potest esse nisi rationis, and nullo modo sensualitatis: quia oration
proponitur Deo. Illius est ergo orare, ut proponentis orationem, cujus est in
Deum tendere: istud autem non est sensualitatis, quae non transcendit
sensibilia; sed rationis. Secundo modo potest esse oration seusualitatis,
tanquam ejus pro quo proponitur: and sic oravit Christus, quando petivit
calicem passionis hujus a se transferri. Durand. l 3. Sent. d. 17. q 2. B.
Advocate of Sense, and express these desires in a Prayer for the removal of
them, so long as Reason still so rules and governs Sense, that it patiently
submits to Gods pleasure, and desires it only with condition that God so sees
fit. And this we find to have been the condition of our Saviors Prayer. First
the Condition is expressed, and then the Will is resigned to Gods ordering and
pleasure, and finally resolved and shut up in that, Father, if it be possible,
let this Cup pass from me: yet not my will, but thine be done.

. 58. The only Sed hinc quaeritur, cum ratio sciret sensualitatem non
exaudiendam, quomodo hanc proposuit petitionem. Nich. d' Orbellis l. 3. Sent.
did. 17. q 2.
difficulty that remains is, to consider with what propriety and congruity
Christ might thus pray, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me,
when he knew it was not possible it should be removed; because God had from all
eternity decreed and absolutely resolved he should drink it, when he himself
had contracted and covenanted with his Father, and came into the world for no
other end.

. 59. To this I answer, first, that since Christ de facto did thus pray,
without doubt most congruous it was that he should so pray, though we knew not
the reason of it. For plain it is that thus he prayed for a removal of this
bitter Cup, since all the Evangelists do punctually record it, and S. Paul in
his Epistle to the Hebrews does further confirm it; and as plain it is that he
himself did know that it was impossible the hour should be removed from him,
because he himself does so declare his knowledge, even when he prays for a
removal of it. Now is my soul troubled, says he, Joh. 12. 27. and what shall I
say? Father, save me from this Vbi (...) omnino mortis tempus denotat. Grot.
Annot. in Matt. 26. verse. 39.
hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Nor can it here be said, that
any thing either now or in his bloody Agony did Cum autem verba haec Christi
and quae sequuntur uno nexu cohaerea^t, non est putandum quicquam illi velut
impraemeditatum excidisse, and quod prius dixerat vere and proprie per id quod
posterius est emendari, cum multo rectius dicatur uno codemque tempore Christum
exprimere voluisse tum quid vellet tum quid velit, etc. H. Grot. Matt. 26.
verse. 39.

Vide Luc. Brugens. ibid. Hooker's Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 48. p. 282.


fall from him without due pondering and regard, or that his present Griefs had
distracted his Thoughts, and troubled his Reason, or disturbed his Memory so,
that he should need to correct and amend what he before had spoken amiss. As
this were unworthy the Savior of the world, so more truly we must say, that
Christ did at one and the same time express the desires of Nature and Grace, of
Sense and Reason, both his absolute and effectual Will and Resolution, and his
inefficacious desires, and the present necessities of Nature.

. 60. For Prayer, as Mr. Hooker has most excellently well Hookers Eccl. Pol. l.
5.. 48. p. 284.
observed, has other lawful uses then only to serve for a chosen mean, whereby
the Will resolves to seek that which the Understanding certainly knows, or
is persuaded it shall obtain. It serves as well for a presentation of mere
desires, and an expression of our present griefs, as to procure desired effects
at the hands of God. Pain then and Torments and Death being irksome to flesh
and blood, Nature teaches us to pray and seek for remedy where it is to be had.
And though we have no assurance of being heard in this our present request, nay
though we know we shall be denied in the particular we pray for, yet hereby we
testify our dependence upon God, and that we put our trust in him, even when
or although he will slay us Add to this, that hereby we testify and
acknowledge Gods sovereignty over us, and his absolute Power to help us, even
then when we are assured that for Reasons best known to his own almighty
Wisdom he is resolved not to hearken to us. And as thereby we glorify him, by
offering the Tribute of Praise to his name: so we express our Faith and
assurance that our Prayers shall some way or other return into our own bosoms;
and though he answer us not in that very kind that we pray for, yet he will not
fail us in that which he shall judge more for our Advantage. For he himself has
invited us to call upon him in the day of trouble, and has promised to deliver
us, that so we may glorify him. The event shows that this Promise is not to
be understood according to the deliverance we pray for, but only for that which
his own Wisdom thinks fit. And therefore though to pray for things absolutely
impossible be irrational and absurd; yet to pray for that which ex hypothesi,
and upon supposition of this or that decree of Gods, is impossible, is most
pious and Christian; since thereby we acknowledge that he who now, for some
reasons best known to himself, will not help us, might otherwise very easily do
it, and will otherwise compensate the refusal of this present request.

. 61. And therefore since Prayer is not only explicatio propriae voluntatis
apud Deum ut eam impleat, but also, as the same Aquinas, it is an expression of
the present exigencies of Nature, our Blessed Savior, though he knew God had
otherwise decreed, might pray for a removal of the bitter Cup, because Oration
est quasi interpres voluntatis humanae apud Deum. Durand. l. 3. Sent. d. 17. q.
2. art. 1 p. 1. 85. C.
hereby he did not express Alio modo potest dici aliquis orare secundum
sensualitatem, quia sc. ejus ratio orando Deo proponit quod est in appetitu
sensualitatis ipsius. Et secundum hoc Christus oravit secundum sensualitatem,
in quantum sc. ejus oration exprimebat sensualitatis affectum, tanquam
sensualitatis advocata: et hoc ut nos de tribus instrueret. Primo quidem, ut
ostenderet se veram naturam humanam suscepisse cum omnibus ndturalibus
affectibus. Secundo, ut ostenderet quod homini licet secundum naturalem
affectum aliquid velle quod Deus non vult. Tertio, ut ostendat quod proprium
affectum debet homo divinae voluntati subjicere. Vnde Augustinus in Enchiridio
dicit, Sed Christus hominem gerens ostendit privatam quandam hominis
voluntatem, cum dicit, Transeat a me calix iste; haec enim erat voluntas humana
proprium aliquid and tanquam privatum volens: sed quia recto cord rectum vult
esse hominem, atque ad Deum dirigi, subdit, Veruntamen nonsicut ego volo, sed
sicut tu. Acsi dicat, Vide te in me: quia potes aliquid velle, etsi Deus aliud
velit. Aquin. 3. p. q. 21. ari. 2. in Corp. Sic and Durand. l. 3. Sent. d. 17
q. 2. art. 23.
what he absolutely desired, but only what Nature was at present troubled and
amazed at, and should otherwise effectually desire, if God had not been pleased
to resolve the contrary.

. 62. And this he did for three reasons especially, as the Quantum ad secundum
etc. dicendum quod hujus ratio fuit triplex. Prima ad manifestationem humanae
naturae assumptae, quia naturaliter refutabat passionem; and in hoc erudivit
nostram sidem. Secunda vero ad confirmandam nestram imbecillitatem, ut non
diffidamus si passionum pericula exhorremus; and in hoc erexit spem nostram.
Tertia ut ostenderet voluntatem nostram divinae voluntati esse per omnia
subjiciendam, quod ostendit in condition apposita, Non sicut ego volo, sed
sicut tu: and in hoc ordinavit in nobis Charitatem, qua affectum nostrum
divinae voluntati confer debemus; unde magis oravit pro nobis in illa
oratione quamoraret pro se. Nic. d'Orbellis l. 3 Sent. d. 17 q 2.
Schools have observed. First, to testify the truth of his humane Nature, and
that he had taken flesh and blood, with all the frailties and infirmities of
it. And secondly, to show that it is lawful for the Christian, according to the
exigencies of Nature, to desire some things that God has otherwise resolved
against. And thirdly, to instruct us, that notwithstanding any contrary
inclinations and desires of flesh and blood, yet we should cheerfully submit
our present desires to Gods all holy will.

. 63. Nor can it here be said that this Prayer of our Savior was vain, because
it was a desire of that which he knew was not possible to be effected; or
Foolish, in that it was for the changing his will which is immutable. For
though our Savior knew that God had decreed against the removal of the Cup,
yet he also knew that he had not decreed against the Prayer it self; and so it
would not be vain, though the desire it self was not to be accomplished: he
knew that though God had determined against the event, which would be hurtful,
yet not against the desire it self, that was natural. And therefore as tender
Mothers, though they resolve to deny the Child that which it cries for, because
it would be dangerous, yet are pleased with the earnest prayers of the Child,
because they are arguments of its affection: So God is well pleased with those
Prayers which, for reasons best known to himself, he resolves shall be
fruitless as to the thing desired, because they are testimonies of our Faith
and dependence upon him, and that we look for nothing but only at his hands.
Will any say that Hezeckiah did in vain open and spread Senacherib's letter
before the Lord, or that he attempted 2 Kings 19. 14.
to lay open that to God which he knew not? Though Hezekiah knew God was
Omniscient, yet hereby he expressed his abhorrence and de estation of
Senacheribs Blasphemies in the sight of the Lord, and manifested his assurance
and confidence in Gods assistance. And the event declared that this action, as
well as his Prayer, was acceptable in Gods sight. And therefore as to this part
of Christ's prayer, impious it could not be, that was it self an act of Piety
and well pleasing to God; and foolish it could not be, that had other glorious
ends beyond the supply of Natures wants. Though it could not procure the
effecting of the present desire of Nature; yet for all that it might obtain
something else that would either countervail or transeend the blessing which at
present Nature stood in want of.

. 64. We are therefore (as Hooker's Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 48. p. 284.
Mr. Hooker most excellently) taught by his example, 1. That the presence of
dolorous and dreadful Objects, even in minds most perfect, may as clouds
overcast all sensible joy. 2. That no assurance touching future victories can
make present conflicts so sweet and easy, but Nature will shun and shrink from
them; Nature will desire ease and deliverance from oppressive burdens. 3. That
the contrary determination of God is oftentimes against the effect of this
desire. 4. Yet not against the affection it self, because it is naturally in
us. 5. That in such case our prayers cannot serve us as a means to obtain the
thing we desire. 6. That notwithstanding, they are unto God a most acceptable
sacrifice, because they testify we desire nothing but at his hands, and our
desires we submit with contentment to be overruled by his will; and in general
they are not repugnant unto the natural will of God, which wishes to the works of
his own hands, in that they are his own handiwork, all happiness, although
perhaps for some special cause in our own particular, a contrary determination
have seemed more convenient. 7. Finally, that thus to propose our desires to
God, which cannot take such effect as we specify, shall notwithstanding
otherwise procure us his heavenly grace, even as this very Prayer of Christ
obtained Angels to be sent him as comforters in his Agony. And this is most
agreeable to the Apostles determination, Heb. 5. 7. Luke 22. 43.


. 65. From these This will not seem strange unto us, if we consider that in
Christ every faculty, power and part was suffered, notwithstanding the
perfection found in some other, to do that which properly pertained unto it:
and from hence it is easy to discern how it came to pass that Christ should
desire and pray for that which he knew should never be granted, as namely that
the cup of death might pass from him. For the sense of Nature and inferior
Reason presented death to him, etc. Field of the Church, l. 5. c. 18. p. 452.
Premises and foregoing considerations it will be no hard matter to show how
the Ardency and fervor of Christ in the inward Acts of Prayer might gradually
increase, and he might be more earnest in this Act of Prayer in his bloody
Agony then formerly, without any derogation from the fullness of his habitual
Grace, the impeccability and perpetual happiness of his soul, or the
all-absolute Perfection of his Actual Love of God, as Comprehensor in the
superior part of the Soul, his Mind.

. 66. For since Prayer, as Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. tom. 1. q. 21. art 1. in
Commentar.
Suarez tells us, est actus indigentis open alterius, cui cultum and reverentiam
exhibet, and ideo ad Religionem pertinet, an Act of Religious worship, whereby
we express to God our present wants and necessities, in order to his help and
assistance; this must only belong to Christ in the state of a Viator. And
therefore the Apostle signally tells us, that in the days of his Flesh (as
that frequently signifies the frailty and infirmity and passible condition of
his humane Nature before his tion) he offered up prayers and supplications,
with strong crying and tears, to him that was able to help him.

. 67. And now though, as In quo actus orationis consistat and cujus facultatis
sit non facile, ut existimo, explicari potest -- Nunc, quod praesenti instituto
satis est, supponamus actum mentalis orationis seu petitionis apud Deum (de hoc
enim agimus) includere vel supponere aliquid ad intellectu^ and aliquid ad
volu^tate^ pertinens, sc. volu^tate^ seu desiderium obtine^di aliquid a Deo,
seu opedivina; quae voluntas supponit Deu^ cognosci ut authorem talis boni, a
quo expectandum est and petendum. Deinde includit oration ordinationem quandam
hujusmodi voluntatis seu desiderii ad Deum, qua homo manifestat Deo suum
affectum, cupiens and sperans obtinere quod appetit. Sive igitur haec ordinatio
vel explicatio desiderii apud Deu^ ad intellectum five ad voluntatem pertineat,
constat tamen Christi animam capacem fuisse omnium istorum actuu^, cum
creatasit, Deoque subjecta and inferior. Suarez. ibid. p. 588, 589.
Suarez thinks, it be hard to determine how or in what the Act of Petitionary
Prayer does consist, and to what Faculty of the Soul it belongs; yet this,
which is sufficient to our present purpose, is acknowledged, that the Inward
Act of Prayer or Petition unto God (of which alone we now speak) does include
or suppose something belonging to the Understanding, and something that
appertains unto the Will, to wit, an Actual volition and desire of obtaining
something from God, by his aid and assistance; which will supposes God to be
known and acknowledged as the author of that good, from whom we expect and
crave it. And then 2ly it includes an ordination or address to God of this will
and desire, whereby the Soul manifests her affections to God, desiring and
hoping and trusting to obtain what it so earnestly longs for.

. 68. And therefore it being evident that Petitionary Prayer can belong to none
but only those that are in want of that help from others, which they cannot
give unto themselves, and that thereby we lay open and express our desires to
God for his aid and relief, it must of necessity imply, as Mr. Hooker has well
observed, these four things: 1. the want of that which we pray Hookers Eccl.
Pol. l. 5.. 48. p. 279.
for; 2. a sense and feeling of that want; 3. an earnest longing and
willingness of mind to be eased therein; and 4. a declaration of this our
desire in the sight of God, not as if he should be otherwise ignorant of our
necessities, but because we this way show that we honor him as our God, and
are verily persuaded that no good thing can come to pass which he by his
omnipotent power effects not.

. 69. Since then that Prayer in its formal Notion is nothing else, as I may so
speak, but an interpreter and expresser of the desires of the soul to God, who
is able to help us, and since Reason Oration est quasi interpres voluntatis
humanae apud Deum. Durand. l. 3. Sent. did. 17. c. 2. page 185. C. Oration est
quaedam explicatio voluntatis apud Deum ut eam impleat. Aquin. 3. part. q. 21.
art. 1. in Corp. Constat quod oration non potest esse sensualitatis actus, and
quod sensualitatis affectus potest esse materia quam oration Deo offert.
Cajetan. in 3. part. Thom. art. 2.
in the Soul of our Blessed Savior was still the faithful advocate of Sense
and Nature, to plead her wants and necessities at the throne of grace; it
follows that as the desires were more high and ardent in him, or less inflamed,
so the gradual intenseness of this inward Act of Prayer must grow or decrease,
otherwise it could not be a true and faithful expresser of the present longings
and desires of the Soul.

. 70. And now plain it is, that the fervor and intenseness of these desires of
the Soul did rise and fall in him according to the present exigences of Nature,
or the gradual difference in the Perfection of the Object or the thing desired.
For as he could not be cozened and deluded with empty shows and appearances of
good; so his Judgment and Reason always regularly moving, must still incline
him to affect and desire orderly, and according to the true value and esteem of
the native worth and goodness of the desirable Object. As therefore the Order
of Charity, and Reason, and Gods law requires that we should love God above
all, and next our selves, and then our neighbors as our selves; so Christ,
without derogation to the fullness of his habitual Grace, as we have showed,
did, according to this Order of Charity, prefer and more earnestly desire his
own glorification at the right hand of God then ours, for whose glory he dyed;
so without doubt he prayed for it with a different fervor and ardency, as will
easily appear by the very expressions in that Prayer, which S. John has
recorded to these very purposes, Joh. 17. And has not God himself, as he
commanded us to set a higher price and esteem on spiritual blessings then
temporal, so also enjoined us to pray for them with a different ardor and
fervency? Shall I pray as earnestly for the bread that perishes, as for the
Manna that comes down from heaven? for a little fading wealth or bodily
refreshment, as for the riches of heaven and a never-fading happiness? The very
Vide Juvenal. Satyr. 10. -- nos animorum Impulsu and caeca magnaque cupidine
ducti Conjugium petimus, partumque uxoris: at illis Notum qui pueri, qualisque
futurasit uxor. Vt tamen and poscas aliquid, voveasque Sacellis Exta, and
candiduli divina tomacula porci, Orandum est ut sit men's sana in corpore sano.
Fortem posce animum, etc. Juvenal. ibid. Vide H. Grot. Annotat. in 6. Mat. v.
8. p. 142.
Heathen Poet could jeer this folly in his Votaries: and our Savior, that has
given us the most perfect pattern of Prayer, has allowed but one Petition for
temporal blessings, and five or six for spirituals; and he has so encompassed
it with spiritual desires, as if he would not have it either to begin or end
our Prayers. And therefore in that very Chapter where he has taught us to pray,
he has given us rules for the heightning and growth of this ardor according to
the worth and value of the things we desire. Lay not up (says he) for your
selves treasures Mat. 6. 19, 20, 21.
in earth, where moth and rust do corrupt, and where thieves break through and
steal. But lay up for your selves treasures in Hoc vult Christus, prout de
rebus judicamus, ita nos erga eas affici. Si in divitiis positam credimus
felicitatem, futurum ut nihil pravertamus conquirendae pecuniae studio: sin
veram virtutem solidum credimus bonum, ei nos omnem daturos operam. Et sane
verum est, quod Philosophi etiam docent, ex decretis in animo conceptis sequi
(...). Epictetus, ut solet, nervose, (...). Vnde etiam monent sollicitos nos
esse debere ut discamus rem quamque suo pretio aestimare, etc. H. Grot. Annot.
in 6. Matt. verse. 21. page 151, 152.
heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not
break through and steal. The Reason is excellent; For where your treasure is,
there will your hearts be also. What we most value, that with the greatest
longing and most earnest ardor we hunt after. The voice of Nature teaches us
this Truth, and even Philosophy has advised it.

. 71. If then our Prayers be but expressions of our desires, and as they rise
and fall, so of necessity must the ardor of our Prayers, where we pray as we
ought, and if our desires are intended or remitted according to the present
exigencies of Nature, and the real or apparent goodness of the desirable
Object; it must evidently follow, that if now at least our Saviors Natural and
sensual desires were innocently heightened, according to the present pressures
he groaned under, his Prayers and inward ardor and fervency of his desires for
a removal of the burden must proportionably increase, according to the growth
of its weight. And therefore if it also appear that our Savior was never till
this hour encompassed with such horrors, such anguish and astonishment, and
Nature and Sense in him were never so oppressed; it will also most clearly
follow, that such a tempestuous time as this, such an hour of affliction was a
fit season for Christ's ardency to receive some growth, for his zeal, to use the
Doctors expression, to be emulous of those waves, and to pour out it self not
only more profusely, but also more earnestly, at such then at a calmer season.

. 72. And now we find him in such an Agony Lament. 1. 12.
that he might well cry out, Behold and see if there were ever sorrow like unto
my sorrow! Vide B. Andrews of the Passion, Sermon. 2. Field of the Church, l. 5.
c. 18. p. 451. Aquin. 3. part. q. 46. art. 6. in Corp. Suarez. 2. tom. in 3.
part. Thom. q. 46. art. 6. disp. 33. sect. 2. p. 399. Durand. lib. 3. Sent.
did. 15. q. 3. Ambros. commentar. in Luc. c. 22. Maldonat. in Mat. c. 26.
verse. 39. Beza in Luc. 22. 44.
Here was now presented to his view in one sad and fatal night-piece, the
fearful wrath, the flashes and the lightning of an angry God for sin, not yet
attoned and pacified; triumphant death, with all its train of horrors, not yet
mastered, but proudly trampling upon all the sons of Adam; Hell and the devil,
with all his cursed Legions, threatening a final conquest of the race of men;
and finally, flesh and blood left naked, like a winters tree without any fruit
or leaves, without any the least gleam of spiritual light or joys, and left
alone, as in an open Theater, naked, to fight with all these cruel beasts and
dism^l monsters, Cum clare testetur Petrus, impossible fuisse Christu^ retineri
a doloribus mortis, sequitur non fuisse immunem ab illis and penitus liberum;
and certe suscepta nostra persona nostroque reatu necesse habuit ad Dei
tribunal se instar peccatoris sistere: hinc horror ille and pavor, qui ad
deprecandam mortem cum coegit: non quia tam acerbum illi foret e vita migrare,
sed quia ante oculos erat Dei maledictio qua peccatoribus incumbit, etc.
Calvin. Comment. in Psalm. ^2. verse. 2, 3. Vide Hug. de Sacrament. lib. 2. par.
1. c. 10. cited by Hooker l. 5.. 48. page 283.
What should now frail flesh and blood but tremble? Could it choose but stand
amazed, and cry for help? If nature ever were astonished, now it was in Christ.
If flesh and blood could ever tremble, now it must. If Vide Calvin's Institut.
lib. 2. cap. 16. 11, 12.
ever Sense and Nature could have need of Reasons help, to call for aid to him
that alone could help, this was the proper season. For what say the Evangelists
of it? He began to be troubled in Soul, says Saint John, c. 12. v. 27. to be
in an Agony, as Saint Luke c. 22. v. 44. to be sorrowful, as S. Mat. c. 26. v.
37. to be sore amazed and very heavy, as S Mark. c. 14. v. 33. So that he says
to his Disciples, my soul is exceeding sorrowful unto Death. Here is trouble,
horror and amazement, and exceeding sorrow even unto death. So great the Agony
was, so high was his astonishment, that now in a Cold night, in open air, lying
flat upon the ground, he Vide Suarez in 3. part: Thom. q. 46. art. 8. disp. 34.
sect. 2. tom. 2. page 406.
sweat for very fear, and not an ordinary common sweat, but a sweat of blood:
and this not diaphoreticus, a thin faint sweat, tainted with the thinner and
more serous part of the blood, whereof Instances are given from (...). Arist.
de histor. animal. l. 3. c. 19. p. 891. B. (...). Arist. lib. 3. de partibus
Anim. cap. 5. p. 1156. F. Duas nimirum agnoscit causas Aristoteles, unam
sanguinis tenuitatem and aquositatem, alteram vero raritatem and laxitatem
cutis and pororum apertionem; quibus nonnulli tertiam addunt, nimirum
facultatum nutritioni inservientium debilitatem. si scil. retentrix debiliter
contineat, expultrix vero fortiter expellat. Sennert. Institut. Medic. lib. 2.
part. 3. sect. 2 c. 8. de causis Sanguinei Sudoris, page 548.

Cum sudor nihil aliud sit quam pars sanguinis aquosa quae in venis est, cur
quemadmodum omnibus pars illa per sudorem effluit, non possit in paucissimis
quibusdam, qui ra^issimo sint corpore, and subtiliorem sanguinem habeant,
sanguis ipse tenuior loco sudoris effluere? and quemadmodum videmus omnes
subito correptos metu sudare, ita Christum, qui delicatissimae naturae erat,
non dicamus naturaliter apprehenso ignominiosissimo genere mortis sanguinem
sudavisse? Audio de his qui viderunt aut cognoverunt, ante annos duos, Luteriae
Parisiorum, hominem robustum and been valentem, audita in se capitali
sententia, sudore sanguineo fuisse perfusum. Maldonat. in Comment. ad Matt. 26.
verse. 36. fol. 620. C. D. Crudled drops] A singular or at least very rare
example in nature, being the effect of an extreme anguish. Deodat. in loc. Vide
Bezam, Jansenium in loc.


Aristotle and others; but grumosus, a sweat of gross and clotted blood, great
drops of blood, and those so many, that they went through all his clothes,
trickling down to the ground in great abundance. So great, so miraculously
strange a sweat it was, that some Notandum and Hilarium, l. 10. de Trinitate,
and D. Hieron. l. 2. cont. Pelag. indicare in plerisque Graecorum and Latinorum
Codicibus non inveniri neque de Angelo confortante, neque de Sudore sanguineo:
verum haec erasa videntur a quibusdam, qui verebantur Christo tribuere tam
insignia humanae infirmitatis argumenta. Jansenius in loc. So also Beza,
Maldonate on the place.

Alii non delent verbum sed sensum extenuant, quasi non revera sanguinem
Christus sudarit, sed Proverbiali forma dictum sit, sudasse sanguinem, i. e.
vehementi timore correptum fuisse, sicut vulgo de his dicere solemus, qui valde
anxii and impediti sunt, guttas eos sanguinis sudare: Ita Euthymius and
Theophylactus explanant. Mald. in loc. Confer Janscn. hic cum Theophylact. and
Euthymio. H. Grotius agrees in his Notes on the place, p. 816.


good Expositors are willing rather to understand it by a Trope or a Proverb,
then according to truth and reality in the letter. Howsoever plain it is, that
so great his grief, astonishment and agony was, that he had an Angel sent to
comfort him. How could Nature, left alone and naked, but stand amazed to enter
these so bloody lists? Well might he now take up David's complaint, and say, De
profundis, Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord. Nothing now of
comfort and protection was left; the Godhead now restrained its comfortable
influence, and left the Manhood all naked to the encounter, and nothing left
him for relief but his Prayers. Here, here was a time for ardency and zeal, and
a most heightened devotion. One Deep did now call upon another; and for his
encouragement in these his addresses to the throne of grace he had Gods own
assurance, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. He had all the fears and burdens of nature, and the
astonishment of sense, and the horror of frail flesh and blood alarming Reason
to be their faithful advocate in Prayer. And therefore to deny a heightning of
his ardor proportionable to his fears, is to make him insensible of his present
burden, and to phansy Nature not to be desirous of relief. But the Evangelist
has assured us, that as reason tells us this was a proper season for the growth
of Christ's ardency in Prayer, so it was actually heightened, and being in an
Agony he prayed more earnestly then at other times he did, when he had not such
occasion. His prayers being now the interpreters of Natures burden, they must
of necessity be heightened in fervor according to the height of the present
distress. And therefore the Apostle tells us that in the days of his flesh,
when he was now encompassed with all the miseries and frailties of nature, he
offered up Prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him
that was able to help him. These strong cries and tears Coegit haec absurditas
multos interpretes ad cap. tandum effugium. Itaque dixerunt Christum potius ex
vulgi opinione, quam proprio sensu, ita conquestum esse: sed interea non
viderunt se multum detrabere ex beneficio redemptionis, dum Christum a
terroribus quos peccatoribus incutit Dei Judicium prorsus immunem fuisse
fingunt. Inanis vero fuit hic metus, quod veriti sunt Christum tanto dolori
subjicere, ne ejus gloriam min^erent, etc. Calvin. in Commentar. ad Psalm. 22.
verse. 2, 3. p 9^. Quod si primo conflictu elicitae fuerunt sanguinis guttae, ut
opus fuerit Consolatore Angelo, non mirum est si in ultimo Agone confessus est
tantum dolorem, etc. Calvin. ibid.
were not only for a show, and to be taken notice of by men, but they came from
the heart; the heightened outcries, the streams and floods of tears and strong
clamors were true and real symptoms of a more then ordinary fervor, a more
intense ardency then formerly he had accasion for. And therefore we may well
conclude, that as his now -approaching torments made a stronger impression on
his humane Nature then at other times; so now, on this occasion, he prayed the
more earnestly then at other times. As the occasion was weighty for the
inflaming of his zeal, so it cannot be denied but his fervency was advanced to
a proportionable degree. And so, as the Doctor says, his bloody Agony may well
testify, but it cannot prejudge the ardency that by this occasion was
heightened.

. 73. And therefore Non ergo sine causa ipse quoque Dominus, quum precibus
incumbere vehementius vellet, in secessum procul hominum tumultu se conferebat,
etc. Calvin. Institut. lib. 3. c. 20.. 29.
Mr. Calvin not only acknowledges that our Blessed Savior did sometimes pray
more ardently then at other times, but also demonstrates that times of trouble
and distress are fit opportunities for the heightning of our fervor and
ardency in Prayer, and that then Vide Calvin. in Matt. 26. 39. Institut. lib.
2. c. 16.. 11, 12.
more especially God calls upon us for it. His words are these, Si quis
objiciat non semper aequali necessitate urgeri nos ad precandum, fateor id
quidem: atque haec distinctio nobis a Jacobo utiliter traditur. Jac. 5. 13.
Tristatur quis inter vos? oret: qui laetus est, canat. Ergo dictat ipse
communis sensus; quia nimium pigri sumus, prout res exigit, nos acrius a Deo
pungi ad strenue orandum. Psalm. 32. 6.
Et hoc tempus opportunum nominat David: quia (sicuti pluribus aliis locis
docet) quo nos durius premunt molestiae, incommoda, timores, aliaeque species
tentationum, ac si nos Deus ad se accerseret, liberior patet accessus. Calvin.
Institut. l. 3. c. 20.. 7. So again to this purpose. 29. Sed enim istud nihil
obstat quo minus unaquaeque Ecclesia, cum subinde ad frequentiorem precationum
usum se extimulare, tum majore aliqua necessitate admonita acriore studio
flagrare debeat.

. 74. And therefore since, as Mr. Calvin most truly, a time of great affliction
is a fit season for the heightning our zeal and devotion, and God then more
signally calls upon us for it; Our Savior, all whose actions, especially of
this nature, were for 2 Pet. 2. 21.
our example and instruction, did now in this his Agony pray more earnestly, to
teach us what we should do in such cases, and that we might learn from his
practice, that a Time of affliction is a season for the growth of our inward
ardency and devotion and intenseness in Prayer, as well as for the outward
clamors and outcries. Quoderat demonstrandum.

. 75. And therefore, though it is evident that now it will be lost labor to
make any reflections upon the former part of our Refuters second Answer, yet to
gratify him in these his injunctions, I shall cast some light strictures on
it, though the Doctor did not, because it was needless.

. 76. Whereas then our Refuter says in the application of the first branch of
his second answer, That if we consider Christ's prayer in reference unto the
Object unto whom it was made, God, the religion and inward worship of his
Prayer was for degrees always alike equal. His trust and dependence upon God,
love of zeal, and devotion toward God, from which all his Prayers flowed, were
not at one time more intense then at another.

. 77. To this I answer First,

1. That if these be considered in the Habit, without doubt they were always
alike equal, they were not at one time more intense then at another; because
habitually they were always in him in the full height and Perfection. But then
this is not the question between him and the Doctor. 2. But then secondly, if
these be considered in their several Acts, and if we shall compare them one
with another, there must of necessity be a gradual difference in them according
to the present exigence and occasion. The reason is one and the same in these
and all other Acts of virtue, quod scilicet, as Cajetan truly, si homo exercet
Cajetan. in 2. 2. q. 38. art. 12. in respons. ad terlium.
eos tenetur eos exercere cum debitis circumstantiis, A man is bound to perform
them with all due and lawful circumstances. And therefore though the Habit of
divine Charity, of Religion and Devotion, etc. be always full, yet the will of
Christ did perform the several Acts of those graces according to those due
measures and circumstances that Gods Law required. His love to God in the Act,
I mean in that high, that transcendent Act of divine Love immediately
terminated on God, was at the height; his own glory and exaltation in the
Humane Nature he loved in a proportionable degree next to that, and then the
Church, and then his own life, which yet he laid down for the redemption of the
Faithful. So also in the Acts of Prayer and Devotion, they were always
performed with that fervency as the present occasion and the things that he
prayed for did require. This already has abundantly been demonstrated, and
therefore needs no further proof.

. 78. Secondly I answer, That if we shall consider Christ's actual Love as
immediately terminated on God, and the Acts of his trust and dependence upon
him, his Acts of Love and Zeal and Devotion toward him, that immediately flowed
from his all-full and perfect knowledge of Gods absolute sovereignty and
goodness, which as Comprehensor, and also by the Habit of infused knowledge of
God he enjoyed, those were always one and the same; he could not love him more
then he did, or reverence him more then he did, or trust in him more then he
did, because it was impossible he should know or enjoy him more then he did.
But these being the spring and fountain from which all Christ's Prayers flowed,
as our Refuter expressly acknowledges, were not the Acts of that holy Love and
Zeal and Devotion that are now in controversy between himself and the Doctor;
and therefore their constant fullness of intensive perfection makes nothing to
this purpose.

. 79. But then there are other Acts of Love and Charity, of Zeal and Devotion
which flow from these as the effects from their cause, and of which only the
Doctor spoke, as we have abundantly demonstrated, that differed one from
another in gradual Perfection. We have already proved it of our Saviors Prayer
in the Garden.

. 80. The Acts then of Love and Trust and dependence upon God, and of Zeal and
Devotion to him, may be considered either precisely and abstractly in
themselves, and by themselves, as flowing from peculiar Habits and Virtues of
the same names, which are the causes and fountains from whence all our Prayers
flow: (for pray we do to God, because we love, and honor, and reverence, and
trust and depend on him) or else as they are the Acts issuing from Prayer, as
they are the consequents and ^manations, Aquin. 2. 2. q. 83. art. 3. in Corp.
as I may so speak, that visibly shine in it, and per modum connotantiae result
from it. For, as Aquinas truly, Ad religionem proprie pertinet reverentiam and
honorem Deo exhibere: and ideo omnia illa per quae Deo reverentia exhibetur
pertinent ad Religionem. Per Orationem autem homo Deo reverentiam exhibet, in
quantum scil. ei subjicit and profitetur orando se Deo indigere, sicut authore
suorum bonorum: unde manifestum est quod oration est proprie religionis Actus.
As out of Religion we pray to God, so in and by our Acts of Prayer we give him
religious reverence and worship. And therefore, as Cajetan well observes, there
Cajetan. in 2. 2. Thom q. 83. art. 3.
are three things considerable in Prayer; First, the thing prayed for, the
object of our desires and prayers: and in this we acknowledge Gods fullness and
superlative Goodness, because we desire to have our wants supplied from his
store, and therefore we ask it of him. Secondly, the Petition it self: and thus
we honor God also, because our very Petition and Act of Prayer is an Act of
subjection, and an acknowledgement of Gods power to help us; for he that asks
any thing of another, does eo ipso acknowledge his own wants, and by this very
Act does submit himself to his will and power; he does also in this his asking
profess a Power in him to whom he prays to relieve him, a goodness and mercy
that will incline him to make use of this his Power to his relief, and a
wisdom and gracious Providence to over rule and order all things, that they
may best serve for his relief. Thirdly, the Petitioner, who by his mind and
understanding does petition God, (for Prayer is an Act of the Understanding,
the prime and most noble part of man:) and thus he also honors God in this, in
that he subjects the noblest part of his Soul to him, makes use of that to
express his desires, and acknowledgement of his Power and Goodness.

. 81. And now as by all these we honor God in Prayer, so our Religion and
worship in the first and second respects are capable of augmentation, and God
may be more or less honored by them. Nay in the third also this is possible of
increase, when the Petitioner, as we say in our Liturgy, does offer up not
only his mind, but his whole soul and body, and every part and faculty of it in
Prayer, the Mind to conceive, the Will to censent, the Tongue, the Hand, the
Eye, the Knee, all to testify and acknowledge our homage. But in the first and
second there can be no doubt. When we petition God for spiritual and heavenly
blessings, we more honor him in this Act of Prayer then when we ask him only
temporal, because we hereby more acknowledge his transcendent Perfection, Grace
and Goodness. Honoramus Cajetan. in locum ut supra.
(says Cajetan) Deum petendo, and tanto magis, quanto vel ex modo petendi vel
ex re petita profitemur ipsum esse supra omnia Creatorem, provisorem, etc. So
also when with greater longings of spirit, stronger ardencies and desires we
petition him, hereby we acknowledge our greater trust and confidence in his
Power to help us, which more magnifies and honors him. We should not come with
so much eagerness, unless we had the greater confidence in his Wisdom, Power
and Goodness.

. 82. And thus Prayer being an Act of Religion, as Aquinas truly, which in the
Act of Prayer is capable of increase, this may and ordinarily is gradually
intended, though the former were not. And yet we have already seen, that our
Savior did as well increase in the Perfection of the Acts of Wisdom and
Grace, as he did in Stature, and this acknowledged by our Refuter himself.

. 83. In short then, the Acts of Religion, and Devotion, and Love, and Trust in
Christ praying (or these Acts from whence his Prayers did all issue, as our
Refuter has it) might be still gradually the same, and yet the Acts of Zeal and
Devotion and religious worship of and in his Prayer might be, and often was
upon occasion, augmented, particularly in his prayer in the Garden. And this
was all that Doctor Hammond intended. His words are plain, The Ardency in
Christ was sincere ardency accompanied with Acts of Love and Trust of the same
temper, and the heightning it (...), was an addition of Degrees to that Act of
Ardency, and so of Prayer, and proportionably of Love and Trust in God, above
either what there was, or what there was occasion for at other times.

And so at last I have gotten liberty to follow our Refuter's Motion.

SECT. 17.
The Refuters three Arguments to prove the Act of Christ's Love always equally
intense, impertinent to the present Question. His confident proposal of them to
be examined as rigidly us the Doctors pleases, and his vain Ostentation in
placing them in his Title Page censured. The Ambiguity of the Phrase, Christ's
Love of God, distinguished from Crellius, Estius, Aquinas, and others. In what
sense still used by the Doctor.

. 1. He goes on most magnificently, and (...) with much pomp and ostentation,
he threatens to beat the Doctor with the very Muster-Roll of his Forces.

JEANES.
His Actual Love of God was in termino, as they say, was always at the
highest, and most intense: and this I shall not barely dictate, but prove by
three arguments, which I present unto you to be examined as rigidly as you
please, 1. The all-fulness and perfection of Christ's habitual Grace. 2. His
perpetual and uninterrupted happiness. 3. His impeceability.


. 2. Well, Sir, if this be all you aim at, you might have spared your pains in
these three Arguments. For this was never yet questioned, as we have already
demonstrated. The Doubt only is, whether those Acts of divine Charity or holy
Love in Christ, which belonged to him as Viator, and by which he merited, (such
as those of Prayer, Mercy, Charity and the like, to which he had an absolute
freedom) were capable of intension and remission. It concerns not that high
and necessary Act of Divine Love which he enjoyed as Comprehensor, and was
always in Termino, by which, as being necessary, he did not, could not merit.
And if you had not put these your Reasons in the frontispiece and Title Page of
your book, and proposed them to be as rigidly examined as the Doctor pleases,
or any for him, I should have wholly passed them by, as nothing at all to the
purpose. Howsoever I am glad that you are a man of that equal temper, that your
successes and great acquests against Doctor Hammond have not so puffed you up,
as they did the Roman Caesar, that you should vote your self perpetual
Dictator, and that you will not always dictate, but afford us some proof at
last.

. 3. Et jam ad Triarios ventum est, we are now come to our Refuters thundering
and immortal legions, those whom Victory it self shall not be able to conquer.
For these we may examine as rigidly as we please. These are the very Chariots
and horsemen of Israel; they are the forces he is so confident of, that he
sings his Io Paean himself, and proclaims his conquests by them before the
battle is yet begun; and in the very frontispiece and Title of his book, he
tells all spectators, Doctor Hammond his (...), or a greater Ardency in Christ's
Love of God at one time then another, proved to be utterly irreconcilable 1.
with his fullness of habitual grace, 2 the perpetual happiness, and 3.
Impeccability of his Soul: by Henry Jeanes Minister of Gods word at Chedzoy in
Somersetshire.

. 4. But though our Refuter when he kept within his own verge, and talked of
Thomas and Scotus, the Sums and the Sentences, amongst his Country
neighbors, seemed a tall Schoolman; yet when he dares assault Doctor Hammond,
whose Doctrine in defense of our Church being solidly founded on the Rock of
Divine Truth, neither the overflowes of Tiber nor the waves of the Lake
Lemannus, though they beat never so violently against it, could overthrow, he
is now in great danger to loose that little reputation he had already gained in
the world.

. 5. But before I come to consider his arguments, it will be needful again to
mind the Reader of the ambiguity of the Phrase, The Love of God. Charitas Dei,
sive in Deum, says Crellius (in this no Socinian) quae per se tota ad Deum
spectat, non uno modo in Sacris literis accipitur. Interdum enim sumitur
latissime, pro Sanctitate in universum; unde Jo. 1. ep. 5. 3. inquit, hanc esse
Charitatem Dei, seu in Deum, ut mandata ipsius servemus; quod idem affirmat c.
2. 5. ubi inquit, Qui servaverit sermonem ipsius vere, in hoc charitas Dei
perfecta est: nam hic quoque charitas Dei passive accipitur, hoc est pro
charitate qua Deum diligimus. Idem de charitate and dilectione sui affirmat
Christus Joh. 14. 21. cum quo conjunge verse. 15, 23, 24. Huic Charitati in Deum
salus veluti in solidum ascribitur, quod ad nos attinet, Romans 8. 28 and 1 Cor.
2. 9. Vide etiam Exodus 20. 6. ubi eodem sensu ponitur diligere Deum and
custodire praecepta ejus: and Deuteronomy. 11. 1. item 30. 16. Interdum vero strictius
paulo sumitur, ita tamen laxe, ut omnia erga Deum praecepta and officia
complectatur, and sic non pictatis pars sit, sed eadem cum illa. Quo pacto
sumitur in iis locis in quibus Lex universa dilectione Dei and proximi
contineri dicitur. Tertio strictissime ac maxim proprie sumitur pro affectu
eo, quo desideramus ut ea tum a nobis tum ab aliis fiant quae Deo sunt
gratissima, etc. Atque ex hac significatione reliquae sunt ortae. Quja enim
dilectionis est seu charitatis in Deum, ex animo cupere ea quae Deo sunt grata,
inter quae primum locum obtinent ea quae ad ipsius cultum and honorem praecipue
spectant; hinc fit ut charitatis divinae nomine comprehendantur, per quandam
metonymiam synecdochicam, ea Pietatis officia quae in Deum per se vertuntur,
quae secunda est nobis tradita hujus vocis significatio. Veruntamen, quia ea
quoque Deo sunt grata atque accepta quae Deus hominibus servanda praescripsit,
hoc est omnis generis virtutes ac recte facta, hinc fit ut illa quoque omnia
dilectionis divinae nomine comprehendantur, etc. Io. Crellii Eth. Christiana
lib. 3. c. 4. page 259, 260. To the same purpose also Estius, In Scriptura fere
ponuntur indifferenter charitas and dilectio, propterea quod in Graeco vox
unica sit (...), quam interpres modo charitatem modo dilectionem Estius l. 3.
Sent. did. 27.. 1. p. 89. col. ^. E. F.
vertit; unde Augustinus l. 14. de Civit. Dei, c. 7. disputans detribus his
vocibus, Amor, Dilectio, Charitas, dicit eas cum in bono accipiuntur in sacris
literis idem significare -- Eodem loco unum atque idem vult Charitatem and
voluntatem bonam: and similia scribit lib. de Gratia Christi, c. 21. Idem Sermon.
14. Par. in festo omnium Sanctorum, c. 11. dicit quod nihil sit aliud Charitas
quam Dilectio. Et scribens in Psalm. 9. Amor, inquit, si pravus est, dicitur
Cupiditas; si rectus, Charitas. Similis locus tract. de Substantia dilectionis,
cap. 1. To the same purpose also Aquinas, (as shall after be shown) 1. 2. q.
26. art. 3. in Corp. Francis de Sales of the love of God. l. 1. c. 14.
Sales, and so generally others.

. 6. In this general sense it is, as the Love of God signifies Holiness or
Charity, Doctor Hammond takes it, as we have beyond all exception already
demonstrated. And thus also our Refuter understood him, as will be evident from
his first argument that follows; though still, when it may serve for his
advantage, he understands it of the high and most transcendent Act of Divine
Love, that agreed to Christ as Comprehensor, which was always in termino, and
at the highest, and nothing concerning the present debate. Go we then to that.

SECT. 18.
The Refuters first Argument contradicts his second, and proves not his
Conclusion. Reduced to Form. The Sequel denied. The Reason. His Authorities
concern not the Question. His citing Aquinas from Capreolus censured. The
Conclusion to be proved. Hurtado's, and Aquinas first saying from Capreolus
true, with the Reason of it from Suarez; but not pertinent. A view of the place
in Aquinas. He speaks of the Habit etc. not the Act. The different workings of
Necessary and Voluntary Causes. The Refuters Argument guilty of a double
Fallacy. His next place of Aquinas from Capreolus impertinent. His gross
ignorance, or prevaricating in his third place of Aquinas. Scotus Testimony
impertinent. Aquinas and Scotus maintain that Proposition which he would
confute in the Doctor by their Testimonies.

JEANES.
The first Argument, which has been already so fully insisted on (but yet,
with our Refuters leave,, never yet proved, as we have clearly demonstrated) is
the all-fulness and perfection of Christ's habitual G^^^e; The habits of all
Graces and virtues in Christ were always full and perfect, most intense, and
not capable of further or higher degrees, and therefore so were the inward Acts
of those Graces and virtues too, and particularly the inward Acts of the
habitual grace of divine Charity.

The Consequence of this, etc.

. 1. Well, Sir, hold you there. Are the Inward Acts of those Virtues and
Graces, and particularly the Inward Acts of the habitual Grace of divine
Charity, that very actual love of God that was in Termino, as they say, always
at the highest? were they the Acts of Christ as he was perfectus Comprehensor,
as you intimate in your second Argument? I desire your Reason for it, and do
not dictate, but prove it. I had thought that these had, if not all, yet the
greatest part of them agreed to Christ only as Viator, according to the frail,
mortal condition of his state of humiliation. What need, I pray, had he of
Trust and dependency on God for a supply of any want, that now, as
Comprehensor, was fully possessed of heaven happiness? what need had he to pray
or hope, the heaven happiness of whose soul did now even during the whole time
of his abode here on earth far surmount that of all the Saints and Angels in
heaven, as you assert in your second argument? Have the Saints and Angels in
heaven any need of Patience, and Meekness, and Fortitude, and Temperance, and
Obedience, and an humble submission to the Cross? does not the Apostle tell us,
that high and most transcendent Act of Divine Charity shall remain where God is
all in all? do not the Schoolmen that write de merito Christi say, that Christ
did not merit, but only as he was Viator? Why then do you so ignorantly or
negligently confound those Acts and Graces that are incompossible, as they
speak? As Comprehensor he could not merit, and as Viator he was not in
possession of heaven happiness. As Comprehensor his holy Love was always in
Termino, and a necessary effect of the Beatifical vision: As Viator it was not
a necessary, but a free Act of his will, and the effect of the habit of divine
Grace. As Comprehensor he has no need of the Habits and Acts of Virtues, but
only as Viator, in which state he was only in a Capacity to exercise them.
Either therefore, Sir, write more distinctly and to the purpose, or else
forbear troubling the world for the future with your Scholastical notions,
which are so crude and half codled.

. 2. Howsoever I observe that in your first Argument you rightly understand the
Doctors Notion of The Love of God, and take it here, as he still does, in the
large sense, as it is all one with holy Charity, as containing in its general
notion the Acts of all Graces and Virtues whatsoever: And therefore because now
habemus confitentem r^um, I am resolved to hold you to your Concession; and so
I come to examine it. In short it is this,

. 3. If the habitual Grace and Habits of all Graces and Virtues were in Christ
always full and perfect, then so were the inward Acts of those Virtues and
Graces, and particularly the inward Acts of Charity. But the Antecedent is
true; Ergo, also the Consequent.

. 4. To this, Sir, I answer by denying the sequel of your Major. My Reason is,
Because all Habits whatsoever, whether infused or acquisite, that are seated in
the Will, are free, and not necessary causes of the Acts that issue from them.
And therefore though all natural and necessary causes do work uniformly and
equally, and produce the same effects, where the distance is the same, and the
Patient equally disposed; yet in voluntary free causes it is far otherwise, as
we have showed. And therefore since the inward or immanent Acts of all Habits
are elicite Acts of the Will, and not necessary effects, their gradual
intension and remission in this sense depends not upon the Physical
efficaciousness, but the free and voluntary exercise of that intrinsic virtue,
as we have already demonstrated.

. 5. But he goes on and tells us that.

JEANES.
THe consequence of this Enthymeme has been already sufficiently proved, and
therefore I shall add nothing for further confirmation of it, but the
testimonies of some few Schoolmen, Aquinas, as Capreolus, etc.

. 6. How is this, Sir? I beseech you make good your promise. Did you not just
now tell us, that you would not barely dictate, but prove what you undertook?
And have you not told the world so long since in your very Title Page? And must
we now be put off to look for a Proof I know not where? I think I have given
the world abundant satisfaction already, that you have very little reason to
refer us to your former Performances. They say of the Chickens that are hatched
in the furnaces of Egypt, that they all come from the egg lame and imperfect,
for want of a natural kindly warmth. And such abortive cripled lame creatures
are all your proofs, for want of a truly genuine and Scholastical heat in the
brain that brings them forth. Though in outward modesty, like Caesar, you seem
to decline the title and office of Perpetual Dictator; yet it concerns you in
point of Interest, as it did that great Conqueror, not to forego it, that you
may secure your great victories over Truth and Doctor Hammond But by your so
worthy performances in this Part of your argument, you give me very little hope
that you have better quitted your self by the testimonies of the School men.

. 7. And thus they follow.

JEANES.
AQuinas, as Capreolus quotes him lib. 1. did. 17. q. 2. fol. 306. has this
Passage. Nihil, inquit, aliud est qualitatem augeri quam subjectum magis
participare qualitatem. Non enim aliud est esse qualitatis, nisi quod habet in
subjecto: ex hoc autem ipso quod subjectum magis participat charitatem,
vehementius operatur, quia unumquodque operatur in quantum est actu. Aquinas
thought (you see) that a greater vehemence in the Operations of Love, argued a
greater participation in the Subject of the Habits of Love. And again, secund a
secundae q. 24. art. 4. ad tertium. Similiter charitas essentialiter est virtus
ordinata ad actum, unde idem est ipsam augeri secundum essentiam, and ipsam
habere efficaciam ad producendum ferventioris dilectionis actum. Unto this I
shall add a third place out of Aquinas, quoted by Capreolus lib. 3. dis. 27.
28, 29, 30. page 209. Cum Actus and Habitus speciem habent ex Objecto, oportet
quod ex eodem ratio perfectionis ipsius sumatur. Objectum autem Charitatis est
summum bonum; igitur perfecta Charitas est quae in summum bonum fertur in
tantum in quantum est diligibile. The Habit of Love is then perfect, when it is
carried toward God as the chief, when God is loved so far forth as he may be
loved, to wit, by a Creature: when God is not loved thus inintensely, the Habit
of Love (as Aquinas thought) was imperfect. With Aquinas also Scotus accords l.
3. dis. 13. q. 3. Possibile est animam Christi habere summam gratiam, ergo
summam fruitionem. Consequentia probatur, quia actus naturaliter elicitus ab
aliqua forma, aequatur in perfectione illi formae. Unto these two great School
men I shall add the testimony of a Philosopher of great subtility and repute,
Pet. Hurt. de Mendoza De anim. dis. 16. sect. 8. page 672. Intensio actus
secundi supponit aequalem intensionem in actu primo, cum actus secundus
supponat primum.

. 8. But what, Sir, if not one of these Testimonies any more concern the
present controversy then any thing else in their whole writings? and that
Thomas and Scotus directly assert what Doctor Hammond maintains, and you
oppose? must you not appear to be a rare School-man, and that you quote Aquinas
and Scotus to purpose? For your credit, Sir, I doubt not, but I shall
demonstrate both these.

. 9. But First, I pray, Sir, why cite you not Aquinas from his own writings?
why do you quote him twice from Capreolus? For what if Capreolus has misquoted
Aquinas, or not rightly understood him? what if he only made use of those
words that might best serve for his present purpose, and left out those that
might clear the present difficulty? or what if he quoted Aquinas only to refute
him, as usually the latter Schoolmen do the former? Now as these may be
possible, so if either of them be certainly so, what then I beseech you is
become of your proof from Aquinas? You should therefore, like a man that would
write solidly, and as becomes a Master of Controversies, have referred us to
the place it self in the Author, that so we might by the Antecedents and
Consequents rightly have considered whether you have not mistaken the meaning
of your Author.

. 10. But for the present we will suppose that these are the words of Aquinas,
or that (which I rather believe, because I find some things tending to it in
that Author) Capreolus has given us the full meaning of the place. And therefore
I shall now consider how they serve to our Refuters advantage.

. 11. The Sequel or Enthymeme to be confirmed by the Testimony of the
Schoolmen is this, That seeing the Habits of all Virtues, and in particular
that of divine Grace and holy Charity in Christ, were all fully and most
intensively perfect in him, therefore the inward Acts of those Virtues and
Graces must be all as full and equally perfect in themselves, and with the
Habits. But do any of these Testimonies speak to this purpose? For shall I
therefore conclude, because an Infant in swaddling clothes cannot naturally
exceed the stature of a man, that therefore he equals it? Or because the Act
cannot possibly exceed the Habit from whence it issues in gradual Perfection,
that therefore of necessity it must be still as perfect as the Habit? I grant
indeed, as Hurtado has it, that Intensio Actus secundi supponit aequalem
intensionem in actis primo, that the second Act cannot possibly exceed the
first in gradual perfection, quia Actus secundus supponit primum, because it
issues from the first as the Effect from the Cause; and the Sed contra est,
quod effectus non excedit virtutem causae, etc. Aquin, 2. 2. q. 24. art. 6..
Sed contra.
Effect cannot possibly be more noble then the Cause, because all its
perfection flows from it. Aquinas therefore thought truly (as you tell us from
Capreolus) that a greater vehemence in the operation of Love argued a greater
participation in the subject of the Habits of Love. The holier Acts that any
man does perform, without doubt the more holy he is. And where the Lutenist
plays excellently, I may justly conclude, that he is a skilful Musician. But
shall I vice versa conclude, that therefore of necessity he must always play to
the very height of his skill. This, this is to be proved, and nothing else.
Tell us not therefore from Aquinas, that Charit as essentialiter est virtus
ordinata ad actum, unde idem est ipsam augeri secundum essentiam, and ipsam
habere efficaciam ad producendum ferventioris dilectionis actum. This without
controversy is an undoubted truth. And I shall help you with a reason from
Suarez; Propter necessariam proportionem inter Habitum and Actum, non potest
habitus remissus per se efficere actum intensiorem se, quia habitus non
inclinat nisi ad actus similes ill is a quibus fuit genitus, test Aristot. 2.
Eth. c. 1. and test etiam experientia: ita enim facile operamur sicut
consuevimus, tam in specie operum, quam in modo. Et ratio est, quia Habitus non
est nisi veluti impulsus quidam, seu pondus relictum in potentia ex vi
praecedentium actuum, actus autem praecedentes non habent vim inclinandi
potentiam ad motus perfectiores, sed ad summum ad similes: alias si iidem actus
efficcrent inclinationem in potentia ad actus intensiores, pari ratione dici
posset aequales actus intendere ipsum habitum, neque ulla superesset ratio ad
oppositum probandum -- Denique etiam in habitibus infusis docent communiter
Theologi, ex vi illorum non posse potentiam efficere actus intensiores ip sis
habitibus: quamquam in eis posset esse major ratio dubitandi, vel quia tales
habitus sunt PERFECTIORES SVIS ACTIBVS; (mark that, Sir,) vel quia non solum
dant facilitatem, sed etiam potestatem. Nihilominus quia revera sunt habitus,
and dantur cum debita proportione ad actus, and ex vi illorum fiant actus
connaturali modo, ideo quantum est ex intrinseca virtute talium habituum, non
valet potentia efficere intensiores actus ip sis habitibus, sed si eos interdum
elicit, est ratione alterius, auxilii divini, de quo alias? Suarez Metaph.
disp. 44. sect. 6.. 4, 5.

. 12. But let us view the place at large as it lies in Aquinas. The question
is, Vtrum Charitas augeri possit? The answer is affirmative, In corpore;
Respondeo, Dicendum quod Charitas viae potest augeri, etc. And then in his
answer ad tertium he says, Dicendum, quod quidam dixerunt charitatem non
augeri, secundum suam essentiam, sed solum secundum radicationem in subjecto,
vel secundum fervorem: sed hi propriam vocem ignoraverint. Cum enim accidens
sit, ejus esse est inesse: unde nihil est aliud ipsam secundum essentiam
augeri, quam eam magis inesse subjecto, quod est magis eam radicari in
subjecto. Similiter etiam ipsa essentialiter est virtus ordinata ad actum: unde
idem est ipsam augeri secundum essentiam, and ipsam habere efficaciam ad
producendum ferventioris dilectionis actum. Augetur ergo essentialiter, non
quidem ita, quod esse incipiat, vel esse desinat in subjecto sicut objectio
illa procedit; sed ita, quod magis and magis in subjecto esse incipiat. The
passage that Capreolus alludes to in Aquinas is, as I suppose, partly taken out
of this answer ad tertium, and partly from the body of the answer to the
following question, Art. 5. Vtrum Charitas augeatur per additionem? The words
are these, Relinquitur ergo quod nullo modo charitas augeri potest per
additionem Charitatis ad charitatem, sicut quidam ponunt. Sic ergo charitas
augetur solum per hoc quod subjectum magis and magis participat charitatem, id
est, secundum quod magis reducitur in actum illius, and magis subditur illi.
Hic enim est augmenti modus proprius cujuslibet formae quae intenditur eo quod
esse hujus formae totaliter consistit in eo, quod inhaeret susceptibili, etc.
Aquin. 2. 2. q. 24. art. 5. in Corp.

. 13. And now, Sir, will any man suppose that you ever consulted the places
that you quoted, since they make so little, so nothing to your purpose? For
first, does not Aquinas here treat of the Habit of Charity, and not the Act?
Does he not consider it in abstracto, and precisely, as they speak, according
to the nature of the Form simply and in it self considered, and not as it is in
Concreto, in this or that subject planted? what it is naturally apt and
disposed to do, not what it actually still performs? And secondly, does he not
here all along, and in the other questions also, consider Charity as it belongs
to Sinners, and as it is capable of Increase, and not as it is in Christ in all
fullness and perfection? How then can this any way serve your turn? You are
gotten into a Quick-mire, and the more that you strive, the more deeply you
will plunge your self.

. 14. In short then I say, Though Necessary causes and Natural forms do always
work uniformly, because by a necessity of Nature they work ad ultimum virium,
to the utmost of their Power and Efficacy; yet in Voluntary Causes it is
otherwise. They work not always according to their Power, but according to
their Will and Pleasure; and this because they are naturally free and
undetermined in their Operations. Of this kind are the Habits of Grace and
Charity and all other virtues, whether in Christ or in all other men.

. 15. Your Argument then here is guilty of a double fallacy, For first you
argue a Potentia ad Actum affirmative, thus, The most perfect Charity, or that
which is more gradually perfect, may or has a power and efficacy to produce the
most or more noble Act, therefore of necessity it must, or always does so.
Though this may be allowed in Natural and Necessary Causes, yet how it fails in
Voluntary Causes and Effects, there is no man can be ignorant.

Secondly, you argue a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, thus, Because
the Act can never be more noble or intense then the Habit, therefore of
necessity it always equals the Habit in gradual perfection. How these two fail
I have already so often demonstrated, that I am ashamed to speak to the same
purpose so often; but our Refuter will have it so, and therefore we must obey
him.

. 16. To your next place of Aquinas quoted by Capreolus (though here also I
suppose that Author has given us the Meaning, not the words) let Aquinas
himself answer, and let his words themselves (to which I suppose Capreolus
alludes) show how it makes nothing to your purpose. They are in the body of the
answer of the 8th. Article, Vtrum Charitas in hac vita potest esse perfecta? To
which he answers, Dicendum quod Perfectio charitatis potest intelligi
dupliciter: uno modo ex part diligibilis, alio modo ex part diligentis. Ex
part quidem diligibilis perfecta est charitas, ut diligatur aliquod quantum
diligibile est. Deus autem in tantum diligibilis est in quantum bonus est.
Bonitas autem ejus est infinita, unde infinite diligibilis est. Nulla autem
creatura potest eum diligere infinite, cum quaelibet virtus creata sit finita.
Vnde per hunc modum nullius Creaturae charitas potest esse perfecta, sed solum
charitas Dei qua seipsum diligit. Ex part vero diligentis tunc est charitas
perfecta, quando diligit tantum quantum potest. Quod quidem contingit
tripliciter. Vno modo sic, quod totum cor hominis actualiter semper feratur in
Deum. Et haec est perfectio Charitatis Patriae, quae non est possibilis in hac
vita, in qua impossible est propter humanae vitae infirmitatem semper actu
cogitare de Deo, and moveri dilectione ad ipsum. Alio modo, ut homo studium
suum deputet ad vacandum Deo and rebus divinis, praetermissis aliis quantum
necessitas praesentis vitae requirit. Et ista est perfectio Charitatis quae est
possibilis in via, non tamen est communis omnibus habentibus charitatem. Tertio
modo, ita quod habitualiter aliquis totum cor suum ponat in Deo, ita scil. quod
nihil cogitet vel velit quod divinae dilectioni sit contrarium. Et haec
perfectio est communis omnibus charitatem habentibus. Aquin: 2. 2. q. 24. art.
8. in Corp. And hence it is that when in the same question art. 4. it had been
thus objected, 2. Praeterea id quod est in termino non recipit augmentum: sed
Charitas est in termino, quasi maxima virtutum existens and summus amor optimi
boni: ergo Charitas augeri non potest. (An objection just to the design and
drift Aquin. 2. 2. q. 24. art. 4. Obj. 2. and respons. ad 2.
of our Refuter.) To this according to the former doctrine he answers, Dicendum
quod Charitas est in summo ex part Objecti, in quantum scil. ejus Objectum est
summum bonum, and ex hoc sequitur quod ipsa sit excellentior aliis virtutibus:
non tamen est Charitas in summo quantum ad intensionem Actus.

. 17. How say you now, Sir.? Because Aquinas, and Capreolus from him, tell us
that Charity in regard of the Object is infinite, will you therefore conclude
it is infinitely perfect also in regard of the Subject and the Intension of the
Act Will you argue, because God is infinitely Lovely, that therefore by us Men
he is infinitely Beloved? Aquinas only speaks to the first, to the Perfection
of Charity ex part diligibilis, and so does also Capreolus. But your argument
concerns the Perfection of Charity ex part diligentis, which yet, in the
places quoted, Aquinas does deny of all but only God, whose Love is only
commensurate to the Object beloved.

. 18. But the truth of it is, since your Argument concerned the Habit and the
Acts of Divine Grace in Christ, you were ill advised to look for any thing in
the Author intendit de augmento charitatis secundum statumviae, tantu^ and non
de augmento charitatis absolute: and ratio est, quia de augmento charitatis
absolute loquendum erat in tractatu de gratia animae Christi, qui fuit verus
Comprehensor ab initio, and non est ei data gratia ad mensuram, etc. Cajetan.
in Commentar. 2. 2 q. 24. art. 7.. Ad secundum dubium principale.
Secunda secundae of Aquinas Sums, where ex professo he disputes only of
Charity as considered according to that imperfect state and condition of
Travelers that are now in the Way to heaven-happiness. As for the habitual
grace of Christ, which was all full and perfect, and belonged to him as
Comprehensor, that he treats of only (I mean ex professo) in the third part of
his Sums, and there you should have sought for proper Mediums and not
elsewhere.

. 19. If you shall here reply, that the Charity of Christ is Charitas Patriae
and Charitas Comprehensoris, and that Aquinas says of that, quod totum cor
hominis actualiter semper feratur in Deum, and therefore the Acts of his love
must be always uniform and at the height:

. 20. To this I answer, The Charity of Christ, or Love that we now speak of, is
not actus Comprehensoris (as shall instantly be showed,) but belonged to him as
Viator, and in its own general Notion contained in it all Virtues and Graces
whatsoever. The Acts of this Love, though they were always perfect in their
kinds, yet of necessity they could not be equal in themselves in gradual
perfection, because of the gradual difference in the Objects of this Love, much
less could they equal the all-full perfection of the Habit whence they issued.

. 21. And thus we have seen that our Refuters two first testimonies from
Aquinas, and his last from Hurtado, make nothing to this purpose.

. 22. As for his third from Aquinas, I must observe, that he has either
grossly prevaricated, or most ignorantly mistaken his Author. For whereas
Capreolus and Aquinas, in the place cited, speak only of the perfection of
Charity ex part diligibilis, and in order to the Object beloved, he renders it
to the Reader as if they had meant it of Charity ex part diligentis, and in
order to the person loving. The words in Capreolus as himself cites them are,
Cum Actus and Habitus speciem habent ex Objecto, oportet quod ex eodem ratio
perfection is ipsius sumatur. Objectum autem Charitatis est summum bonum:
igitur perfecta Charit as est, quae in summum bonum fertur in tantum in quantum
est diligibile. Which our Refuter thus renders, at least to the sense; The
Habit of Love is then perfect when it is carried toward God as the chief, when
God is loved so far forth as he may be loved, to wit, by a creature: when God
is not loved thus intensely, the Habit of Love (as Aquinas thought) was
imperfect.

. 23. In good time, Sir. But if it had been your good fortune to be a Critic
as well as Dr. Hammond, and you had been so happy to know the difference
between Participles ending in ens and ending in bilis, you would have otherwise
understood Capreolus, and not have made use of a Testimony that is so utterly a
stranger to your Argument.

And so I am come to consider whether Scotus his Testimony be any whit more
material.

. 24. With Aquinas, he says, Scotus accords; and therefore I conclude he
speaks as little to the purpose.

. 2. The place in Scotus at large is this: Contra, possibile est illam animam
habere summam gratiam, ergo summam fruitionem. Scotus l. 3. Sent. did. 13. q.
3.. 2.
Consequentia probatur; quia Actus naturaliter elicitus ab aliqua forma
aequatur in perfectione illi formae. Fruitio est Actus supernaturalis, and per
consequens elicitus a causs supernaturali, quae est gratia; and patet quod
naturaliter, quia Gratia non est formaliter libera. Ergo secundum quantitatem
gratiae potest esse quantitas fruitionis.

. 24. The truth of it is, that Subtle Schoolman does there dispute four
questions. Primo, utru Christo potuerit conferri summagratia, quae potuit
conferri creaturae? Secundo, utrum de facto fuerit collata animae Christi summa
gratia possibilis conferri creaturae? Tertio, utrum possibile fuerit voluntatem
animae Christi habere summam fruitionem possibilem naturae creatae? From whence
this passage of our Refuter is taken. Quarto, utrum anima Christi potuerit
sum frui Deo sine summa gratia? The resolution of the three first questions
he defers to the fourth. His answer to the third, whence this testimony is
taken is this: Ad tertiam Quaestionem dico, quod animam posse sum frui,
potest dupliciter intelligi, vel formaliter, vel effective; hoc est, vel quod
summa fruitio informet istam voluntatem a quocunque causetur, vel quod ipsa
voluntas efficiat summam fruitionem, and sit causa acttiva ejus. Primo modo
possibile est summam fruitionem creabilem conferri animae Christ, quia ipsa est
receptiva cujustibet accidentis convenientis sibi, and in summo; quia non
determinat sibi certum gradum istius, sicut fuit probatum in prima quaestione
de gratia: et fruitio est quoddam accidens absolutum, possibile creari a primo
Causante immediate sine action voluntatis creatae. Secundo modo videtur
probabile, quod cum illa voluntas non possit tantam vim activam habere quantam
voluntas creata alia potest habere, ut Angelica, non potest it a perfect
elicere fruitionem sicut alia voluntas potest. Licet enim possit summam gratiam
habere, quae ut causa Partialis respectu fruitionis aeque causaret fruitionem
in ipsa and Angelo, si haberet eam; tamen alia causa partialis erit inaequalis,
ut voluntas: altera autem causa partialis sit aequalis; modo tamen de facto est
maxim elicitiva, quia licet non sit voluntas ejus ita perfecta sicut voluntas
Angeli, tamen ipsa cum summa gratia, ut alia causa partiali activa, potest
ferri in perfectiorem fruitionem quam voluntas Angeli cum minori gratia, quia
excedentia gratiae excedit in ea essicientiam voluntatis Angeli. The sum in
short is this, that God de facto has bestowed on Christ a fuller enjoyment of
himself, because of a larger measure of Grace, then he has upon Angels. For
though the will of Angels be Naturally more perfect then the created Will of
Christ, yet by Grace it is capable to receive whatsoever is fit for it, and God
shall bestow upon it.

. 25. And is not our Refuter a very unsuccessful Man in all his Quotations? How
can this in any measure concern the present debate? For does not here Scotus
consider first what was possible for God to do, or Christ to receive,? Does he
not also here consider him in the state of Comprehensor, and not of a Viator?
Is not the question moved concerning the possibility of Glory, upon the
supposal of an Habitual fullness of Grace, and not at all of the Acts of Grace?
Does he not prove by the very words that our Refuter has quoted, that since it
was possible for Christ to have a fullness of Grace, that therefore it was also
possible for him to have a fullness of heavenhappiness? and this because Glory
is the necessary effect of Grace, and Acts that necessarily flow, and by way of
emanation, from their Forms and Causes, must of necessity be equal in
Perfection to the Forms from whence they issue? If then our Refuter will say
any thing to the purpose, he must conclude that all the Inferior Acts of
Virtue and Grace in him did as Naturally flow from the Habits, as Glory does
from Grace; and that Christ had no more proper Freedom to them, then he had, or
has now to the Sight and enjoyment of God: which Position, as it expressly
destroys the Foundation of his Merit, and the Redemption of the world by his
death, so it is expressly contrary to the Scriptures, and all the Fathers and
Schoolmen and Orthodox Divines in the world, for ought I could ever learn.

. 26. And thus having showed the absolute impertinency of his Testimonies to
the matter in hand, I come to prove that both Thomas and Scotus maintain that
very Proposition which he would confute in Dr. Hammond by the Testimonies of
Aquinas and Scotus.

. 27. I shall not trouble the Reader with what I have already observed to this
purpose from Aquinas. The Passage I insist on is taken from Lib. 3. Sent. d.
29. q. 1. Art. 2. The question is, Vtrum ordo Charitatis sit attendendus
secundum affectum vel secundum effectum? It is affirmed against this, when it
was objected thus, 2. Actus mensuratur secundum rationem Objecti: sed quamvis
plura sint quae ex charitate diliguntur, tamen in omnibus est una ratio
dilectionis, sc divina bonitas, quae est Objectum charitatis: Ergo, ad omnia
quae ex charitate diliguntur aequalis affectio est. The Conclusion is the very
same with our Refuters, who affirms that the Inward Acts of Christ's Love were
all equal, though the Outward Acts were not; that his Love was the same quoad
affectum, but not quoad effectum: To this the answer is, Dicendum, quod quamvis
sit eadem ratio communis diligendi in omnibus, tamen illa ratio non aequaliter
participatur in singulis, and ideo nec aequalis affectio eis debetur. So again
Art. 3. of that question in his answer ad Quintum, he says, Quod Deus ubique
aequaliter diligitur, tamen divinum bonum in isto esse non est tantum amabile
sicut ipsum esse in Deo, quia non aeque perfect in omnibus est. The sum of all
those determinations in short is this, That though the Habit of Divine Charity
respecting God and our Neighbors be one and the same; yet because of the
different Participation of the divine goodness (the formal Object of Charity)
which is infinitely perfect in God, and but unequally communicated to the
creature, there must of necessity be a gradual difference in the Acts of divine
Charity, because every thing must be beloved according to the order of the
divine goodness shining in it.

. 28. The place in Scotus which for the present I insist on is taken out of the
3. book of the Sentences, did. 14. q. 3. The question is, Vtrum anima Christi
noverit omnia in genere proprio? Now whereas to this it had been objected,
First, Luc. 2. Jesus proficiebat aetate and sapientia coram Deo and hominibus.
Secondly, Heb. 5. Didicit ex his quae passus est obedientiam; Thirdly, Fuit
Viator, igitur habuit cognitionem competentem Viatori.

. 29. To these he thus answers in order. Patet ad primum per hoc, quod Textus
Evangelii non est exponendus, ut tantum proficiehat secundum apparentiam, quia
secundum Augustinum 83. quaest. q. 9. contra Apollinaristas, Evangelistae
narrant historias, and ideo verba eorum vera sunt ut exprimuntur: non sic a
aliis sermonibus tropic is scripturae sacrae. Et hoc etiam declarat authoritas
Ambrosii and Apostoli ad Hebraeos, quia vere in eo aliquis sensus profecit, non
quod aliquorum cognitionem abstractivam habitualem acquisivit, sed intuitivam,
tam actualem quam habitualem. And then to the third he answers, quod illa
cognitio (quae est ex multis Actibus and experientiis) quoad cognitionem
intuitivam semper est necessitatis, and quoad hoc competebat Christo, quia fuit
nobiscum Viator. Scotus tom. 2. lib. 3. sent. did. 14. q. 3.. 8. p. 102. ex
edit. H. Cavelli.

. 30. The sum is, that S. Luke is to be understood literally, and that Christ
did truly, and not in outward appearance only, grow and increase in the
Perfection of Actual Knowledge and Grace, and that this must agree to him as
Viator. But there is another passage in the same Author, in due time to be
cited, where he proves that the Act of loving God as Viator, cannot be so
perfect as it is and must be in him as Comprehensor, though the Habit of them
both be one and the same. It is lib. 3. sent. did. 31. q. 1.. 9. p. 213. And
so I come to our Refuters second Argument.

SECT. 19.
The Refuters second Argument. Christ on Earth Comprehensor, true: but Viator
also. Proved from Scripture, Aquinas, Scotus, in the places referred to by the
Refuter. From Suarez also. None but the Socinians deny Christ to be thus
Comprehensor. His Beatisick Love as Comprehensor an uniform, because necessary,
Act. Fruitless here to enquire wherein the essence of Happiness consists
according to the Thomists or Scotists. It follows not, because Christ's Love as
Viator was more intense at one Time in some Acts, then at another in other
Acts, that therefore his Happiness as Comprehensor was at that time diminished.
Proved, The Doctor never denies the Fullness of Christ's happiness as
Comprehensor. The Refuter's grave Propositio male sonans. His Argument a
Fallacy a dicto secundum quid. Christ's twofold state. Though the infused Habit
of Grace in him always full, yet not so the Acts. The Reason. Mr. Jeanes and
others guilty of this Propositio male sonans as well as the Doctor. The
piouslycredible Proposition of the Schoolmen, as the Refuter calls it, much
prejudices an assertion of his own in his Mixture, but no whit the Doctor.

JEANES.
A Second argument is drawn from the perpetual and vn-interrupted happiness of
Christ. It is resolved both by Aquinas 3. q. 34. art. 4. Scotus lib. 3. disp.
18. and their followers, that Christ in regard of his soul was even here in
this life, from the first moment of his conception, all his life long unto his
death, perfectus Comprehensor; and therefore he enjoyed in his Soul all that
was necessary unto heaven happiness. And I find learned Protestants herein
consenting with them. Now it is the unanimous opinion of the Schoolmen that a
most intense actual Love of God, an actual Love of God for Degrees as high, as
ardent, as fervent as is according to God's ordinary Power possible unto the
humane nature, does necessarily belong to the heaven-happiness of men. The
Scotists place the very formality of Happiness solely herein, and Suarez with
others think it essential unto happiness, though he supposes the essence of
happiness not to consist wholly or chiefly in it. And for the rest of the
Thomists, who hold that the essence of Happiness stands only in the Beatifical
vision of God, why even they make this actual most intense Love of God a
natural and necessary consequent of the Beatifick vision.

. 1. To this I answer, That it is most true, as these Schoolmen determine, that
Christ, by virtue of the hypostatical union was in the superior part of his
soul, the mind, Perfectus Comprehensor from the first Moment of his Conception,
and so he did love and enjoy God more perfectly then all the Saints and Angels
did in heaven. This was a necessary Consequent of the hypostatical union and
the fullness of divine Grace. Manifestum est, says Aquinas truly, Quod Christus
in primo instanti suae conceptionis accepit non solum tantam gratiam quantam
Aquin. 3. p. q. 34. art. 4. in Corp.
Comprehensores habent, sed etiam omnibus comprehensoribus majorem. Et quia
gratia illa non suit sine actu, consequens est quod actu fuerit Comprehensor,
videndo Deum per essentiam clarius caeteris creaturis.

. 2. But then it is as true, that Christ at the same first Moment wherein he
was Comprehensor in respect of his Soul, was also in respect of the inferior
Faculties of that, and the frail mortal passible condition of his Flesh, a
Viator too. And this the same Aquinas has as expressly determined in the same 3
part of his Sums q. 15. art. 10. And this is a most clear Scripture-truth in
it self. For ought not Christ to suffer, says he Luke 24. 26.
himself, and then to enter into his glory? And therefore for the joy that was
set before him, says the Apostle to the Hebrews, he endured the Cross, and
despised the shame, and is now set down on the Heb. 12. 2. Philip. 2. 6, 7, 8,
9.
right hand of God. For though he were in the form of God, and thought it no
robbery to be equal with God: yet he made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant, and humbled himself to death, even the death of
the cross; wherefore God also has highly exalted him. In this state though he
were a son, yet learned he obedience by the things that he suffered. In this
state Heb. 5. 8.
he prayed for his own after-exaltation as well as ours, saying, Father, the
hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may also John 17. 1.
glorify thee. In this state he merited (as Suarez and some other of the
Schoolmen determine) his own exaltation in the flesh (how truly or in what
sense I now determine not;) but most certain it is (and no man but the Socinian
denies it) that he merited ours. And this is so clear a truth, that I think not
any of the Schoolmen that write upon the third of the Sentences, or the third
part of the Sums, but acknowledge it. And our Refuter himself, if he had but
consulted the places in Thomas and Scotus that here he referrs to, might have
found it. For Aquinas in the very next words, in his answer to the first
objection says, Ad primum ergo dicendum, quod sicut supra dictum est, q. 19.
art. 3. Christus non meruit gloriam animae, secundum quam dicitur Comprehensor,
sed gloriam corporis, ad quam per suam passionem pervenit. The answer in the
Body of that article tert. part. q. 19. art. 3. is long, the sum is this;
Dicendum est quod Christus gloriam corporis, and ea quae pertinent ad
exteriorem ejus excellentiam (sicut est Ascensio, Veneratio, and alia
hujusmodi) habuit per meritum. And then immediately in his answer ad primum he
says, Dicendum quod fruitio, quae est actus Charitatis, pertinet ad gloriam
animae, quam Christus non meruit; and ideo si per Charitatem aliquid meruit,
non sequitur quod idem sit meritum and praemium. Nec tamen per Charitatem
meruit in quantum erat Charitas Comprehensoris, sed in quantum erat Viatoris.
Nam ipse fuit simul and Viator and Comprehensor,- ut supra habitum est q. 15.
art. 10. Et ideo quia nunc non est Viator, non est in statu merendi. And then
as for Scotus, who in the 18th. distinction most admirably disputes this
question, Vtrum Christus meruerit in primo instanti suae conceptionis, he
founds his whole discourse upon it.

. 3. This subtle School-man, having first proposed diverse arguments against
the possibility of Christ's Merit (which are all founded upon the fullness of
Christ's happiness as Comprehensor, and to the very same purpose with this of
our Refuter) in the next place he proceeds to determine the question. And
having acknowledged the difficulty of it, he goes on to define what Merit is;
and having Difficile videtur salvare quod meruerit (Christus,) cum fuit beatus
and perfect conjunctus fini secundum voluntatem in primo instanti. Scotus l.
3. Sent. did. 18. q. unica. 4. p. 131.
cleared that, he proceeds to resolve, that though the Saints and Angels in
Heaven, because they are Comprehensores, were incapable of Merit, yet Christ in
the days of his flesh, being not only Comprehensor but Viator too, in this
respect he was capable of meriting at Gods hands, by Particular Covenant and
Contract; and that he did indirectly at least de facto merit his own exaltation
in the flesh. I shall, for the Reader's satisfaction, transcribe one short
passage, and refer him to the Author for the rest. Alii beati a Christo, quia
secundum totam voluntatem conjuncti sunt ultimo fini, sc. Deo, affectione
justitiae perfectissimae, etiam habent summum commodum conjunctum sibi, quod
appetunt affectione commodi, scil. conjunctionem summi boni: ideo non possunt
habere actum oppositum affectioni Commodi, ut libere velint aliquid quod non
sit eis commodum: nullum enim Objectum est in Patria quod possint velle, quod
sit eis incommodum, quod affectione Commodi nolunt. Sed Christus secundum
aliquid fuit Viator, and passibilis secundum partem sensitivam and portionem
inferiorem voluntatis; ideo multa habuit objecta praesentia sensibus and
portioni inferiori, circa quae potuit libere velle contra affectionem commodi,
quae semper est ad conveniens illi cujus est: ideo jejunando, vigilando,
orando, and multis aliis talibus potuit mereri, vel exercendo talia exterius,
vel volendo interius talia propter Deum; Tunc dico, quod licet Angeli habeant
bonas operationes circa nos, vel alii beati; quia tamen illi actus sunt inclusi
in beatitudine illorum, hoc est ratione beatitudinis, and ex illius beatitudine
and collatione obligantur nobis a Deo, potest dici quod non merentur. Sed
hujusmodi operationes Christi praedictae non includuntur in sua beatitudine:
ideo per illos actus meruit: quia quantum ad illos actus fuit Viator non
Comprehensor, ita quod radicaliter in sua beatitudine, etc. There is very much
more to this purpose all along that Disputation, but I shall give the sum of
that which concerns the present argument from his Epitomator Nicolaus
d'Orbellis. Quantum ad Nicol. d' Orbellis lib. 3. Sent. did. 18. q. unic. art.
1.
primu^, sciendu^ quod meritu^ est aliquid acceptu^ in aliquo, pro quo ab
accepta^te est sibi aliquid retribuendu^, velalteri pro quo meruit. Consistit
autem radix omnis meriti maxim in affectione justitiae, puta, volendo Deum
bonum, ut esse, and been esse, scil. justum, sapientem, etc. and volendo sibi
and proximo Deum secundum ordinem Justitiae, seu cum debitis circumstantiis.
Item notandum, quod licet Christus non potuerit peccare ratione plenitudinis
gratiae sibi in instanti creationis collatae, potuit tamen mereri, quia
secundum aliquid fuit instatu Viatoris, licet anima ejus ab instanti creationis
frueretur divina essentia. Vnde licet fuerit in Termino quantum ad
impeccabilitatem, tamen non quantum ad impassibilitatem. Ideo potuit Deus omnem
actum creatum illius Personae acceptare tanquam dignum pro se, vel pro illis
pro quibus offertur Deo, etiam actum beatificum. Sicut enim meritum non tantum
consistit in ipso actu elicito, sed in conditionibus per se elicitis; sic
acceptatio divina non solum respicit actum, sed conditiones accidentales
suppositi elicientis. Vt si a duobus fiat aeque gratiose supplicatio pro aliquo
reo apud Principem, poterit tamen citius dimitti offensa propter preces unius
quam alterius, propter aliquam ejus conditionem accidentalem.

. 4. So also his other Author, Suarez to this purpose. Respondet ergo (D.
Thomas) Christum fuisse Comprehensorem secundum animam: Viatorem vero in
quantum deerat illi corporis beatitudo. Circa quam veritatem nihil nobis
disputandum superest; quod n. Christi anima viderit Deum a principio suae
creationis supra late ostendimus q. 10. quod. a. Christi corpus fuerit
passibile, and dotibus gloriae caruerit, in q. 14. demonstratum est. Et ex his
duobus constat fuisse Comprehensorem and viatorem: Infra etiam ostendemus
fuisse in statu merendi sibi and aliis, quod est proprium munus viatoris.
Suarez in Comment. ad q. 15. tert. part. Thom. art. 10. page 466. in tom. primo.

. 5. Plain then it is from our Refuters own Authors that Christ was not only
Comprehensor but Viator also in the days of his flesh. And therefore I grant
that Christ from the first Moment of his Conception was Perfectus Comprehensor
in the sovereign part of his Soul, the Mind, and enjoyed the sight of God, and
the fullness of heaven happiness, and that it is not only the Tenent of the
Schools, and some learned Protestants, as our Refuter sets it down, but for
ought I find of all others whatsoever, that are Orthodox, there being none,
that I know of but the Socinians, and those of their Leaven, that deny the
Divinity of Christ, or else eclipse it, that hold the contrary.

. 6. I grant also that Christ, perfectly seeing God, and enjoying him in his
Soul, did therefore perfectly, equally, and uninteruptedly Love him: this Love
of his was always in Termino, and at one utmost height, because it was a
Necessary Act, and flowed per modum Emanationis from the beatifical vision; and
impossible it was, that he should do otherwise, since even Philosophy and
Aristotle could determine, that ultimus finis, and summum bonum, quando
cognoscatur necessario amatur.

. 7. And therefore it will be now fruitless, and nothing pertinent to the
Debate, to enquire, whether the Thomists or Scotists are in the right, and
whether the Formality of happiness consists in the Love of God, or the
Beatifical vision, or both, or whether (as I rather believe) in the Ravishing
Contentment and Delight that results from both, since most evident it is, that
Christ was not only Comprehensor but also Viator from the first moment of his
Conception.

. 8. Come we now then to Consider, what advantage our Refuter can make of this
Concession. He goes on then, and says.

JEANES.
BY this that has bin said it is evident, that whereas you aver that the
inward Acts of Christ's Love of God were less intense at one time then an other
(for so you affirm in saying they were more intense at one time then at an
other) you deny Christ to be happy and blessed at those times, wherein his
inward Acts of Love were thus less intense, and that this is Propositio male
sonans harshly sounding in the ears of Christians, that are jealous of their
Saviors honor, will I hope be ingeniously confessed by your self upon a
review of it.

. 9. You have said Sir. But could you possibly imagine Doctor Hammond should
retract a known-scripture-truth, because you say it is propositio male sonans?
Or did you your self believe what you here write, if you truly understood it?
For how much more can this derogate from the fullness of his Soul-happinesse,
then the truth of his Manhood, and the frailties encompassing it, did derogate
from the truth of his Godhead, to which it was hypostatically united? For does
not he himself say, Mark 14. 34.
that his Soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death? And does not the
Evangelical Prophet describe him to be a man of Esaias 53. 3.
sorrows and acquainted with grief? And does not his bloody sweat, and bitter
Agony express it? And does not the Apostle tell us, that for the joy that was
set before him he endured the Heb. 12. 2.
Cross and despised the shame, and is now set down on the right hand of God?
Does he not also say, that when Christ had by Heb. 1. 3, 4.
himself purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on
high, being made so much better then the Angels, as that he has obtained a
more excellent name then they? what? are these also Propositions harshly
sounding in the ears of Christians, that are jealous of their Masters honor?
Review your assertion Sir, and confess and acknowledge your own thoughts? or
will you write uses of Confutation against the penmen of sacred writ, as well
as against Doctor Hammond? For can a state of Sorrow and Grief, and Misery and
Want, consist with an absolute and complete uninterupted heaven happiness,
where the Scripture testifies there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor
crying, neither Revel. 21. 4.
shall there be any more pain for the former things are passed away? If in the
days of his flesh he were so absolutely and completely happy, that this
blessedness could in no respect be interrupted how then as the Apostle
testifies, did he offer up prayers and supplications with strong crying and
tears to him, that was able to help him? For how can he pray for assistance
that is in an absolute incapacity of want? that is always as happy as God, and
heavenhappiness can make him? If he were so absolutely and completely happy, so
that in no respect it could be interrupted, why then for the joy set before him
(which sure was not therefore yet Heb. 12. 2.
obtained) did he endure the cross and despise the shame? why prayed he so
earnestly for his own after-glorification? Why John 17. 1. 2.
said he to his Disciples after his Resurrection, Ought not Christ Luke 24. 16.
to suffer these things, and to enter into his glory?

. 10. If here now you say that Christ in the state of his humiliation may be
considered 1. Either in respect of the present state of his soul, in the
sovereign part of it, his Mind and understanding, or else 2ly in respect of the
present state of the Inferior sensitive part of his soul, and the frail mortal
passible condition of his flesh. In the first respect he was Perfectus
Comprehensor, and enjoyed the fullness of heaven-happiness, and therefore
always did love God to the full height, that he enjoyed him; And of this only
you now spoke. But then in the second respect he was in a state of frailty and
misery and sorrow and want, and because truly a Viator, he was not yet
possessed of heaven-happiness, and of this speak the Scriptures: I shall accept
of your answer and acknowledge the truth of it. But withal I shall desire you
to apply this distinction to your own argument, and the assertion of Dr.
Hammond.

. 11. And now I pray deal ingeniously with the world, and tell us, whether ever
Dr. Hammond did deny the fullness of Christ's happiness in the sovereign Part of
his Soul? Does not he allow him to be truly (...) God man, from the first
endued with the fullness of habitual grace? And does not of congruity a fullness
of happiness in Christ's soul flow from this Union, and fullness of grace? And
does not an absolute uninterrupted Act of divine Love in its utmost height and
intenseness, flow necessarily from this happiness? show us then, whether ever
this was brought into debate betwixt you and the Doctor. Nay do not you your
self acquit him of this charge, in your first argument, when you conclude that
the Inward Acts of the habits of all virtues and graces were always full in
him, because the habits themselves were so? will you say that the habits of
virtues and other graces were proper to him as Comprehensor, and that he could
watch, pray, Taste, suffer, be meek, patient, humble etc. as now in the state of
heaven-happiness? And have we not most evidently proved that Doctor Hammond
understands by The Love of God, only that Love and that Charity, which was
proper to Christ as Viator, in the days of his flesh, and not that other
necessary Act of Divine love, proper to him as Comprehensor?

. 11. And therefore I pray now, what is become of your argument and your grave
Propositio male sonans? do you not all this while build upon an empty Sophism,
argue a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter? and conclude because Christ
was perfectly happy in his Soul as Comprehensor, and did therefore necessarily
love God at the height, therefore he must be absolutely so too, in every
respect, and happy, equally happy, he must be also as Viator, and according to
that respect; and so must also all his other Acts of divine Charity toward
God, himself, and his Neighbors be equal, all in themselves, and with that
high transcendent Act of Love, immediately seated on God? And is not this now a
weighty argument, well deserving to be put in the Title page of the Book, to
tell all the world, how Doctor Hammond is subdued by it? But because I see you
sufficiently ignorant in this point, I shall add something for your
instruction.

. 12. Plain it is that there was a twofold state of Christ during his abode
upon earth. The one was status Comprehensoris, in respect of the sovereign Part
of his Soul, the Mind. The other Status Viatoris, in respect of the Inferior
Faculties of his soul, and his frail mortal passible condition in the Flesh. In
this, he was in statu merendi; in the other not. And consequently the Schoolmen
do distinguish, and observe a twofold Act of Divine Charity or holy Love in
him. The one Necessary, Vide Suarez in 3 part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 39 Sect. 2.
p. 540. col. 1. and page 541. Col. 1.
qui non potuit esse meritorius, quia non erat liber, sed necessario
consequebatur visionem beatam. This they call Actus amoris Dei beatificus, and
Actus Comprehensoris, and is the same with that of Christ, and the Saints, and
Angels now in heaven; who, because they see, and enjoy God face to face, cannot
choose but perfectly love him. The other * a Free Act, and though it is Vid:
Suarez ibid.
supernatural, as flowing from the all perfect Habit of Divine Charity in
Christ, yet distinguished it is from the Beatifick Love, that necessarily
flows from the Fullness of heaven-happiness: this was proper to him as Viator.

. 13. Now though the habit of this Love was always in Christ full, and without
any interruption even as he was Viator: yet the Acts that flowed from this
Habit were de facto, some or other still interrupted, because his present
finite state, and condition, could not actually apply himself to the
performance of all at once, and the acts themselves were not all compossible in
the same subject in one and the same moment, and the Necessity of Nature, at
least when he slept, required the intermission of some of them; and as they
were of necessity to be interrupted, so of necessity also they could not be
equal in themselves, but some must be more high, more intense then others,
because of the unequal participation of the divine goodness, unequally shining
in the several Objects of this Love, as we have already beyond exception
demonstrated. This interruption, this inequality in the fervor of these
several Acts of divine Charity, no more derogates from the fullness of that high
Act of Divine Love, he was possessed with as Comprehensor, then the sorrows and
anguish of his Soul and Spirit in the inferior Part, and the passible mortal
condition of his flesh did derogate from the truth of his Godhead, and the
fullness of his happiness which he enjoyed as Comprehensor. Nay so far it was
from derogating from the fullness of his habitual grace, that if the Acts of
this Love had been all equally intense, his Love in the Habit had not been yet
perfect, because as we have shown, Gods Law requires an Order in our Charity,
and that we must love the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our
Soul, etc. and our neighbors as ourselves.

. 14. When therefore you say that it is evident, that whereas the Doctor avers
that the inward Acts of divine love or holy Charity in Christ were less
intense at one time then at another, (for so he affirms in saying they were
more intense at one time then at another) he denies Christ to be happy and
blessed at those times wherein his inward Acts of Love were thus intense, and
that this is Propositio male sonans, I must return that then also Mr. Jeanes
himself is guilty of this harsh sounding proposition. Nay not only Mr. Jeanes
himself, but his own Ames, and our Hooker Jeanes mixture, etc. p. 250.
and Field, and Vorstius, and Grotius, and Aquinas and Suarez and Estius, and
many more of the Schoolmen, are all equally guilty of this ill sounding
proposition, who all unanimously affirm that Christ did really grow in Actual
Wisdom and Grace, as well as Stature. And so Doctor Hammond has very learned
Company in this, if it be an Error, and our Refuter himself among the number.

. 15. Whereas then you say in the close of this Argument,

JEANES.
Add hereunto that the Schoolmen generally consent as unto a Proposition that
is piously credible, that the happiness of Christ's soul did even during the
whole time of his abode here, far surmount that of all Saints and Angels in
heaven: but if the inward Acts of this Love of God were less intense at one
time then at another, the bliss of his soul would have come far short of that
of the Lowest Saint in Heaven; for the Actual love of the Lowest Saint was not,
is not more intense at one time then at another, but always full and perfect;
and therefore incapable of further and higher degrees.

This will no whit prejudice Doctor Hammond, who never spoke any thing of
Christ's happiness and Love as Comprehensor in his Soul, but only of the Acts
of divine Charity or holy Love that belonged to him as Viator, and as he was in
statu mere^di. But then let me add that if this assertion of the Schoolmen be
so piously credible (as indeed it is in their sense) it will much prejudice an
assertion of Mr. Jeanes his, in his very use of Confutation, who tells us, It
is not to be denied, but that by special dispensation Jeanes mixture page 261.
there was some restraint of the Influence of his happiness or beatifical
vision in the whole course of his humiliation, and Particularly in the time of
his doleful Passion.

. 16. Nay I dare undertake in the Consideration of his following argument to
demonstrate, that this one concession destroys the very foundation of his Use
of Confutation, and all that he has replied against the Doctors Ectenesteron.
And therefore I hasten to it.

SECT. 20.
The Refuters third Argument Reduced to Form. The Major denied. His Sophistical
Homonymy discovered. His confounding the different Acts of Christ's Love as
Viator, and Comprehensor. The true Assertions in his discourse severed from the
false inferences. Christ impeceable. Thence it follows not, that the Acts of
his Love are all equal, but the contrary. The great Commandment of Love
enjoins the most ardent Love that we are able to reach to, Thence it follows
not, that the Acts of this Love ought always to be equal. Christ as
Comprehensor had on earth greater Abilities to Love God then Adam in Paradise
or the Saints and Angels in Heaven. Thence it follows not that the Acts of his
Love as Viator were to be equal, or if they increased successively that he
sinned. This discourse cleared and confirmed from Suarez. The several Acts of
Charity by which Christ merited. Hence the inequality of intention in these
Acts demonstrated. Further proved from the Refuters Mixture. The Viator differs
in Abilities from the Comprehensor. Proved from Scripture and Reason Cajetan
Scotus. The Refuters following Digression impertinent; His design in it to
amuse the Reader, and to bring the Doctor into an unjust suspicion.

. 1. And here our Refuter is gotten into a very fruitful and advantageous
digression. Now with all the skill and Artifice he has, he labors to raise
Umbrages and Clouds, to obscure the Doctors Reputation, and to fill the heads
of weak Readers with suspicions and Jealousies, as if his tenent did infer
that our Savior was not impeccable, because he loved not God as intensely as
he might. But notwithstanding he is here so profusely copious, yet I undertake
that all that is material to the present controversy in his full four leaves,
may be contained in the compass of two Syllogismes, but I shall give it in his
own words.

JEANES.
The third and last argument, is fetched from Christ's impeccability; it was
impossible for Christ to sin: but if the inward acts of his Love of God had
been less intense at one time then at another, he had sinned; for he had broken
that first and great Commandment, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, with all thy Soul, with all thy mind, with all thy might and
strength, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Matthew. 22. 37. Mark. 12. 30. Luke 10. 27. For this
Commandment enjoyneth the most intense actual Love of God, that is possible,
an actual love of him tanto nixu and conatu quanto fieri potest (i. e.) as much
as may be; what better and more probable gloss can we put on that clause, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy strength or might, (...), then thou
shall love him with thy uttermost force and endeavor: suitable hereunto is that
interpretation which Aquinas gives of those words, Thou shall love the Lord
with all thy heart (i. e.) says he, ex toto posse tuo, with as high a degree
of actual love, as thou art able to reach unto. Deus est totaliter diligendus,
potest intelligi ita quod totalitas referatur ad diligentem: and sicetiam Deus
totaliter diligi debet: quia ex toto posse suo homo debet diligere Deum, and
quicquid habet, ad Dei amorem ordinare; secundum illud Deuter. 6. Diliges
Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo, 2. 2. q. 27. art. 5. But now Christ-man
had in him as great abilities for the actual Love of God as Adam in Paradise;
as the Saints and Angels in heaven, for an all fullness of the grace and virtue
of Love dwelled in him, and therefore if the inward acts of his Love were less
intense at one time then another, then sometimes, when he actually Loved God,
he did not Love him as intensely, as ardently, as fervently, as he could, he
did not Love him with all his might, and strength, ex toto posse suo, and so
consequently he fulfilled not all righteousness; for his obedience unto this
commandment would have been by this your opinion imperfect, and sinful, which,
to imagine were blasphemy. But you will be ready to tell me, etc.

. 2. This is your Argument and the most specious of all, but yet as little to
the purpose as any of the rest. And that it may so appear, I thus reduce it
into Form.

He whose love of God in the inward Act is more intense at one time then an
other, breaks that first Commandment that enjoynes the most intense Love of
God Possible.

But Christ (that was impeccable) could not, did not, break that Commandment.
Ergo,

Christ's Love of God in the inward act was not more intense at one time then
another.

Or thus.

He that had greater abilities for the Actual Love of God then Adam in
Paradise, or the Saints and Angels in Heaven and yet does Love God in the
inward Act more intensely at one time then an other, he does not always love
God ex toto posse suo, and as much as the Law requires.

But Christ had always greater abilities for the actual Love of God then Adam
in Paradise, or the Saints and Angels in Heaven, and yet (as you say) his Love
of God in the inward Act was more intense at one time then another. Ergo,

(By consequence according to your saying) he loved not God ex toto posse suo,
and as much as the Law requires, which consequence (because it makes him
sinful) but to imagine were blasphemy.

. 3. Choose you which Form you will, the force and evidence of the Argument is
the same, and one answer will fit both. And I shall give it you in brief, and
it is no more then by a denial of your Proposition or Major in both.

. 4. The truth is, all the seeming strength of this Discourse lies in the
ambiguity of the phrase The Love of God, which is differently understood by our
Refuter in the premises, and Doctor Hammond, whom he opposes, in the
Conclusion. And consequently the Syllogismes consist of four terms, and so are
(...) fantastical paralogismes, like the Colors in the Rainbow, they make a
fair show Arist: Elench: l. 1. c. 3.
indeed to the eye, but when we come to search what they are, they are nothing
but show, and without any solidity.

. 5. They are both guilty of that Sophism, which the Philosopher calls (...),
the first of the six in Voce. For whereas Doctor Hammond (as we have most
demonstratively proved, and as is also acknowledged in our Refuters first
argument) takes the Phrase, The Love of God, for the Acts of Divine Charity or
holy Love in the General Notion, our Refuter here takes it; in a more
restrained sense, for that eminent Act of holy Charity, that is immediately
terminated on God, and is contradistinct from these other Acts of Charity,
whereby we love our selves, and our neighbors, as our selves. And this will
appear from the Tenor of the first Commandment, and the places that himself
has quoted, Matthew. 22. 37. Mark 12. 30 Thou shall Love the Lord thy God, with
all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first
and great Commandment, and the second is like unto it, Thou shall Love thy
neighbor as thy self. Though then it were granted, that all the Acts of our
Love, immediately fixed on God, must be equal, because always, by virtue of
that Commandment, we must Love God, as highly, as intensely as we can, yet it
will not follow that all the Acts of Divine Charity, or holy Love, must be
therefore equally intense. Nay because it was impossible for the Savior of the
world to sin, I must conclude that the Acts of this his Love were not, could
not be equally intense. For then he should have loved himself, and his
Neighbor, the Finite goodness of the Creature with the same equal fervency and
ardor as the infinite goodness of the Creator, contrary to the Tenor of these
Commandments, and the fullness of our Saviors wisdom and grace.

. 6. But then this is not all the misadventure of our Refuter. For in the
latter part of his Discourse he confounds that Act of our Saviors Love of God
belonging to him as Comprehensor, with that other Act of Love, that belonged to
him as Viator, and which alone is enjoined in that first, and great
Commandment. Now these two, though the Objects be the same, yet differ as
really, as heaven in possession, from heaven in hope and expectation. The one
is a Free Act of the Will issuing from the Infused habit of Charity, the other
a necessary Act of the Will, that flows per modum emanationis from the
beatifical vision, as Light does from the Sun. To the one he had a proper
freedom, and the Act by way of Duty fell under the authority and guidance of
the first and great Commandment. To the other he had no more freedom, then now
the Saints and Angels in heaven have; who because they are already possessed of
heaven, and all that heaven can afford, are not under any Law, but as Naturally
as Necessarily they love God, as since their being made perfect, they see him
there.

. 7. And now though this be sufficient to demonstrate the weakness of our
Refuters Discourse, yet for the full satisfaction of the English Reader, who is
most likely to be deceived with these False Lights, and empty shows, I shall
take his whole discourse asunder, that so I may sever Truth from Falsehood, and
vain aerial shapes, and Appearances from solid Bodies.

. 8. First then I grant that it was impossible for Christ to sin; For such a
high Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
and made higher then the heaven. Heb. 7. 26. When not only Pilates Wife calls
him that just man, but even his very adversaries and accusers were not able to
convince him, and his Judge does publicly acquit him; when Mahomet, who has
commanded his followers to oppose and persecute his worshippers, has yet in his
very Alcoran declared him to be a most holy man, and the next great Prophet
sent from God, and therefore condemns his own followers that blaspheme him;
for us Christians, that acknowledge him our Savior, either directly or
indirectly to pull the glorious Crown of Righteousness from his head, is most
hideous and protentous blasphemy. And therefore I shall as readily, as
cheerfully, as our Refuter, pronounce Anathema to all such Conclusions, that
cast the least Umbrage and suspicion of guilt upon our ever blessed Savior.
And so I undertake shall Doctor Hammond; and I am bold to promise our Refuter
his thanks, and most grateful acknowledgement if at any time he shall reclaim
him from any such dangerous, though by himself undiscovered, Inferences.

. 9. But then secondly, I must add, that because Christ was absolutely
impeccable, and could not sin, therefore of necessity the Inward Acts of his
Love, and holy Charity could not be of the same equal Intenseness, but must
differ in gradual Perfection, according to the Order of Charity that Gods Law
requires, and the different Participation of the Divine goodness in the several
Objects of this Love.

. 10. Thirdly I grant, that the first and great Commandment enjoynes us the
most intense Actual Love of God, that is possible; command us it does, to love
God tanto nixu and conatu, quanto fieri potest, with our utmost force and
endeavor, and with as high a degree of Actual Love as is possible for us to
reach unto.

. 11. But then fourthly, I must deny that it will follow that even the Acts of
this Love, this high transcendent Love, that is immediately fixed on God, are
all equally intense, though the Ardor of them must be still as intense, as we
are able. For since as St. Austin and Bernard, Aquinas and Scotus say truly,
that this commandment, in that sense, cannot perfectly be fulfilled in this
life, but it shall be then only in Heaven, when man shall be totally united,
and joined to God, by virtue of the beatifical vision, when God shall be all in
all; since also it is evident that this first and great Commandment obliges us
to love God only with all our strength, and not with more, then ever we had at
first in Adam, before his fall; and since it is also evident, that Adam in
innocence, had not the same Abilities to love God in Paradise, as the soul of
the same Adam, and the Spirits of all just men now made perfect have in Heaven;
and since it is also as evident (as I shall also by and by, and beyond all
exception, further demonstrate) that Christ as considered in the state of a
Viator, had not the same Abilities to know and love God, as he had at the same
time as considered in the state of a Comprehensor, and fully possessed of
heaven happiness, and the full sight and Vision, and enjoyment and fruition of
God; it will undenyably follow that even in the Acts of this high transcendent
Love of God, there was, and must be acknowledged a Gradual difference in
respect of Ardor and Intensenesse, according to the difference of his Abilities
as considered in the state of a Viator, and as considered in the state of a
Comprehensor.

. 12. Fifthly I grant that Christ as Man had in his humane soul, as considered
in the state of a Comprehensor, in the superior part of it, the Mind, far
greater abilities for the Actual Love of God, then Adam had in Paradise;
because from the first Moment of his Conception, and Birth, by virtue of the
hypostatical Union, he had greater Abilities for this Love, then all the Saints
and Angels in heaven. And therefore I do also grant, that the inward Acts of
this his Love, as Comprehensor, were always One, without any Interruption, or
Gradual Variation; these were always at the height, and the same equal
intensenesse; because they were always in Termino, and not free Acts of the
Will, but Necessary effects of the Beatifical Vision.

. 13. But then sixthly I must add, what our Refuter has in his Mixture of
Scholastical Divinity with Practical told us Jeanes mixture page 261.
concerning our blessed Savior, as considered in the state of a Viator. That
it is not to be denied, but that by special dispensation there was some
restraint of the influence of his happiness or beatifical vision in the whole
course of his humiliation, and particularly in the time of his doleful passion.
But (though) truly (as he adds immediately) it seems very improbable, and no
ways sortable unto the state of Christ's blessedness, for his grace and
holiness, the Image of God in him, his love of God, etc. (to wit in the habit
as these Phrases signify) to be liable to perpetual motion and augmentation,
yet because, (let me add) his Abilities during this restraint of the Influence
of his happiness, and as considered in the state of a Viator, were not the
same, as now they are in the state of a Comprehensor, the Intensenesse and
Ardor in the Acts of his Love now, must be higher then they were during that
Restraint. But much more must this be allowed, that there was a Gradual
difference in the Acts of his Love, if, as our Refuter in his Mixture
undertakes to demonstrate, that Jeanes his mixture p. 250
our Savior did as truly increase in the inward Acts of Wisdom and Grace, as
he did in Stature.

. 14. But then seventhly let me add, that, if the Inward Acts of this Love of
God were not always equal, but did Gradually differ, because they did
Gradually increase, it will not therefore follow that our Savior must be
concluded guilty, (with all humble reverence be it spoken) of the breach of the
first and great Commandment. For he that always loves God with all his Soul,
and might and strength, that loves him to the utmost of his ability, that he
has by Gods gift, and not weakened by sin nor impaired by his own fault, loves
him pro praesenti statu, as much as that Law does require; and if, as his
Abilities do increase, his Love does constantly still increase, he still loves
God according to that duty and measure, which that Law does require, though the
Acts of this Love are now more intense, than they were formerly And thus it was
in Christ, at least as compared in the state of a Viator with himself as
considered in the state of a Comprehensor. The Acts then of this his Love were
always holy, and most conformable to Gods Law, and still in suo genere
perfect, though they were not all equal in Gradual Intensenesse, and all simply
and absolutely perfect, as now they are, where he sits at the Right hand of
God. And therefore, even in respect of these Acts, it will not follow that,
though they were not always equal in gradual perfection, his Obedience to this
Commandment was therefore imperfect, because he did always love God ex toto
posse suo, with all his might and strength, which strength did differ according
to the variety of his several states and conditions, as Viator and Comprehensor.

. 15. But then lastly, let me add, to prevent all mistakes, that this is not by
me applied to any but only our Savior, that was still holy, harmless,
undefiled. For God is not, cannot be unjust, if by virtue of this Law he should
require us to love him according to the Abilities he gave us, and we have
wilfully lost and squandered away: nor can we be said to love God with all our
might and with all our strength, though in this lapsed depraved condition we
love him as well as we can with this body of sin we carry about us, because it
is by our own default that we can now love him no better, and we our selves by
our own sin and wilful default have disabled our selves, that we cannot love
him so well as we ought, and as Gods Law requires; and which we might have
kept, if Adam and we his offspring had continued in our first innocence. But
then also let me add, that we and Adam in innocence should not have loved God
with that height and ardor as now the Spirits of just men made perfect do love
him, because Adam and they knew and should have known him only by Grace and
Revelation, but now they know him face to face, and their love is enlarged by
the greatness of their happiness and the fullness of their glory.

. 16. I shall clear all this by the Testimonies of some Schoolmen of great note
and worth in themselves, and of great repute with our Refuter. I begin with
Suarez.

. 17. He, in his first Tome on the third part of Aquinas Sums, disputing of
the Merit of Christ, lays it down for a ground, that Christ in the days of
his flesh and in the state of a Viator, was truly in statu merendi, and that
all the conditions requisite to make an Action meritorius, and the Person that
performs it to merit by it, were to be found in him. And if this be not
granted, he could not be the Meritorious cause of our Justification. Ex his
ergo omnibus sufficienter concluditur, omnes conditiones ad perfectum meritum
requisit^ in Christo Domino inventas esse, atque adeo potuisse mereri, ac
denique de facto meruisse: Quae assertio de fide certa est, quam ex Scripturis
melius infra demonstrabimus, etc. -- Ratione etiam patet ex dictis, quia omnis
Viator gratus Deo, illi obediens, and studiose operans propter ipsum and ex
gratia ejus, meretur coram ipso; and haec est una ex magnis perfectionibus
viatoris, sed Christus assumpsit statum Viatoris, and erat gratissimus Deo, and
optime operabatur, etc. ergo meruit coram Deo; sine causa enim assumpsisset
statum Viatoris, and hac perfectione seipsum privasset. Suarez tom. 1. in 3.
part. Thom. disp. 39. sect. 1. p. 539. col. 2. C. D.

. 18. And now having proved that Christ as Viator was in statu merendi, he
proceeds in the next section to determine by what Acts Christ merited, and this
he lays down distinctly in four conclusions. I shall give them here ordine
retrogrado, beginning with the last first.

Dico quarto, meruisse Christum per omnes actus liberos suae voluntatis, etiam
si illi fuerint ordinis naturalis, ut sunt amor naturalis Dei and actus aliarum
virtutum mortalium acquisitarum* Probatur, quia omnes illi actus erant honesti,
and a Christo refebantur in spiritualem finem, and quam vis non referrentur,
sola dignitas suppositi deificantis illos satis esset ut haberent omnem
proportionem and valorem ad meritum, etc.

Dico tertio, meruisse Christum per actus omnes virtutum infusarum, quos libere
exercuit. Est certissima; sic enim meruit per actum obedientiae, ut testatur
Paulus, and per actum religionis, ut orationis, etc. Et ad eundem modum meruit
per Passionem suam, etc.

Dico secundo, meruisse Christum per actum Charitatis proximorum. Est communis
Theologorum and certa, quia in illo actu concurrunt omnia necessaria ad
meritum: solum est notandum, hunc amorem proximi non solum potuisse esse
meritorium ut consesequentem scientiam infusam, quod indubitatum est, sed etiam
ut consequentem scientiam beatam, ut Alexander Alensis and Scotus supra
docuerunt. And then for the clearing the latter part of this Conclusion he adds
two things that will give light to our present Controversy. Voluntas Christi
non majorem necessitatem habuit perseverandi semper in illa actuali dilectione
proximi quam habendi illam in primo instanti, quia neque ab Objecto neque a Deo
ipso necessitatem patiebatur. Refer autem hanc necessitatem in solam naturam
illius actus est gratis dictum, and est quaedam petitio Principii: nam cum ille
actus sit quid creatum, ex hac part non est immutabilis, in quo differt multum
ab actu increato voluntatis; and cum alias sit actus potentiae liberae, and
versetur circa objectum quod non infert potentiae necessitatem, neque etiam ex
sua specifica ratione immutabilis est, non est ergo natura sua immutabilis.
Deinde, quia si Christus in primo instanti libere dilexerit proximos illo actu,
ergo potuit non diligere: demus ergo sustinuisse pro aliquo tempore illum actum
seu extensionem ejus, nonne peterat postea in ip^re diligere proximos illo
actu? certe non videtur id probabiliter posse negari, quia si in principio id
potuit, cur non postea? cum ille actus capax sit illius augmenti, and ipsa
potentia semper retineat vim and libertatem ad efficiendum illum. Quod si
potuit Christus p^st aliquod tempus incipere proximos diligere per illum actum,
ergo ille actus de se mutabilis est, secundum illud augmentum, ergo pari
ratione mutari posset per cessationem ab actuali proximorum dilectione. Denique
ille actus prout terminatur ad proximos, non pertinet ad essentialem
beatitudinem, neque habet necessariam connexionem cum actuali amore Dei:
potest. n. perfect amari Deus, quamvis proximus non semper actu ametur, sed
interdum tantum in habitu: non est ergo inconveniens admittere hujusmodi
mutationem possibilem in illo actu.

And when it had been objected, quod iste actus non sit meritorius, quia non
est actus Viatoris ut Viator est, cum fundetur in scientia beata; He answers,
Dico igitur, ut actus sit meritorius satis esse ut sit bonus, liber, and in
persona grata in via existente: unde supposito eandem personam simul esse
Comprehensorem and Viatorem, non repugnat Merito ut aliquo modo fundetur in
ipsa visione Comprehensoris, sed solum repugnat illi ut formaliter ac per se
pertineat ad statum Comprehensoris ut sic. Vnde sicut scientia beata existens
in Viatore potest esse ratio prophetandi: it a etiam potest esse principium vel
fundamentum merendi, and dici potest ille actus Viatoris ut sic; quia ipsa
visio non potest ad illum actum ut meritorius est deservire, nisi prout est in
Viatore.

Dico primo, Christum habuisse actum amoris Dei liberum supernaturalem and
elicitum a charitate, and ab amore beatifico distinctum, and illo actu
perfectissime meruisse. It a intelligo Sententiam D. Thomae hic solutione ad
primum dicentis meruisse Christum per charitatem, non in quantum erat charitas
Comprehensoris, sed in quantum erat Viatoris: ubi de charitate loquitur prout
terminatur ad Deum. Et non potest exponi de uno and eodem actu charitatis Dei,
ut sub una ratione sit meritorius, and non sub alia, quia non potest idem actus
numero, prout tendit in idem indivisibile objectum, atque adeo secundum eandem
indivisibilem entitatem, esse liber and necessarius, quia hae duae proprietates
includunt contradictionem: ergo non potest idem actus indivisibilis esse
meritorius ut est Viatoris, and non ut est Comprehensoris: praesertim quia ille
actus licet materialiter, ut ita dicam, potuerit dici Viatoris, quia fuit in
Christo etiam eo tempore quo fuit viator, formaliter autem proprie non dici
potest pertinuisse ad Christum ut Viatorem. Intelli endus est ergo D. Thomas de
charitate operante per diversos actus, quorum alter consequitur visionem
beatam, and ut sie dicitur charitas Comprehensoris, alter vero versatur circa
Deum ut cognitum per scientiam infusam, quae ut sic dicitur charitas viatoris,
etc. Suarez. tom. 1. in 3. p. Thom. disp. 39. sect. 2. per totum.

To this for the further clearing of the whole I should add another passage in
the same Author, and the same Treatise, disp. 37. sect. 4. p. 518. But it is
quoted after, and thither I refer the Reader.

. 19. To give the sum of this discourse from Suarez. First, plain it is, that
Christ in the days of his Flesh was truly Viator, and in statu merendi.
Secondly, It is essential to Merit, that the Meritorious Act be freely and
voluntarily performed. Thirdly, Christ did truly merit, otherwise we must deny
him to be the Meritorious Cause of our Salvation, and turn downright Socinians.
Fourthly, He merited not only by the Inward Acts of that Love which was the
consequent of his supernaturally infused knowledge of God, but also by the
Inward Acts of Charity and Love to his own Glory, and his Love to us Men his
Neighbors, and all Inward Acts of all Virtues and Graces, whether Infused or
Acquisite, as also by those other free Acts of his Will of a more inferior
Alloy, such as Suarez calls ordinis naturalis, his Natural Love of God. Since
then that all these were not, could not be equal in themselves, and with that
high transcendent Act of his Love that was immediately, yet freely, seated upon
God, it necessarily follows, that as he merited by them all, though all were
not of the same height and Gradual Perfection, so he was not, cannot be
concluded guilty of the breach of the first and great Commandment, though they
differed from one another in gradual perfection, because he truly did merit by
every one of them. Qu^d erat demonstrandum.

. 20. But then though this be abundantly sufficient to acquit the Doctors
assertion from the least suspicion and umbrage of that so dangerous
crimination, yet I shall further demonstrate it from our Refuters own
Concessions, and that so clearly that either, Sampson-like, he must involve
himself as well as his adversary in the same common ruin, or else retract his
so uncharitable aspersion.

For first, in his Mixture he expressly grants that Christ in the Jeanes his
mixture of Scholastical, etc. p 261.
days of his Flesh was not pure Comprehensor, but also Viator; and if he
should not, he must contradict the Scriptures, that in many places assert it.

Secondly, he expressly grants that Christ in the days of his flesh did as
truly grow in the Inward Acts of Wisdom and Jeanes Mixture of Scholast. p. 249,
250. Jeanes Mixture of Scholast. p. 261.
actuai apprehension and Grace, as he did in Stature.

Thirdly, he says, It is not to be denied, but that by special dispensation
there was some restraint of his happiness or beatifical vision in the whole
course of his humiliation, and particularly in the time of his doleful passion.

. 21. From hence I argue that if Christ did truly and not in Appearance grow
and receive Increase in the Inward Acts of Wisdom and Grace, then the utmost
height and degree of Actual Grace and holy Love is not always pro hic and nunc
required by that first and great Commandment; because Christ was impeccable,
and it was impossible for him to sin.

. 22. Secondly, I argue that if Christ was truly Viator in the days of his
flesh, then as Viator, and in that state and respect, he could not love God so
highly, so ardently, by virtue of the infused Habit of divine Love, as he did
as considered in the state of a Comprehensor, or as now he does at the right
hand of God; because, as our Refuter maintains from Austin and Bernard,
Aquinas and Scotus, this Precept of Loving God perfectly, cannot be fulfilled
in this life, but only in Patria, quando Deus erit omnia in omnibus.

. 23. Thirdly, I argue that if Christ as Viator had not, could not have the
same Abilities to love God with the same fervor and ardency as he has as
Comprehensor, therefore there must of necessity be a gradual difference in the
Acts of his Love as Comprehensor and Viator, because our Refuter has told us in
his first Argument from Hurtado, that Intensio actus secundi supponit aequalem
intensionem in actu primo, cum actus secundus supponit primum.

. 24. And now that the Viator differs in Abilities from the Comprehensor, as it
is clear to any that understands the very terms, so plain also it is, because
the Viator knows God and his Goodness only by Infused knowledge and Revelation,
and the other by Actual Apprehension; the one only tastes and sees how good he
is by Grace, and the other actually enjoyes him by fruition in Glory. And since
our Love must still be proportionable to our Knowledge, the more we see and
enjoy God, the more are we enabled, and the more perfectly we love God. For we
know in part, and we prophecy in part. But when that which 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10,
12.
is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. For now we
see through a glass darkly, but then face to face: now I know in part, but then
shall I know even as I also am known. Nor can our Refuter deny but this must in
some measure agree to Christ in the state of a Viator, though always
absolutely sinless, as well as it does to us, to whom he was made like in all
Heb. 2. 17. and 4. 15.
things, sin only excepted. And certainly it can be no part of our sin, that we
see nor God face to face whilst we are in the flesh, because no man, as in the
flesh, can approach unto him and live. Exodus 34. 20.
He dwells in inaccessible light, says the Apostle, whom no man 1 Timothy 6. 16.
has seen or can see, as considered in this state. And hence it is that our
Savior John 17. 1, 5.
prays for his glorification in this state; and in this state Heb. 12. 2.
for the joy set before him, he endured the Cross; and Heb. 1. 3.
when he had by himself purged our sins he then sat down on the right hand of
God. For Luke 24. 26, 46.
thus it first behooved him to suffer, and then to enter into his glory.
Besides, if in the state of his Humiliation there was by special dispensation,
as our Refuter grants, a restraint of his happiness or beatifical vision, he
could not then see God so perfectly, and so perfectly enjoy him, as after his
Glorification when there was no Restraint; and consequently his Love could not
be so ardent, so highly intense and perfect as afterward, when now he sits at
the right hand of God.

. 25. And further to demonstrate the clearness of this conclusion, I shall call
in the reason and assistance of two eminent Schoolmen, Cajetan and Scotus.
Cajetan in 2. 2. Aquin. q. 24. art. 7. p. 61. Col. 3, and 4.


Diversarum rationum esse perfectionem Charitatis Viae and perfectionem
Charitatis Patriae ex Signo and Ratione monstratur. Ex Signo quidem, quia
quantum cunque crescat Charitas in Via ex part Subjecti, nunquam pertingere
potest ad perfectionem Charitatis in Patria ex part Subjecti, quoniam nunquam
potest ad hoc pervenire ut diligat actualiter Deum totaliter, hoc est ex toto
cord, ex tota mente, etc. Vt patet ex infra dictis ab Augustino and authore in
discussione hujus praecepti. Et similiter quantum cunque crescat Charitas Viae
ex part Objecti, nunquam pertingit ad perfectionem Charitatis Patriae ex part
Objecti, quoniam nunquam potest ad hoc pervenire, ut moveatur ad amandum a Deo
viso, sed movetur in hac vita a Deo in speculo Creaturae. Hoc enim quod est
quantitatem perfectionalem Charitatis in Via, quantum cunque crescat, non posse
pertingere ad minimum quid quantitatis perfectionalis propriae Charitati
Patriae, ostendit quantitates has esse diversarum rationum. Ratione vero, quia
ea quae consequuntur ad actus diversarum rationum ut sic, sunt diversarum
rationum, sed perfectio Charitatis in Via and perfectio Charitatis in Patria
consequuntur ad actus diversarum rationum, Ergo sunt diversarum rationum. Minor
patet, quia Subjectum in Via and in Patria diversarum sunt rationum, secundum
actus visionis per fidem, and visionis facie ad faciem. Et similiter Objectum
in Via and in Patria, in quantum est movens, est diversarum rationum, secundum
actus visi in speculo, and visi in seipso, ut patet. Deus enim visus in speculo
nunc movet ad amandum, tunc autem Deus visus in seipso -- Notanter autem dixi
Objectum, ut movens, esse alterius rationis hic and in Patria, quoniam Objectum
Charitatis potest dupliciter considerari, sc. ut terminans amorem, and ut
movens ad amorem. Et quamvis terminans sit unius rationis hic and in Patria,
sc. Deus ipse prout in se est, and propterea Charitas nunquam excidit; ut
movens tamen est diversarum rationum, quoniam movere ut visum in speculo, and
movere ut visum in seipso, constat diversarumesse rationum. And then he adds a
little after, Apparet tertio, quod diversarum sunt rationum, sicut via
praeternaturalitatis semper habens aliquid admistum, and terminans in statis
naturalissimo. Charitas enim quia est amicitia ad Deum consequens consortium
divinae naturae, est amicitia habens suum naturalem statum solummodo in Patria,
ubi similes Deo erimus, and videbimus ipsum sicutest: nunc autem in Via, apud
Apostolum, semper aliquid praeternaturalitatis habet admistum ex vi ipsius
peregrinationis, and quia quicquid imperfectionis in hoc praeternaturali statu
habet deponetur, and ad natural and perfectionis undique statu^ perducta erit
in Patria, ideo diversaratio perfectionis Charitatis in Via and in Patria ab
Apostolo declaratur, exemplo perfectionis puerilis, and perfectionis virilis.
Thus far Cajetan.

But the place I most insist on is that of Scotus, which, according to promise,
I now acquaint the Reader with. Et si aliquis haberet hic aequalem Charitatem
sicut in Patria, non propter hoc esset beatus, quia non posset habere aequalem
Actum, sicut tunc habebit; nec sequitur, si Habitus est aeque perfectus hic and
ibi, igitur and Actus similiter: quia Actus diligendi Deum dependet sicut a
causa partiali non solum a Voluntate and Charitate, sedetiam ab Objecto
praesente per actualem intellectionem, sicut dictum est did. 25. secundi, et
hoc secundum determinatam perfectionem secundum quod est determinate praesens,
si magis, magis, si minus, minus. In Via de communi lege non potest esse
Objectum praesens sicutin Patria etiam praesentia speciei ejusdem. Vnde ex hoc
sequitur, quod Actus non possitesse ita perfectus, etsi Habitus sit aequalis:
quia Habitus non erit totale principium illius Actus, sed partiale, et eo modo
quo ipse Habitus est Principium, semper aequaliter se habet ad Actum. Semper
enim quantum est exse dat Actui suo, quod sit quoddam amare Dei in quantum est
summum bonum, nec Habitus dat sibi qued sit Dei ut praesens vel abs^ns, nec dat
sibi perfectionem quam habet ex Objecto sic vel sic praesente. So Scotus l. 3.
Sent. did. 3. q. 1.. 9. p. 213. col. 2. Vide ibid.. 4. p. 212. col. 1.

. 26. And thus having fully acquitted the Doctors assertion, and fully answered
the Refuters arguments, I might now contentedly sit down, without taking notice
of his very large Digression, that is purely an extravagance, and not at all
concerns the present Question. For though all were granted that he labors to
prove, and that Christ did love God ex toto posse suo, with as high a degree of
actual love as he was able to reach to, as I most readily grant; yet for all
that it will not follow that even this Act of divine Love was, or could be,
equal in gradual perfection, with that other Act of his Love that he exercised
as Comprehensor; much less will it follow, that all the other Acts of holy
Charity and Virtue and Grace, were equal in Gradual Perfection among
themselves, or with this high transcendent Act of Love, immediately fixed on
God, as we have evidently demonstrated.

. 27. Howsoever, that he may not say that any part of his Reason and skill in
School-learning is neglected, I shall gratify him so far as to consider this
also. But then I cannot choose but observe, that since these three following
Leaves are nothing at all to the enforcement of his Argument, but only tending
to prove that which was never yet denied him, at least in this controversy,
our Refuter could have no other design in this extravagance, but only to amuse
the Reader, and to bring the Doctor in suspicion, as if this his Assertion, and
consequently the whole Treatise of Will Worship, and the Defense of it against
Mr. Cawdry, were Popishly affected, and that the main Pillar of it was borrowed
from Bellarmine, whom Ames and Chamier and our White have already confuted; and
that Aquinas and Scotus, St. Austin and Bernard, and Reason and Scripture were
all opposite to Doctor Hammond, as well as Bellarmine in this assertion. But if
the contrary be proved, I doubt not but the Reader will no sooner discover then
abominate such Artifices wheresoever he finds them, though masked under never
so specious and sanctified shapes of Zeal and Reformation. To go on then in
this disquisition and Adventure.

SECT. 20.
As the Doctor needs not, so is it not his Custom to make use of former
Expositions. This Practice in the Refuter censured. This Digression not an
answer to the Ectenesteron, but a fling at the Treatise of Will Worship. His
brief transcribing the Doctors Exposition, and large examining it censured. Mr.
Cawdry grants all in Controversy between the Doctor and Refuter, but
contradicts himself. The Refuters prevaricating and false suggestions to his
Reader. His first Reason for this suggestion reduced to form. Destructive to
all Religion. Biddle, Hobbes Leviathan. Whatsoever Answer he shall make for
himself against a Socinian, Anabaptist, Quaker, etc. will secure the Doctor.
His five very false and proofless Criminations in his next reason mustered up.
His hasty oversight in citing Chamier.

JEANES.
But you will be ready to tell me, that you have prevented this Charge by that
exposition of those large inclusive words, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart with all thy soul, etc. Which you have given in your
Treatise of Will Worship, which I shall transcribe, and briefly examine. Once
more if it be objected, etc.

. 1. But how know you the Doctors mind, Sir, that he will be ready thus to tell
you? For suppose he could give you another answer to your argument, as you see
I have done. What need then had the Doctor to borrow this answer from his
Treatise of Will Worship? Sir, though you are so barren of Invention, that in
every leaf almost of this Reply you give the Reader the same argument; yet he
that shall peruse the Doctors writings, will find that this is not his custom,
and that if he be forced to speak to the same subject, he still enriches his
discourse with New Observations to the profit and contentment of his Reader.
But you, as if you write only to children, feed us still with chewed meats. And
yet if in a scarcity of better Provision you had, as the Cook in Livy, made us
twenty several dishes out of one single Pork^t, you had showed your self a
Master in your Art, and the Reader might have judged what you could do if your
matter had been more copious. But when, like Aesops Master, you every day
invite your guests to a new Feast, and yet every day, like Aesop his Caterer,
you feed them only with Tongue, what other thanks can you expect then he met
with.

. 2. The truth is, Sir, that as the Doctor has no need to make use of that
answer here; so there he gave it to far different purposes, namely, to show
that he who loves God with all his heart, may yet have room left for a
Voluntary Oblation, notwithstanding that precept. And therefore I must conclude
that as this is brought in by the head and shoulders, so it is not an answer to
Doctor Hammond's Ectenesteron, but a fling at the Treatise of Will Worship,
which yet, like Canis ad Nilum, you but touch at, and instantly you are gone
for fear a Crocodile should meet you.

. 3. You tell the Doctor you shall transcribe his answer from the Treatise of
Will Worship, and briefly examine it. But the truth is, you have briefly
transcribed it, and very largely, and altogether besides the purpose examined
it; like those that write the Sermon in shorthand, and read it at length, and
not in figures, making more at the Repetition then either the Preacher
delivered or intended.

JEANES.
ONce more, if it be objected that whatever is thus performed, is commanded by
those large inclusive words. (Thou shall love thy God with all thy heart, with
all thy soul, etc.) nothing being of such latitude as that the (with all)
should not contain it; I answer, that that phrase denotes two things only.

1. Sincerity of this Love of God, as opposed to partial divided love or
service.

2. The loving him above all other things, and not admitting any thing into
Competition with him: not loving any thing else in such a degree: Treat.
Will Worship, p. 24.

Here you barely dictate that that phrase, (Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, etc.) denotes only those two things you
mention, whereas your Reader has just cause to expect a confirmation of what
you say.

. 4. I thought, Sir, you had wholly engrossed this office of Dictator to your
self. And the Doctor of any man will not entrench upon it. But if you had been
pleased to have dealt impartially with your Reader, and acquainted him with the
grounds and occasion of the answer, and reported it full and entire, as it lay
in that Treatise, he could have had no Reason to expect a further confirmation
then what the Doctor there delivered.

. 5. So satisfactory indeed the reasons were, that Mr. Cawdry himself, in his
Exercitation on that very Treatise and Paragraph, acknowledges and yields all
that is now in contest betwixt the Doctor and you. For let it be supposed,
says he, yea granted, that sincere Love is capable of Degrees, whether in the
same man at several times, or two men at the same time, and so both obey the
praecept; yet these degrees and growth of Love do argue Love not to be perfect
(and so not strictly answerable to the law) and is so far faulty, in vitio, as
Hierome.

. 6. This latter clause is added only (...), that he might seem to say somewhat
when the whole cause was yielded. And indeed it carries its own confutation in
its forehead, because one part (to use the Doctors own words) is directly
contrary, if not contradictory to the other. For -- sure if those of Dr.
Hammond's Account of Mr. Cawdrey's triplex Diatribe, page 222.. 3.
whom the supposition is made do both obey the precept, then they do not offend
against it: and if they do not offend against it, then is not this faulty or in
vitio; for sure every fault or vice must be a transgression of the Law. And if,
as he says, that Commandment require of all men that Perfection of Love that
is absolutely sinless, then evident it is that the utmost Sincerity of Love,
that as himself grants implies Degrees, and therefore necessarily supposes
Imperfection and sin, cannot be the fulfilling of it: nor would Adam's
sincerity, supposing his Fall, have ever been accepted, or prevented the Curse
and his eternal damnation, if no new Covenant had been made. And if sincere
Love that is capable of Degrees be a fulfilling of this law, and the same man,
at several times, or two men at the same time, that are only thus sincere, and
not perfectly in love, do both obey this precept, as he expressly supposes and
grants; then manifest it is that this sinless Perfection he speaks of is not
required to fulfill it. For it is impossible the same Law should at one and the
same instant be both obeyed and transgressed by one and the same Person in one
and the same respect. And if he speak of several respects, and according to
several Obligations and Covenants, he does but confusedly beat the Air, and
deceive himself and his Reader, and what he grants with the one hand he takes
away with the other.

. 7. And then to the example of Christ's ardency in Prayer, he says, Christ was
above the Law, and did more then the Law Mr. Cawdrey's Diat. of Will Worship
page 116.. 47.
required, and did supererogate in many of his Actions and Passions, and so in
the degree of affection in Prayer, if not in the Prayer it self, etc. -- yet
thus much that example holds forth, that greater pressures and necessities call
for enlargement of affections, not as voluntary Oblations, but as Duties.

. 8. And therefore, Sir, you did very much prevaricate, and impose upon the
Faith of your confident Reader, when you labored to persuade him that he had
just reason to expect a confirmation of that exposition which the Doctor had
given. You should first have attempted to give a more solid answer to those
reasons then Mr. Cawdrey had afforded, before you had called for more. Or else
you should have been so ingenuous as he was, to have yielded to the force of
that truth which you could not withstand.

. 9. But why has the Reader just cause to expect a confirmation of what the
Doctor says.

JEANES.
BEcause this very answer is the shift of Papists in several controversies
between them and us; Bellarm. tom. 2. De monachis, lib. 2. cap. 13. tom. 4. de
amissione gratiae, and statu peccati, l. 1. cap. 12, etc. And was it not fit
that you should acquaint us what those cogent reasons were, that necessitated
you unto this compliance with Papists?

. 10. Well, Sir, I promise to acquaint you with the heads at least of those
Reasons that induced the Doctor to make use of this Interpretation, though not
to a compliance with Papists, if you will also acquaint your Reader what those
cogent reasons were, that necessitated you to make use of that Objection, that
not only opposes Doctor Hammond in this particular, but equally overthrows the
whole Christian Religion; that destroys the Doctrine of the ever-blessed
Trinity the Godhead and Satisfaction of our Savior, and the Immortality of the
Soul, and hell fire and eternal Torments; that blows up as well the Office as
the maintenance of Ministers, and opens a broad gap for the Socinian and
Anabaptist, the Ranter and Atheist to come and invade all that is sacred
amongst us.

. 11. And now that the Reader may see that I do you no wrong, I shall for the
present suppose that the Doctor had borrowed this exposition from Bellarmine,
and consider the force of your argument against him upon this supposition. I
reduce it thus into form, that the strength of it may appear. Whosoever makes
use of any argument or Tenent or exposition of Scripture that is to be found in
Bellarmine or other Popish writers, is guilty of a compliance with Papists.

But Doctor Hammond makes use of this very exposition which is to be found in
Bellarmine. Ergo,

Doctor Hammond is guilty of compliance with Papists.

. 12. What say you, Sir? Is not this your present argument? can you give us any
other Proposition to reduce your Socratical Enthymeme into a Syllogism? If you
cannot, pray tell me then, what strength is in your Major? And what answer will
you give to it, when a Socinian, an Anabaptist, a Ranter or Atheist shall press
you with it? For does not Mr. Biddle in the Biddle's Catechism, preface to the
Reader.
preface to his Catechism upon this very score and argument decry the
expositions and determinations of all Counsels, and Convocations, and
Assemblies of Divines, that are opposite to his Doctrine? Does he not in that
very preface call those expressions of God's being infinite, incomprehensible,
of his being a simple Act, of his subsisting in three Persons, of an Eternal
generation of the Son, and Procession of the Holy Ghost, the Incarnation and
Hypostatical Union, Original sin and Christ's taking our nature on him, of
Christ's making satisfaction to God for our sins, and purchasing Heaven for us,
etc. as well as Transubstantiation, a Babylonish confusion of language, and
monstrous Terms? And does he not upon this very score plead for a necessity to
reform Religion beyond such a stint as that of Luther, or at most that of
Calvin, by cashiering those many intricate and devised Forms of speaking? And
may he not, nay does he not justify this his Crimination by this very
Argument? For are not all these very forms, and the Tenants couched under them
to be found in Bellarmine's Controversies as well as in Calvin's Institutions?
Are not all those expositions of the Scriptures that any Reformed Writer gives
in these Socinian Controversies to be found in Bellarmine and other Popish
Writers, that maintain the same common truth with us? What shall these also be
condemned as well as Doctor Hammond for a compliance with Papists? May not the
whole fifth and sixth Books of Volkelius de vera Religione, and the Racovian
Catechism be defended by this very argument, and the Catholic doctrines be
overthrown? And do not the Socinians frequently run to this Argument for
shelter, and by it with the greater plausibility insinuate their damnable
Doctrine to their Proselytes? Nay has not Mr. Hobbes of late founded his whole
kingdom of darkness upon this very Argument? Does he not as well damn the
Immortality Hobbes Leviathan, Part. 4. c. 44. p. 339, 340, 343, 344, 345, 346,
347. c. 46. p. 370 etc. 379 etc. 44. p. 335, 336, 341, 342. c. 47 p. 382, 383,
etc.
of the Soul, and the eternal Torments of Hell, as the fire of Purgatory; as
well Tithes and Universities, Presbytery and Discipline, as the Pope's
Supremacy and Monastic Perfection, upon this very score, because maintained in
the Romish Church? Nay, did not the Independent refute the Presbyterians at
Oxford upon the proof of their calling, by this very Argument? And if
Episcopacy has been damned by this one Objection as Antichristian, has not also
Presbytery and Discipline and Tithes and Maintenance of Ministers been
arraigned for Antichristian, and condemned in cart-loads of Pamphlets, by this
single evidence? And does not the Anabaptist undermine the Independent by this
one Engine, as now the Ranter and Quaker does by it also labor to undercreep
the Anabaptist? And therefore since this is so evident in it self, and so
clearly confirmed by a long succession of experiences, I cannot but wonder why
our Refuter in his Anger should take up a Delphick sword, that will fit every
scabbard as well as his own, and which will, at every blow he gives his
Adversary, recoil upon his own breast. But whatsoever answer he shall make to
this Objection, for the securing his own Interest and Principles, will equally
serve for the defense of Doctor Hammond, and I undertake to make it good.

. 13. But then, though this were sufficient to demonstrate the weakness and
folly of this Crimination, which could serve for nothing but only to amuse and
terrify vulgar Readers, and may as well fright them from the Truth as from an
Error; yet I shall not content my self with this, but shall in the next place
declare that this is not Bellarmine's exposition, or that known Protestants
have given it as well as he, and that Doctor Hammond himself has fully
acquitted it, in that very Treatise, and the defense of it against Mr. Cawdry,
from any such Popish compliance.

. 14. But I shall first hear your second Reason. For you say,

JEANES.
THose Protestants that have dealt in the controversies betwixtus and the
Papists have proved this your sense to be too narrow, and withal have given
another exposition Nimirum huc tandem res redit, ut sciamus ita imperari nobis
amorem Dei, ut nullus sit amoris gradus, intra summum, cui quisquam debeat
acquiescere. Summum autem dico non tantum comparate ad res alias quae sub
amorem cadunt; sed etiam, and quidem praecipue, comparate ad nos ipsos, ut ne
ultra possimus amare: Ita enim vere totum cor erit tota anima; men's tota, vires
omnes, etc. Chamier. tom. 3. l. 11. cap. 16. sect. 22.
of the words which they have cofirmed and vindicated from the exceptions of
Papists. Now of all this it had been equitable for you to have taken notice,
and not to have troubled your Reader with that which has been so abundantly
refuted by Protestant pens.

. 15. And thus we see no less then four or five very severe Criminations are in
this and the former Paragraph laid to the Doctors charge by our Refuter, and
not one of them is proved but only by his own venerable authority. Consider,
Sir, consider, do not you here barely dictate? What proof have you offered us
of any one charge? Let us muster them up.

1. You lay it to the Doctors charge, that he borrowed this exposition from
Bellarmine, and that it is to be found in the places by you quoted.

2ly. That in this the Doctor is guilty of Compliance with Papists.

3ly. That those Protestants that have dealt in the Controversies betwixt us
and the Papists have proved this sense too narrow.

4ly. They have given another exposition of the words, which they have
confirmed and vindicated from the exceptions of the Papists.

5ly. That Doctor Hammond has taken no notice of all this, but without all
equity has troubled his Reader with that which has been so abundantly refuted
by Protestant pens.

. 16. Now for the proof of all these we have our Refuters own word, and two
citations of Bellarmine, and one place quoted from Chamier in the Margin, which
yet through his over great have is mistaken; for it is not in the xvi chapter,
but the xiv of that book, which figures our Refuters hasty eye did very easily
mistake. And I am persuaded that if he had sat down and well weighed that
Chapter, and the design and scope of that learned man, he would never have made
use of his authority against the Doctor, that speaks every thing that he
undertakes to make good against Bellarmine.

. 17. And now to acquit the Doctor from these Criminations, I conceive it
necessary to lay down the Doctors answer at large, and to acquaint the Reader
with the ground and occasion of it, and what he has added further to it in his
Reply to Mr. Cawdrey. And then I doubt not but our Refuters ingenuity and fair
carriage will appear to the most ordinary Capacity. To begin with the Occasion.

SECT. 22.
The Occasion of the Doctors exposition of the first great Commandment of
Love. The Reasons of his fundamental Position in short. If any one of them
demonstrative, as Mr. Cawdrey grants one is, then all not bound to it, to every
Act acceptable to God, nor to perform it to a degree, even when they are
obliged ad speciem. This the utmost the Doctor undertook, either against Mr.
Cawdrey or the Refuter. Reasonable the Refuter should answer these, before he
suggested to the Reader a need of further Proof.

. 1. And it is this. The Doctor in in his Treatise of Will Worship having
undertaken to vindicate the true Notion of (...) from the ordinary misprision
and contempt that was vulgarly thrown upon it, lays this down for his ground,
that there were certain Acts of Religion and degrees of Piety to which no man
by any particular Law was obliged, which yet when they were spontaneously and
voluntarily performed were approved by God, and accepted of him as Free
will-offerings over and above what the Law in Particular required. Treat. of
Will Worship, sect. 9.

. 2. And this he proves by diverse Arguments.

As first, by the (...) or free-will-offerings under the Law. sect. 29. and
before.

Secondly from the Sect of the Hasidaei mentioned and defined to be (...), 1
Macc. 2. 42. Which, according to the Protestant Scaliger, were men that in
their obedience performed something which the Law required not. Section 28.

Thirdly, from David's Pious intention and magnificent design to build a Temple
to the Lord, which was very acceptable to God, though no where commanded. Sect.
30. and 36.

Fourthly, from Saint Paul's preaching the Gospel gratis to the Corinthians,,
when he might by Gospel-law have exacted his wages as the other Apostles did.
Sect. 30.

Fifthly, from the same Apostles voluntary going up to Jerusalem when bonds
expected him, which persecution he might as innocently have declined as in
other cases he had done, and justified it by our Saviors own example. Sect. 31.

Sixthly, from the Liberal man's munificence and bounty to the poor above that
proportion which by any particular Law he is obliged to. Sect. 32.

Seventhly, from those prostrations and humble gestures and frequency in
Prayer, beyond what any Law determined. Sect. 33, 34.

Lastly, from the different improvements of the several talents and graces
which God bostowes upon us, and the proportionable rewards according to those
improvements. Sect. 39.

. 3. And now as all these have been sufficiently there proved and clearly
vindicated from the exceptions of Mr. Cawdrey in the Doctors Account of his
Triplex Diatribe: so if any one of them be demonstrative (as without doubt some
one of them at least is, and is so acknowledged by Mr. Cawdrey) the whole cause
is gained, and it will evidently sollow, that all men are not bound to the
performance of every Act of Charity or Piety that is highly acceptable to God
when it is performed, nor to do it in such a degree, even when they are obliged
ad speciem, or that the things be done, which was the utmost the Doctor
undertook in this Controversy either against Mr. Cawdrey or the Refuter.

. 4. And therefore I must make bold to return him his own language and tell
him, it had been highly equitable for him to have taken notice of these Reasons
and those other the Doctor added ex abundanti in the Close of his answer to the
Objection, which our Refuter now carps at, and first demonstrated the weakness
of them, which yet Mr. Cawdrey has not, before he had insinuated to his Reader,
that he had just reason to expect a Confirmation of what the Doctor there had
said in his answer to the Objection.

. 5. And therefore being already secured of the Cause by our Refuters crafty
tergiversation, I shall the more confidently attempt his several Criminations.

SECT. 23.
The Refuters two first Charges. Bellarmines explication at large. The Doctors.
The Defenders challenge hereupon. The difference between Bellarmine and the
Doctor examined. What good in Bellarmine approved by the Doctor. What
erroneous, not found in the Doctor, or else declared against. Bellarmine and
the Doctor, speak not of the same thing, Chamier assents to the Doctors
Position. The sixth Corollary of Bellarmine, if found in the Doctor, yet
otherwise understood: not censured by Chamier, Ames, Vorstius. Two men may love
God with all their hearts, and yet one love him more then the other. The
Doctors exposition not borrowed from Bellarmine, nor yet Popishly affected.

. 1. First then, he lays it to the Doctors charge, that this very answer of
his is the shift of Papists in several Controversies between them and us, and
particularly of Bellarmine, Tom. 2. de Monachis, l. 2. cap. 13. Tom. 4. de
Amissione gratiae and statu Peccati, l. 1. c. 12, etc. And therefore 2ly the
Doctor is guilty of Popish compliance.

. 2. But with the Readers good patience let us view the places in Bellarmine,
and compare them with the Doctors exposition, that so his innocence may appear.

. 3. Thus then says Bellarmine.

Dilectio Dei ex toto cord duobus modis intelligi potest. Vno modo -- ut idem
sit ex toto cord, quod super omnia integre ac perfect, ut nihil Dei amori
anteponatur vel adaequetur. Altero modo, ut semper Actu Deus cogitetur and
diligatur, and sic animum Dei amor occupatum teneat, ut nihil obrepere possit
quod sit, non inquam contra, sed praeter Deivel proximi charitatem. Priori modo
imperari nobis, ut Deum ex toto cord diligamus, sed cum hac dilectione negamus
pugnare peccata venialia. Ac per hoc falsum esse contendimus repugnare
observantiae Legis quamlibet leve peccatum. Posteriore modo fatemur nullam
vitiosam cogitationem obrepere posse ei, qui totus in Dei amore occupetur,
sedeam dilectionem quae propria est beatorum nobis in hac vita non proprie
imperari, sed tantum indicari, asserimus, ut nimirum sciamus, qu^ spem ac
desideria dirigere debeamus. Haec autem ita se habere in lib. de Monach. c. 2,
and 13. jam antea demonstravimus, etc. Bellar. lib. 1. de Amiss. great. and
stat. Peccat. c. 12. col. 89. D. E. -- Deus jubet se diligi ex toto cord, ex
tota anima, and ex omnibus viribus, unde nihil superest non debitum qnod
erogemus; quicquid enim agimus, Cord, anima, mente ac viribus agimus: quare
omnia nostra Deo sunt obstricta, etc.

Respondeo, vis argumenti principalis potissimum in duobus posita est. Primo,
in illa enumeratione potentiarum cordis, animae, mentis, virium omnium: 2 do,
in illa particula, Ex toto; hinc enim videtur colligi debere, nihil omnino
posse hominem propter Deum facere, sive cord, sive corpore, quod non teneatur
facere. Ostendam igitur neutra ex part argumentum concludere.

Quod attinet ad illam enumerationem, quidam ex Patribus existimarunt illa
omnia esse diversa, etc.

Sed simplicior and Scripturae conformior est eorum sententia, qui docent ista
omnia idem significare, and more Scripturae multa and varia nomina poni ad rem
eandem explicandam, majoris expressionis gratia, itaque idem esse diligere
cord, and diligere anima, and diligere mente, nimirum diligere vere, sincere,
non ficte, non simulate. Nam etc.

Porro illa verba, Ex omnibus viribus, non significant ex omnibus potentiis
animae, sed cmni virtute, and quod vulgo dicimus, pro viribus: nam in Graecis
codicibus nihil est aliud (...), quodtamen interpres nunc vertit ex omni
virtute, nunc ex omni fortitudine, nunc ex omnibus viribus, etc. -- Sed etiam
si juxta priorem expositionem enumerarentur variae potentiae animae, ac
juberemur illas omnes exercere ad gloriam Dei, adhuc nihil adversarii
obtinerent; quoniam enim hoc praeceptum affirmativum est, ideo dicendum esset
solum praecipi ut exerceremus ejus potentias propter Deum, quando id necessitas
gloriae ejus procurandae requireret, alio autem tempore si id sieret, opus
esset Consilii and supererogationis.

Jam vero quantum ad illam particulam. Ex toto, sunt etiam duae Patrum
expositiones; una Sancti Augustini, Bernardi and Thomae, locis notatis, qui
docent illud, Ex toto, significare, imperari nobis hoc mandato omnes gradus
Charitatis quos vel in hoc mundo vel in alio habere possumus, it a ut semper
Deum amemus, and non sit in nobis ullus motus cupiditatis, neque voluntarius
neque involuntarius, cum Dei amore pugnans; ex quo recte deduc unt hoc mandatum
in hac vita perfect impleri non posse. Quae sententia non pugnat cum sententia
nostra de consiliis Evangelicis, etc. (quia) Patres supra-citati existimant hoc
praecepto simul imperari medium and indicari finem, and ideo docent, non posse
impleri perfect hoc praeceptum in hac vita, and tamen non esse praevaricatorem
qui non perfect illud implet, etc. -- Quo circaremanet jam suus Consiliis
locus etiam circa hoc praeceptum: nam etiam si nihil possim addere huic
praecepto quatenus indicat finem, tamen possum addere quatenus indicat medium:
and si non pecco ex sententiae S. Thomae, si non amem Deum nisi vno gradu
amoris, certe non teneor in rigore amplius amare; implicat enim
contradictionem, quod non peccem non faciendo quod facere teneor: ergo si addam
alterum gradum amoris, amo plus quam teneor, atque eo modo facio actum
supererogationis and consilii, etc.

Est igitur alia Sententia, illud, ex toto Cord, non significare omnes actus
Cordis, vel omnem intensionem possibilem, ita ut imperetur, ut nihil cord
agamus nisi Deum diligere idque summa vehementia amoris, sed solum ut amemus
Deum praecipuo amore, nihilque illi in amore anteponamus vel aequemus; ac
proinde solum in hoc praecepto contineatur id quod faciendum est, non etiam
finis ob quem faciendum est: ex quo sequuntur sex quasi Corollaria.

Primum est, Huic praecepto adversari omnia peccata mortalia, quia in omni
peccato mortali anteponitur Creatura Creatori. Secundum, Huic praecepto non
adversari amorem honestum affinium and amicorum, licet non roferatur actu in
Deum, quia non tenemur Deum solum amare, sed eum praecipue. Tertium, Non
adversari peccata venialia eidem praecepto, quia peccata venialia non mutant
ultimum finem. Quartum, Non adversari eidem praecepto motus involuntarios
concupiscentiae, etiam si rerum alioqui gravissimarum, ut infidelitatis,
blasphemiae, adulterii, etc. Nam cum charitas Dei sit in voluntate non
adversantur ei nisi motus voluntarii. Quintum, Hoc praeceptum perfect in hac
vita servare posse, quia non exigit nisi ut amemus Deum plus quam Creaturas.
Sextum, Posse Deum ex toto cord magis and minus diligi; qui enim propter Deum
abstinet se a licitis, magis diligit quam qui solum se abstinet ab illicitis,
and tamen uterque diligit toto cord. Quod autem haec explicatio sit verior and
Scripturae conformior quam superior, multis modis probari potest, etc. --
Bellarm. de Monachis lib. 2. cap. 13. col. 343, 344, 345, 346.

. 4. The Doctors answer stands thus.

I answer that that Phrase (Thou shall love the Lord thy Treat. of
Will Worship,. 49.
God with all thy heart, with all thy Soul, etc.) denotes two things only.
First, the sincerity of this love of God, as opposed to Partial divided Love or
Service; Secondly, the loving him above all other things, and not admitting any
thing into competition with him, not loving any thing else in such a degree:
and in neither of these respects excluding all other things from a subordinate
place in our Love Which being supposed, it will be easy to discern that this
sincere Love of God above all is capable of degrees, and that it is possible
for two men to love God with all their hearts, i. e. sincerely and above all
things, and so both to obey the praecept, and yet one to love him in a more
intense degree then the other does (which may be observed amongst the Angels
themselves, the Seraphims being so called because they are more ardent in Zeal
then other Angels;) nay, for the same Person constantly to Love God above all,
and yet to have higher expressions of that Love at one time then at another.
Thus we read of Christ himself Luke 22. 24. (who we know did never fail in
performing what was man's duty in prayer or any thing else, yet) that he at
that time prayed more earnestly; which is a demonstrative evidence that the
lower degree is not necessarily sinful, when the higher is acceptable to God:
which when it is granted, there is no doubt but these freewill-offerings will
be reconcilable with that Command, and he that loves God with all his heart,
may have some possibility of loving God better then yet he does, and so some
room left for a voluntary oblation.

. 5. To this, for a further clearing and unfolding his mind, the Doctor thought
fit in his Reply to Mr. Cawdrey's Triplex Diatribe to add these two things.

To the first branch of his answer, (The sincerity of this Love of God as
opposed to partial divided Love) I now add, says the Dr. Hammonds Account of
Mr. Cawdrey's Triplex Diatribe, c. 6. sect. 9. 1. p. 221. Ibid.. 5. p. 222.
Doctor, for further explication, that what we do according to the precepts of
Gods Law, we do out of Love toward God, not hypocritically, or as by constraint.

2ly. He says, Still it must be remembered that it is not the sinless
perfection we speak of, when we say it consists in a latitude, and has
degrees, but sincerity of this or that virtue, expressed in this or that
performance: and as this, though it excludes not all mixture of sin in the
suppositum (the man in whom it is) yet may by the grace of God in Christ
exclude it in this or that Act. For it is certain that I may in an Act of Mercy
give as much as any Law obliges me to give, and so not sin in giving too
little.

. 6. To which let me now add what the Doctor had before delivered in his
Treatise of Will Worship, Sect. 16.

-- When in the service of God a man out of a pious affection (of hope and
gratitude inciting to do things acceptable to God, as well as of fear deterring
him from all that is prohihited) shall, in conformity to Gods general commands
and the Doctrine of the Gospel, do any thing else besides what God has
commanded by any particular precept, this Action of his is to be accounted so
much more commendable and acceptable to God. Piety being one of those virtues,
quarum tantae sunt amplitudines, ut quanto auctiores sunt, tanto sunt
laudatiores, which have such width of compass, that the larger they are, they
are also so much more commendable; and withal the more voluntary and
spontaneous, the more acceptable. To which that of the Son of Sirach is
agreeable, Ecclus. 43. 30. When you glorify the Lord, exalt him as much as you
can, for even he yet will far exceed; and when you exalt him, put forth all
your strength, for you can never go far enough: i. e. how far soever you
exceed the particular command, you are yet within the compass of the general,
and in respect of that can never be thought to have done enough, though the
particular act or degree of it be somewhat, that you are not particularly
obliged to.

. 7. Lastly, I shall add one thing more from the Doctors Annotations on this
commandment, Matthew. 22. 37. and then I doubt not but his exposition will
appear so full and complete, that it will be beyond all exception. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind, that is (says the Doctor,) with all thy Will and Affections and
Understanding.

. 8. And thus having represented the Doctors answer full and entire, and given
his true sense and meaning of it from other parts of his writings, I shall now
be so bold as to challenge our Refuter to make good any one of those severe
Criminations he has laid to the Doctors charge. And if he cannot prove them (as
without doubt he cannot) he is bound in Justice to make the Doctor reparations
for the injury he has done him by a public Recantation. And as this is most
equitable and Christian, so he has under his hand promised it in the very
entrance Jeanes p. 2*
of this Reply.

. 9. But now I undertake to demonstrate that you have notoriously abused the
Doctor, and laid that to his charge he is no way guilty of, and therefore I
expect that you make good your engagement, otherwise I must accuse you not only
of unchristian dealing, but also of breach of promise.

. 10. You tell us, this very answer is the shift of Papists in several
controversies between them and us, and for this you cite Bellarmine. But who is
there that shall compare the places in Bellarmine you have quoted with the
Doctors Exposition, that will not clearly perceive the vast difference between
them? It is true indeed that whatsoever is good in Bellarmines exposition, the
Doctor approves of: and for this he has the Authority and allowance of the
learned Chamier, and our Ames, and the Fathers, and Reason and Scripture to
justify him. But then secondly, whatsoever is justly wanting in Bellarmine's
answer, and is so taxed for his defect by Chamier and Ames, is supplied in the
Doctors: And thirdly, whatsoever is purely erroneous and Popish in this answer
of Bellarmine's, is either not to be found in the Doctors answer, or ex
professo declared against.

. 11. The sum of Bellarmine's answer consists in this, That to love God from
the heart is to love him truly and without dissimulation, and that the other
words were added for the heightning of the expression. 2ly. that to love God
with all our might and strength and heart is to love him pro virili, with might
and main, so that God may have the chief place in our Love, so that nothing may
either be preferred before him or equalled to him in this our affection. And
this is all he allows to be required in this Commandment. And consequently
from thence he inferrs.

1. That none but mortal sins are inconsistent with that Love that is required
in this Commandment.

2. That venial sins, and the Involuntary motions and temptations to the
grossest sinners of Infidelity, Blasphemy, Adultery, etc. are not opposite to it

3. That it is possible to fulfill this Commandment perfectly in this life, and
keep all the Commandments of God employed in it and depending on it, so that a
man may in Justice not only merit from God, but also supererogate, and do more
then this or any Law of God else does require, and therefore upon this score
may deserve and expect a brighter aureola and Crown of glory at Gods hands,
then if he had done no more then the Law does require. And as this was the only
venom of Popery to be found in Bellarmine's answer, so for the maintenance of
these errors is Bellarmine's answer artificially framed. And as these are the
shifts of Papists in the several controversies between them and us, so the
Doctor is so far from any Compliance with Bellarmine or any other Papist in
the world in these and the like shifts, that his answer and exposition does not
only overthrow them, but he has expressly declared his opinion against them, and
fully vindicated his exposition from having any thing to do with them, as is
plain to be seen in the Treatise of Will worship in the Sections immediately
following the Doctors answer, and ex prosesso added to prevent this Calumny,
50. 51, 52, 53. as also in the Doctors vindication of it from the exceptions of
Mr. Cawdrey in his Account of the Triplex Diatribe, c. 6. sect. 10. page 223,
224, 225, 226. And therefore it had been very equitable that our Refuter should
have taken notice at least of the Doctors praeoccupation and Apologetical
defense carefully affixed to prevent this and the like Calumnies, before he had
so injuriously defamed and aspersed him.

. 12. If our Refuter shall here reply, Does not Bellarmine say, That this
Commandment enjoynes us to love God sincerely, that is truly and from the
heart, not seignedly and without dissimulation? Does he not also say, that we
must love God with the chiefest Love, not preferring any thing above him or
admitting any thing into competition with him? And does not Doctor Hammond say
the same? And was it not fit that he should acquaint us with those cogent
reasons that necessitated him to this compliance with Papists.

. 13. I answer, It is true Doctor Hammond and Bellarmine both say so; and so
does Ames and Chamier, and the Fathers, and Reason, and Scripture say the same.

. 14. For as to the first, does not the Apostle expressly command and enjoin
that Love be without dissimulation? Romans 12. 9. does he not commend the Romans
because they had obeyed from the heart the form and doctrine which was
delivered unto them? Romans 6. 17. Is not this truth and simplicity and purity
and singleness of heart every where required, and counterfeit and hypocritical
shows every where condemned? Ephesians. 6. 5, 6. Heb. 10. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 22.

. 15. And then as to the second, Does not our Savior expressly say, Matthew. 10.
37, 38. He that loves Father or Mother more then me is not worthy of me? and
he that takes not his Cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me? Does
he not also say, Luke 14. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father
and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own
life also, he cannot be my disciple.

. 16. And therefore what says Mr. Cawdrey? Says he not Cawdrey Trip.
Diatribe, p. 114. Ames. Bellar. enervat tom. 2. p. 154. Chamier. Panstrat. tom.
3. lib. 11. c. 14. 6.
expressly, But we say that both these are noted, and required we grant? Does
not Ames in the place quoted by our Refuter say, Hoc aliquid est sed non totum
quod his verbis praecipitur? Does not the very learned Chamier say first, Imo
ultro concedimus, non prohiberi alia quaedam praeter Deum amari, quia
manifestum est alterum illud mandatum simile primo, and in Ecclesia nihil
frequentius fraterna dilectione. Concedimus ergo nihil amandum contra Deum,
supra Deum, nihil aeque cum Deo. Omnia igitur infra Deum, and propter Deum? So
again in the same Chapter, Ibid.. 17.
Itaque sic concedimus significari id quod Bellarminus dicebat, diligere vere,
sincere, non ficte, non simulate. And therefore if this be to be guilty of a
compliance with Papists, the Doctor has good company, and he had been an Enemy
to Truth if he had not thus complied. All then is not Popery we see, nor so
censured by our Writers against Bellarmine, that is to be found in him.

. 17. But do not Ames and Chamier say that this is not all that is required in
this precept? Ex his quis non videt olim Christianis persuasissimum suisse,
debere se ita Deum amare, non tantum ut ei nihil anteponatur, quod Bellarminus
tanquam in Deum i^eral^ssimus concedit; sed etiam ut totus in amore Dei
occupetur? Quod si est, quis non videt sequi illud etiam, ut nulla vitiosa
cogitatio obrepere possit, quod Bellarminus negat, etc. Chamier. Panstrat. tom.
3. l. 6. c. 12.. 34. Vide. 35, etc. p. 91.
Yes, and justly they say so. And therefore though Bellarmine for the securing
his cause is forced to maintain that these two only are meant and nothing else,
yet Doctor Hammond adds a third, which satisfies all the defects that Chamier
and Ames or any man else can justly find fault with in Bellarmine's answer. For
does he not say, That Precept does also enjoin sincerity of this our Love, as
opposed to partial divided Love or Service.

. 18. But before I come to demonstrate the fullness of this answer, I shall
crave leave to demand of our Refuter wherein is this answer of the Doctor
guilty of the least compliance with Papists, I mean in their Errors, which we
justly condemn? For does the Doctor any where say that lukewarmnesse in our
Love is acceptable to God? or that he who loves God only with one degree, has
so perfectly satisfied the obligation of this precept, that he may sit down
contented, and if he will vouchsafe to love God more intensely, he then does a
work of supererogation? And yet this is directly and in terminis to be found Si
non peccem quando amo Deum nisi uno gradu amoris, non teneor in rigore amplius
amare: Ergo si addam alterum gradum amoris, amo Deum plusquam teneor, atque eo
modo facio actum supererogationis and consilii. Bellarm. de Monach. l. 2. c. 13.
in Bellarmine, and is justly charged upon him by our Ames and Vide Davenant.
de Justit. habit. and act. c. 43. p. 496, 497. and ibid. c. 44. p. 503, 504.
our worthy Bishop Davenant.

. 19. Does the Doctor any where say that this precept binds men no further
then to an unfeigned and sincere love of God, and the observance of his
Commandments without breach of friendship, and that therefore it binds us not
to the shunning of venial sins? And yet this and more is to be found in
Bellarmine, and it is justly charged upon him, and disproved by our learned and
reverend Bishop White against Fisher, page 525.
White, from St. Austin and Bernard, and also by Chamier and Ames, and Davenant
de Just. habit and act. c. 48. p. 535, 536, etc.
our most learned Bishop Davenant.

. 20. Does the Doctor any where say that these words, The heart, the soul, the
mind, the strength and might are here put to signify one and the same thing,
and are added only for the greater expression? And yet this is charged upon
Bellarmine's exposition by the learned Chamier. And yet Vide Davenant de Just.
habit and act. cap. 42. p. 485.


. 21. The truth is, that learned man could not deny but there was some
probability and truth in this part of Bellarmine's assertion. And therefore he
says, At ne nos quidem serupulo si sumus in singulis voculis numerandis
appendendisque, sed non habere maximum pondus tam sollicitam enumerationem nemo
nos persuadebit -- Nihil habere mysterii, quia non eisdem vocibus, non eodem
ordine apud omnes legamus, nos negamus, nec ipse Bellarminus serio dixit, qui
concessit majorem expressionem, quae nobis satis est, nisi ab his enervatur.
Concedimus idem -- posse significari per totum cor, etiam si reliqua non
exprimantur. Sed negamus propterea nihil esse mysterii -- Hoc igitur nos magnum
pondus esse dicimus hujus enumerationis, quae omnia complectitur quibus homo
moveri potest intra se, and inde prorumpere in opus externum, -- etc: Chamier.
Panstrat. tom. 3. l. 11. c. 14.. 11, 12, 13.

. 22. And says not also the Doctor the same in his Annotations on Matthew?
Says he not expressly there, that the Law requires that we love God with all
our Will and Affections and Understanding? And says not the Apostle the same,
when he bidds us to glorify God in our bodies and our spirits, which are Gods?
1 Cor. 6. 20. Nay, though the Chaldee Paraphrase, which renders the word (...)
by Riches, does not so properly express it as the LXX. do, that translate it
(...), yet there may be some good use made even of that interpretation also.
For Solomon advises us, Prove. 3. 10. That we honor the Lord with our substance
also. The truth is, that all that is within us, and all that is without us,
must most readily be at Gods service, and praise him we must not only with the
best member we have, but with every part and faculty both of soul and body, and
our lives and our liberties and wealth and honors must be all at his Devotion.
But then it cannot be denied, what the learned Grotius has observed, Illorum
supervacua diligentia qui (...), nimium subtiliter hic distinguunt (as will be
evident to any that shall consider the subtilties of the Ancients in their
Commentaries on this place, as is acknowledged also by the learned Chamier) cum
vocum multarum cumulatio nihil aliud quam intensius studium designet, sicut and
Latini dicunt cord, animo atque viribus In Graeco codice est (...). sic etia^
Hebraei loquuntur (...) Plautus Captivis, Persequarque cord and animo atque
viribus; Cord (...), Animo (...); (nam animum pro anima posuit) atque viribus,
Lucas dixit, (...), ex totis viribus tuis. Veritas Hebraica, (...) in omnibus
viribus tuis. Drusii annot. in N. T. par. alter. in Matt. 22. 37. p. 48.
ut ab aliis est annotatum. Itaque eodem sensu quae hic habemus, terna modo,
modo singula, modo bina reperias: Singula, ut 1 Reg. 14. 8. 1 Samuel 7. 3. 2 Reg.
10. 31. Psalm. 119. 2. quibus addi potest illud in Eccl. c. 47. 10. Bina, ut
Deuteronomy. 4. 29. 2. Par. 15. 12. and 2 Reg. 23. 3. Nec dissimile illud M. Antonini,
l. 12. (...), cujus hic est sensus, as the same Author had before observed, qui
apud Thucididen (...), id est, in id intentus sum. Idem autem valet sive dicas
pro viribus, sive omni studio atque contentione. And as this is full and high
to what Chamier aims at, so it is not at all questioned by the Doctor, but is
expressly asserted by him in this very Treatise of Will Worship, sect. 16. as we
have already quoted it at large.

. 23. But then let me ask further, does Bellarmine, or any Papist else, in
these controversies assert that this Commandment obliges us to that sincerity
of Love that is opposed to Partial divided Love, or Service? Indeed if he had
done this, the distance between him and the Doctor had not been so great as now
it is. But then he had withal clearly yielded up the whole cause to those he
disputes against. And this is it that Chamier so succesfully presses against
Bellarmine from the ancient Fathers, as shall be made good when we come to
parallel the Doctors Answer with their Exposition, and that of the most
reformed Writers.

. 24. The truth of it is, that the Doctor is so far from any compliance with
Bellarmine or any other Popish writer, or from making use in this answer of any
of their shifts in the several Controversies between us and them (as the
Refuter sadly lays to the Doctors charge) that both Bellarmine and the rest of
his party speak of another thing then the Doctor does. For Vide Davenant de
Justit. Act. and habit. ca. 39. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44.
they, by the love of God, understand the Habit of Charity, and the Perfection
of Righteousness, whereby a man may not only fulfill the Law of God so, that he
may in Justice merit at Gods hands, but also he may supererogate and do more of
Righteousness then any Law does require, and so merit a brighter Aureola, a
larger Crown of glory by the advantage of this Perfection. But then the Doctor
he speaks only of the Acts of this or that Virtue or Grace. For still it must
be remembered, says he, that it is not the sinless perfection we speak of, when
we say it consists in a latitude, and has degrees, but the sincerity of this
or that Virtue expressed in this or that performance, and as this, though it
excludes not all mixture of s^n in the suppositum (the man in whom it is) yet
may by the grace of God in Christ exclude it in this or that Act. For it is
certain that I may in an Act of Mercy give as much as any Law obligoth me to
give, and so not sin in giving too little.

. 25. And as this is very evident in it self, so it is plainly acknowledged by
Chamier. For whereas Bellarm. de Amiss great. and stat peccat. l. 1. cap. 12.
col. 89, 90.
Bellarmine had objected that the Scriptures testify of David and Josias and
others, that they loved God with all their soul, etc. and consequently, the
Command enjoynes only that Love, which excludes not venial sins; he grants
that they did love God with all their heart at some times, though not at
others. His words are these. To the same purpose also Bp. Davenant de. Justit.
habit and act. cap. 24. p. 328.
Vicimus ergo, nisi forte meretur victoriam illud quiequid est de Davide and
Josia, sed non potest. Illi igitur sequuti sunt Deum toto cord suo, and tamen
peccarunt: utrumque inquam, verum; sed distinctis temporibus. Tum enim cum
peccarunt, non amarunt Deum toto cord. Itaque cum peccarunt, peccarunt
mortaliter. Tum autem quis nescit Deum, cum de suis loquitur, saepe loqui
tanquam de iis quibus nulla imputat peccata, ac proinde tanquem prorsus justis?
Denique quid hoc ad peccata venialia? etc. Chamier tom. 3. lib. 6. cap. 12..
365.

. 26. And therefore I shall not be sollicitous if our Refuter should suggest
that the Doctors answer agrees at least with the Sixth Corellary of Bellarmine:
Sextum, posse Deum ex toto cord magis and minus diligi. Qui enim propter Deum
abstinet se a licitis, magis diligit quam qui solum se abstinet ab illicitis;
and tamen uterque diligit toto cord; since he speaks of a gradual difference
in that perfection of Love that consists in the keeping of all Gods
Commandments, and is fitted to the Romish Doctrine of Merit, and the several
states and degrees of Persection, and Evangelical counsels and works of
supererogation. But the Doctor speaks of the gradual difference of perfection
in regard of this or that Act of this or that Virtue or Grace. But then withal
I cannot but observe unto the Reader, that I do not find that either Ames or
Chamier or Vorstius, that ex professo unde take to refute the errors of
Bellarmine, have directly taxed him for this Corollary, whichme thinks they
should have done, if they had condemned it as faulty.

. 27. Indeed me thinks it cannot be denied but that two men may love God with
all their hearts, and yet one may love him more then the other, as is plam from
the Parable of the Talents. For if God reward every man according to his works,
plain it is, that he that received the greater Reward and Crown, brought a
greater improvement to his Lord, and so loved him more, and his Charity and
Righteousness was greater, then he that received the less Glory, because his
improvement and Righteousness was less. And yet as plain it is, that both
these Servants loved their Lord with all their heart, because both were
rewarded, and received that James 1. 12.
Crown of life which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

. 28. And this is abundantly sufficient to acquit the Doctor from the least
supicion of the two first Criminations: and plain it is, that he has not
borrowed his exposition from Bellarmine, nor made use of any of their shifts,
nor is in the least guilty of any Popish compliance.

SECT. 24.
The Refuters third and fourth Charges. The Doctors exposition parallel to that
of Bishop Andrews, Davenant, Downham, White, Hooker, Field, Grotius, Ainsworth
praised. Assembly Annotations, Ursin, Calvin, Victor Antiochenus. Imperfect
work on Matthew. Theophylact, Theodoret, Zacharias, Austin, Chamier. The
Objections from Calvin, Ursin, answered. Chamier's conclusion against
Bellarmine examined; Concerns not the Doctor; Advantages not the Refuter.
State of Innocence a state of Proficiency. Proved from Mr. Cawdrey. Saints and
Angels love not God all to the same indivisible height. Saints differ in glory.
The Doctor of the first and second Covenant. Perfection Legal, Evangelical.
Learned Protestants agree with him against Chamier. The Falsehood of Chamiers
Inference as understood by the Refuter and Mr. Cawdrey demonstrated. How to be
understoood. Haeresie of the Perfectists. How not favored by Chamier. Thus
more agreeable to himself* Recapitulated in five Positions. Chamier and the
Doctor agreed. The Doctor justified from Mr. Cawdrey's concessions. Mr.
Cawdrey's contradictions in the Point of Perfection. In what sense
Free-will-offerings and uncommanded Degrees and Acts of Piety and Charity. The
Question stated. Davenant, Montague, White, Hooker, and generally the Fathers
and diverse Protestants agreeing with the Doctor in this Point of Perfection
and Counsel, and doing more then is commanded. This proves not the Popish
doctrine of Supererogation.

. 1. The third and fourth charges are, That these Protestants that have dealt
in the Controversies betwixt us and the Papists have proved the Doctors sense
too narrow. And withal have given an other sense of the words, which they have
confirmed and vindicated from the exceptions of the Papists; and for this the
Authority of Chamier is avouched in the margin, though the figures of the
Chapter be mistaken.

. 2. And now for the acquitting the Doctor from these Criminations, I suppose
it necessary (and must therefore crave the Reader's patience) to compare the
Doctors exposition with that of the Prime Reformers, and those beyond suspicion
of any Popish compliance, especially with that of the Greek and Latin Fathers,
whose authority Chamier does so powerfully press against Bellarmine in this
very Chapter. And if it appear that the Doctor speaks home to them, and is not
defective in any thing that Chamier does require in that very passage our
Refuter has quoted in the Margin, I then shall hope that he himself will
acquit the Doctor from this aspersion, and will be the first that shall blot it
out in a public Recantation according to his promise.

. 3. The Doctors answer is, That Phrase denotes two things only. First,
sincerity of this Love of God, as opposed to partial divided Love or Service.
Secondly, the loving him above all other things, and not admitting any thing
into competition with him, not loving any thing else in such a degree, and in
neither of these respects excluding all other things from a subordinate place
in our Love. To these in his Reply to Mr. Cawdry he adds for further
explication, that what we do according to the precept of Gods Law, we do out of
Love toward God, not hypocritically, or as by constraint.

. 4. That all these are required by the precept there is no Question, and
acknowledged it is by all Protestant Writers whatsoever, for ought I yet can
understand. The Doubt is, whether only these are required. Let us therefore
consider the full scope and purpose of it.

. 5. First then, when the Doctor adds, That we must love God not
hypocritically, or as by constraint, this implles the freeness, Romans 6. 17.
Ephesians. 6. 6. 1 John 3. 18. Romans 12. ^. 2 Cor. 6. 6. and 8. 6.
the cheerfulness of our Love in opposition to all compulsion and constraint;
Secondly, the truth and sincerity of our Love in opposition to that which is
only in show and outside hypocritical appearance. This is that which the
Apostle calls love and obedience in truth and from the heart.

. 6. Secondly, when he says we must love God above all other things, not
admitting any thing into competition with him, not loving any thing else in
such a degree, this denotes more then Bellarmine's amor praecipuus or chief
Love, it implies the Ardency and Fervor and intensenss of our Love as that is
opposite to a remisness and lukewarm affection, which yet Bellarmine approves
of as a fulfilling of this Law. And therefore says the learned Chamier,
Concedimus nihil amandum contra Deum, supra Deum, aeque cum Deo: omnia igitur
infra Deum, and propter Deum. Sed addimus, voces eas esse in praecepto, quae
non hanc tantum Dei comparationem cum reliquis creaturis includunt, sed etiam
emphasin habeant praeterea significandi amoris divini per se considerati.
Chamier tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 14.. 6.

. 7. And therefore the Doctor says thirdly, That we must love God in
sincerity, as that is opposed to partial divided love. And this makes up all
that is or can justly be desired for the full sense and meaning of this
Precept. For this sincerity which is opposed to partial divided Love implies,
First, that we love God toti: for he that loves not God withal his soul, his
mind and strength, that does not labor to glorify God in his body and in 1
Cor. 6. 20:
his spirit, which are Gods, that does not all he can for the Love of God, is
partial in his Love; he loves not in sincerity, as that is opposed to partial
divided service, because he divides himself, and imployes not all his strength
and what ever belongs to him in Gods service.

Secondly, it implies that we love God totum, that we love every thing in God,
and all that belongs to God, that we have a delight, as David speaks, to all
Gods Commandments; otherwise Psalm. 119. 6, 10, 127, 128.
we are partial in our Love, and affect him by halves.

Thirdly, it implies that we love God toto tempore, that we constantly and
always love him; otherwise our Love is not sincere, but broken and divided.
And this is that which the Apostle calls, (...), Love of Christ in Sincerity,
Ephesians. 6. 24.

. 8. This then, Sir, being the true meaning and full purport of the Doctors
exposition, I come now to parrallel it with that which the most eminent of the
Reformed writers have given of it.

. 9. And I shall begin with the most incomparable Bishop Andrews. The second
thing says he, required in every law, and so in this, Bishop Andrews Pattern
of Catechist. Doctr. at large Introduct. 15. p. 64.
is the manner how it must be done, which by learned men is much dilated: we
will reduce them all to three things. We are to do it, 1. Toti, 2. Totum, 3.
Toto tempore, or semper.

1. Toti, as Jacob said to Rachel, You know that with all my power I have
served your Father, Genesis 31. 6. and no doubt but he would yield as much service
to God as he did to man.

2. Totum, with our whole souls and bodies we must endeavor to keep the whole
law: not as Naaman did 2 Kings 5. 18. keep it by halves; but as Noah, who did
all that the Lord commanded him about the Ark, Genesis 6. 22. and 7. 5.

3. Toto tempore, not for a time only, but all the days of our life. Noah was
toto tem-pore justus, righteous all his life, Genesis 6. 9. and Abraham was
Juvenis and senex idem, the same man in his age that he was in his youth.

So again the same Reverend Father.

1. First it requires, that Toti we be whole observers of the Law It commands
that we do it with our whole Soul and Body. For Bishop Andrews Pattern of
Catechist. doctr. at large, Introduct. cap. 17. p. 70.
we consist but of those two parts. And the Soul has likewise two parts, the
Mind and the Heart. Now God must be perfectus mentis Scopus, the mark at which
the Mind must wholly aim, the end of all our Actions, there must be plena
intentio erga Deum, look wholly to God in them. And the Heart, which is the
Will, must be tota inflammata wholly inflamed. As for the Body, every member of
it must be used, and all the strength of it, to perform the Law, and be
instruments of righteousness, toto cord, totis viribus, all our heart, and all
our strength must be employed therein.

2. For Totum all the Law. Its Gods own wish concerning the people, O that
there were such a heart in them that they would Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
keep all my commandments always! and it were absurd to except any. For
whereas God is perfectly wise, if some of his precepts were needless, then
might he be taxed with folly, in not leaving out them which were superfluous.
And as none of Gods laws must be left unkept, so none but his, or what is
grounded upon them, or not repugnant to them, and imposed by lawful authority
derived from him, must be kept; for then his wisdom would be likewise
impeached, if any thing be sides his Law, or without subordination to his, were
to be kept, and the Law it self would be imperfect; but it is neither
defective, nor has any thing superfluous in it: and therefore God says Deuteronomy.
12. 32. Whatsoever thing I command you, observe to do it; thou shall not add
thereto, or diminish from it. Nothing must be commanded in Gods name, as
immediately from him, but what he has prescribed.

3. For the continuance, Tota in vita est observanda, It is to be kept always
all the days of our life. The place before quoted shows by the word
(always) that to continue all our lives in his obedience is a part of the Law.
And the same in effect he commands elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 11. 1. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and his Judgments,
and his commandments always. And in all places too. For though the place
includes not the time, yet the time includes the place: and therefore the
house of Rimmon, 2 Kings 5. 18. is not, nor can be excepted,

. 9. To this of Bishop Andrews I shall annex the explication of Reverend Bishop
Davenant, that was purposly addressed against the errors of Bellarmine.
Davenant de Justit. habit. and actual. c. 4. p. 489, 490, 491, 492.


-- Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord, etc. -- Hinc nos
deducimus nullum locum relinqui supererogatoriis operibus; primo, quia nemo
potest implere hoc praeceptum, secundo, quia nemo potest facere opus melius aut
nobilius quam illud quod hoc praecepto continetur, etc. -- Bellarminus -- quia
videt, si omnia nostra Deo obstricta sunt virtute hujus mandati, quae toto
cord, tota anima, tota fortitudine efficere possumus, nihil indebitum
superesse in quo supererogemus, primo -- dicit, more Scripturae, multa nomina
poni ad rem unam explicandam, majoris expressionis gratia, atque hoc unum
juberi, ut Deum diligamus sincere, non simulate. Sed reclamat contextus: non
enim solum modo jubet vere and sincere diligere Deum, sed diligere totali
intention omnium virium. Sic Aquinas opusc. 17. c. 6. and 2. 2. q. 44. art. 5.
and 6. and 9. 184. art 3. Gerson de Consil. Evangel. Ealsa ergo Bellarmini
interpretatio, qui nihil aliud -- praecipi vult quam sinceritatem dilectionis.
Praecipitur enim and haec, and insuper totalitas, perfectio, sive suprema nobis
possibilis intensio ejusdem dilectionis. Secundo respondet, -- quia praeceptum
affirmativum est, praecipit solum ut exerceamus has Potentias propter Deum,
quando id necessitas gloriae ejus procurandae requirit; alio autem tempore si
id fiat, opus esse Consilii and Supererogationis -- Concesso -- (quod)
Affirmativa praecepta semper obligant, sed non ad semper, tamen -- juxta verbum
Dei obligamur ad glorificandum Deum nostris bonis operibus, non solummodo cum
necessitas id exigit, sed cum facultas suppetit and opportunitas occurrit. Gal.
6. 10. Tit 2. 14. etc. 3. 8. 1 Cor. 10. 31. Haec emnia ex Diametro pugnant cum
maligna illa Jesuitae interpretatione, etc. -- Tertio respondet, illos -- qui
-- docent imperari nobis supremum gradum charitatis, affirmare simul non fieri
homines praevaricatores, licet hoc non perfect impleant in hac vita. Vnde
colligit non proprie imperari, sed potius indicari nobis hanc supremam
Charitatis perfectionem: nam peccat quisquis non facit quod Deus illi proprie
mandavit. Sed nec hoc -- illi proderit. Nam vere dicere possumus Legem Dei
obligare ad habendam and exercendam perfectam hanc dilectionem, and tamen
fideles non esse praevaricatores, hoc est, non incurrere aliquem novum reatum,
ex eo quod defectum patiantur perfectae charitatis tam in habitu quam in actu.
Ratio, quia uterque defectus, quatenus involuntarius est, pertinet ad originale
peccatum; ac proinde ejus reatus solvitur in Baptismo. Sicuti ergo inordinatae
concupiscentiae sive actus sive habitus lege Dei prohibetur, and tamen renati
non fiunt praevaricatores, i. e. reatum nullum contrabunt habendo vel sentiendo
hanc concupiscentiam prohibitam, quia ejus reatus sublatus fuit in
regeneratione spirituali: sic perfectae Charitatis habitus and actus lege
divina imperatur, and tamen non constringuntur aliquo reatu fideles quod ab hac
perfectione deficiant, quia tales defectus non ultra imputantur regeneratis. Ad
haec optimi renatorum non modo deficiunt ab hac plenaria charitate quam Lex
exigit, sed etiam ab illo divinae dilectionis gradu, quem ad vitandam
transgressionem Culpabilem ipsi Scholastici necessarium esse statuunt Number
(authore 2. 2 q. 18 41. art. 3.
Aquinate) infimus divinae dilectionis gradus est, ut nihil supra Deum; aut
contra Deum, aut aequaliter cum Deo diligatur; a quo gradu perfectionis qui
deficit; nullo modo implet praeceptum. At Christo uno excepto, ab hoc gradu
defecerunt and deficiunt filii hominum universi. Nam peccati (a quo nemo
immunis vivit) generalis causa est inordinatus amor creaturae, qui contrariatur
ordinato amori Creatoris. Denique and illud addo, ipsos renatos in Deo
diligendo and gloria ejus promovenda, non modo minus semper facere quam ex
rigore Legis deberent, sed plerumque minus quam possent si enixe pietati operam
darent. At qui minus fecit in obsequio divino quam potuit facere, is longissime
abest a supererogando ultra id quod debuit facere, Postremo argutatur, --
Etiamsi nihil possimus superaddere huic praecepto -- quatenus indicat -- finem,
tamen possumus quatenus indicat medium, atque illo modo facere opera
supererogationis. Si per finem intelligat supremum illum gradum and finalem
perfectionem cbaritatis, quam jubemur praestare in Deo diligendo per media,
externa quaelibet opera pietatis, quibus exercemus and declaramus hanc nostram
Dei dilectionem, nego illu^ qui deficit in fine posse supererogare in mediis.
Dicet Bellarminus, Vtcunque non possum, quod attinet ad ipsam dilectionem Dei,
plus facere quam illum toto cord, tota anima, tota fortitudine diligere, uti
in ipso mandato praecipitur; tamen quod attinet ad media, per quae haec
dilectio exercetur and ostenditur, possum plus facere, quam ex praecepto
teneor. Nam possum ad amorem meum testificandum decies invocare Deum in dies:
at nemo tenetur ex praecepto toties orare singulis diebus. Possum pauperibus
dimidiam partem bonorum meorum elargiri: at nemo tenetur ex mandato tantam
portionem illis decidere. Possum abstinere non modo ab illicitis, puta crapula,
scortatione, and consimilibus, sed a rebus insuper licitis, puta a carnium esu,
a conjugio, and id genus aliis. In hisce caeterisque quae afferri possent
videor supererogare, quia plus facio quam teneor facere.

Vt haec diluantur, scire oportet, externas circumstantias operum bonorum, ut
pote Temporis, Loci, Quantitatis, Numeri, aliasque consimiles, propter
infinitam varietatem nec potuisse nec debuisse lege aliqua express definiri
and limitari: Lex enim Dei, quae jubet nos invocare Deum, non jubet ut toties
and ^amdiu illum singulis diebus invocemus: Lex Dei quae obligat ad diligendos
proximos and pauperes sublevandos, non praecipit singulariter quibus and quam
magnis beneficiis hanc dilectionem and benignitatem nostram internam
testificari and exercere oporteat. Porro and illud notandum, hasce
circumstantias externas, quae sub particulari praecepto non cadunt, esse tamen
ex regula Charitatis and prudentiae moderandas. Hisce positis, nego in rebus
aut circumstantiis illis externis, quae nulla lege particulari praecipiuntur,
opera supererogationis constitui ullo modo posse. Primo, quia opus omne bonum
aestimandum est tam ab interna part quam externa. Quando igitur opus ex part
magis principali est mancum and defectuosum, non potest a part minus
principali ireputari eximie perfectum and supererogatorium -- Secundo, quia hae
circumstantiae quae liberae relinquuntur, fiunt debitae interveniente dictamine
Prudentiae and Charitatis Christianae -- Postremo, (quod rei caput est)
quicquid facio in hisce externis actibus aut circumstantiis quod non teneor ex
mandato facere, est eo long inferius and ignobilius adquod teneor ex mandato,
quodque minime ad amussim Legis adimpleo. Sicuti ergo miles non supererogat qui
pugnat ignaviore animo quam oportuit, quamvis -- utatur gladio longiore quam
Imperator illi praescripsit: sic neque nos supererogamus apud Deum, quamvis
utamur mediis sive instrumentis majoribus quam ille imperavit, dum in actibus
internis diligendi Deum, diligendi proximum, mortificandi veterem Adamum,
perfectionem illum quae sub mandato est non assequimur.

. 10. To him I shall annex the Exposition of our Reverend Downham Bishop of
Derry. It is in his Treatise of the Covenant venant of Grace, c. 10. p. 175.
of Grace, c. 11. where describing what uprightness is, he tells us, among many
other things tending to this purpose, it is expressed. -- 5ly by the whole
heart being not Legally but Evangelically understood, as when duties are to be
performed with the whole heart and with all the soul, as Deuteronomy. 4. 29. and 26.
16. and 30. 2. 1 Samuel 12. 24. 2 Kings 23. 3. Psalm. 119. 2, 10, 34, 69. Joel 2.
12. Which being legally understood, import a greater perfection then is
incident to man since the Fall; but being Evangelically understood, according
to the Covenant of Grace, nothing else is meant thereby but that they are to be
performed with an entire and upright heart, or, as David speaks Psalm. 119. 7.
with uprightness of heart, not with an heart and a heart, Jam. 1. 8. and 4. 8.
Psalm. 12. 2. 1 Chronicles. 12. 33, 38. without guile, Psalm. 17. 1. and 32. 2, etc.
And then in the recapitulation of his whole Doctrine, to this purpose he tells
us, that to worship God Bishop Downeham ibid. p. 240.
in holiness before him, is to walk with God without hypocrisy, in sincerity
and truth, with perfect, with pure, with our whole hearts, that is to say, with
entire or upright hearts, walking in the way of Religion and godliness with a
right foot, looking right before us, declining neither to the right hand nor to
the left, neither treading awry by dissimulation, nor ha^l^ing down right
either as neuters in Religion betwixt Christ and Antichrist, or as worldlings
between God and Mammon, nor worshipping or obeying God by halves, but approving
our selves to be (...), entire and sound Christians, to him that tries and
searches the heart and reins, setting God always before our eyes, and
behaving our selves as in his presence, doing that which is right in his sight.
Once more. In this Evangelical sense the Obedience of the upright is total in
three respects, totius Legis, hominis, vitae, as being the Obedience of the
whole law, of the whole man, of the whole life* after our Justification and
reconciliation with God obeying the law in respect of their desire and purpose,
totam, toti, tota vita, etc. This he there proves at large, which would be too
tedious to transcribe. But this is sufficient to declare that learned and
Judicious man's opinion. Indeed the whole Chapter is well worthy the Readers
perusal, and is exactly agreeable to the Doctors explication White's Reply to
Jesuit Fisher's answer, Point the 8.. 2. p. 523, 524. a. Aquin 2. 2. q. 44 art
4. ad 2. B. August. de doctrina Christ. l. 1. c. 22. Idem l. de Perfect Justit.
Resp. ad Rat. 16. Bernard in Cant. Sermon. 20. Gregor. super Reg. l 3 c. 1.
Bernard in Cant. Sermon. 50.
and opinion, as he has delivered it in his writings, especially in his Account
to Mr. Cawdrey.

. 11. Nor does our Reverend and learned Bp. White (to whom our Refuter in this
very argument thinks fit to appeal) differ any whit from them even in his
answer to the Jesuit. For whereas Fisher had said that the precept, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, etc. does not command an entire employment of all our
powers on God with all our utmost forces; nor that we never love nor desire nor
think of any thing besides him; nor that all our thoughts and affections be
wholly, entirely, and perpetually on him, etc.

To this he returns, We maintain not that the precept, Matthew. 22. 37. Luke 10.
27. obliges man at all times to an actual employment of all his powers, and
the forces thereof on God, without conversion to other lawful Objects: But we
believe with St. Austin and other of the Fathers three things concerning this
Precept.

First, That it commands to esteem, desire, delight in, and to honor God
Almighty above all things created, and to subject all our faculties, and the
forces and operations of the same, to his Obedience and service.

Secondly, That we ought not to entertain any cogitation or inordinate motion
in our hearts repugnant to his Law, or commit any thing contrary to his
commandment.

Thirdly, That this Precept obliges all People to the obedience thereof in
this life, for it is the first and greatest Moral Praecept, Matthew. 22. 38. And
Christ our Savior came not to destroy, but to continue and ratify the Moral
Law, Matthew. 5. 17.

. 12. To the same purpose Mr. Hooker. In the powers and faculties of our souls
God requires the uttermost which our unfeigned Hooker Eccles. Pol l. 5. sect.
5.. 6. p. 194.
affection toward him is able to yield: so that if we affect him not far above
and before all things, our Religion has not that inward perfection which it
should have, neither do we indeed worship him as our God.

. 13. Of the same Judgment also is our most profound Doctor Field of the
Church, in the Appendix to the Third Book, c. 13. p. 331.
Field. The Papists imagine certain degreees of Moral goodness: the lowest
whereof who so attaineth not does sin, as not doing that the Precept requires;
the higher, such as men are counseled unto, if they will be perfect, though
not by any precept urged thereunto; they that attain to such height of virtue
are said by them to do works of supererogation. But Gerson (de consiliis
Evangel. and statu Perfectionis) shows that these men err, in that they
discern not between the matter of precepts and Counsels, imagining that the
Precept requires the inferior degrees of virtue, and the Counsels the more
high and excellent: whereas the Praecept requires all the Actions of Virtue in
the best sort they can be performed, and the Counsels are conversant in another
matter, namely in showing us the means whereby most easily, if all things be
answerable in the parties, men attain to the highest Virtue, etc.

. 14. To these of our own I shall subjoyn the interpretation of the most
incomparably learned and judicious H. Grotius. Media igitur and vera sententia
haec est, exigi a Deo, non ne quid unquam praeter se cogitemus aut amemus, quod
hujus vitae status non patitur, sed ut potissimum animi nostri studium Deo
impendamus, hoc omni conatu agentes, ut non aliqua, sed omnia Dei mandata
exequamur. Nam illud (...) vel (...) idem est quod alibi dicitur (...), ut
Paulus vertit 1 Timothy 1. 5. id est est cord integro atque sincero, sicut and
Latin dicimus, Totus in hoc sum. Posse autem homo intelligendus est, non id
duntaxat quod potest viribus naturae peccandi Consuetudine prostratis, sed quod
potest adjutus divino spiritu, quem Deus priscis illis temporibus paucis
quibusdam selectis, non ex communi lege sed ex particulari gratia dedit, in
Novo autem faed^re omnibus faederatis suis, hoc est in Filium suum cred^ntibus,
liberaliter admodum pollicetur. (...), inquit Paulus, (...). Quo autem major
nunc aut datur aut offertur Spiritus copia, eo Praeceptum quoque istud uberius
praestandum est. H. Grot. in Annot, ad Matthew. 22. Verse 37. p 375.

. 15. But if Grotius and the former be suspected as partial, what say you to
Mr. Ainsworth, that left his own Country that he might be sure to run far
enough from Rome? May we not say as David did of G^liah's sword? None like
this. Thus he then. 1 Samuel 21. 9.
[Heart] Unto the Heart the Scripture attributes Wisdom and Understanding, 1
Kings 3. 9, 11, 12. Prove. 2. 10. and b^l^^f in God, differing from Confession
with the mouth, Romans 10. 10 and it is opposed to Hypocrisy, Matthew 15. 8.
[^o^l] the s^at of the Will and Affections, Deuteronomy. 21. 4. and 24 15. and 1^ 20,
21. [Might] in Hebrew Meod, which signifies Might or Vehemence, all that we
can. The Chald^e^ translateth it Riches, the Greek Power (Dunamis,) But the H.
Ghost uses a more signife a^ word (Is^l^us) Might or Ability, Mark 12. 32.
where also another word is added for explanation (D^anoia) which is the
ef^^ca^y both of the mind and will; and the Scribe uses a fifth word (Sunesis)
Understanding, Mark 12. 33. By which variety of words God would teach us to
love him unfeignedly with all whatsoever is in us, and is in our power; for we
ought to honor him with our substance also, Prove. 3. 9. This praise is of King
Josiah above all Kings, that he turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with
all his soul, and with all his might, 2 Kings 23. 25. Moreover from this word
with all thy Might, the Hebrews teach that a man is bound to bless (God) with
cheerfulness of Soul for Evil (or Affliction) even as he blesses for Good and
Prosperity with gladness. Maimonid. in Beracoth cap 10 sect. 3 And hereof we
have a good example in John 1. 21. Thus far Ainsworth in Annotat. on Deuteronomy. 6.
5.

. 16. What say you, Sir, to him? is he not a fit umpire in respect of his
integrity? Nay is he not fit to decide this Controversy in respect of his
Judgment and Learning? Where, where shall we find a Man that has opened the
Pentateuch in any language with more exquisite Judgment and profound learning
and skill? This work of his, as it is very much for the honor of our Nation,
so there be very few writers that do equal it, and scarce any that exceed it.
And yet such is our Refuters ill fortune, that the Doctors exposition and his
are almost one and the same in themselves, and with that of the most excellent
Grotius.

. 17. But yet if Ainsworth, because too much Independent in his Judgment,
should be of as little value with our Refuter as the former, I shall now annex
the exposition of those that without doubt are of greater authority with him.

. 18. And first I shall begin with the Annotations of the Assembly of Divines,
Matthew. 22. 37. Thou shall love the Lord] Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Luke 10. 27. With all thy
heart] with all the faculties of thy Soul. With all thy Mind] This is here
added to Deuteronomy. 6. 5. and with all the strength or might] lest out here, is
added Mark 12. 30. Luke 10. 27. Verse 38. The first] in order: for God must be
loved before, and more then all men. So again on Mark 12. 39. Love the Lord thy
God] see on Matthew. 22. 37, 38. Luke 10. 27. with all thy strength] As much as
possibly thou can: the measure of love to thy Neighbor must be thy self, but
the measure wherewith we must love God must be to love him without measure. So
again on Luke 10. 27. Thou shall love, etc.] See Deuteronomy. 6. 5. with all thy
heart] as much as thou can: modus diligendi Deum est sine modo diligere,
Bernard. The measure of our loving God is to love him beyond measure. On Deuteronomy.
6. 4, 5. Thus -- God though but one must be loved with all the heart, Soul and
might of every Man, as in the next verse; and all that is too little for so
great and so good a God, though it be a great deal more then we can perform.
Cap. 4. 35. Zach. 14. 9. Mark 12 29. Joh. 17. 3. 1 Cor. 8. 4, 6. Ephesians 4. 5.
Verse 5. with all thy heart] See the precedent Annot. and the Annot. on cap. 4.
29. Genesis 31. 6.

The Annotations they refer to for the fuller explication of their meaning are
these. Deuteronomy. 4. 29. All thy heart] Not without word, or show, or Ceremony, but
with a true confession of thy faults, and a sincere desire of his Favor. The
other is Genesis 31. 6. with all my Power] A faithful and religious Servant will
be as intentive and laborious in his Masters affairs as in his own, serving
him as Jacob with all his might, and more then that he cannot do for himself;
and as he could not do more, so could he not endure more for himself, then for
his Master he did, see Verse 40. Which good Servants will take for a pattern of
pains and patience to the bad, who are slight and slothful in their Masters
business, minding their own ease and pleasure more then their Masters profit
(though bad Masters, as Laban was) it may be brought for a Rebuke.

. 19. To these I shall adjoyn the interpretation of Vrsin, as I find it in his
Catechism of Paraeus's edition and castigation, Diliges Dominum Deum tuum]
Diligere Deum ex toto cord, etc. est ex agnitione infinitae bonitatis Dei
reverenter de Deo sentire, and pro summo bono Deum habere, and ideo Deum sum
amare, nec non in Deo laetari and acquiescere, omniaque Dei gloriae postponere,
adeo ut ne minima quidem cogitatio vel inclinatio vel appetitio ullius rei in
nobis sit quae Deo displiceat, ac potius omnia etiam charissima amittere, vel
durissima perpeti velimus, quam a Dei communione avelli, aut Deum ulla in re
offendere; Denique omnia eo dirigere ut Deus solus celebretur.

Ex toto Cord tuo) Cor Hebraeis significat affectus, appetitus and
inclinationes. Deus ergo cor nostrum requirens, vult se solum agnosci and
haberi pro summo nostro bono, se solum supra omnia amari, in se solo cor
nostrum acquiescere, nec partem ejus sibi, partem alteri tribui; ita ut nihil
sit quod ei aequale, nedum autem apponere vel in amoris partem admittere
velimus. Hoc vocat Scriptura perfecto cord ambulare coram Deo: cujus oppositum
est ambulare coram Deo non toto, non perfecto, sed diviso cord coram Deo, hoc
est claudicare nec se totum Deo dedere.

Object. Solus Deus est diligendus: Ergo non proximus, etc. Resp. -- Fallacia
accidentis a negatione modi ad negationem rei. Solus Deus est diligendus sum
and supra omnia, hoc est sic ut nihil prorsus sit quod ei vel praeferamus vel
aequemus, quodque ipsius causa amittere non parati simus. Proximum vero and
alia debemus non sum, non supra omnia, nec ita ut malimus Deum quam parents
offendere, sed infra Deum, and propter Deum, non supra Deum.

Ex tota Anima tua] Anima significat partem volentem, and motus Voluntatis;
quasi dicat, tota voluntate and proposito diliges.

Ex tota Cogitatione tua] Cogitatio significat mentem seu partem intelligentem,
quasi dicat quantum de Deo cognoscis, tantum etiam eum diliges. Omnes vero
cogitationes tuas intendere, ut Deum recte cognoscas, and sic etiam amabis:
quantum enim cognoscimus tantum diligimus. Nunc imperfecte diligimus, quia ex
part tantum cognoscimus. In altera vita perfect cognoscemus, ideo perfect
etiam diligemus, and id quod ex part cessabit. Nunc cognoscimus in speculo,
tunc videbimus eum a facie ad faciem, 1 Cor. 13. 10.

Ex omnibus viribus tuis] Intelligit omnes actiones simul, internas and
externas, ut cum Dei lege sint congruentes. Thus Vrsin Explicat. Catechis. part
1. de Miseria hominis, q. 4. Explicat. p. 23, 34.

. 20. And now for a close of this very tedious task, I shall appeal to those
very places in Mr. Calvin that Chamier himself has quoted against Bellarmine in
the present Controversy.

Eam vim Calvinus ita expressit. Tunc rite compositam fore vitam nostram, si
Dei amor omnes nostros sensus occupet: solid amandum esse Deum, and huc
conferri debere quicquid facultatis inest hominibus. Deum legis praeceptis, non
respicere quid possint homines, sed quid debeant Et in harmonia Mosis ad summam
Legis, Jubemur Deum amare ex toto cord and anima totisque viribus. Quamlibet
enitamur mutilum est ac debile nostrum studium, nisi omnes sensus nostros
occupet amor Dei, and ad ipsum penitus ferantur vota nostra and cogitationes,
ad eum quoque se applicent omnes nostri conatus. Institutionis lib. 3. cap.
19.. 4. Legis praeceptum est ut diligamus Deum nostrum ex toto cord nostro, ex
tota anima, ex totis viribus: id ut fiat anima prius omni alio sensu and
cogitatione est evacuanda, cor omnibus desideriis expurgandum, vires in hoc
unum colligendae and contrahendae. Thus far the learned Chamier out of Calvin.
Chamier Tom. 3. lib. 11. c. 14.. 13.

. 21. Come we now to the exposition of the Ancients And here to ease my self of
trouble, and the better to acquit the Doctors exposition from any the least
Popish Compliance, I shall appeal to those very places of the Fathers that the
learned Chamier has quoted against Bellarmine.

Victor Antiochenus in Marci 12 m Lex haec ejusdem verbis, circa eandem
materiam repetitione prae caeteris abundat, Ex toto cord tuo, and ex tota
anima tua, and ex tota mente tua, and ex tota virtute tua. Facit hoc autem, quo
hominem tanto Dei amore flagrare debere commonstrat, ut nihil prorsus in ullam
omnino animae facultatem irrepere sinat, quod suam erga Deum dilectione^
excludat aut diminuat, aut alio transferat.

. 22. To him Chamier has subjoyned the Author of the imperfect work on St.
Matthew annexed to St. Chrysostom in the Latin edition of his works. But I
shall quote it more largely then Chamier has done.

Quid est, says he, diligere Deum ex toto Cord? Id est ut cor tuum non habeas
inclinatum ad ullius rei dilectionem amplius quam ad Dei: nec delecteris in
aliqua specie mundi amplius quam in Deo; non in honoribus, non in auro vel
argento, etc. -- si enim aliquo horum amor cordis tui fuerit occupatus, jam ex
toto cord non amas Deum. Pro quanta enim part cor tuum fuerit ad aliquam rem
amandam inclinatum, pro tanta part minus est ad Deum -- Omnis anima
Christiana, quia sponsa Christi est, ita diligere debet Deum, ut nihil sit in
mundo quod amplius amet quam Deum aut in tantum.

Quid est in tota anima diligere Deum? Id est, certissimum animum habere in
veritate, etc. -- Quis autem diligit Deum? Qui^omne bonum credit apud Deum, and
omne bonum credit esse Deum, and extra Deum non credit esse Deum: Qui omnem
virtutem and sapientiam credit esse Deum, and extra Deum non credit esse
aliquam sapientiam: Qui credit Deum omnia facere, and sine Deo nihil fieri
posse, ille tota anima diligit Deum.

Quid est in tota mente diligere Deum? Id est, ut omnes sensus tui, qui
pertinent ad te, Deo vacent. Cujus Intellectus Deo ministrat, and cujus
Sapientia circa Deum est, cujus Cogitatio ea quae sunt Dei tractat, cujus
Memoria quae sunt bona recordatur, tota mente diligit Deum -- Cujus autem
Intellectus quae sunt Dei non intelligit, aut non secundum Deum sapit, aut
Scientia illius est vana and secularis, aut Recordatio ejus non est bona, aut
Cogitatio displicens Deo, ille non tota mente diligit Deum. Incert us Author
apud Chrysostom hom. 42. cap 22. Matthew.

. 23. Then follows Theophylact, Theodoret, and others.

Theophylactus Et si paulo alienius inquirat (...), tamen been, (...). non
debere Deum ex part, sed nos ipsos totos ei imp^nd^re: (...), oportet Deum
amare ex tota anima, i. e. ex omnibus animae partibus and viribus ei attendere.

Theodoretus questione in Deutrono. 3a (...). Hinc docemur dilectionem non
dividere in Deum and aurum, in Deum and uxores, in Deum and liberos, verum
universam dilectionis vim Creatori consecrare Deo: post Deum autem unicuique
suum tribuere, liberis, fratribus, amicis. Aponius in Cantica libro secundo.
Non vult alium quemquam socium amoris Deus in anima hominis; sed in tota
virtute ejus, in toto cord and in totis visceribus ejus, solus obtinere
desiderat principatum. Dicendo enim, Diliges Deum, Deum tuum in toto cord tuo,
cogitationem sibi hominis velut palatium intitulavit. Dicendo and in tota
anima, sermones sibi ejus singularem laudem sacravit. Dicendo vero in tota
virtute, quis ignoret operam hominis nominasse, quam pro sua voluntate sibi
vult semper impendi? Zacharias Concordiae l. 3. cap. 127. In tribus rebus Dei
exprimitur dilectio, ut nihil remaneat in homine quod non divinae dilectioni
subdatur. Nam dum dicitur, diligi Deum extoto cord tuo, omnes cogitationes
referendas in Deum praecipit. Dum vero dicitur ex tota anima, omnes affectiones
animae referri ad Deum praecipit. Dum vero adjecit ex tota mente, omnem
rationem indicat humanam qua intelligimus and discernimus in rebus divinis esse
occupandam. Ubi autem dicit, ex tota virtute, bonum Perseverantiae injungit.
Augustinus lib. 1. de Doctr: Christiana cap. 2. Haec regula dilectionis
divinitus constituta est. Diliges, inquit, proximum sicut teipsum; Deum vero ex
toto cord, ex tota anima, and ex tota mente, ut omnes cogitationes tuas, and
omnem vitam tuam, and omnem intellectum in illum conferas a quo habes ea ipsa
quae confers. Cum autem toto cord, tota anima, tota mente, nullam vitae
nostrae partem reliquit, quae vacare Deo debeat, and quasi locum dare ut alia
re velit frui, sed quicquid aliud diligendum venerit in animum, illuc rapiatur,
quo totius dilectionis impetus currit. Et statim post, Sic proximum diligens
tanquam seipsum, totam dilectionem sui and illius refert in illam Dilectionem
Dei, quae nullum a se rivulum duci extra patitur, cujus derivatione minuatur.

. 23. Haec veterum fuit sententia, says the learned Chamier quam nos tenemus.
Itaque sic concedimus significari id quod Bellarminus dicebat, diligere vere,
sincere, non ficte, non simulate, ut tamen addamus has omnes animae vires quas
exprimir tam sollicita, and ut ita dicam, tam curiosa enumeratio. Quod etiam
postulat illud, Totis viribus; nam quod pro eo Bellarminus substituit, pro
virili, potest ambiguum esse: cum soleat sonare quid accommodatum viribus
praesentibus, non autem quae esse debeant; atque ita mensuraretur obedientia ex
modulo obedientis, quod Hieronymus merito improbat in iis qui ex sua socordia
arguebant praecepta esse impossibilia; nos vero multo magis in iis qui ex eadem
Legis justitiam evirant peccantes in alterum externum. Amandum ergo dicimus
Deum totis viribus naturae: non tantum totis viribus corruptionis. Et quia
scimus hanc corruptionem obstare quo minus ametur totis viribus naturae; ideo
negamus impleri posse legem. Denique omnes gradus comprehendimus amoris qui
obtineri possunt vel in hac vita vel in altera, and si quid sit minus id
peccato deputamus. Chamier. tom 3. l. 11. c. 14.. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

. 24. And thus we have brought in evidence sufficient, as well Ancient as
Modern, to acquit, or condemn the Doctors exposition. And now I desire no mercy
from our Refuter: let him use the utmost severity of his Logic, and in his
most Tyrannical Mood bring it to his Procrustian Bed, there let him torment and
rack out or lop off whatsoever is defective or redundant in it.

. 25. If now it be here replied that Vrsin says, that to love God with all the
heart, is Deum sum amare -- omniaque Dei gloriae post ponere, adeo ut ne
minima quidem cogitatio vel inclinatio vel appetitio ullius rei in nobis sit
quae Deo displiceat, etc. I answer, that the Doctor says the same. He that
wittingly and wilfully commits the least sin, that holds any the least
confederacy and correspondence with the enemy of God, is not truly sincere, but
is partial and divided in his love; he sets not the highest price upon his God,
but admits something into a society and fellowship in his affection. True Love,
and that which is sincere indeed, is a very sollicitous and careful thing; it
will harbor no thought, it will cherish no desire, it will be guilty of no Act
that may any way distaste or offend the party that it loves. But then though to
will be present with us, yet how to perform this we know not, and therefore the
very best of us all have need to say, Dimitte nobis debita nostra. And though,
as St. Paul said, we can do all things through Christ that strengthens us: yet
if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us.
Nor does God now measure the height and Perfection of our Love by the
exactness of our performance, but by the truth and sincerity of our
endeavors. The Love may be still equal, though the Successes may not.

. 26. But does not Mr. Calvin say, Deum in Legis praeceptis non respicere quid
possunt homines, sed quid debeant, etc. I grant it, and so does the Doctor. The
holy God frames not his Laws according to the abilities of our corrupt
debauched natures, but commands what is most agreeable to his own purity. He
regards not quid possint homines in statu corrupto and viribus naturae peccandi
consuetudine prostratis, sed quid debeant. But then though of our selves, as of
our selves, we can do nothing, yet I can do all things, at least necessary to
salvation, says St. Paul, through Christ that strengthens me. He that has
promised a Crown of life to those that love him, has also promised to assist
and enable us by his grace to perform what he requires in the Gospel for the
attainment of this promise. And thus we love him says St. John, because he
first loved us. 1 John 4. 19.


. 27. If it be further replied, that Calvin says, Quamlilibet enitamur,
mutilum est ac debile nostrum studium, nisi omnes sensus nostros occupet amor
Dei, etc.

I grant it, and so does the Doctor, Haec regula dilectionis divinitus
constituta est, Diliges inquit, proximum sicut teipsum: Deum vero ex toto
cord, and ex tota anima, and ex tota mente, ut omnes cogitationes tuas, and
omnem vitam, and omnem intellectum in illum conferas, a quo habes ea ipsa quae
confers. Cum autem ait, Toto cord, tota anima, tota mente, nullam vitae nostra
partem reliquit quae vacare debeat, et quasi locum dare, ut alia re velit frui,
sed quioquid aliud diligendum venerit in animum, illuc rapiatur quo totus
dilectionis impetus currit. -- quae nullum a se rivulum duciextra patitur,
cujus derivatione minuatur: Augustine. de Doctrine. Christian. l. 1. c. 22. Vide
Chamier Panstrat. tom. 3. l. 6. c. 12.. 34. p. 191. Supra citat.
For he that employes not all the faculties both of Soul and Body, and all his
thoughts, words and Actions, and all things that belong unto him in Gods
service, he loves not God above all things, but is partial and divided in his
affection. And therefore says the Apostle, whether ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, let all things be done to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. We
must not suffer the least Rivulet to be driven backward like Jordan, or to empt
it self, as that does, into a dead Sea, but it must constantly run, and pour
all it is streams into that boundless Ocean of goodness from whence it was
derived.

. 28. But does not Mr. Calvin say, Id ut fiat, anima prius omni alio sensu and
cogitatione evacuanda? Yes he does so, and so does the Doctor. For he that
cherishes any thought or desire that is opposite and contrary to this Love, or
admits any thing into competition with God, and a Coordination in his
affection, is not truly sincere, but is partial and divided in his Love. But
then this is so far from excluding all other things from a subordinate place in
our Love, that we cannot truly love God from the heart, if, according as he
commands us, we do not love our Neighbors as our selves. This present state
and condition which we now enjoy in the body does require that other things
besides God have a place in our affection. For as he is worse then 1 Timothy 5. 8.
Heb. 13. 1. 1 John 4. 20.
an Infidel that provides not for his Family; so Brotherly Love must continue
among us. For how can he love God whom he has not seen, that loves not his
Brother whom he has seen? But then God as he is the sovereign good, so he must
have the supreme, the royal place in our hearts. For if any man loves Father
or Mother or any thing else more then me, says our Savior, he is Matt. 10. 37.
not worthy of me.

29. If he shall yet further object that Chamier goes higher, for says he not,
Amandum ergo dicimus Deum totis viribus naturae, non tantum totis viribus
corruptionis. Et quia scimus hanc corruptionem obstare quo mimus ametur totis
viribus naturae, ideo negamus impleri posse Legem. Denique omnes gradus
comprehendimus amoris qui obtineri possunt vel in hac vita vel in altera, and
si quid sit minus id peccato deputamus? Is not this the Perfection that St.
Austin, and Bernard, and Aquinas, and Scotus, and other of the old Schoolmen
say is required by this Law? And is not this denied by Bellarmine? and is it
not therefore justly charged upon him by Protestants? And yet does not the
Doctors exposition in this comply with Bellarmine?

. 30. -- To this I answer by degrees.

First, that true it is that the learned Chamier does thus conclude against
Bellarmine. But then plain it is, that these are none of that Veterum Sententia
quam nos tenemus, but only Inferences and Deductions from it. And if our
Refuter will allow me, what he cannot reasonably deny, that the Doctors
exposition is exactly conformable to this of the Ancients, which Chamier
acknowledges that the Protestants maintain, I shall not envy him those
advantages he can make by these Corollaries.

. 31. Secondly, though it were Vide Davenant de Justit. habit. and actual. c.
46. p. 529, 550, in sol. ad 2.
granted that these Inferences were good and forceable against Bellarmine, that
maintains a man may not only keep the Law to that height that he may merit at
Gods hands, but also supererogate, and be more holy and righteous then the Law
does require; yet they no ways concern the Doctor, that speaks not of a
sinlesse perfection, but of the sincerity of this or that virtue, in this or
that Performance; which though it exclude not all mixture of sin in the
suppositum, the man in whom it is, yet may by the grace of God in Christ
exclude it in this or that Act. The truth of which assertion, as it is
acknowledged by Chamier in the Case of David and Josiah; so is it so far
different from Bellarmine's assertion, against which these Corollaries of
Chamier were directed, that it is even opposite and contrary to it.

. 32. Thirdly, I acknowledge that Bellarmine grants that Saint Austin and
Bernard and Aquinas and other of the old Schoolmen do speak of such a
Perfection required by this Law, that advances our Love to that height, that we
must do nothing else but think of God, nothing else but love him, and this not
only in the Habit, but in the Act. This Love he acknowledges does so wholly
possess the soul, that no idle vicious Thought can obtrude or press in upon it,
nothing either contrary or besides this holy love can have any the least
admission into the heart, but that of necessity God is, and must be all in all.
But then he adds that this Love is proper only to the Saints in Bliss, and
that we whilst we are in the flesh, as we are not capable of it, so it is not,
it cannot be enjoined us, but it is only proposed that we may know what we are
to aim at, and hope for, and desire in heaven, and that this is the meaning of
Saint Austin and Bernard and Aquinas and the Schoolmen, when they say this
Perfection is not attainable in this life. But of this more in due place, and
let Bellarmin stand and fall to his own Master.

. 33. But then Fourthly, be it granted that those Corollaries of Chamier are
rightly inferred against Bellarmine's doctrine of the several states of
Perfection, and works of supererogation, and the possibility of fulfilling the
Law; yet neither of them will any whit advantage our Refuter in the present
controversy depending between him and the Doctor. For though God should
require of us by that Law that we love him totis viribus naturae, and non
tantum totis viribus corruptionis; yet the Vide Doctor Hammonds Account of Mr.
Cawdrey's Triplex Diatribe, c. 6. sect. 8.. 6, 7. p. 204.
Doctor has most irrefragably demonstrated against Mr. Cawdrey, that even the
sinless Perfection of Adam in Innocence was a state of Proficiency, and that he
and all his posterity had even in that first Integrity and Holiness wherein
they were first created been in statu merendi till the time of their
translation, and consequently had been obliged, as well as we are now, to grow
at least in Actual Grace, and the knowledge and the Love of God.

. 34. And Mr. Cawdrey in effect grants it. For Christ, (being Heb 7. 26.
Cawdrey's Triplex Diatrib. p. 116.
holy, harmless, undefiled, and still perfectly continuing in that first
innocent estate, wherein Adam was created) he says, did more then the Law
required, and did supererogate in many his Actions and Passions, and so in the
degree of affection in Prayer, if not in the Prayer it self.

. 35. It is true that for a Salve he says, that Christ was above the Law.

. 36. But then this is nothing to the purpose. For though 1 Timothy 6. 16.
as he was God, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, he were the supreme
Lawgiver, and the absolute Sovereign, and so in this Philip. 2 7. Gal. 4. 4.
sense was not under, but above the Law; yet as he took upon him the form of a
servant, as he was made of a woman, so the Apostle expressly says he was made
under the Law, and as he was born Gal. 3. 16. Genesis 17. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Gal. 5. 2.
the Son and Seed of Abraham, so bound he was to be circumcised the eighth day;
and being thus circumcised, the Apostle plainly testifies, that as every man
that is circumcised, so he was a debtor to do the whole Law: and consequently
in this sense he was not above it. And therefore nothing hinders but that Adam
if he had persevered in his first Innocence, might notwithstanding the
Obligation of that first great Law of Love (to which Christ also was subject as
Man) supererogate also in some such like Actions and Passions, and so in the
degree of Affection, suppose in Prayer, if not in the Prayer it self.

. 37. If here it be replied, that as Christ according to his Divine Nature was
above the Law, so by virtue of the Hypostatical Union as Man he had the fullness
of Grace, which Adam had not, whereby he was enabled to such supererogating
Performances;

. 38. For answer, indeed I grant that he had the very John 1. 16. etc. 3. 34.
Coloss. 1. 19.
Fullness of Grace. But then this solves not the Doubt. For the Question is not
now concerning the Measure of Grace, but the Extents and Obligation of the Law,
and whether that admits of any virtuous o^ holy or pious performances, above
what Man is in particular obliged to by it. And in this respect the first and
second Adam are equal, because both as Men were equally made under the Law.
But then Adam, though he were created in a mutable Condition, as Christ was
not, though he had not a fullness of Grace, as Christ, had, yet if he had not
fallen from his first innocence, he had such a Measure of Grace and Original
Righteousness bestowed upon him, that would not only have preserved him in his
integrity, but also enabled him to do whatsoever the Law required, and
whatsoever other virtuous, holy, pious performances could by Man, a debtor to
the Law, be done above it. And if any man shall assert the contrary, I desire
either his Reason or Scripture to make it good.

. 39. And then secondly, as to the Perfection of the Love of the blessed Saints
and Angels in Heaven, it is easily demonstrable (and the Doctor has in part
done it in his Treatise of Will Worship) that though they all love God
Naturally, and Necessarily, and ad ultimum virium, yet they do not all love God
in the same indivisible degree of Perfection and Point of fervor and
intensenesse, which (to use the Doctors Dr. Ham. Treat. of Will Worship, sect.
49. p. 101. edit. Londin. Vide Davenant de Justit. habit. and Act. cap. 45. p.
514, 527. Jeanes, p 27.
words to this purpose) may be observed among the Angels themselves, the Seraph
in being so called because they are more Ardent in Zeal then other Angels. For
if it be true that God rewards every man according to his works, and that there
be different degrees of happiness in Heaven, proportionable to the Saints
proficiency in Grace here on earth; it must necessarily follow, that if our
Refuters observation from the Schoolmen be any whit considerable, and that the
Scotists do rightly place the very formality of happiness solely in the love
of God, or if at least Suarez and others think truly, that it is essential to
happiness, though the very Essence of happiness consists not wholly or
chiefly in it; or if at least the rest of the Thomists (who hold that the
Essence of happiness stands only in the beatifical vision yet) truly make this
Actual most intense Love of God a natural and necessary consequence of the
beatifical vision; it must, I say, necessarily follow, that the Love of the
Saints must be proportionable to their happiness, and that they cannot love
God more then they see and enjoy him.

. 40. But to wave these speculations of the Schoolmen; Plain it is from the
Scriptures, and our Savior tells us that in his Fathers house are many
Mansions. Plain it is from the John 14. 2. 1 Cor. 15. 41, 42.
Scriptures, and the Apostle has told us that as one star differs from
another star in glory, so also it shall be in the Resurrection of the dead.
Plain it is from the Scriptures, and our Savior has made it good from the
Parable of the Talents, that the enlargement Matthew. 25. 15, etc. Vide Tertul.
Scorpiac. c. 6. p. 622. Augustine. Tract. 67. in Joan. p. 171. col. 1. D. and
col. 2. A. Tract. 68. p. 172. col. 2. A. Gregor. M. Homil. 16. in Ezech. fol.
282. B. Dialog. l. 4. c. 35. fol. 238. C. F. Cyrill. in loc.

-- A Resurrectione diversos fore honoris and gloriae gradus -- Verissimum est,
aliisque Scripturae testimoniis probatur, etc. Calvin in 1 Cor. 15. 41. p. 2^0.
Nos, ut profitemur quod antea diximus, varios fore gradus gloriae. Chamier.
tom. 3. Panstrat. l. 25. c. 4.. 7. Vide cap. 3.. 8, 9, 10. and ibid. l. 21.
cap. 21.. 58.

Sed nec in ipsis Comprehensoribus est haec plenitudo summa omnium gratiarum
quae est in Christo. Nam si stella a stella differat luce and magnitudine, tum
multo magis differt a Sole. Habent omnes beati illam gratiae and gloriae
mensuram quam capere potest maximam men's vniuscujusque sed non habet illam
capacitatem vel gratiae vel gloriae men's cujusvis purae Creaturae, quam habet
anima Christi. Davenant. Expos. in Colos. 1. 19. p. 100. n. 3. Vide Davenant.
de Justit habit. and Act. cap. 44. p 516, 517. Quod autem visio Dei plena
dicitur, non efficitur inde aequalem fore omnium Sactorum visionem and
fruitionem. Nam in domo Dei multae sunt mansiones; and uti inter Stellas alia
alii praefulget, ita inter Sanctos diversa erit gloria, Dan 12. Quisque tamen
quantum maxim pro doni sui capacitate. Lambert. Danaeus in c. 5. Enchirid.
Augustine. as I find him cited and approved by Chamier, tom. 3. Panstrat. l. 25.
c 3. 9, 10. Vide Sculteti Idea Concion. p. 1097. alios.


of our Crowns of glory shall bear some proportion with our improvement of
those Graces that God has here bestowed upon us. And therefore it seems to me
most undenyably to follow, that a gradual difference in the Participation of
the Beatifical Vision must of necessity infer a gradual difference in the
height and Fervor and intensenesse of our Love. For though all the Saints and
Angels in Heaven shall love God to the utmost of their might and ability (there
being nothing there to interrupt it, nothing there to mingle with it) and this
because they naturally and necessarily love him, and their happiness consists
in this Love, and this sight, and this enjoyment of God; yet because all do not
equally enjoy God, because their capacities are not the same, they cannot
therefore all love him in the same height and degree. All the Stars of the
firmament are full of the Suns light: yet all are not of the same brightness
and luster, because they are not of the same Magnitude. We see there is one
glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars: For one
Star differs from another Star in glory. And yet the Sun, the Fountain of
light, does equally shine on all. This gradual difference in their luster and
brightness arises from their different Capacities. If all were of an equal
Bigness and Magnitude and Distance from the Sun, their sight would be the
same. The Essence and the Form of Fire is as truly in the weak and lambent
flames of spirit of Wine or Straw, as in red hot Iron, or moulten Brass, or
Nebuchadnezars fiery furnace; and yet they do not heat and flame and scorch
alike. This difference does arise from the variety of the Combustible matter
now enkindled. For though Natural agents do always work uniformly, because
they work necessarily and to the utmost of their power: yet the intenseness of
their operations is always proportioned to the vigor and efficacy and virtue
of the Causes from whence they do flow. Otherwise the light of a Candle would
be equal to the brightness of the Sun, which yet we see is lost and swallowed
up by the Sunbeams. And therefore Mr. Cawdrey, as we have already observed,
without scruple grants to the Doctor that sincere Love is capable of Degrees,
whether in the same man at several times, or two men at the same time, and so
both may obey the precept; though yet with Chamier he maintains that the utmost
height and Point of Perfection possible is required, and that whatsoever is
short of that (...) and indivisible point of Perfection is so far faulty: How
rationally and consequently we have already declared.

. 41. And therefore fifthly, though it be granted that Mr. Cawdrey and our
Refuter and Vide Bp. Andrews Pattern of Catechist. Doctrine at large,
Introduct. c. 17. p. 71. Davenant de Justit. Habit. and Actual. c. 44. p. 504.
etc. 44. p. 484. Arg. 5. and p. 490. etc. 51. p. 556, 557, 558.
others do say with Chamier, first that God by this Law requires that we love
him according to those abilities, that integrity and uprightness which he gave
to Adam in innocence, and that 2ly all the degrees of love that are attainable
either in this life or in the next, or, to speak in Jeanes answer to the
Ectenest. p. 31.
our Refuters words, a love of God with as high a Degree as is possible to the
humane nature, is required by this Law, and whatsoever is short of this height
is to be accounted sinful or faulty: yet as true it is that other Protestants,
as Pious as Learned and as truly opposite to the Errors of Popery as any of the
forenamed, are of another Judgment, and the Doctor is of their number And yet
indeed the opposition here is only (...), in word and show, and not in truth.
For these speak in order to the Covenant of Grace, but those are to be
understood as speaking of this obligation according to the strictness and Tenor
of the first Covenant (in which sense they always dispute against the Popish
Doctrine of Merit and Justification by works, and fulfilling the Law, and
Perfection, and Counsels, and works of Supererogation, as is plain from Bishop
Davenant in that excellent Vide Davenant. de Justit. Actual. and habit. iis
ipsis in locis proxime citat. and alibi passim.
Treatise of his de Justitia habit. and actual.) and consequently oppose not
the Doctor in these Controversies depending between him and Mr. Cawdrey and our
Refuter * The Doctors Judgment in the case is very plain.

. 42. For whereas Mr. Cawdrey in his Triplex Diatribe had said, that every man
is bound to be prudent to that degree of Prudence which Adam lost by sin; the
Doctor makes answer, That if by sin he means not actual, but original sin, and
so thinks that every man is bound to be prudent to that degree of Prudence that
Adam l^st by his fall, this sure will be found a mistake. For this loss of
Adam's was a punishment of Adam's sin, and when it is inflicted by God on his
posterity, must be looked on as a punishment, and he that is punished cannot be
obliged not to be punished No man is now obliged to be as prudent as Adam was
in his integrity any more then to be as healthy, in effect to be immortal. Nay,
supposing Adam to have sinned, and so to have transgressed the Law in that, it
cannot be imagined that it is over and above that a new or further Act of sin
in him to be less knowing, prudent or healthy then he was: all these without
any new act of his will, nay contrary thereto, falling upon him by God's Decree
or punitive Justice. And if it were not sin in Adam himself, then sure it
cannot be such in his Posterity; and so a man now of his posterity cannot be
bound to that degree of Prudence which Adam once had, any more then to be born
in the state of Innocence and Perfection, when yet he is necessarily supposed
to be born after the image of the lapsed imperfect Adam, which he Hamm. Account
of Mr. Cawdrey's Triplex Diat. c. 6 sect 8. 44 Vide Bishop Davenant. de Justit.
habit. and actual. c. 30. p. 395, 396.
could not be if he were born in this Perfection.

. 43. And then secondly, whereas Mr. Cawdrey in the same place added, that
every man is bound to be pious in the highest degree, because the law requires
Perfection of holiness, and in another place, because the Law requires perfect
Obedience of Christians, as the Rule of eternal righteousness; to this the
Doctor makes answer thus: The Law indeed sometimes signifies the Covenant of
exact unsinning Obedience. And of that Law, or that Covenant it is most true
that it required perfect, as that signifies unsinning, Obedience. But then,
first, This was the first Covenant, and is not now in force with faithful
penitent Christians, who are not under this Law, but under Grace, i. e. under a
2d Covenant, which requires not Innocence but Repentance, sincere, but not
perfect Obedience. And therefore 2ly, It cannot truly be said, that this Law
requires this Perfect Obedience of Christians, nor consequently that it is the
rule of Evangelical righteousness, i. e. of that righteousness by which
believers are now said to be justified: for that (as he had more fully
explained in the Practical Catechism) is Pract. Catechis. l. 1. sect. 1. p. 9.
edit. Land. 5.
positively the new Creature, or renewed, sincere, honest, faithful obedience
to the whole Gospel, giving up the whole heart to Christ, the performing of
that which God enables us to perform, and bewailing our infirmities and
frailties and sins, both of the past and present life, and beseeching Gods
pardon in Christ for all such, and sincerely laboring to mortify every sin,
and perform uniform obedience to God, and from every fall rising again by
repentance and reformation. In a word, the condition required of us is a
Constellation or conjuncture of all those Gospel Graces, Faith, Hope, Charity,
Self-denial, Repentance and the rest, every one of them truly and sincerely
rooted in the Christian heart, though mixed with much weakness and
imperfection, and perhaps with many sins, so they be not wilfully and
impenitently lived and dyed in; for in that case nothing but perdition is to be
expected.

. 44. And as this is the Doctors opinion of the Condition of the second
Covenant, and the Sincerity of Holiness required by it; so he maintains, and
has fully made it good, that neither the Legal nor Evangelical Purity, not that
Perfection of holiness which consisted in unsinning obedience, nor that which
required sincere and upright conformity to Gods laws, did include the highest
degree of Piety which is possible, but had a latitude, and consisted of
Degrees; both states being states of proficiency and growth, and containing in
their compass and extent several Vide Davenant de Justit. Habit. and Act. cap
39. p. 461, 462. cap. 42. p. 491, 492. Where he asserts the very same.
Acts and Degrees of uncommanded devotion: so that a man may do that
voluntarily and spontaneously out of Love to God, which God requires not in any
particular Command, sub periculo animae, but in them has left us to our Liberty
to make use of those advantages which he in his Wisdom chose to afford us, that
there might be somewhat for us freely to exercise his graces upon, and for him
as freely to reward us. And now that there might be no mistake of his meaning,
and no advantage given to quarrel by the Ambiguity of the word Perfection, he
says that that word is capable of two Notions: for either it may signify the
Perfect obedience of never sinning, or else any higher degree of exercise of
any particular Virtue, Chastity, Mercy, Fortitude and the like; and to this
only his affirmatio^ belongs, that there are degrees in that Perfection, and
that he that has attained to any of those Degrees, sins not against Christ's
precept of Perfection, though he has not arrived to the highest Degree. This
the Doctor has at large proved and explained beyond all the exceptions of Mr.
Cawdrey. The places are too many to be transcribed, and therefore I must refer
the Reader for further satisfaction to that accurate Treatise of the Doctors,
being a full Account of Mr. Cawdrey's Triplex Diatribe, particularly to the 6.
chapter of that Treatise sect. 8. Indeed the whole Vindication of the Treatise
of Will Worship, is chiefly spent upon this Argument. And I was the more
willing upon this occasion to represent the Doctors opinion in this point the
more largely, that our Refuter might have occasion ex professo to undertake and
to make his experiment, whether he can more succesfully manage it against the
Doctor then Mr. Cawdrey did or can.

. 45. And now to acquit the Doctor from Singularity and the aspersion of Popery
in this Point, I shall crave leave of the Readers patience to instance in two,
and but two, very learned Protestants (for I am quite tired with this dull work
of quotation, though it cannot possibly be declined in this manner of dispute)
that are of the same opinion with the Doctor, and differ with him from Chamier
and our Refuter.

. 46. The first is that Reverend and learned Author of the Additions annexed*
to the Pattern of Catechistical doctrine at large.

But against this (that God gave us ability at the first to do what he
commanded, but we having lost that ability vainly, God may lawfully exact of
us, what he set us to do) some object, that seeing man lost this ability not
efficienter, but meritorie, God's penal Act depriving him of it, it can no more
stand with God's Justice and Wisdom still to require the same obedience without
new abilities, then for a Magistrate having cut of a man's feet for some
offense, yet to require him to go to such a place, and then to punish him for
not going: and therefore it may be said, that God never requires any thing of
us, but he either gives or is ready to give ability to do it, if we be not
wanting to our selves. And therefore as God requires Obedience under the
Gospel, so he enables us by his Grace, or is ready to enable, if we seek to him
to do what he requires: as to avoid every known and wilful sin, and so perform
the substance of every good duty; though we are still subject to sins of
infirmity, which we must labor against, and though we come short of Perfection
in some degree, yet we must aim at it, and not rest in a Perfection of parts.
Thus every Christian may and ought to keep the Law of God, as it is qualified
and moderated in the Gospel, so as to be free from all reigning sin, and to
perform every Act commanded in sincerity: and as this is possible by the grace
of the Gospel, so it is necessary to salvation in all after their Conversion
and Repentance. As for that absolute Perfection or freedom from all sin, it is
commanded too, but not as actually necessary to salvation, but only in our true
and constant endeavor as that which we must aim at, and come as near to as we
can, though we do not attain it in this life. And thus it may be truly said,
that the Law, though it cannot be kept in that absolute and exact manner which
is required in the Covenant of works, that is without the least omission or
intermission, in which sense God does not now require it of us to salvation,
yet as it is required in the second Covenant according to the equity and
moderation of the Gospel, it may by the grace of Christ be kept, and must be
kept by every true Christian, so far as God requires it of us now. And this is
the Christian perfection which the Scripture often exhorts to, and the
Catholic Church of Christ ever acknowledged. God having made a second
Covenant, wherein there is a Law to be kept, as well as promises to be
believed, requires Obedience now not by virtue of the first Covenant, which is
void, but according to the second, which is still in force, whereby he is
always ready by such means and various dispensations as are agreeable to his
Wisdom and Justice to enable us to do what in this Covenant is required.
Pattern of Catechistical Doctrine at large, Indroduct. c. 17. Addition 5. p. 71.

. 47. The second shall be the incomparably-learned and Judicious Grotius in his
explication of his great Commandment of Love, Matthew. 22. 37. But for the
Readers ease I shall omit what we have already quoted from this Annotation, and
desire him to have recourse to it. -- Notandum est extare particulam hanc non
in formula Sinaitici faederis, quod est in Exodo, sed (...), quomodo Platonico
more Philo eum librum vocat quem vulgo Deuteronomium appellamus. In eo autem
libro plurima sunt quae ad normam faederis quod per Christum plane revelatum
est populum vocant, and rudimenta quaedam continent Evangelicae pietatis.
Rursum Hortationes istiusmodi admonent quid fide exposcere, quo spem
praemitt^ere, and in quae anteriora nos extendere debeamus. Augustine de Spirit
and liter. cap. 36. tom. 3. Confer. Davenant de Justit. Habit. and Act. c. 24.
p. 328, 329. Confer. Davenant de Justit. Habit. and Act. c. 47. p. 531, 532.
etc. 42. p. 489, 490, 491.
Augustinus and eum secuti alii putant eam Perfectionem istis verbis
significari, quam in hac vita nemo habuerit aut habere potuerit, quasi
praescriberetur non tam qua currendum, quam quo currendum esset. Quae Sententia
suum habere potest usum, ut homines infirmitatis suae admonitos intra
humilitatis terminos contineat, and de siderium in iis excitet vitae alterius:
sed propriam non esse hanc verborum interpretationem, patet collatis quae
attulimus locis; nam David, Josias, atque alii id quod lex ista postulat
fecisse memorantur: Nam Deum (...) and (...), in Hebraismo idem valere
manifestum arbitror. Sic and implere post Deum quidam dicuntur, quod Chaldaeus
Paraphrastes exponit perfect Dei timorem sequi, ut videre est Number. 14. 24. and
32. 12. Deuteronomy. 1. 36. Praeterea vult lex amorem istum praestari pro viribus
(...), i. e. quantum homo potest. Posse autem hominem quantum potest nemo sanus
negabit. -- Posse autem homo intelligendus est, non id duntaxat quod potest
viribus naturae peccandi consuetudiue prostratis, sed quod potest adjutus
divino Spiritu. -- Quo autem major nunc datur aut offertur spiritus copia, eo
praeceptum quoque istud vberius praestandum est. H. Grot. in annot. ad Matthew c.
22. verse. 37. p. 375.

. 48. Daille l. 1. de Jejuniis, cap. 7. apud D. Hammond in his Account of the
Triplex Diatribe p. 144 Scalig. Elench. Trehaeres. c. 22. in the treatise of
Will worship sect. 28. Vide Bp. Downeham of the Covenant of Grace, c. 10.
throughout.
Monsieur Daille and Joseph Scaliger, both Protestants sufficient, and in
Treatises particularly opposed against Bellarmine and Serrarius the Jesuit,
have been quoted by the Doctor to this very purpose, and others might be added
to the Number. But these are sufficient to acquit the Doctor from the suspicion
of Popery in this his Doctrine; and let our Refuter know, that all Protestants
are not even of the learned Chamier's opinion in this point. And now that the
Doctor and those of his Judgment are in the right, I undertake to defend, and
shall make it good in Vide infra sect. 32.. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, etc. 32. and
sect. 26, 27, 29, 31.
due place.

. 49. Indeed the assertion of Chamier is so notoriously false, that it carries
its own confutation in its forehead, even to the most ordinary observer; and I
wonder by what misfortune and inadvertence it dropped from his Pen. What? Omnes
gradns comprehendimus amoris qui obtineri possunt vel in hac vita vel in
altera, and si quid sit minus, id peccato deputamus? Let our Refuter himself in
his most Protestant Ruff construe it, and tell us how he can make it good. Can
he ever be able to prove that it is my sin, that I see not God face to face
while I am in the body, and walk by Faith, not by sight? If it be my sin that I
be not a Comprehensor in Heaven while I am in the state of a Viator upon earth,
that I be not present with the Lord while I am absent from him, that I enjoy
not Heaven happiness and the sight of God whilst I am in the flesh (in which
state no man can see him and live) then God (with all humble Reverence be it
spoken) must be the Author of it. For God has planted us all in that Condition,
where we can only see him by Faith and Revelation as through a glass darkly,
and not face to face. Even Adam in innocence had only this advantage to see God
by 1 Cor. 13. 12.
Faith and clearer Revelation, but not at all by Sight. And now if our Love of
necessity must bear proportion to our Knowledge, Impossible it is I should love
God at that height whilst I am in the flesh, as I can do, and shall (by Gods
Grace I firmly hope) when I see him face to face, and shall know as I am known.
Even the souls of Adam, and all just men now made perfect do far more
intensely, more fervently love God whom they now see and enjoy in Heaven, then
ever Adam did or could if he had continued still in Innocence. They love him
now Naturally, Uninterruptedly, Constantly and Immutably; but Adam in Paradise
Habitually, and not always Actually (for of necessity the Acts of his Love
must be interrupted at least whilst he slept) and Freely, and therefore
Mutably, as his fall does too sadly evidence. Nay the very Angels that fell
not, but kept their first station, do now more fervently love God since their
Confirmation in Grace, because they now Immutably love him, and have had since
the fall of Lucifer an Experiment of his Favor to them, which the others had
not.

. 50. With what color of truth then can it be maintained that it must be
deputed and reckoned my sin, if I love not God to as high a degree in this life
as is possible to be attained in the next? For does not that height and
perfection of Love depend purely upon the sight and enjoyment of God, and the
participation of Heaven happiness? And is not this height and intensenesse of
Love an effect at least of the happiness of the Spirits of just men made
perfect? And does not this wholly and absolutely depend upon Gods bounty? For
though the wages of sin be death, yet the gift of God is eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6. 23.
And shall it be my sin that Gods gifts are not at my Command, or within my
power to purchase them? Or must we say with Bellarmine that it is our sin, and
will be our punishment, if we do not even ex condigno merit Heaven? For so of
necessity it must be said, before it can be maintained that it must be our sin
and transgression of this first and great Commandment, if we love not God to
that height and degree that the blessed Saints and Angels do love him in
Heaven, with that precise utmost height which is possible to be attained not
only in this life but also in the next. Add to this that the Saints and Angels
now confirmed in grace do love God Naturally and Necessarily to that height
that they love him, and they can as well cease to see God and know God, as not
so to love him. This is not now their election and choice, but their happiness
and Crown; their reward, nay their Nature, not their Labor and Endeavor. How
then can the want of that Fervor be my sin, which is not within the compass of
my Will and power to arrive at? Vide Davenant de Justit. habit and Act. c. ^1.
p. 470. arg. 1.
He should as well have said it is our fault, that now we be not immortal and
glorified whilst we are in the flesh. And let me tell our Refuter that he also
should have said, we are obliged to see God face to face whilst we are in this
body, as well as to have told us, that the first and greatest Commandment
enjoyneth us a love of God with as high a degree as is possible Jeanes hic, p.
31.
unto the humane Nature. For I hope he will not say, but that is possible to
the humane Nature which Enoch and Elias (not to speak of our Blessed Savior at
the right hand of God) and the Spirits of just men made perfect have now
attained to.

. 51. Indeed this assertion of Chamier is so extremly crude and absurd in that
sense which the words at first view do seem to import, that I had rather strain
them to the meaning and purpose of Grotius and Doctor Hammond, then any such
monstrous Paradox should be affixed to so Judicious and learned a man.
Howsoever, if Mr. Cawdrey and our Refuter will needs otherwise understand him,
as they seem in this assertion of theirs to have done, which I conceive was to
them the (...), the Stone of stumbling and Rock of offense, I shall leave them
to defend and make it good. For though I very much reverence and value the
Learning and Judgment of that excellent man; yet I have long since learned
from a great Master of Morality, (...) Aristoteles l. 1. Ethic. c. 6.. 1. edit.
Ricobon.
(...)* that Truth is more sacred and venerable then any the greatest Names,
and that it is the honor and the duty of a Philosopher (much more then of a
Divine) to retract or oppose an error, whether in himself or any other, for the
preservation of this Jewel.

. 52. Thus therefore I should, with our Refuters leave, choose to understand the
words, though I must confess with a little streining, because thus understood
they are more agreeable to truth, and other Protestant Writers, and his own
more sober expressions, and the whole scope of that Chapter; namely, That all
the degrees of Love to the utmost height that are possibly attainable either in
this life or the next, are in that commandment either proposed to our
Endeavors, or our Hopes and our Aims, and it is purely through our own fault
if we do not attain unto it. Not that any lower degree of love were a sin in
us, but that it is through our fault if we do not grow in grace, and the love
and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ.

. 53. I remember that Cajetan in his Commentary on that question in Aquinas,
(vtrum charitas augeatur in infinitum?) tells us of a sort of Heretics
condemned in the Council of Vienna by Clement the fifth (and some such we have
now among us at this day, or else the world is much mistaken in them) that
maintained, That man in this present life may attain to that height and degree
of Perfection, that might render him altogether impeccable, Vide Concilium
Viennense in Clement in c. Ad nostrum de Haereticis: Vbi de nova secta dicitur,
tenens and asserens doctrina sua sacrilega and perversa inferius designatos
errores. Primo videlicet, quod homo in vita praesenti tantum and talem
perfectionis gradum potest acquirere, quod reddetur penitus impeccabilis, and
amplius in gratia proficere non valebit. Nam, ut dicunt, si quis semper possit
proficere, posset aliquis Christo perfectior inveniri Haec ibi, etc. Cajetan in
2. 2. q. 24. art. 7. p. 61. col. 2. E.
and unable to grow and increase to any higher degree of grace then he had
already obtained. For they said if a man might always grow in grace, some man
at least might be found more perfect then Christ himself. I shall not say that
learned man did any ways countenance those errors: yet it cannot be denied
but this assertion of his, as understood by our Refuter, will very easily and
advantageously be managed to countenance that assertion; since it is easy to
make good, that God requires nothing of us by, or under the Gospel as necessary
to salvation, which he gives not Grace and strength to perform. And some not
long since have undertaken to maintain Perfection as a duty, even upon this
very score.

. 54. But then plain it is that those words, construed in the sense I have
given of them, do no whit favor that opinion. Yet be this as it will, and let
our Refuter make what use he can of them: Sufficient it will be to the Doctors
Vindication, if the same learned Chamier speaks to the Doctors purpose in his
Recapitulation and summary of all that he had formerly delivered. And it is
that very place which our Refuter has in his Margin quoted against the Doctor.
The words are these.

-- Nimirum huc tandem res redit, ut sciamus ita imperari nobis amorem Dei, ut
nullus sit amoris gradus cui quisquam debeat acquiescere. Summum autem dico non
tantum comparate ad res alias quae sub, amorem cadunt, sed etiam, and quidem
praecipue, comparate ad nos ipsos, ut ne ultra possimus amare: ita enim vere
totum cor nostrum crit, tota anima, men's tota, vires omnes, nec erunt tamen,
quamdiu aliquis motus concupiscentiae malae vigebit in nobis: quod and
Augustinus dixit, and Bellarminus negare non potest a Patribus assertum.
Chamier tom. 3. l. 11. cap. 14.. 22. page 345. That is, The matter at length
comes to this, or this is the short and sum of all, That we know and take
notice that the Love of God is so enjoined and required of us by this Precept,
that there can be no one degree of Love beneath the highest, with which any man
may lawfully sit down and rest contented as a fulfilling of the Command. The
highest, I say, not only in respect of all other things that fall under our
Love, and within the compass of our affection, but also and more especially in
regard of our selves, so that we cannot possibly love more or go beyond it in
our affection. For then and so only will truly the whole heart, the whole Soul,
the whole mind and all our stength be placed upon this Love, which yet shall
not fully be accomplished in this life, so long as any motion of sinful lusts
and concupiscence reigns and flourishes or springs up in us. And this is that
which Austin has also said, and Bellarmine cannot deny to have been affirmed
and maintained by the Fathers.

. 55. From whence plain it is.

First, that Chamier in this place against Bellarmine speaks of an absolute
sinlesse Perfection, and an exact conformity to the whole Law of God, not
attainable in this life, which no whit concerns the Doctor, that speaks not at
all of that, but only of the sincerity of this or that virtue or grace in
respect of this or that Performance, which he says consists in a latitude, and
has Degrees.

Secondly, that though this sinless Perfection be not attainable in this life,
yet labor we must after it as much as in us lies, there being no one degree of
Charity or divine Love below this, wherein a man may acquiesce, so that he may
cease to grow in grace and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; which was
the Heresy of the Perfectists condemned in the Council of Vienna.

Thirdly, that by the highest degree Chamier means, not that which is (...)
absolutely and simply such, as if there were, as We say that there are degrees
of, or rather to perfection here, upon condition that every degree, even the
highest, is required by the Law of God, and what is short of the highest is so
far culpable. Cawdrey Triplex Diatribe, p. 110.
Mr. Cawdrey would have it, one indivisible point of Love and height of
Perfection to which all must arrive that obey the Precept; but only (...), that
which is respectively and in some sort the highest, not so much in comparison
of other things beloved by us, as in regard of our own strength and vigor, so
that we can not love beyond it.

Fourthly, that then we shall truly love God with all the heart, when we shall
do nothing else but love him, and perfectly obey his Laws; which will not,
cannot be so long as any motion of evil concupiscence dwells in us, which will
be so long as we are in the Flesh.

Fifthly, that his Opinion in this Point is the same with St. Austins and the
ancient Fathers; and this is all he undertakes to make good against Bellarmine.

. 56. And therefore if it appear (as I doubt not but it will anon) that St.
Austin and Bernard, Aquinas and the old Schoolmen were of opinion, that this
absolute, sinless perfection, and uninterrupted actual Love of God, was not
attainable in this life, and therefore could not be obligatory to believers sub
periculo animae to attain it, but was only so far commanded as that we should
aspire to it, only so far proposed as the Object of our hopes and aims and
endeavors, and that we should labor as much as in us lies to come up to the
Perfection of Saints, (it being the prime Jewel, the brightest aureola and
glory of their Crown of happiness) that we should earnestly long for our
translation, and desire a better life wherein dwells righteousness, that upon
consideration of it we should be humbled in our Pride and empty conceits of
Perfection, and be admonished of our Frailty and infirmity, and that we should
be instructed that by the works of the Law no flesh living can be justified,
and that therefore we have all reason to rejoice that now we are not under the
Law (which requires exact unsinning obedience) but Grace, and the second
Covenant (which requires Faith and Repentance, and our utmost and most sincere
and hearty Endeavors to serve God, in holiness and righteousness and
conformity to all his Commandments all the days of our lives) it will
evidently follow that Chamier also meant the same. And then there will be a
perfect harmony and agreement between him and the Doctor, whatsoever becomes of
Bellarmine.

. 57. And now let me desire our Refuter to review this Recapitulation and
Summary of Chamier's opinion in this point, and let him tell me if it be not
the very same with that of Grotius? Let him consider, and deal impartially, and
say whether it be not all one in substance with that of the learned Author of
the Additions to the Reverend Bishop Andrews his Pattern of Catechistical
Doctrine. Let him tell me whether there be any thing in this Opinion of Chamier
that is not to be found in the Doctor. For does he not expressly say that we
must love God above all things, and as much as possibly we can? that we must
not acquiesce in any one degree of holiness, but that we must grow in grace
till we come to be perfect men in Christ Jesus, and still improve our Talents
till we be called to our Audit? does he not say that though exact unsinning
obedience, this absolute perfection, be not attainable in this life; yet
renewed, sincere, honest, faithful obedience is required to the whole Gospel;
that we give up the whole heart to Christ, and sincerely labor to mortify
every lust, and perform uniform obedience to God, still bewayling our
infirmities and sins, and from every fall rising again by Repentance and
Reformation? Says he not in effect all along, that though Believers are not
bound sub periculo animae to attain to exact unsinning obedience (that being
the Condition only of the first Covenant, and not at all concerning us now to
Justification, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace;) yet by the
Tenor of the second Covenant we must aspire to it, and endeavor after it as
much as we can, because the Tenor of the second Covenant requires our utmost
endeavors to obey God in all his Commandments; to love him with the whole
heart, and will, and affections, and understanding, to improve our Talents to
the utmost advantage; and that the more God enables us by his Grace, the more
we should labor to love him; and that having these promises we should cleanse
our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of the Lord?

. 58. Nay says he not expressy and in terms terminant, as they speak in the
Schools, That Piety is one of those virtues -- which Hammond Treatise of
Will Worship,. 16.
have such width of Compass, that the larger they are, they are also so much
more commendable: To which that of the Son of Sirach is agreeable, Ecclus 43.
30. When you glorify the Lord, exalt him as much as you can, for even he yet
will far exceed; and when you exalt him, put forth all your strength, for you
can never go far enough. i. e. How far so ever you exceed the particular
Command, you are yet within the compass of the general (this general command of
Love, on which hang all the Law and the Prophets) and in respect of that, can
never be thought to have done enough, though the particular Act or Degree of it
be somewhat that you are not particularly obliged to?

. 59. And now if this come not home to that exposition of Chamier which our
Refuter has quoted in the Margin; I shall never expect to find a Parallel, or
that the Print and the Seal, the Face and the Shape and Reflection in the Glass
should ever agree and be alike. And therefore if after a second review of this
his Charge he shall not find any the least passage in that quotation rightly
understood, that I shall not also parallel in Doctor Hammond and those of his
Opinion, I shall in Justice expect that he should blot out this Calumny also,
and say that he was mistaken in the Doctors opinion, and acknowledge that it is
the very same with Chamier's, and of all other Protestants that understand what
they say, and are willing to say no more against Papists then they are able to
maintain. For as for his friend Mr. Cawdrey's Addition to this exposition, it
plainly appears by the Doctors answer that he is not able to make it good; and
I doubt not but our Refuter will be found as weak as he, in his defense of a
known untruth, which admits of no rational Medium to make it good.

. 60. Nay I doubt not if it were worth while to the Doctors vindication from
this aspersion of compliance with Papists, to prove all that our Refuter with
any color or show quarrels at, even in Mr. Cawdrey himself, and in that very
Treatise that was purposely writ against the Treatise of Will Worship.

. 61. For says he not expressly, The degree of Grace binds to a gradual
improvement. To whom more is given, more is required? Triplex Diatribe p. 103.
104.

Says he not again, Every man is bound to be merciful to his ability as our
heavenly Father is merciful (which sure is the highest degree) though every man
be not bound to the same degree of mercy with other men, because every man has
not either the same measure of abilities, or the same opportunities? Ibid. p.
104.

Says he not again, Now to undertake the way of perfection in holiness cannot
be dangerous to any, but is the duty of all, and every man may receive it that
in Sincerity looks after it, at least to acceptance? Ibid. p. 108.

Says he not again, Who knows not that if there be a willing mind, it is
accepted according to what a man has, not according to what a man has not?
And his reward (for ought we know) may be accordingly equal with those that
have more abilities and opportunities of doing good or suffering ill for
Christ. Any men, all men are always bound to aspire to the perfection of
Holiness, not to the perfection of Martyrdom? Ibid. p. 109.

Says he not again, But then thirdly, the Perfection we are commanded by
Christ to aspire to is capable of Degrees, etc. we shall grant him this etc. --
For we say there are degrees of, or rather to perfection here? Ibid. p. 110.

Says he not again, If by Repentance, Faith, and Love, we sincerely endeavor
after perfection, First our failings shall be pardoned, and our weak works
accepted through Christ our Mediator? Ibid. p. 113.

62. If Mr. Cawdrey says this (as plain it is he says it) how then can our
Refuter quarrel with the Doctor, but he must also by the same Argument fight
against his dear friend? If the Doctor be Popishly affected in this Doctrine,
how then can Mr. Cawdrey escape? If that first and great Commandment, and what
else our Refuter in this Rhapsodie, and heap of Digressions has heaped up,
truly strikes at the Doctor, the point of the same sword must wound Mr. Cawdrey
also through the Doctors breast.

. 63. If now our Refuter shall say that it is true Mr. Cawdrey says all this,
but then he adds all along, that the highest degree of Perfection is also
commanded; that nothing of goodness nor any Cawdrey's Triplex Diat. p. 110.
the least degree is left to our Liberty and choice; that there is no voluntary
oblation left to us under the Gospel; that every degree, even the highest, is
required by the law of God, and what is short of Ibid. p. 50. Ibid. p. 111. and
p. 113. Ibid p. 110. Ibid. p 113.
the highest, is so far culpable; that perfection admits of no degrees or
growth, but rather degrees and growth in grace (which are often commanded) argue
there is no perfection in this life, but still perfection, though not
acquirable here is under Evangelical precept, and that perfect holiness is
required under the Gospel, and this in opposition to the Doctor:

. 64. To this I answer;

That it is very true indeed that he says this and more in opposition to Truth
as well as Doctor Hammond, nor could his cause have been maintained with any
Color but by such assertions. But then how truly, how rationally, how
consequently he speaks this, I shall refer the Reader to take notice from the
Doctors very learned Account of that Triplex Diatribe. Indeed it is no news
for a man to speak contradictions, that undertakes to maintain Paradoxes, and
to serve his Hypothesis with any sayings that may make for his present seeming
advantage.

. 65. For is it not a Contradiction to say that Perfection is not attainable in
this life, and yet every man may receive it that in sincerity looks after it?
Is it not a Contradiction to say that perfect holiness is required under the
Gospel, though it be not acquirable in this life, and yet every man may attain
it that in sincerity looks after it, at least to acceptance? Is it not a
contradiction to say that the perfection we are by Christ commanded to aspire
to is capable of Degrees, and yet Perfection in the highest Degree is under
Evangelical Precept? Is it not a contradiction to say that every man is bound
to be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful (which sure is the highest
degree) and yet every man is not bound to the same degree of mercy with other
men, because every man either has not the same measure of abilities or the
same opportunities? Is it not a Contradiction to say, Perfection is capable of
Degrees, and that there are degrees of, or rather to Perfection, and yet that
Perfection admits of no degrees and growth, but rather degrees and growth in
Grace argue there is no Perfection in this life? Is it not a Contradiction to
say that sincere Love is capable of Degrees, either in one man at several
Triplex Diaribe p. 115.
times, or in two men at the same time, and so both obey the precept, and yet
those degrees shall argue Love not to be perfect, and so far faulty, and in
vitio, and consequently that the Law shall be obeyed and transgressed by the
same person, at the same time in one and the same Act?

. 66. If our Refuter can now find a salve for these sores, I shall think him an
admirable Chyrurgion; but then withal I must accuse him for his skill, and say
he is Popishly affected, because he undertakes to make good contradictions, and
maintain they may both be true, and yet be contradictory. So easy it is for
men that are overcurious to spy faults in a Brother's eye, not to see the
greatest beam in their own; and they that are most guilty of This I can say, he
speaks Contradictions; for Perfection admits of no degrees or growth, but
rather degrees and growth in Grace (which are often commanded) argue there is no
perfection in this life. Cawdrey's Triplex Diatrib. p. 110.
Contradictions themselves, do first find fault with it in others; and men in
opposition to a Person and a Cause they have once without reason or for
interest disliked, may be drawn in that heat and zeal of contradiction to fight
against truth it self for the Persons sake that maintains it. It were well if
our Refuter at least could acquit himself of this sad, but too frequent
misadventure.

. 67. If now our Refuter shall, Antaeus like, recover breath and strength by
this fall, and say, that if the Doctor acknowledge that we are bound to love
God with all the heart, and to obey him sincerely in all commands, then
consequently in this, and then there will be nothing that will be left to our
freedom and choice:

. 58. To this I answer,

First, that this Objection as equally concerns himself and his Friends as it
does the Doctor For first, it is most true that there were certain (...), as
the LXXII. renders it Free Will offerings under the Law, that were a part of
the worship and service of God when they were performed, which yet were not
particularly enjoined by any particular precept or command of God's in the Law,
but were left to every man's liberty to offer or not to offer them, but yet were
accepted by God if they were heartily performed. And Mr. Cawdrey acknowledges
that the Jew under the Mosaical dispensation had not only libertatem
specificationis, a liberty to make choice of what he would offer, but also
libertatem exercitii, a liberty to offer or not offer them, when it was (to use
his own words) left free in some cases for a man to offer or not to offer
beyond what was positively required by the Law. If thou will offer a free will
offering, a Nidabah, etc. And herein only or chiefly stands the formality of a
Free Will offering, as contradistinguished to those offerings which were
commanded by the Law, etc. Triplex Diatr. p. 88, 91.

And secondly, to David's Voluntary Resolution of building the Temple, the same
Mr. Cawdrey replies, that this was in the time of the Law or before Christ, but
the time of the Gospel gives no such allowance. Free Will offerings were then
allowed. And for this answer he quotes Chamier, tom. 3. l 20. c. 5.. 25. p.
754. Chemnit. in Exodus and says moreover, that Divines resolve there be now no
free will offerings under the Gospel, though under the Law there were, because
the worship then is far different from the worship now. Triplex Diatribe p. 95,
96. How truly this is asserted it concerns not me at present to enquire, and
therefore I shall refer the Reader to the Doctors Account of this Triplex
Diatribe, c. 6. sect. 1, 2, etc. Sufficient it is that both he and Chamier
allow Free Will offerings and uncommanded Acts of Worship under the Law. And
therefore I infer, that this Law of loving God with all the heart
notwithstanding, there are yet some Acts of Worship that were left to man's
liberty to perform: if he offered them he did well, and it was accepted by God;
and if he did not, he transgressed no particular command, nay sinned not
against that first great Law of Love. For as plain it is, that this Law was in
force even under the Mosaical dispensation, when yet as plain it is, that the
Free Will offerings were allowed. What is written in the Law (says our Savior
to the Lawyer?) how read thou? And he answering said, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, etc. And he said unto him, thou have answered right, Luke 10. 26,
27, 28. And in another place he resolves that this is the first and great
Commandment in the Law, and that on this, and the second like unto it, hang
all the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 22. 38, 39, 40.

. 69. And now whatsoever answer our Refuter shall be able to make to reconcile
and solve this allowance with that Precept, will also equally serve the Doctors
interest and assertion; it being plain that when this Law was in force, there
were uncommanded acts of Piety and Religion, which no man sinned by omitting,
but were left free to the liberty and choice of him that should perform them.

. 70. Secondly, I answer from the Doctor, that these uncommanded degrees or
acts of Devotion, though they are not enjoined or imposed upon any man by any
particular Law and Precept sub periculo animae, and in this respect are left to
our freedom to do or not to do them, yet they are within the compass of the
general command of Love, and in respect of that, when a man has done all he
can, he can never be thought to have done enough, though the particular Act or
the degree of it be somewhat that he is not particularly obliged to. Treat. of.
Will Worship, sect. 17.

. 71. Thirdly, I answer from the Doctor, that this is an affirmative Precept,
of which according to the Observation of the Schools, the rule is true that
obligant semper, sed non ad semper, they oblige us always, yet do not oblige
us to be always exercising some one act of the virtues so commanded; and so
though a man be always bound to love God to the utmost height he can, in
regard of the habit, yet there may be a liberty and freedom in the exercise,
not only to this or that particular Act, but also to this or that degree, not
under any particular command, and yet the general Law may at the same instant
be fully satisfied.

. 72. Fourthly, I answer, that this Matt. 22. 38.
first and great Commandment, and the second like unto it, are This is the
first and great Commandement] It was none of the ten Commandments in
particular, but contains all the Commandments of the first Table; and
therefore is counted the greatest. Verse. 39. Is like unto it] Not equal to it,
duty to God is above duty to man, but like it in greatness, because it
contains all the duties of the second table as the other did of the first,
Verse. 40. And the Prophets] This is the contents and sum of them all. Assembly
Notes on Matt. 22. 38, 39, 40.
General precepts on which hang all the Law and the Prophets, and the Gospel
duties too. And therefore I cannot conceive that they should infer any other
special obligation then what is commanded in the special laws, into which they
are particularly branched and spread. Hence it is that our Savior says to his
Disciples, John 14. 15.
if you love me keep my Commandments, And the Apostle in another place, Romans
13. 8, 9, 10. He that loves another has fulfilled the Law. For this, Thou
shall not commit Adultery, thou shall not Kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou
shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet, and if there be any other
Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self. Love works none ill to his Neighbor;
therefore Love is the fulfilling of the Law. For all the Law, as the same
Apostle Gal. 5. 14. is fulfilled in this one word, even in this, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. These therefore being general Commandments,
must be supposed, as all other generals are, to be fully contained in the
several Particulars that are comprehended under them. And therefore if it
appear that there be certain Acts or degrees of Piety that are not commanded by
any particular Law suo periculo animae, but are left free to our liberty to
perform or not perform them, they cannot be supposed to be commanded by the
general, so that the man should sin that does not perform them. For that would
infer a contradiction, that they should be left at liberty, and yet at the same
time they should be commanded; that it should be lawful for me to do or not to
do them, and yet at the same instant I should sin, and so endanger my own soul,
if yet I did not perform them. And if any man at any time should be obliged to
perform them sub periculo animae by virtue of this general Law, then all men,
at the same instant must be obliged under the same danger to do it, because all
men by virtue of this Law, are bound to love God alike, because with all their
heart and mind and strength, and their neighbors as themselves; and then the
Law, which is the rule of Righteousness, would be a rule and a cause of
transgression, and I must of necessity sin, whatsoever I did. Add to this,
that if any special obligation not contained in any particular law were over
and above contained in these two generals, then something that is not in the
Law and the Prophets and Evangelical precepts must be contained in it, and then
the Generals would be larger then all the Particulars collectively taken; and
then our Savior had not given us a sufficient Account of the latitude and
extent of these precepts, when he said they were the great commandments on
which hang all the Law and the Prophets.

. 73. And therefore though it may be granted, that if there are uncommanded
Acts and Degrees of devotion (as it is plain there were under the Law by the
Free Will offerings, and the Doctor has abundantly proved it that there are so
also under the Gospel) they all come under the general command for allowance
and approbation, as proceeding out of a pious affection of Love and gratitude
to God, in which regard it is impossible to go beyond the latitude of the
Command; yet I cannot see how they can so come within the compass of this
general Law, that they should induce a particular obligation, and make the man
guilty of transgression that does not perform what he is not in particular
commanded.

. 74. Though then when they are done they may be acceptable to God, because
when they are freely performed they are fruits and arguments of our Love, that
is enjoined by that Commandment; yet for all that, the Omission of them cannot
make us guilty of our breach of a precept, or neglect of a duty, since
whatsoever is of this nature is contained in some particular law that
particularly enjoynes it. And therefore

. 75. Fifthly, I distinguish of the love of God; It is often taken (as we have
formerly demonstrated from the Scriptures) in general, for the affection of
Piety, or Charity, and often more strictly and properly, for that high, that
transcendent affection that is immediately fixed on God himself. The Acts of
this are elicite Acts, and properly and formally Acts of Love; the other are
imperate Acts, and effectively, and demonstratively Vide Crellii Ethic.
Christia. l. 3. c. 4. p. 259, 260.
Love, because they are the fruits and effects and signs and demonstrations of
our love of God. For he that truly loves God, cannot choose but desire and
endeavor to do that which is pleasing and acceptable to God, and that which he
commands; such as are the Acts of Piety and Charity, which himself has
prescribed and enjoined in his Law: and the more intense and ardent our love
is, the more we shall labor and endeavor what we can to please him, and do
that which is agreeable to his will. Now then, though in respect of the formal
and elicite Acts of Love, there can be no Act nor degree that is left to our
Liberty and choice, but all things are here in the utmost height commanded that
we can possible perform, and this by virtue of Vide Augustine. Enchirid. ad
Laurent. c. 21. per tot. p. 85. edit. Paris.
this first great fundamental Law, as also by the obligation of gratitude, and
congruence (to use our Refuters words) he being infinitely good in himself, and
we also owing to him omne quod sumus and omne quod possumus, whatsoever we are
and whatsoever we can do; yet in respect of the imperate Acts of Love, that are
the fruits and signs of the former, there may be uncommanded Acts and Degrees,
which though they are approved when performed, because they are conformable to
this first great Law, and are the issues and demonstrations of that Love there
enjoined, yet are they not commanded by this or any other particular law sub
periculo animae, but are left by God to our liberty and choice, for Free Will
offerings of our Love, that there might be somewhat over and above his
particular commands for us freely to exercise his grace upon, and so for him as
freely to reward us. But then whatsoever God enjoyneth us to be done sub
periculo animae, and as absolutely necessary to express and testify our Love
to him, he has shut up under particular Precepts and Injunctions, and if we
love him we must keep his Commandments, and there is a necessity and an
obligation lies upon us, which we must not neglect or violate upon the peril
of our Souls.

. 76. And therefore though every man be bound to love God as much as he is
able, and to express his love in that obedience and manner that he has
prescribed in his particular laws to that purpose; yet this nothing hinders but
that he may labor to express that Love in some Acts and some Degrees that God
has not particularly enjoined, so long as they be within the compass of his
general approbation and promise of acceptance. And therefore though it be
lawful for every man to express his love as much as he can, though it be in
Acts of Piety and Charity or degrees of them not particularly commanded; yet it
will not therefore follow, that because I am bound to love God as much as I can
by this Law, therefore I am bound to express this my Love in this or that
particular degree or Act of Piety and Charity not particularly commanded. And
therefore notwithstanding this Law of loving God with all the heart, there may
in regard of these expressions be room for a Nidabah, a free will offering and
Performance: and though we cannot in this life attain to a sinless perfection;
yet out of a love to God we may in some Acts of Piety or Mercy, and the like
imperate Acts of divine Love, perform more then any Law in particular requires
of us; and consequently this sincere Love in these particular Acts may be
capable of Degrees, and so either the same man may love more intensely at one
time then another, or two men at the same time, and yet both obey the precept,
as has already been frequently demonstrated; but more signally and ex professo
Sect. 13.. 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74.

78. For a close of this Section, and for a full acquitting of the Doctor from
any the least suspicion of Popish compliance in this Doctrine, as the Refuter
very intemperately lays to his charge, I shall here annex the concurrent
Opinion and Judgment of our excellently-learned, and every-way-accomplished
and Orthodox Bishop Davenant, as he himself has delivered it in that very
Judicious work of his, that was purposely addressed against Bellarmine and the
Errors of the Church of Rome in these very points.

-- Sub hisce nominibus (operum Supererogationis quae ex consiliorum
observatione oriuntur) monstra alunt quamplurima, Divinae legis contemptum,
Pharisaicam perfectae justitiae praesumptionem, novi Christianismi
institutionem. Explodunt etiam certissima fidei nostrae fundamenta; utpote
justificationem gratuitam and remissionem peccatorum in solo Sanguine
Redemptoris, defectum and imbecillitatem nostrarum virium in impletione Legis,
obligationem cujuscunque Christiani ad plenitudinem divinae dilectionis.

Nisi haec and alia quamplurima inessent vitia huic doctrinae Papisticae, de
solo and nudo nomino Consiliorum nunquam litem illis intenderemus: Nam
concedendum est cum ad unum finem per diversa media tendere liceat, relinqui
nobis sub consilio liberam electionem hujus aut illius, prout maxim videbitur
conducere ad finem consequendum. Verbi causa, tenemur ad castitatem corporis
mentisque conservandam, tenemur ad Deum integro cord and pura conscientia
colendum. Jam vero Consilii res est utrum quis castitatem custodire velit,
Deoque pie inservire, in statu caelibi aut conjugali: and quoniam in personis
idoneis vita caelebs affert majores opportunitates atque minora impedimenta, a
consulente Apostolo praefertur conjugali, atque eo respectu Opus Consilii
appellatur. Sic etiam in operibus Charitatis, multa dicuntur esse opera
Consiliorum, quatenus externus actus cum talibus circumstantiis nemini
imponitur virtute praeceptorum. Exempli causa, Praeceptum est diligere proximum
sicut teipsum, atque bona nostra dispensare ad Gloriam Dei and utilitatem
aliorum: sed quibus operibus, and quibus singularibus circumstantiis haec
dilectio exercenda sit, sub consilio relinquitur. Si unus igitur dilectionem
exerceat in extruendis Collegiis, alius in Templis aedificandis, tertius in
pauperibus v^sti^ndis, quartus in Captivis redimendis, nemo horum non dicatur
opus Consilii fecisse, quod attinet ad materiam singularem in qua charitatem
suam exerit; quia nemo expresso mandato obligatur ad hoc vel illud opus
singular. Nam sicuti singularia non cadunt sub Art, ita neque sub Lege. Par
ratio in aliis circumstantiis operum mandatorum considerari potest. Tenetur
vnusquisque ad dandum pauperibus: sed quoties, qua mensura, quibus singularibus
personis, non praecipitur. Si quis igitur apud animum suum decernat, ter
singulis diebus aliquid erogare pauperibus, aut talem partem bonorum suorum
illis decidere, aut denique hisce singularibus personis tantam pecuniae summam
quotannis elargiri, is quoad hasce singulares and determinatas circumstantias
rem Consilii facit, non Praecepti. Removeantur igitur errores Papistici, atque
hoc sensu Multa Consiliorum opera agnoscamus.

Postremo, quod attinet ad Perfectionem quam illis tribuunt, qui in certis
Consiliorum operibus exercentur, Concedimus esse quaedam dona quoad gradum
excellentiae altiora and perfectiora aliis, esse etiam Actiones ab eisdem
manantes magis perfectas quam quae ab inferioribus donis dimanant, denique eos
qui haec dona excellentiora rite exercent, Praemiis majoribus ab ipso Deo
honorandos: sic donum virginalis continentiae majus and altius est dono
conjugalis castitatis, and si recte excolatur, sancteque adhibeatur, hoc est,
(...), coelibes in gradu altiori collocat, atque proemium luculentius tandem
illis apportat. Sed haec omnia ita intelligenda sunt, ut interim agnoscumus,
qui maximis and pulcherrimis donis ornatur in hac vita, inchoatam solummodo
sanctitatem esse consecutum; qui maximas and pulcherrimas actiones facit a
perfectione tamen in Lege mandata long abesse; postremo, qui proemiis maximis
honoratur, non merito suorum operum, sed miseratione and munificentia divina
obtinuisse. Concludam verbo, si inter se comparentur dona divinae gratiae, and
sunt alia aliis perfectiora: si status and opera hominum conserantur, in his
etiam gradus conspici possunt Majoris and Minoris perfectionis: sed si ad
perfectam and spiritualem illam Justitiam quam Lex Dei praecipit exigamus vel
sanctitatem hominum, vel ipsos homines, vel quaelibet eorum opera, nihil horum
attingit culmen Legis Divinae, aut perfectionem illam obtinet quae est sub
praecepto. Davenant de Justit. Habit. and Act. c. 39. p. 461, 462.

And now that there might be no doubt of what Perfection he speaks that is
under the Precept, he immediately declares himself in the beginning of the
following Chapter, thus -- Papistis solenne est ita Consiliorum epera
depraedicare, ut prae illis Divinae Legis opera faciunt sordescere. Hinc illos
omnes qui Alphons. cont. haeres. lib 12. in verbo Praecipitur.
praecepta Dei tantummodo implent dicere oportere dicunt, Servi inutiles sumus,
quod debuimus facere fecimus: sed eos qui praestant opera consiliorum (quod
Monachos facere arbitrantur) servos Domino suo utiles pronunciant, hosque solos
tal^nta sibi commissa multiplicasse jactitant. Vt itaque huic aliisque
erroribus obviam eatur, (Thesis esto)

Nulla sunt opera Consiliorum perfectiora aut praestantiora operibus in Lege
Divina mandatis: Neque Monachi collocandi aut reputandi sunt in singulari
aliquo statu perfectionis, propter observationem talium Consiliorum. Postremo,
nemo mortalium, ex eo quod hisce aliisve quibus^unque Consiliorum operibus
incumbit, plus facit in operibus sanctitatis quam tenetur sacere, hoc est, non
supererogat, ut vulgo loqui solent, Ibid. c. 40 p. 462, 463.

Nam hoc ipsum Vocabulum (Supererogationis) duo haec includit: unum, Vt qui
supererogare statuatur, totum Legis penfum absolvat, ne minimo quidem apice
praetermisso; alterum, ut Legem transvolet and transcendat, faciendo Actiones
non solum indebitas and minime imperatas (quod quivis sacere potest) sed
faciendo Actiones meliores, perfectiores, Deo gratiores, quam sunt illae quae
in Lege praecipiuntur. Jam vero quod ad prius, certum est neminem mortalium
posse ipsam Legem implere, etc. Ibid. c. 42. p. 480, 481.

Dicit Bellarminus, quod Praeceptum commune sit omnium. Consilium non item. Hoc
discrimen aliquatenus agnoscimus: nam Legis praecepta omnes ex aequo obligant,
quae autem dicuntur Consilia non obligant omnes: sed illud etiam addimus
Consilia ex dono and vocatione particulari induere posse naturam Praeceptorum,
atque ita, in casu (ut loquuntur) hic and nunc, particulares personas
particulari quasimandato constringere. Nam recte Thomas, Nullus Perfectionis
actus sub Consilio cadit, qui in aliquo eventu non cadat sub praecepto. Ibid.
c. 44. p. 500.

Opus itaque Consilii (puta coelibatus, etc.) considerari potest dupliciter; in
se, nulla habita ratione qualitatis personarum, atque 2. 2. q. 124. art. 3.
sic simpliciter subijcitur arbitrio humano: atque cum respectu ad hanc vel
illam particularem personam, hisce particularibus donis a Deo ornatam, hac
particulari vocatione ad talem statum excitatam; atque sic non permittitur
liberae electioni voluntatis humanae, quia male agit qui donum Dei and
vocationem particularem ad hoc opus particulare negligat, 1 Cor. 7. 17. Ibid.
p. 501.

Once more. Quod affirmat Basilius, Deum noluisse virginitatem esse praeceptam,
Respondeo, Loquitur de communi praecepto Legis Divinae quod omnes mortales ex
aequo obliget. Agnoscimus virginitatem hoc sensu non esse sub praecepto: si
enim itase res haberet, peccarent omnes qui matrimonium inirent. Ibid. c. 45.
p. 521.

If any be desirous to see more to this purpose, I shall entreat him to peruse
the Treatise from Chap. 39. to the 47. wherein he shall find an exact harmony
betwixt the Doctor and this Orthodox Reverend Bishop.

. 79. Nor is the Bishop singular in this Doctrine, but herein he has the
Concurrence of the most eminent of our Church, and in the Controversies with
the Papists.

. 80. For my part (says our excellently-learned Bishop Mountague in his answer
to the Gagger) I know no Doctrine of our Mountague Answ. to the Gagger of
Protestants, c. 15. p. 103, 104
English Church against Evangelical Counsels. Private resolutions this way or
that way are but Opinions, and may as well be rejected as admitted. I willingly
subscribe unto antiquity for the point of Counsels Evangelical. For quod ex
voluntate est, laudis est amplioris, says Philastrius. God puts the yoke of
virginity upon no man, but leaves it to those that can and will undergo it.
Therefore Nazianzen well resolved, We have laws among us that bind of
necessity, others which be left unto our Free choice to keep them or not; so as
if we keep them, we shall be rewarded, if we keep them not, no fear of
punishment or danger to be undergone therefore. But I deny thereupon works of
Supererogation to be laid up in store for employments, etc. -- For although a
man may do more then is exacted, in many other things he does much less then he
should do, etc.

. 81. With him agrees that very Reverend Doctor White, to Bish. White against
Fisher, Point 8.. 3 p. 527, 528, 531.
whom our Refuter in this argument appeals. Touching the distinction of
Precepts and Counsels, I answer; That if, according to the Fathers, we
understand Free Will offerings or spontaneous actions exceeding that which
Augustine. Enchirid. c. 121. Gregor. Nazian. contra Julian. Orat. 1. Chrysostom.
in Matthew. Hom. 2 and in Romans hom. 14. and in 1 Cor. hom. 22.
the ordinary bond of necessary duty obliges men unto, and which are
acceptable to God in respect of their end, the Doctrine of Counsels proves not
works of Supererogation according to the Romish Tenet.

In his answer to the second Section of the Jesuit he adds; Haimo and
venerable Bede affirm that some men do that by vow or voluntary choice (to wit
in some particular actions) which they are not obliged unto by strict Precept;
and that at the day of Judgment they themselves (not souls in Purgatory) shall
reap the benefit hereof (to wit an accessory augmentation of Bliss.) But from
a Partial supererogation to a Total and General it follows not.

And in the following section he grants that the Fathers, Fulgentius, Paulinus,
St. Fulgent Proleg. in lib. con. Monimum. Paulm, Ep ad Severum. Augustine. lib.
2. 4 Evangel. c 30. ibid. c. 19. de Adulterin. conjug l. 1. c. 14. Optat. lib.
6. con. Parmen. Hieron. l 1 advers. Jovin c. 7. Chrysostom. hom. 8 de poenitent:
Nazianzen. Orat 3 Cypr. de habit. virgin. prope finem. Origin. in cap 15. ad
Romans Ambrose de Viduis ultra mod.
Augustine, Optatus, St. Hierom, St. Chrysostom, Gregory Nazianzen, St.
Cyprian, Origin and St. Ambrose mention works of Counsel, and one of them
says, it is possible to do more then is commanded. But this Father (as he
adds) speaks not thus in respect of all the Commandments of God, for then
he must free just persons from all sin; but in respect of some particular
Actions: to wit, whereas the Law of Charity commands to distribute a Portion
of goods to the Poor, a man may bestow half his goods, nevertheless he which
performs this may be deficient another way. And then presently after he adds
that, First, Ambrose teaches that there is a difference between Precepts and
Counsels; Secondly, that the observing of Counsels is not required of all but
of some; Thirdly, They which besides Precepts observe Counsels, are more
profitable servants, and shall receive a greater reward. Thus he.

. 82. I shall conclude with Mr. Hooker; Finally some things, although not so
required of necessity, that to leave them undone Hooker. Eccles. Pol lib. a. n.
8. mihi page 78.
excludes from Salvation, are notwithstanding of so great dignity and
acceptance with God, that most ample reward in heaven is laid up for them.
Hereof we have no commandment, either in nature or Scripture, which does exact
them at our hands; yet those motives there are in both which draw most
effectually our minds unto them. In this kind there is not the least action,
but it does somewhat make to the accessory augmentation of our bliss. For which
cause our Savior does plainly witness, that there should not be as much as a
cup of cold water bestowed for his sake without Matt. 10. 42.
reward. Hereupon depends whatsoever difference there is between states of
Saints in Glory: hither we refer whatsoever belongs unto th highest
perfection of man by way of service toward God: hereunto that fervor and first
love of Christians did bind it self, causing them to sell their possessions,
and lay down the price at the blessed Apostles feet. Hereat Saint Paul
undoubtedly did aim in so far abridging his own liberty, and exceeding that
which Act. 4. 35. 1 Thessal. 2. 7, 9.
the bond of necessary and enjoined duty tied him unto. Wherefore seeing that
in all these several kinds of Actions there can be nothing possibly evil which
God approves, and that he approves much more then he does command, etc.

. 83. More might be added from S. Augustine. l. de sancta virginitate c. 30. p.
344. Et de verbis Apostoli Sermon. 18. p. 136. and in Enchirid. c. 121. p. 85.
Eusebius lib. 1. de demonstrat. Evangel. c. 8. p. 29, 30. edit. Paris. Gregor.
Magn. l. 15. Moral. c. 9. p. 82. F, G. Epiphan. haeres. 48. Athanasius lib. de
incarnatione verbi, Basil. l. de virginitate, and others of the Ancients; as
also from Bishop Morton's Appeal l. 5. c. 4. sect. 3. n. 11. Bishop Andrews
cont. Apol. Bellarm. cap. 8. p. 196. Muscul. in 1. Cor. 7. Hiperius in 1 Cor.
7. 25. Selnecer. ibid. and others of the modernes.

. 84. But this is abundantly sufficient, if not more then enough, to acquit the
Doctors opinion in this point as well from Novelty and Singularity, as from any
Popish Compliance.

And so much for his third and fourth Charges.

SECT. 25.
Heads of the Reasons for the Doctors Exposition and Assertion of Degrees in
Love and Freewill-offerings. Refuters fifth charge examined. Falsehood of it.
Challenged to make Reparations. Calumny of Popishly affected, how easily and
unhappily retorted.

. 1. WE come now to examine his fifth charge. But before I consider that, it
will be expedient to give the Reader an account of the heads of those cogent
reasons, which necessitated the Doctor to make use of that interpretation,
which our Refuter so quarrels at, though not to any compliance with Papists,
as he falsely suggests.

. 2. And the First is, Because an absolute sinless perfection is the Condition
of the first Covenant which is not now obligatory to Believers, as the
Condition of their Salvation; because they are not under the Law, but under
Grace: and consequently this Law now only requires of Believers that we love
him in sincerity, and with our utmost endeavor above all things, etc.

The Second, If Love were not capable of degrees, but consisted in one
indivisible point of perfection, to which all, by this Law, must arrive sub
periculo animae, then there could be no growth in grace; and whatsoever Act of
Love, or Piety, or Charity came short of this degree, were a sin; which is
directly contrary to so many Gospel Precepts, and the Parable of the Talents,
and the manner of Gods proceedings at the day of Judgment, when he shall
reward every man according to his works.

The Third, Because it is contrary to the whole Gospel frame Ephesians. 4. 12, 13,
14, 15, 16. 1 Pet. 2. 2. 2 Pet. 3. 18. 2 Cor. 8. 6.
and temper, which is a state of constant proficiency and growth; and therefore
Believers at their first admission and incorporation into Christ are said to be
begotten to a lively Hope, to be and truth, he loathes this double mindedness;
it is as offensive as lukewarm water is to the stomach, that causes loathing
and vomiting; and therefore God threatens to spue such an one out of his mouth.
But then the young Infant Christian, the newly Revel. 3. 16.
regenerate is as much owned by God for a child, as he that is grown up. There
be Babes in Grace, as well as perfect men in Jesus Christ; nay and Embrio's too
yet in the womb of the Church. For S. Paul says of his Galathians, that he
travailed again in birth with them, till Christ were formed in them. God Galat.
4. 19.
in the meanest Infant and first newborn Christian beholds all the shape and
Pourtraicture, and all the lineaments of his son. Christ is perfectly formed in
them; and therefore God owns them for his children, though they be not yet
grown up. They have a perfection of parts, and increasing and growing on they
are to a perfection of degrees; they have a perfection of shape, though yet
they have not a perfection of stature; and they are now in their growth to the
measure of the Stature Ephesians. 4. 12, 13, 14, 15.
of the fullness of Christ. Even the very seeds, and first degrees of Grace and
holy love are the fruits of the Spirit; and our Regeneration, and Newbirth, and
inchoate Sanctification are the works and effects of that blessed Spirit, and
we are not able so much as to think a good thought but by his blessed 2 Cor. 3.
5.
assistance. And therefore the very lowest degree of Grace, the least spark of
holy love cannot possibly be a sin, and therefore in this sense must be a
perfect fullfilling of this Law, though it be not a fullfilling it in the
utmost height and perfection of love. For though M. Cawdrey says, Perfection
admits of no degrees or growth, but rather degrees and growth in grace (which
are often commanded) argue there is no perfection in this life; yet because he
acknowledges that the Scriptures command degrees and growth in grace, and
consequently in the highest royal sovereign grace of holy Love and Charity, a
lower degree of Love then the highest, must be acknowledged to be no sin,
because commanded by God. Nay even the state of sin-less perfection, which was
the utmost that the Law or first Covenant required, though it be not now
attainable in this life, consisted not in one indivisible point, but had been a
state of proficiency and growth to us, if Adam and we had persevered in that
first integrity wherein he was created. For this state was a state of Merit and
Probation, not of Trust and Reward. And then not only Philosophy tells us,
that the middle point, wherein virtue does consist, admits of a latitude and
degrees; but Grammar also teaches us to compare perfectus, perfectior,
perfectissimus, because Reason it self is able to discover that there is
nothing absolutely, simply perfect, but God, whose Perfection is alone
incapable of growth and addition and degrees, because he is simply one and
absolutely infinite.

. 10. To the next Inference. If you say one of the middle degrees betwix the
lowest and the highest, it concerns you to determine and specify what degree
this is, below which all degrees of Love are sinful; and beyond which all
degrees are voluntary oblations, and uncommanded worship; Here again I deny the
Sequel. For if the Doctor should assert, that neither the lowest degree of
love were a fullfilling of the law, nor the highest degree enjoined, what
necessity lies upon him therefore to fix upon a precise middle degree
commanded, below which all were a sin and above which all were a freewill
offering? For may he not say that any one, or two or more, or all the
intermediate degrees may be allowed as a fullfilling of the Law, and yet there
may be room for a Nidabah, a freewill offering for all that. It may be the
sixth or the seventh, at least it may be the eighth, that may be left for a
free will offering, and what then will become of your conclusion.

. 11. And therefore to your third Inference, And therefore if you cannot do
this (as I know you cannot) I shall conclude that the highest degree is
commanded in our love of God, I must tell you, that here I deny the Sequel
also.

. 12. And now to demonstrate the vanity and weakness of this kind of
Argumentation, and to show that it will conclude a falsehood, as well as a
truth, I shall make it appear by one instance. It is a known truth, that though
non datur Temperamentum ad pondus; yet datur ad Justitiam, and our health does
consist in a just mixture of our natural heat and moisture, which as it is not
simply the same in all men, so it is not still the same in the very same man at
all times. Against this known truth I would thus argue and prove the contrary,
as strongly as our Refuter does, Thus. Either the lowest degree of heat, or
some middle degree; or the highest degree is required to this Crasis, and
temperature of health. If the lowest. degree, then the Natural heat and
Temperature of men must be the same with Plantanimals or vegetables, nay with
stones and mineralls, and the dead and the living would be of the same natural
heat and temper; If you say some one of the middle degrees, betwixt the lowest
and the highest, it concerns you to determine and specify what degree this
is, below which all degrees of heat bring a Gangrene, a deadness, and
mortification of the Parts, and beyond which all degrees of heat are a Fever,
and if you cannot do this (as I know you cannot) I shall conclude that the
highest degree of heat is naturally required to a healthy constitution, and
then the Madman was in the right, that in a fit of his phrenzy cried out that
he was perfect fire, and the burning Causus will not be our tormenting killing
Disease, but our Nature, and we may not only live with the Salamander in the
fire, but by this argumentation, we shall be Metamorphosed into it.

. 13. And therefore notwithstanding our Refuters rare Argument, there may be a
graduall difference of intensness and Perfection in the Acts of that Love, that
is required by this Law, as well as in the habit, which the Schools do
determine may be increased in infinitum, and has no precise term to bound it,
beyond which it cannot go. It is not with Grace, as it is with Nature. Though
Natural Forms, and Qualities, that are capable of graduall intension, have set
terms beyond which they cannot go, and below the first degree they are nothing,
and at the highest degree they are something else, as Heat in the eighth degree
becomes Fire: yet God may increase his Graces in us, how, and in what manner he
pleases. Though Christ the sun of righteousness still moved in his Ecliptic of
Perfection, yet all the other Planets, that receive their light from him, move
in a Zodiac and under a line of Righteousness, that consists of a breadth and
latitude of degrees, and sometimes they in their Excentricity move without it;
as David in the case of Vriah and Bathsheba, but then by the power of Gods
Grace they return into their Compass.

. 14. But then I shall make no scruple to grant our Refuters Conclusion though
his Premises infer it not, if he will admit me to distinguish and declare, in
what sense I take it. For still to speak in general, ambiguous,
undistinguished terms, as he does, is to confound, and not instruct; not to
state controversies, but involve them; not to clear truth, but to cloud and
mask it.

. 15. Love then whether in the Habit or the Act may be the highest, either
absolutely or comparatively, or to make use of Aquinas his distinction, for the
greater authority, it may be said to be the highest in a threefold
consideration. 1. Either ex part diligibilis, so that the Love shall be
commensurate and equal to the Object, a love as high and perfect, as that is
lovely and amiable. Now this love of God, that is as high as his own goodness,
is absolutely and simply the highest, because it is infinite, as God is; a Love
Proper and Peculiar unto God himself, that is infinite and essential love, one
entire Act, Loving, and beloved; whose love must still be equal to himself,
because it is no other, but himself. The Creature cannot possibly be obliged
thus to love God, because being naturally finite in its being, and all its
operations, it is absolutely impossible to be attained to; because between that
which is naturally, necessarily finite, and that which is infinite, there can
be no proportion, and there can be but one infinite, because but one God. And
therefore here the Digest. de Regul. Juris leg. 185.
Rule of the Law is undoubted, and nemo tenetur ad impossibilia, and God might
as well oblige us to be omnipotent, to raise the dead, and make an other world,
in short, be God, as thus to love him.

. 16. Secondly, Either, Ex part diligentis, so that the Love be commensurate
to the power of the Lover, and he cannot transcend it, and this is
comparatively the highest. And thus I grant, that the Law obliges us to love
God, (...), and (...), with all our soul, our mind, our heart, our strength,
every faculty both of soul and body must be wholly and to the utmost of our
strength still employed in this love.

And if our Refuter mean no other but this by his ex toto posse suo, he shall
not find an Adversary of me or the Doctor in this.

. 17. But then because this is yet too general, and our Refuter, I perceive,
has other thoughts, and means another thing by these terms then the Doctor
does, and because latet dolus in generalibus, I shall (to come out of these
mists and clouds of discourse) yet be more Particular. For the Abilities of man
being diverse in sundry respects, it will be necessary clearly to express of
what Abilities we speak, when we say man is obliged to Love God to the utmost
of his Power.

. 18. I say then further, That man's Abilities may be considered according to
his threefold state, Past, Present and Future.

. 19. If we consider Man according to those Abilities, he had in his first
estate in Paradise, we shall find, that as he came innocent and spotless from
the hands of so pure and undefiled an Artificer, so God bestowed upon him the
Habit of Original Justice and righteousness, whereby he was enabled to serve
God and love him to the height of sinless perfection. But then as we have
already observed, even this very state of sinless Perfection was a state of
growth and Proficiency, because it was a state of Merit. And Adam was left in a
capacity to improve his Talents of grace, and to grow in Love, as well, as we
are now. Now the Law, and Natural gratitude obliging man to love God withal
his strength, must of necessity also oblige him to a sin-less perfection of
love and service to God in all the Commandments. And this was the Condition of
the First Covenant, Fac hoc and vives, Do this, and thou shall live, whereby
man was to have been Justified.

. 20. But though God made man upright, yet he found out many Inventions; he
fell, and forfeited those Abilities God Eccses. 7. 10.
gave him, not only for himself, but for all his Posterity. The Attainder did
extend to the Race for the grand Treason of the Father; and impossible it is,
that by the works of the Law flesh and blood can be Justified.

. 21. But then this sinlesse perfection and height of Love, as it is impossible
now to be attained, so it is not obligatory to the Justification of believers,
that are not under the Law, but under Grace. The Condition of the second
Covenant, whereby we must all be justified, is Faith, and Repentance, and
sincere holy endeavors, which supposes the Fall, and Man's frail, sinful, weak
condition.

. 22. Now of keeping of the Law according to exact unsinning obedience, a
loving God to this perfect height, a loving him according to the Abilities God
gave, and Adam forfeited, and here irrecoverably lost, it is that our Divines,
Bishop White against Fisher, Ames against Bellarmine, Bishop Davenant de
Justitia Habituali and Actuali, Bishop Morton de merito, Bishop Andrews in his
Sermon of Justification, Chamier against Bellarmine, Hooker against Travers,
and Generally the Protestants in their discourses of Justification by works,
and Merit ex condigno, supererogation, and Fullfilling of the law and the
states of Perfection speak, when they say God must be thus Loved; And the
Romish doctrines in many Branches enforce it. Of this it is Saint Paul speaks
in his Epistles to the Romans and Galathians, when he disputes with the Jew,
that expected Justification without Faith, Justification by their own works,
according to the tenor of that Part of Moses Law, that exemplified the
Condition of the first Covenant, and affixed the Curse to every one that
continued not in every thing that was written in the book of the law to do
them. And according to this Tenor, this Condition of the law the Apostle
demonstratively proves against the Jew from the law, that no flesh living can
be justified, because that law expressly testifies that all men have sinned and
fell short of the glory of God. According to this Condition expressed in Moses
law, the Jew must acknowledge, that if he expects to be Justified, his
righteousness must be so exact, that he must not transgress in any least branch
of any the least commandment. If he does, as his own Conscience, and the law
tells him plainly, that he does, he must of necessity acknowledge that by this
law, nor he, nor any man else can be Justified, much less supererogate, and do
more then that law requires. And therefore of necessity he must acknowledge
himself in a damnable state, if he will stand to be Justified by that law, and
his own righteousness. No hope there can be for him, unless he look for another
righteousness, another Covenant; a Righteousness without him, and a Covenant of
Faith. This is it that the Apostle so demonstratively proves against the Jew,
and clearly evidences that as no man can be Justified by that first Covenant,
so Abraham the Father of the Faithful, and all that ever were Justified, were
Justified by faith in the Righteousness of the Messiah, and the second Covenant
made and confirmed in his blood.

. 23. And this is the Righteousness we preach, the righteousness Romans 10. 6, 7,
8.
of Faith in Christ's blood, the Condition of which righteousness or
Justification, and acquitting us at Gods bar, is Repentance from dead works,
and Faith in our Saviors blood, the Mediator of the new Covenant, and a
sincere endeavor to keep all the Commandments of God, that Christ has imposed
upon us. And this the Apostle also as demonstratively proves in his Epistles to
the Romans, Galathians, and Hebrews to have been also contained in Moses law,
the Ceremonial part whereof was but the type and shadow of Gospel-Promises,
and Blessings and Purity and holiness.

. 24. But then not this, but the former Legal Perfection of Charity is the
Love that Chamier speaks of, in his dispute with Bellarmine, when he says we
must love God according to the Tenor and Prescript of this Law, totis viribus
Naturae, non totis viribus corruptionis. And of such a sinless Perfection of
love it is also, that Master Cawdrey speaks, and Doctor Hammond denies to be
obligatory to the Christians Justification, that is not, cannot be Justified by
the works of the law, but is therefore by Gods Mercy and Christ's Merit and
Purchase under the Covenant of Grace. And of a love according to this sinless
height it is that our Refuter speaks, and would make good against the Doctor.
But bate him his Argument called Petitio Principii, and he has not proved it.
Nay I tell him, and shall by and by make it good, that it is impossible for him
to prove it by any other demonstration, then what the Philosopher in his
Elench's calls (...).

. 25. For it is one thing to say that the Law, or Covenant of works, that
required unsinning obedience as the condition of Justification and
righteousness by that Law, requires us to love God to that height, and another
thing to say, that the Christian is obliged so to love God to Justification.
For that infers that believers are yet under the law, when they are not, but
under grace; which is contrary to the Tenor of the Gospel; and yet for all that
it may be true, as the Apostle demonstrates, that the Covenant of works, the
Law as he calls it, did require such obedience, and therefore no man can be
Justified by that covenant or Law, but by such obedience, and such a height of
Love.

. 26. If then secondly Man be confidered in regard of those Abilities he has
now in the Present state of Grace, and under the Gospel dispensation, I say
that Man, according to the Gospel obligation of this Law, and the Tenor of the
new covenant is bound to love God to the utmost of those Abilities of Grace,
and the assistance of Gods spirit, that God gives, and shall bestow upon him.
Bound he is so to love God, that he may go on more and more to love him, so to
make use of the present Talent of Grace, that God according to his promise in
the Gospel, may give more Grace, and more Abilities to love him. For as the
Gospel commands us to grow in grace and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and 2 Pet. 3. 18. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
that giving all diligence, we should add to our faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to
patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness charity: for if these things be in us and abound, they make us that we
shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ: So God has promised in the Gospel, Mat. 13. 11. and 25. 29: Luke 8.
18. and 19. 26. that whosoever has (and makes use and improves it, that has
it not only (...) in possession but (...) in the use and exercise) to him
shall be given, and he shall have more abundance; And our Savior expressly
tells us, Joh. 10. 10.
that he came that we might have life, and have it more abundantly. And thus
man by the Law as understood and expounded according to the tenor and gracious
moderation of the Gospel covenant, is bound to love God with all the strength
he either has, or shall have, and thus as S. Bernard excellently, modus amandi
Deum, est amare sine modo. We can never love enough, because our love always
must be in the increase, nor has any limits to fix and bound its growth.

. 27. But then this love, because it is a thriving thing; of necessity must
admit of a latitude, and endless degrees, because as the Schools determine, it
must be increased in infinitum. And thus the Doctor acknowledges that we must
love God with all our strength, etc.

. 28. This is that Love in the height that Grotius and Concedimus Charitatem
simpliciter insinitam hoc mandato non requiri, quia Creatura sinita non est
capax qualitatis infinitae: sed negamus huic mandato satisfacere ullum certum
gradum charitatis, qui subsistit infra metas ultimae possibilitatis humanae.
Nam mandatum totas vires nostras requirit in Actu diligendi Deum nullamque
earum partem sub consilio relinquit, ut ex Augustino and ipso Aquinate
rectissime statuit Gerson. Davenant. de Justitia habit. and Act. c. 44. p. 504.
others speak of, nay that which M. Cawdrey himself acknowledges cannot be
denied, though he says, not without a Contradiction, that more then this is
required, and that not only growth in grace is required, which of necessity
implies a latitude, and degrees, but perfection also, which he says, has no
degrees. Nay this our Refuter in a lucid intervall does seem to import, though
he long continues not in that sober mood. But I doubt not, but upon better
consideration, he may be drawn to persevere and continue in it. Otherwise
Nauiget Antyciras for me. I shall sooner expect to cure his Intellect by a
Potion of Hellebore, then a demonstration. This is that Love, that is opposed
to Lukewarmness, that is opposed to partial and divided Love, or service; that
Love that is the way to perfection in heaven there only attainable, and not
Perfection it self. This is the Love the Doctor speaks of and contends to be
required by this commandment, the Love that the Apostle calls (...), and not
that Love that consists in a sinless perfection, that our Refuter contends is
now required of the Christian. This Love admits of a latitude and has degrees;
it is like the grain of mustard seed, though as considered in semine, it is
very small, yet by the endeavor of Paul the Planter, and Apollos the waterer,
and the richness of the soil, now manured and fitted by Grace, and the benefit
of the Climate, the Church, where it only grows, and Gods blessing, that
still gives the increase, it grows up and multiplies into a tree so big, that
the fowls of the Air may lodge, and the blessed Spirits and Angels may be
delighted in it.

. 29. But then thirdly, man may be considered according to his future state,
and the Abilities God shall either de facto give us to love him, at the last
day (when not only the Spirits, but the bodies also of just men shall be made
perfect) or Vid. Davenant de Justit. habit. and Act. c. 4. 7. p. 532, 533.
may now by his absolute omnipotent Power bestow upon us (for nothing hinders,
but that he might again create man in innocence, and bless him with the same
Abilities of Original Justice which Adam had, or else he might translate us
immediately soul and body into heaven, as he did Enoch and Elias.) This, this,
as it is the height of our happiness, and holy ambition, so it is the utmost
height of love that we shall de facto ever arrive at.

. 30. But then I must add, that this Love is but like the Physicians
Temperamentum ad Justitiam, not like that which they call Temperamentum aequale
ad pondus. There is no one indivisible point and measure of love, to which all
arrive, but Vid. Aquin. 2. 2, que 28. art. 3. in corp. and respons. ad 2.
proportionable still it is to our works, and the reward, and the happiness
God shall bestow. All the vessels of this new Jerusalem shall be full, as full
of love, as they can possibly hold, but yet the love in all will not be equally
one and the same, because the vessels are not all of one equal capacity. For
as one star differs from another star in glory, so shall it be also at the
Resurrection of the dead, and as there be degrees of Angels, whether Thrones,
or Principalities, or Powers, Angels and Arch-angells, Cherubins, and
Seraphins, whose very name imports a higher and more ardent strain of love and
zeal, so shall there be also degrees among Saints in respect of Glory, and
happiness, and consequently of Love. Christ the first in Glory, as the
first fruits from the dead, and afterward they that are Christ's. I doubt not
but the blessed Virgin, and the Mother of God, as she was saluted by the Angel
Gabriel; Luke 1. 28.
with an Hail thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee, blessed art
thou among women, so she is blessed among Saints; as she bore our Savior in
her womb, so she is next to him in glory. And then as for the Apostles, our
Savior has promised, that they shall sit with him on twelve Thrones. And Mat.
19. 28, 29. Luke 22. 30. Jude 14.
if they and ten thousand of his Saints, with whom he shall come to Judgment,
shall be admitted to be Assessors with him in his Throne of Judgment, I cannot
but conclude they shall have a higher state of Glory. And if our Love of God
must of necessity bear a correspondence to our knowledge and sight and
enjoyment of God in heaven, and that knowledge, and that happiness must be
proportioned according to our works on earth, then it will necessarily follow,
that according to the difference of our Love, and grace, and improvement of our
Talents and stewardship here, so shall our glory and happiness and sight, and
knowledge and Love of God be in heaven. A love this, though it be not equal in
every man, yet it is as high as any man shall for all eternity ever enjoy. The
love shall be still one in every man, as the Crown of glory shall eternally be
the same. A love at the utmost height, that the lover of God, whosoever he is,
shall ever eternally obtain. A love perfect, because without sin; a love
constant, because without interruption, and not in habit, but in Act; a love,
where God shall be all in all.

. 31. This is the love we all hope for and aim at, and must endeavor after;
and it will be our sin, and our misery, if we do not attain to it. But then it
is the (...) of the Christian, as we have already noted, the mark he must aim
at, the crown and the kingdom, and not the Race it self, and the way to the
kingdom. This is that height, that Perfection of Love, which S. Austin and
Bernard, Peter Lumbard and Aquinas, and others of the old Schoolmen speak of,
when they say, it is not attainable in this life, but is the Perfection of
heaven, and add that the Commandment in this sense can and shall only be
fulfilled there. Commanded indeed they say it is in the Law, but only to be
endeavored after in this life, and attained to in the next. And more then this
we shall prove by and by they say not, and as much as this, I, and those of the
Doctors opinion, shall most willingly acknowledge. And let our Refuter see what
advantage he can make of it; and if he requires more then this, let him prove
it, and take all, and make me also his Proselyte.

. 32. Thirdly, the love may be the highest, ex part dilectionis seu Formae aut
Actus Amoris praecise considerati. a love in the highest degree, not as in this
or that subject planted, but in the utmost degree that the form or Quality it
self is naturally and essentially capable of.

. 33. For the better understanding of which it is to be considered; that the
Philosopher, the better to explain the nature of Intension and Remission of
Natural Forms and Qualities (whose essence consists in a latitude) divides
this latitude of Essence into eight degrees of Intension or Remission, below
which they are nothing, and beyond which they become something else,
substantial forms, and not Accidents. Now though this be true of all Natural
forms, because naturally they have their intrinsic bounds of being and growth
(it being as true of Natural Forms, as of Natural Bodies; because Nature, or
rather God works all things of this kind in number, weight and measure) yet it
is not so in respect of Grace, and those infused Qualities, that are the
immediate issues and fruits of the Spirit. These being purely dependent upon
Gods good will and pleasure, have no determinate bounds and limits as all
Natural Forms have, but may be greater or lesser, more or less perfect,
gradually higher or lower as God himself thinks fit. There is no one degree of
Grace can possibly be so high, that it can be no higher, or cease to be Grace:
nor can we love God so fervently, but that by the assistance of the Spirit, we
may be enabled to love him more fervently.

. 34. Though then Philosophy acknowledges but eight degrees of latitude in the
graduall intension and Remission of natural forms; yet Theology allows no such
precise number for spiritual Forms and Graces. They may by Gods Power be
intended in infinitum, and the more they are augmented, the perfecter still
they are. And consequently no man can assign any one degree of Love, that he
can in respect of the Form, perfectly call the highest degree of Love, no more
then he can show me any one Number so great, that cannot be made greater by an
Addition of numbers, or Multiplication of it self upon its self. And therefore,
as we have observed, Aquinas and the Schoolmen determine, that charitas potest
augeri in infinitum 2. 2. q. 24. art. 4. And yet our Refuter that calls himself
a Schoolman, tells us of a first and middle degrees of Love, and an eight which
he calls the highest.

. 35. And yet if we should allow degrees of Love (as we must) and for
argumentation sake, we should pitch upon a precise number, suppose of eight (as
the Doctor does in his Account to Master Cawdrey) yet then every degree must be
allowed (as the Doctor excellently observes) to be like the Astronomers degrees
in their Circles, for instance of Longitude and Latitude, that are divided into
Seconds and Thirds and Fourths, etc. and every one of these Fractions into
sixty parts and fractions more, and so on in infinitum, if their Observations
and Art so require it.

. 36. And therefore our Refuter might as well tell the world of the Production
of the Quadrature of a Circle, or a Natural Temperature ad Pondus, or the
existence of a Platonicall Idea, as of the highest degree of holy Love, that is
precisely the eighth, no more nor no less, to which all men are obliged. But
he, because he is a Schoolman, may talk or write any thing, and the world must
admire him for speaking in School-terms, which because they make a strange
noise and sound in English, must needs be deep stuff, though neither the
Writer, nor the Reader understand them. But Oracles and Riddles are therefore
Oracles and Riddles because they are dark, and obscure, and they therefore gain
the more veneration and respect, the less they are understood. Now this is that
height of Perfection to a degree that the Doctor denies, for the reasons
formerly assigned, and our Refuter undertakes to make good by this Argument.

. 37. And now that the Doctor is in the right, besides the Reasons formerly
alleged, I thus further make good by our Refuters own Argument.

. 38. Thus then I retort it. If neither the lowest degree of love, nor the
highest degree of Love be required by this precept, then certainly some one, or
all of the middle degrees are commanded, or else none at all, but some degrees
of love at least is required, and not the lowest nor the highest, ergo. Not the
lowest, for the reason assigned by our Refuter (which for Arguments sake, and
only ad hominem we will admit of) nor the highest, which our Refuter contends
for, because then every degree of love, which is not thus the highest, would be
a sin, because a transgression of that commandment of Love, that our Refuter
says requires the highest. But then this is most notoriously false, and
directly contrary to many places of Scripture that command growth in grace,
that tell us that every degree of Grace is the fruit and effect of his holy
Spirit, which is the only fountain of holiness, and cannot therefore be Author
of any thing that is not pure and holy. Regeneration, new birth, and inchoate
sanctification are the works of the Spirit, as well as growth and the
Perfection of Grace and Love, and every good gift and every perfect gift (as
that signifies James 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
any fruit of the Spirit, and holiness) comes down from above, from the Father
of lights, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of change: with whom is
neither variation, declination, nor Parallax; but one infinite point, and Act
of holiness, one Perfect sun of Righteousness, with healing in his wings, that
like the sun it self, the fountain of natural light (according to the
Hypothesis of Galileus, Copernicus, Philolaus) stands still in one immovable
Center of the world, and gives light and heat and Influence and motion to all
things in the world. A sun of Righteousness, not like Joshuahs sun, that stands
still for a day or two. A sun of Righteousness, not like that in the dial of
Ahaz that goes back; but a sun always fixed in one constant and immovable
Zenith and height of Perfection, and always and in every respect the same,
because infinite. And therefore I must unavoidably conclude, that since Gods
Spirit is like the wind and blows how and where Joh. 3. 8.
it lists, and though we see and feel the motion of it, yet we know not
whence it comes, nor whither it goes, since thus it is with every one that is
born of the Spirit, since we cannot so much as think a good thought as of our
selves, but all our sufficiency 2 Cor. 3. 5. Phil. 4. 13.
is of God, through whose assistance and strengthening we can do all things, he
therefore will own every fruit and degree of Grace, that flows only from his
own holy Spirit and gracious assistance, and will not break the bruised Reed,
nor Mat. 12. 20.
quench the smoking flax, but in due time blow it up into a bright and
glorious flame, and set the bones which he has broken. And consequently I must
conclude that the highest degree is not commanded, and that an Inferior degree
of Love, even of Actual love is no sin, (...) quod erat demonstrandum.

. 39. To recapitulate all for the Readers better satisfaction.

1. First, the highest degree of Love absolutely such, or rather the one
infinite height and simply perfect Act of Love commensurate with the Perfection
and amiableness of God, no body says is required in this Love.

2. The loving God according to sinless Perfection, and the abilities and
original righteousness Adam had in innocence, the Apostle against the Jews,
and the Vid. White against Fisher point. 8.. 1. 2. p. 510. D. p. 522. B. C. D.
E. Mountague's answer to the Gagger, c. 15, 17, 19. Davenant. de Justit. Habit.
Actual.
Protestants against the Romanists say, is required to Justification, and
according to the Tenor of the first Covenant, which therefore they say is
necessary; because the Papists speak of a Justification by works, a fullfilling
of the Law, and merit ex condigno, Perfection, and works of Supererogation.
This our Refuter undertakes to maintain to be now required of Christians to
Justification, otherwise he has no opposite. But then the Doctor maintains,
that this Law requires not that Love and that Charity, that consists in this
sinless Perfection to the Justification of believers now, because they are not
under the law, but under Grace. And if our Refuter be his Adversary in this,
let him try his School-skill, and answer our arguments, in a School-way, and
leave his begging of the question.

3. The loving God according to the Abilities and advantages we shall have in
heaven, when we shall see God face to face, is the Perfection of Saints, and
those of the Church -Triumphant, not the duty of Christians and those of the
Church Militant, more then sincerely to endeavor after it, and by comparing
their weakness with the uprightness of the Law, and the Perfection of this
Love, they may have wherewithal to humble them, and long for, and to fly to
Ckrists Righteousness, and Mediation, and Gods Mercy. And though our Refuter
bring after the Authorities of Austin, Bernard, Aquinas, and Scotus, to prove
that to this we Christians are obliged by the Law, yet I shall demonstratively
prove anon, that they say it not, but the contrary: and so our Refuter stands
alone, and naked, like the Shrub on the point of a Rock, or the top of a Mast
in open Sea in a storm, that has nothing to succor it.

4. That there is no one degree in this Quality and Grace of holy love, so
high, beyond which there can be no higher, or it cannot go, but it must cease
to be love, and become somewhat else: and consequently we cannot be obliged to
love God in any one degree precisely, much less in the eighth degree which is
the highest, as our Refuter and Master Cawdrey maintain.

5. That believers by this old, this new Commandment of Love (as Mat. 22. 39.
Joh. 13. 34.
our Savior and S. John 1 John 2. 7, 8. 2 John 4. 5.
calls it) are obliged to Love God to the utmost of their Power, and sincerely
to endeavor to grow more in grace and the knowledge of our Lord, that so they
may be enabled still to love him the more. The only measure of love here being
to love him without measure, not fixing upon any bounds or limits of love. And
this is that the Doctor and the most learned of Protestants maintain and let
him see if he can disprove it, and make what advantage he can by it.

. 40. But now though all this is said and demonstratively proved, I must tell
our Refuter, that all this is nothing to the present controversy depending
between him and the Doctor: I must grant it indeed, to be very useful in it
self, and very fit to be known, and better considered, then oftentimes it is.
And in this respect I thank our Refuter for his digression, that has thus
occasioned mine. And withal I must add, that though all were granted which
now he contends for, it would no whit at all concern the Doctors assertion:
Because the Doctor expressly in very many places, especially in the defense of
his Treatise of Will Worship, professes not to speak of sinless perfection, but
of the sincerity of this or that virtue or Grace, in this or that performance,
when he says, it consists in a latitude, and admits of uncommanded degrees.
And so much for his first reason. I follow him to the next.

SECT. 28.
His Second Reason proves not, yet granted. God by more Obligations, then he
expresses, to be Loved. Acknowledged by the Doctor. This Love infinite. Not
Positively and Categorematice, but Negatively and Syncategorematice,
Acknowledged by Bellarmine and others. Hinders not Freewill-offerings of Love.
These asserted by Bishop White. Doctor not confuted, though Bellarmine may.
Bellarmine and Ames at no great odds here. Concerns not the Doctor. Refuters
Artifice censured. Doctors Comfort and Precedent in this Persecution of the
tongue.

1. HIs second Reason, whereby he undertakes to evince, that this Commandment
enjoyneth a most intense actual Love of God, a love of God with as high a
degree as is possible to the humane Nature, now follows, and it is this.

JEANES.
A most intense Love of God, a love of him with the utmost of our forces and
endeavors is due unto God, debito connaturalitatis, and debito gratitudinis.
1. Debito connaturalitatis, by an obligation of congruence, for it is fitting
that we love him as much as we can, who is infinitely good in himself, and
therefore the chief good and supreme end of man. The Protestants are brought in
by Bellarmine de Monach. l. 2. c. 13. thus objecting against their Popish
Evangelicall counsels of perfection, that he that is unwilling to love God as
much as he can, does hereby deny, to wit, virtually and interpretatively, that
God is the chief good of man, and whereas he is so bold in his answer to
affirm, that non requiritur ut quis summum bonum tam ardenter amet, quam forte
posset; Ames has hereunto a round and acute reply, tum non requiritur, ut in
bonum omni ratione summum feramur affectu omni etiam ratione summo. 2. This
most intense Love of God is due unto God by an obligation of gratitude, for
hereby (as Doctor Francis White against Fisher out of Bernard) we are indebted
and owe to the Almighty, omne quod sumus, and omne quod possumus, whatsoever we
are, and whatsoever we are able to do.

. 2. To this I answer, First, that this is not the Conclusion that he undertook
to make good. For he promised to evince by these following Reasons, That this
commandment enjoyneth a love of God, with as high a degree as is possible unto
the humane Nature, which this Proof no way reaches. For it is one thing to love
God with our utmost forces and endeavors, and as much as we can, and another
thing to love him with as high a degree as is possible to the humane nature.
The former may be, and is obligatory to the Christian, though this latter is
not.

. 3. Secondly, I therefore answer, That all is granted that this Argument
contends for.

. 4. Obliged we are not only by an obligation of congruence, and gratitude,
but also by many other obligations, not here named, to love God with a most
intense love, with the utmost of our forces and endeavors. The Doctor grants
and expressly proves it, by the Testimony of the son of Syrach, Ecclus. 43. 30.
When you glorify God the Lord, exalt him as much as you can, and when you
exalt him put forth all your strength, for you can never go far enough. i. e.
says the Doctor, how far soever you exceed the Particular command you are yet
within the compass of the general (one of love he means) and in respect of
that can never be thought to have done enough, though the Particular Act or the
degree of it, be somewhat that you are not particularly obliged to. The words
are full and high, and to all the Argument pretends to.

. 5. Because God is infinite in perfection, infinitely good, and infinitely
amiable, we, that are finite in our Natures and Operations, can never love him
enough, and as much as he deserves; and because all our sufficiency is from
God, Natural gratitude, if there were no other Rule and Law, would oblige us
to employ all that strength and sufficiency in his service, from whom alone all
is derived. And because when we have done all we can, we should yet be short of
loving him sufficiently, and to the height of his worth and Perfection, still
labor we must, that we may yet more and more love him, and because this life
is too short, endeavor we may and must to be admitted into heaven, where we
may love him to the utmost height we can, or shall ever attain; and because we
cannot love him infinitely, as his goodness deserves, we yet may love him
eternally. Ratio diligendi Deum est Deus ipse, modus sine modo, says S.
Bernard sweetly, that never speaks otherwise. The only Reason, and Motive to
our Love of God, must be his own Goodness, and the only Measure of this Love,
must be Love without Measure. Because God is Infinite in Perfection, our Love
must also be Infinite; not absolutely, as God is, but only in a sort, that
befits our finite condition. Our Love must be infinite Syncategorematice as
they speak in the Schools, though Categorematice it cannot. That is, though the
word Infinite, cannot be predicated of our Love in casu recto, yet it may in
casu obliquo; though it cannot be Positively infinite, yet Negatively it may,
and must; though still it will be finite, yet it must have no set, no
determinate bounds and limits. Though our love cannot be infinite, yet we must
infinitely love him, love him in infinitum, and never think we can love him
sufficiently, and unto the utmost height, beyond which we neither can, nor need
to go. Our work and labor of love, must be like to the Arithmeticians
Operation in Progressive Multiplication. The further he goes on in his work,
the more is the Product, and the greater still his Task. And if this will
content our Refuter, he has mine and the Doctors free grant, and I hope in this
we shall be friends.

. 6. Nay if it were of any concernment, I undertake that Vid. Bellar. de
aetern. Foelicit. l. 3. c 8. de Gemit. Columb. l. 2. c. 3. etc. 10. Fran. de
Sales of the love of God. l. 3. c. 1. and l. 10. c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and alibi
passim. Jo. Eusebius. Nierembergius de Adorat. in Spiritu and veritate, l. 1. c.
9. l. 3. c. 6. l. 4. c. 4, 5, 9, 10, 12. and alibi passim.
Bellarmine, at least in his Meditations and Prayers will acknowledge it,
whatsoever he does, or shall do in his Polemicks, and if I find not this, and
much more then this in F. Sales of divine Love, and Nierembergius the Jesuit
in his book de Adoratione in Spiritu, and all the rest I have seen, that write
Sermons, and Commentaries, I am very much mistaken, and I shall not believe,
what I read with mine own eyes, and think that in a waking dream I read mine
own Protestant Phansies, and not the writings of Jesuits and Papists. But
because magna est veritas, and praevalebit, It is much for the honor and
Justification of the Protestant Doctrine, that even its adversaries and
opposers in their modest sober thoughts, in their more humble and mortified
considerations do approve, and acknowledge, what we so eagerly contend for.

. 7. If our Refuter shall here reply, that he has gained all he desires in this
one concession, and that then there can be no Nidabah, no free will offerings,
no uncommanded degrees of Love;

. 8. I shall answer, that I am very glad I have pleased him, and hope he will
think that I am no enemy to him, but only an opposer of Errors, a Lover of
Truth, and a defender of its Advocates and Patrons whether Master Jeans or
Doctor Hammond. But then withal I must add, that there must and will be
free will offerings, (...), to be found in the Law of Moses, which if he can
reconcile with his Argument, and Principles, I doubt not, but to reconcile this
very argument to the Doctors Exposition and Concessions. And indeed we have
already done it, or let our Refuter call in his School-abilities to help me.
For he I am sure as a Divine, and Expositor of Scripture, is bound to reconcile
the seeming contradictions of that, as well as the Doctor is bound to give an
answer to all Objections, that may or can be brought against his doctrine.

. 9. Indeed I am half persuaded that upon a serious review, and more settled
thoughts, our Refuter himself will acknowledge, that it is no very difficult
Task. For though it be granted, that a most intense actual Love of God is due
unto God, by an obligation of gratitude, because hereby (as Doctor Francis
White against Fisher out of Bernard) we are indebted and owe to the Almighty,
omne quod sumus, and omne quod possumus, whatsoever we are, and whatsoever we
are able to do; yet this B. White, Reply to Fishers answer, Point. 8.. 3. page
533. C.
Doctor Francis White, in the very same Treatise and Paragraph, does
acknowledge and grant unto the Jesuit, That a man may offer unto God a
Freewill offering, and yet herein he performs no more, then he is obliged
unto by the Law of gratitude.

. 10. No clashing then here betwixt Doctor Hammond and Doctor White, unless our
Refuter will make that learned man first to quarrel with himself, who
positively grants, and acknowledges that Truth which Doctor Hammond maintains.

. 11. But then, though Doctor Hammond is not confuted, yet thanks to our Ames,
Cardinal Bellarmine is confuted and confounded for all that.

. 12. And let him be so for me. I owe him not so much service to come with a
Candle and Lanthorn at Noon to find his Carcass at the foot of your divinity
chair. Nor have I taken Fee from any of his Party, to be an Advocate in his
cause. And I think they would but laugh at us both, If I should undertake to
make it good. Let him and his Party stand and fall to their own Master. I am
sure they are of Age, at least they pretend Antiquity enough, and therefore let
them speak for themselves.

. 13. Howsoever, I shall express my present hasty thoughts of both places, as
well Bellarmines, as Ames; that to me they seem not to be so opposite as our
Refuter would make his Reader believe, and that the difference between them is
rather in the expression, then the thing it self. And I believe that Bellarmine
will not refuse to subscribe Ames his Retort, and yet for all that Ames will
not deny but that Any men, all men are bound to aspire to the perfection of
holiness, not the Perfection of Martyrdom. Cawdreys triplex Diatribe. page 109.
Bellarmine speaks truth, when he says, all men are not bound to love God, so
as to be Martyrs, or Virgins, or what other else he calls states, or Acts of
Perfection. And yet this is all that Bellarmine seems (to me at least) to drive
at, and if it were worth the enquiry, I should be content to be taught this so
wonderful deep point, as the understanding a piece in Bellarmine. But the
Reader if he please may turn to Bellarmine de Monachis l. 1. c. 13. Col. mihi
350. D. E. 351. A. Amesii Bellarmin. Enervat. tom 2. lib. 4. c. 2,. 42. pa. 161.

. 14. But let Ames his Reply be as round and acute, as our Refuter thinks fit,
I shall be so far from envying that commendations the Author does deserve in
his pains against Bellarmine, that I love, and use to read him for it.

. 15. But what I pray is all this to Doctor Hammond? is Bellarmines Ghost by
any Pythagorean Metempsychosis transfused into the Doctor? or has the Doctor
wedded or embraced this saying of Bellarmine that Ames confutes? How then is he
concerned?

. 16. Without doubt, very much! For the vulgar Reader cannot choose but think
the Doctors opinion to be popishly affected, because our Refuter in his answer
to the Doctor so eagerly confutes Bellarmine, and urges against him Doctor
White and Doctor Ames.

. 17. It was an art of Cruelty practiced against the Primitive Christians, to
put them into the skins of Wolves and Bears, that they might be baited more
fiercely in the Theaters. And I remember to have read in Master Fox, of one of
our Martyrs that being condemned to the stake, was forced to his execution in a
coat all painted over with Devils, that so the rabble and multitude of
spectators might be moved by this dress so to loathe and hate the Person, as
not to take notice of his constancy and patience in his sufferings. And if our
Refuter had any such design, I must look upon it, as a very ungodly practice,
and a piece of Tyranny, not much inferior to that of Mezentius, to couple the
living and the dead, that the ill favor of Bellarmines name might poison the
Doctors living spotless repute, and kill it in the Breasts of those that read
him, but much more of those that read him not.

. 18. But if this was the design of our Refuter, I must tell the Doctor for his
comfort, that he has not only the Martyrs for his companions in this piece of
Persecution, but our Savior also for his pattern and president. He was
clothed in a purple Robe, and he had a Reed for a Scepter, and a crown of
thorns on his head, and they bowed the knee before him, and cried out hayl
King, though he always professed his kingdom was not of this world, and
commanded us to Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. But I go on, and
so does our Refuter.

SECT. 29.
His Authorities oppose not the Doctor, why urged by Protestants. Bellarmine
acknowledges the Places and Inference. But such Love simply impossible even in
Paradise. How Austin, Bernard hold it obligatory, how not; Bellarmine the
Refuters adversary. His Authorities from Aquinas, Scotus, His Charity to his
Reader. First, from Aquinas answered. His meaning. Bellarmine and he agreed.
Doctor and all Protestants will subscribe to this of Aquinas. His second from
Aquinas, Answered. Perfection of Life, state, according to Aquinas, not
Pertinent. Aquinas opinion summed up. Scotus, his manner of writing. How God
may be Loved above all things according to Scotus. Henriquez opposed by him.
Love melting strong. This Genuine, that a Passion sensitive. Scotus, Love of
God above all things Intensive, Extensive agreeable to Chamier. He rejects the
Reason grounded on Austin, Bernard. His Authority pruned. At large. Contrary to
the Refuters Inference from him. His sense cleared from D'Orbellis, Cavellus.
The sense of the old Schoolmen from Durand, Austin, and Bernard's opinion, the
same with Durands and the Doctors, Proved. How urged by Chamier. These Fathers
Opinion summed up. What Perfection required of Christians according to them.
What proposed. Refuters discourse impertinent. Distinction, Quatenus indicat
Finem, non quatenus praecipit Medium not invented by Bellarmine. Taken from
Aquinas. By whom used to expound S. Austin. Agreeable to Austin, Cajetan, for
Freewill offerings.

. 1. FRom Reason he comes now to Authority.

JEANES.
For the further confirmation of this point, Protestants allege the
testimonies of diverse of the Fathers, particularly Austin and Bernard, as also
of the ancient Schoolmen, who say this Command cannot be fullfilled in this
life, because it commands such a perfection of Love as is impossible to be
attained in this life. I shall not clog the Readers Patience, etc.

. 2. For the Confirmation of this Point. What Point, I pray, is this, Sir? Do
you not Antipheron like, of whom the Philosopher tells us, that having a fault
in his brain, the Organs of his sight still carried his own Reflection and
shape and effigies before him wheresoever he went? And do you not all along in
this controversy, still carry your own shadow, and Phantasm, that an Error in
your Intellectuals has created, before your thoughts? It is that point of your
own framing, that still runs in your head, and no assertion of the Doctors. For
he has so often expressly declared that he speaks not of sinless perfection,
when he says it admits of uncommanded degrees, but only of the sincerity of
this or that particular virtue or Grace in this or that Act or performance,
that I am ashamed so often to remind you of it.

. 3. And yet it is for the necessity of this sinless perfection, and complete
obedience to all Gods commandments, this perfect habit of Divine Love and holy
Charity that the Protestants in the Controversies about Justification by works
and Merit ex condigno, etc. do make use of these Authorities of Austin, and
Bernard, and the Schoolmen. But then this concerns not at all the Doctor, who
meddles not here with these controversies. Howsoever I observe it is
confutation sufficient to Doctor Hammond, and it is no less then one of
Hercules labors that the Protestants have alleged the Authority of Austin and
Bernard for the confirmation of this, which only flotes in our Refuters brain,
and is no where to be found in the writings of the Doctor.

. 4. But then as to the sayings pressed from Austin and Bernard, they are not
denied even by Bellarmine to be found Vid. Bellarm. l. 2. de Monachis cap. 13.
supra citat.
in those Authors, and withal, as may be seen in the former Quotation, he
acknowledges that the Inference is good, and that such a Perfection is not
attainable in this life.

. 5. But then our Refuter will never be able to prove that such a perfection of
love that is not only sinless, but Perfectly all Act, one interrupted,
constant, and eternal Act of divine love, and nothing else (which is the
Perfection they speak of) was ever commanded to Adam in Paradise, much less to
us Christians, that are not now under the Law and Covenant of works, but under
Grace, and the Mercy of the Gospel. Nor will he be ever able to prove that
either Austin, of Bernard did think that this was the sense of the Commandment
as it is obligatory to Christians.

. 6. What Austin? what Bernard? and the old Schoolmen ever think, that such a
Perfection of Love is commanded It is no part of our Creed, that God in the
Evangelicall Covenant severely exacteth of man any thing as necessary to his
Salvation, which is impossible for him to perform by the assistance of Grace,
and yet we say again, That God by the Rule of his Law commands a greater
perfection of righteousness then man is able to perform in this life, that all
flesh may be humbled by the sight of infirmity, and consider the gracious
indulgence of God in remitting sin, and his free bounty in conferring so great
and so many undeserved benefits. Pet. Martyr super Romans 8. Si quis recte
intelligat nostram assertionem facile videbit nos non docere mandata Dei
prorsus esse impossibilia, nisi tantum quod ad eos attinet, qui a Christo sunt
alieni. August. de Pecc. merit. and remiss. l. 2. c. 16. Jabet Deus omnibus
hominibus, ut non faciant ullum peccatum quamvis sit praescius neminem hoc
impleturum: ut quicunque impie and damnabiliter ejus praecepta contempserint
ipse faciat in eorum damnatione quod justum est: quicunque autem in ejus
praeceptis obedienter and pie proficientes, nec tamen omnia quae praecepit
implentes, sicuti sibi dimitti volunt, si aliis peccata dimiserint, ipse faciat
in eorum mundatione quod bonum est. White against Fisher point 8., 3. p. 533.
D. E.
us Christians, as is impossible to be obtained in this life? Is this the easy
yoke of Christ, whose burdens are not grievous? or were they so dull, and flat,
to say it was impossible, absolutely impossible I mean for such is that
Perfection that is not compatible with the state of a viator, whether in
Paradise, or the Church (that is hortus inclusus, a fenced garden and vineyard)
that is indeed the perfection and Crown and reward of the Saints triumphant in
heaven, (which now alone is that Church without spot or wrinckle) and yet be
commanded by God?

. 7. Commanded it may be, I grant in some sense, and it Vid. August. de spirit.
and li. tera cap. 36. per tot.
is so; not only proposed to our hopes and aims, but enjoined, as to our
endeavors, and striving for; and so run we must, as we may obtain it. But it
is not to be hoped for and gained, while we are here on earth, but only in
heaven.

. 8. And therefore you need not have clogged your Readers patience with
transcribing Quotations to this purpose. The case is plain enough, and no body
denies it, and Bellarmine (our only adversary all along, not Doctor Hammond)
expressly acknowledges it.

. 9. The only difference now between you and Bellarmine is, Whether this
commandment in the sense of Perfection and height, that Austin and Bernard in
those places, speak of, is obligatory to Christians? and that in this life they
either are, or, let me add, ever were, even in Paradise obligatory to mankind?
And since this is the mark let us now see the leap, since this is the true
state of the Question between him and his Adversary, whosoever it is, let us
now see his proof of it.

JEANES.
I shall not clog the Readers Patience with transcribing the several
quotations, because I believe he may have them almost in every Writer of
Controversies betwixt us and the Papists: only I shall trouble him with what I
conceive to be most remarkable in Aquinas and Scotus concerning this matter.
Aquinas secunda secundae. q. 44. art. 6. intendit Deus per hoc praeceptum Deuteronomy.
6. ut homo Deo totaliter uniatur; quod fiet in Patria, quando Deus erit omnia
in omnibus. 1 Cor. 15. and ideo plene and perfect in Patria implebitur hoc
praeceptum. And again, q. 184. art. 3. Non autem dilectio Dei and proximi cadit
sub praecepto secundum aliquam mensuram, ita ut id quod est plus, sub consilio
remaneat: ut pa et ex forma praecepti quae perfectionem demonstrat, ut cum
dicitur, diliges Dominum Deum ex toto cord tuo: totum enim and perfectum idem
sunt, sec. Phil. 3. Phys. and cum dicitur diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum:
unus. quisque enim seipsum maxim diligit. Et hoc ideo est, quia finis
praecepti charitas est, ut Apostolus. 1 Timothy 1. in fine autem non adhibetur
aliqua mensura, sed solum in his quae sunt ad finem, ut Philosophus dicit 1.
Polit, sicut medicus non adhibet mensuram quantum sanet, sed quanta medicina
vel diaeta utatur ad sanandum. Thus also Scotus l. 3. did. 27. dico igitur
quod illud praeceptum Deuteronomy. 6. non potest impleri in via, quantum ad omnes
conditiones, quae exponuntur per illas additiones ex toto Cord, and ex tota
anima, etc. quia non potest esse in via ista tanta recollectio virium ut amotis
impedimentis possit voluntas tanto conatu ferri, quanto possit, si vices essent
unitae, and non impeditae, and quod ad talem intensionem actus expulsis
impedimen. it is, and recollectis viribus debet intelligi dictum. Aug. and
Magistri, quod praeceptum illud non impletur in via; nam pronitas virium
inferiorum pro statu isto impedit superiores ab actibus perfectis. The first
that Bellarmine has to evade these Testimonies, etc.

. 10. Well Sir, because there can be no good Music in unison's, I cannot
commend your skill very much; you are still striking on one string; Forsooth,
the writers of Controversies betwixt us and the Papists. But though you are
very uncharitable to the Doctor in thus aspersing his fame, yet you are very
merciful to your Reader, in not clogging his Patience by transcribing those
quotations so every where to be had. Howsoever I must tell you, that you had
yet been more merciful, if you had spared those, that you have transcribed;
because indeed they are so little to the purpose. And if these wherewith you
say, you trouble the Reader, are the most remarkable that you conceive are to
be found in Aquinas and Scotus concerning this matter, you must give me leave
to tell you, that your Reading in those Authors is not very great, although you
are a School man, nor your Remarques and Recherches very deep, very pertinent
and Judicious. I doubt not but that I, in my slender observation, and small
reading in those Authors, shall observe the quite contrary to what you labor
to persuade your Reader.

. 11. For your first quotation of Aquinas secunda secundae. q. 44. art. 6. I
must say, that if you had rendered it entire, and faithfully, as it lies in
Aquinas, it would have been answered, before it had been objected. I represent
it then at large. It is in Corp. thus. Dicendum quod praeceptum aliquod
dupliciter potest impleri, uno modo Perfect, alio modo imperfecte, Perfect
quidem impletur praeceptum, quando pervenitur ad finem quem intendit
Praecipiens: Impletur, sed imperfecte, quando et si non pertingat ad finem
Praecipientis, non tamen receditur ab ordine ad finem, sicut si dux exercitus
praecipiat militibus, ut pugnent, ille perfect implet praeceptum, qui pugnando
hostem vincit, quod dux intendit. Ille autem implet, sed imperfecte cujus pugna
ad victoriam non pertingit, non tamen contra disciplinam militarem agit.
Intendit autem Deus per hoc praeceptum (and this, this is the Passage our
Refuter insists on) ut homo sibi totaliter uniatur, quod fiet in Patria, quando
Deus erit omnia in omnibus. Et ideo plene and perfect in Patria implebitur hoc
praeceptum, in via autem impletur, sed imperfecte. Et tamen in via tanto unus
alio perfectius implet, quanto magis accedit per quandam similitudinem ad
Patriae perfectionem. The meaning of Aquinas is this. In every Precept or
command we are to consider the end of the Legislator, and the end of the Law.
This is the performance of the duty enjoined, which the Legislator commands, as
a means for the attainment of that end, which he himself did intend and aim
at, when he published the Law. For instance. A General intends and designs the
taking this city or that Fortress, and therefore he rallies up his Forces, and
commands them to storm it. They do so; and if they gain the City by assault,
the Commander has his end, which he first intended, when he gave the word of
command, and the soldier has done his duty, which was the end of the Precept:
but if they storm it, and are repulsed, though the General has missed his
Aim, yet the Soldier has not broken the Precept, and did as much as the
Commandment, though not as much as the Commander intended. It is just so in the
present case, according to Aquinas's doctrine. God, when he first made man,
intended to make him eternally happy by a full enjoyment, and sight and perfect
love of himself. But because he made him upright, and of a nature as well
capable of serving, as of enjoying his maker, he prescribed him a Law, as a
Means for the attainment of this happiness. The Law was, Thou shall Love the
Lord, with all thy heart, or as much as thou art able, and according to that
strength, and that grace I bestow upon thee (For God dwelling in inaccessible
light, cannot be known and loved by us any other way then as God enables us to
know and to love him) and then he promised to admit man to a clear sight and
full fruition, and perfect love of himself. This was Gods end when he first
made the Law; and our duty, and the end of the command it self was, that we
should love him to the utmost of that power and strength which he should give
us to love him. If therefore we consider the Perfection of that Love, and that
happiness, which God intended, we should arrive at by the enjoyment of himself
in heaven, this is man's duty to aim at, because it is his last end and the
perfection God intended to bring him to at first, when he made him. But then
because it is incompatible with our present state and Condition, as we are in
the body, God made it not the end of the Precept, though it was that which he
intended we should arrive at, though it were our last end and his design, when
at first he created us. For otherwise he had prescribed us an impossible duty,
that we should be happy in possession, and yet in the way to it; that we should
be present with him, and see him face to face, and yet be absent from him,
which implies a contradiction. And therefore he requires of us as our duty a
lower kind of love, a love suitable to our present state, that we should love
him as much as we can, and as much as he has enabled us to love him. This is
the end of the commandment, and the other Gods end, that enjoined the
commandment. That is our duty, and this our crown, and reward. This God
commands us to aim at, to labor for, and endeavor after, as much as we can
whilst we are in this life, and the way and means to it is the Performance of
this command in the loving him here according to our utmost abilities, and
endeavors. And this is not an impossible duty, but an easy yoke; a yoke yet
burdensome enough in regard of it self, but made facile and easy by the
assistance of Grace. And he that thus loves God with all his heart; though he
love him not so perfectly as the Saints do in heaven; yet in the Judgment, and
according to the Resolution of Aquinas, he loves him with that height and
perfection of love that the Law does require and look for, the end whereof is
only that we love God as much as we are able, in order to our last end and
happiness, and that we may gain that crown which God principally intended, when
he first did create us, and imposed the command upon us. He then that loves God
as much as he can, and according to the utmost of those abilities God gives him
in this his passage to heaven, fulfills this commandment, though he loves him
not so much as another does, to whom God has afforded more Grace, and more
strength and more abilities to love him. And he that now loves him with all his
heart to day, and so obeys the Command, may by the addition of more Grace be
enabled, and so obliged to love God more to morrow, because the Commandment
still in force indefinitely commands that we love God with all our strength
whatsoever it is. And thus he can never know by this Law an end of his labor,
and an end of his love, till he shall come to heaven, where he shall love God
as Perfectly, as God at first intended, when he shall arrive at the end, that
God aimed at in the enacting of the Law, and prescribing that inferior
growing, still increasing Love, as a duty and means, and way for the attainment
of the other.

. 12. And now that this was the meaning of Aquinas is very plain from this very
resolution. For he expressly here declares that the Love in this height of
Perfection is not compatible with our present state, but is the perfection of
the Saints in Patria, who love not God by way of duty and choice and obedience,
but by necessity of their glorified nature, and the beatificall vision.

. 13. This will further appear from his answers to the three Arguments, in this
very Article and Question. For thus he. Ad primum ergo dicendum, quod ratio
illa probat, quod aliquo modo potest impleri in hac vita licet non perfect.

Ad secundum dicendum, quod miles qui legitime pugnat, licet non vincat, non
inculpatur, nec poenam meretur, ita etiam qui in via hoc praeceptum non implet,
nihil contra divinam dilectionem agens, non peccat mortaliter. Ad tertium
dicendum quod sicut dicit Augustinus, in lib. de perfectione Justitiae. Cur non
praeciperetur homini ista perfectio quamvis eam in hac vita nemo habeat? Non
enim recte curritur, si quo currendum est nesciatur. Quomodo autem sciretur, si
nullis praeceptis ostenderetur. So again in the same Question. Art. 4. in
respons. ad Secundum, dicendum quod dupliciter contingit ex toto cord Deum
diligere, uno modo in actu: id est, ut totum cor hominis semper actualiter in
Deum feratur: and ista est Perfectio Patriae. Alio modo ut habitualiter totum
cor hominis in Deum feratur, ita scil: quod nihil contra Dei dilectionem cor
hominis recipiat: and haec est perfectio viae, cui non contrariatur veniale
peccatum, quia non tollit habitum charitatis, cum non tendat in oppositum
objectum, sed solum impedit charitatis usum. So again ibid. Ad tertium
dicendum, quod Perfectio charitatis ad quam ordinantur consilia, est media
inter duas Perfectiones praedictas, ut sc: homo quantum possibile est se
abstrahat a rebus temporalibus etiam licitis, quae occupando animum impediunt
actualem motum cordis in Deum. So again, 2. 2. q. 24. art. 8. Vtrum Charitas in
hac vita possit esse perfecta? And he determines it in the affirmative, from
the Authority of Saint Austin. The answer to it in Corpore is this. To this
very purpose see also 2 2. q. 184. art. 2. in Corp. and Cajetan. in loc.
Dicendum quod Perfectio charitatis potest intelligi dupliciter, uno modo ex
part diligibilis alio modo ex part diligentis. Ex part quidem diligibilis
perfecta est charitas, ut diligatur aliquid, quantum diligibile est. Deus autem
tantum diligibilis est, quantum bonus est. Bonitas autem ejus est infinita,
unde per hunc modum nullius creaturae charitas potest esse perfecta, sed solum
charitas Dei qua seipsum diligit. Ex part vero diligentis, tunc est charitas
perfecta quando diligit tantum, quantum potest. Quod quidem contingit
tripliciter: uno modo sic, quod totum cor hominis actualiter semper feratur in
Deum, and haec est perfectio charitatis Patriae, quae non est possibilis in hac
vita, in qua impossible est propter humanae vitae infirmitatem semper actu
cogitare de Deo, and moveri dilectione ad ipsum. Alio modo, ut homo studium
suum deputet ad vacandum Deo and rebus divinis, praetermissis aliis, nisi
quantum necessitas praesentis vitae requirit. Et ista est Perfectio charitatis,
quae est possibilis in via, non tamen est communis omnibus habentibus
charitatem. Tertio modo ita quod habitualiter aliquis totum cor suum ponat in
Deo, ita, scil: quod nihil cogitet vel velit, quod divinae dilectioni sit
contrarium. Et haec perfectio est communis omnibus habentibus charitatem. So
again in the following Article 9. Vtrum convenienter distinguantur tres gradus
charitatis, Incipiens, Proficiens and Perfecta? he resolves it in the
affirmative from the authority of Saint Austin. The Answer in Corp. is this.
Dicendum quod spirituale augmentum charitatis considerari potest quantum ad
aliquid simile corporali hominis augmento. Quod quidem quamvis in plurimas
parts distingui possit, habet tamen aliquas determinatas distinctiones,
secundum determinatas actiones vel studia, ad quae homo perducitur per
augmentum, sicut infantilis at as dicitur antequam habeat usum rationis, postea
autem distinguitur alius status hominis; quando jam incipit loqui and ratione
uti, iterum tertius status ejus est pubertas, cum jam incipit posse generare,
and sic deinde quousque perveniatur ad perfectum: ita etiam and diversi gradus
charitatis distinguuntur secundum diversa studia, ad quae homo perducitur per
charitatis augmentum. Nam primo quidem incumbit homini studium principale ad
recedendum a peccato, and resistendum concupiscentiis ejus, quae in contrarium
charitatis movent, Et hoc pertinet ad incipientes, in quibus charitas est
nutrienda vel fovenda, ne corrumpatur. Secundum autem studium succedit, ut homo
principaliter intendat ad hoc, quod in bono proficiat. Et hoc studium pertinet
ad proficientes, qui ad hoc principaliter intendunt, ut in eis charitas per
augmentum roboretur. Tertium autem studium est, ut homo ad hoc principaliter
intendat, ut Deo inhaereat, and eo fruatur, and hoc pertinet ad perfectos, qui
cupiunt dissolvi and esse cum Christo, sicuti etiam vidimus in motu corporali,
quod primum est recessus a termino, secundum autem est appropinquatio ad alium
terminum, Tertium est quies in termino.

. 14. And now I appeal to all the world, whether Aquinas be not a fit man for
our Refuter to build upon? For what one opinion of Vid. Davenant de Justit.
habit, and Act. c. 39. p. 458, 459. etc. 41. p. 469.
Perfection, and Merit, and Evangelicall Counsels, and supererogation is to be
found in Bellarmine that is not in Aquinas? Nay what one Argument or answer is
there that Chamier and Ames find fault with in Bellarmine in these very
controversies, that may not be matched, and indeed were not borrowed and
transcribed from Aquinas doctrine?

. 15. The truth is, Aquinas in these very places cited by our Refuter affirms
nothing but what even Bellarmine grants, and (if that may content him) Doctor
Hammond also will subscribe to even in these very places of Aquinas that our
Refuter has here cited. Bellarmine was too subtle, and the Angelical Doctor
(as they -- call him) had too Aquiline a wit, and eagle-ey'd Judgment to write
palpable contradictions. Indeed this opinion of the Cardinals in this
Particular is easily reconcilable with that of S. Austin; and Aquinas himself
has chalked him out the way. In this Aquinas and Scotus, and the old Schoolmen
and Bellarmine, let me add, and the Doctor, and all Protestants too (that
write not for Passion and Interest) agree, and all accord with S. Austin and
Bernard, who say the same with the Doctor and Bellarmine, and Aquinas and the
Schoolmen. And Truth is venerable and lovely from whose mouth soever it comes,
and a Prophet may be fed with that meat a Raven brings to him, nor is it
therefore polluted in the use, because an unclean bird has touched, or brought
it to us.

. 16. And therefore now being secure of the meaning of Aquinas, I shall not be
very sollicitous for an answer to your next Quotation from that Author. Indeed
if you had rendered the whole determination entire, the place would have
answered it self.

. 17. Thus then it lies at large, and let the Reader be judge how it advantages
your assertion. The Question is, Vtrum Perfectio consistat in Praeceptis, an in
Consiliis? For the determination of this question thus he answers in Corp.
Dicendum quod Perfectio dicitur in aliquo consistere dupliciter: uno modo per
se, and essentialiter: alio modo, Secundario and accidentaliter. Per se quidem
and essentialiter, consistit Perfectio Christianae vitae in charitate,
principaliter quidem secundum dilectionem Dei, Secundario autem secundum
dilectionem proximi, de quibus praecepta generalia divinae legis ut dictum est.
Non autem dilectio Dei and Proximi (this is the passage quoted by our Refuter)
cadit sub praecepto, secundum aliquam mensuram ita quod id quod est plus sub
Consilio remaneat, ut patet ex forma praecepti, quae perfectionem demonstrat,
cum dicitur, Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo (totum enim and
perfectum idem sunt secundum Philosophum 3. Phys. and cum dicitur, Diliges
proximum tuum sicut teipsum: unusquisque enim seipsum maxim diligit. Et hoc
ideo est, quia finis praecepti charitas est ut Apost. dicit, 1. ad Tim. 1. In
fine autem non adhibetur aliqua mensura, sed solum in his quae sunt ad sinem.
ut Philos. dicit in 1. Polit. sicut Medicus non adhibet mensuram quantum sanet,
sed quanta medicina vel diaeta utatur ad sanandum, and sic patet quod Perfectio
essentialiter consistit in praeceptis. unde Augustinus dicit in libro de
Perfectione Justitiae, Cur ergo non praeciperetur homini ista perfectio,
quamvis eam in hac vit a nemo habeat? Secundario autem and instrumentaliter
Perfectio consistit in Consiliis, quae omnia sicut and praecepta ordinantur ad
charitatem, sed aliter and aliter. Nam Praecepta alia a praeceptis charitatis
ordinantur, ad removendum ea quae sunt charitati contraria, cum quibus scil:
charitas esse non potest: consilia autem ordinantur ad removendum impedimenta
actus charitatis, quae tamen charitati non contrariantur. Sicut est
matrimonium, occupatio negotiorum secularium and alia hujusmodi: unde
Augustinus dicit, in Enchiridio. Quaecunque mandat Deus, ex quibus unum est,
Non moechaberis, and quaecunque non jubentur, sed speciali consilio monentur,
ex quibus unum est, Bonum est homini mulierem non tangere, tunc recte fiunt,
cum referuntur ad diligendum Deum, and proximum propter Deum, Et ideo est quod
in collationibus Patrum dicit Abbas Moses, Jejunia; vigiliae, meditatio
Scripturarum, nuditas ac privatio omnium facultatum non perfectio, sed
perfectionis instrumenta sunt, quia non in ipsis consistit disciplinae illius
finis sed per illa pervenitur ad finem. Et supra praemisit, quod ad
perfectionem charitatis istis gradibus ascendere nitimur. Thus Aquinas 2. 2. q.
184. art 3. in corp.

. 18. The sum is, that there is according to this Author a twofold
Perfection, The one of the Christian life, and the other of the Christian
state. The first consists in charity, and the loving God and our neighbors.
This has no bounds or limits, and let a man do here what he can, he can never
do enough, because charity is the end of the Precept, and no man deliberates
how much or how little he should obtain of his end, but simply to obtain it.
Now this being not acquirable in this life but only in the next, let us
endeavor as much as we can to come to the height of it, yet we shall never
attain it. Howsoever fit it was that it should be prescribed by the
commandment, that man might know what to aim at, and that he should labor to
attain his last end. But then as for that other Accidental perfection of
state, which is only isntrumental and subservient to the attainment of the
former, that remains under counsel, and contains uncommanded Acts, and has
uncommanded degrees, though the precepts of Charity toward God and our
neighbors have not. In these all men are absolutely obliged, and nothing
remains to counsel, and Freedom and discretion, but only in the other.

. 19. And what is all this to our Refuters design? How little let the very same
Aquinas tell him in his answers to the first, second, and third objections in
that very article. I shall only acquaint the Reader with the Second. Ad
secundum dicendum quod sicut Augustinus dicit in lib. de Perfectione Justitiae.
Perfectio charitatis homini in hac vita praecipitur, quia non recte curritur,
si quo currendum est nesciatur. Quomodo autem hoc sciretur si nullis praeceptis
ostenderetur? Cum autem id quod cadit sub praecepto diversimode possit impleri,
non efficitur transgressor praecepti aliquis, ex hoc quod non optimo modo
implet, sed sufficit, quod quocunque modo impleat illud. Perfectio autem
divinae dilectionis universaliter quidem cadit sub praecepto, ita quod etiam
perfectio Patriae non excluditur ab illo praecepto, ut dicit Augustinus, sed
transgressionem Praecepti evadit, qui quocunque modo perfectionem divinae
dilectionis attingit. Est autem infimus divinae dilectionis gradus, ut nihil
supra eum, aut contra eum, aut aequaliter ei diligatur. A quo gradu
Perfectionis qui deficit, nullo modo implet praeceptum. Est autem alius gradus
perfectae dilectionis qui non potest impleri in via, ut dictum est art.
praecedenti, a quo qui deficit manifestum est, quod non est transgressor
praecepti. Et similiter non est transgressor praecepti, qui non attingit ad
medios Perfectionis gradus, dummodo attingat ad infimum.

. 20. In short, he that shall read the first, second, third and fourth Articles
of this Question, shall find Aquinas opinion to be this.

1. That the Perfection and last end of man consists in that Love that wholly
unites man to God.

2. That this Love is not attainable in this life, because the state of this
life admits not possibly, that we should so love God, as the Saints in heaven
do, because they are at the end, and we but in the way to it.

3. That yet this Love though only attainable in the next life, is proposed to
our desires and aims; and commanded we are to endeavor after it, as much as
we can, because it is our Last end and Perfection.

4. That the best way to attain this Perfection, is to Love God as much as
possibly we can in this life, and because this Perfection of Love is man's Last
end, therefore he must never deliberate, how much he must love God, since that
agrees not to the end but the means, and consequently we must think, that we
can never love him sufficiently, or more then enough.

5. That therefore God commands us in this life by that great precept of
Charity, that we love him withal our heart, and strength and endeavor, and
that this is the duty of a Christian, required in that Commandment for the
attainment of that end that consists in a perfect union with God.

6. That because the abilities of men are diverse, and the callings and
conditions of men not alike, and the Gifts and dispensations of Grace variable,
and men's endeavors not always the same and equal in the use and employments
of those Talents, some may more perfectly fulfill the Commandment, and love God
more perfectly then others.

7. That he that attains the lowest degree of divine Charity that consists in
avoiding of all mortal sin, has fulfilled this commandment.

8. That this is the lowest degree of divine Charity and the fullfilling this
commandment.

9. That there is an accidental Perfection of state and calling that is
helpful and isntrumental to the attaining the highest degree of divine
charity attainable in this life.

10. That in respect of this state, there is something left to Evangelicall
counsel, and freedom, and choice; and that herein may be a freewill offering
of love unto God, and in this respect a man may do more for his sake, then God
requires by any Particular command.

11. That there is nothing left to Counsel and choice in the precepts that per
se and essentialiter concern the love of God, and our neighbor, but all we can
do in them, and our utmost endeavor to perform them is under the command.

12. That an absolute sinless perfection, and an uninterrupted act of divine
Love is the portion of the Saints, and not attainable in this life; and not the
duty of the Commandment, though the last end and happiness of the Man.

13. That the Christian perfection enjoined in this commandment, to be labored
after, and practiced by us in this life may consist with those they call
venial sins.

. 21. This and much more to this purpose may be found in that Author, and not
only in this Question, but also in the 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, etc. where he
handles the Questions of Charity at large; and with him agree the ancient and
the modern Schoolmen, as will be evident to any man that shall consult them.
And now how contrary these and the like assertions are to the design of our
Refuter, I shall leave any man to judge, and how much hand over head Aquinas
his authority was called in by him for his defense.

. 22. Nor is he more happy in his next quotation from Scotus, which place if
considered according to the scope of the Author fairly answers it self.

. 23. That subtle Doctor there disputes, utrum sit aliqua virtus Theologica
inclinans ad diligendum Deum super omnia? He affirms it, l. 3. sent. did. 27.
q. unica. In the handling this question, he delivers many profound, and acute,
and subtle, and yet very useful things; but then, according to his manner of
writing, he goes not on in an even course and method, but suddenly leaps from
one thing to another, which is the cause of his obscurity to those that read
him only en passant, with a more quick and transeent eye. For usually such
sublime acute wits that move in the highest orb, and so transcendent a Sphere,
like the fixed stars, they cast forth their light sparkling, and with a kind
of trembling scintillation. They are wits of a lower station that cast forth
their luster in one constant, even, orderly Ray. And though these, because they
are nearer to our apprehension, seem to have a more pleasant and far clearer
brightness, yet the other, though (by reason of their height and distance from
the eye) they seem to have a weaker and more inconstant trembling shine, and
not to give so much light in themselves, are stars of a far greater magnitude
and brightness, though to us they seem otherwise. But to come to the business.

. 24. That subtle Doctor. 16, 17. whence this quotation is borrowed, first
distinguishes, and says, God may be loved above all things. 1. Extensive, ita
ut plus quis diligat Deum quam omnia alia, and citius vellet omnia alia non
esse, quam Deum; that is, as others, God may be loved above all things
Objective, and Appretiative. 2. Intensive, quando quis ex majori affectu vult
Deo been quam alicui alteri. And then he resolves that all do agree that God is
extensively to be loved above all things, not any thing without God, nor all
things together equally and comparable to God.

. 25. But then as to the second member he says. Some (meaning Henriques and
others) do distinguish and say, that one love may be said to be more Intense,
and exceed an other; first, because it is ferventior seu tenerior, more tender
and melting and effeminately Passionate (a tumult in the affections, sometimes
enlargeing the heart with joy, and then strangling it: for some lovers have
dyed with it, as the Father at the news of his sons victories and triumph, and
sometimes contracting it, or melting it into tears.) Or secondly, because it is
fortior, sive firmior, of a more strong and masculine temper, and can make a
man bold as a Lion, and resolve to lose life and all things, and suffer the
utmost can be inflicted, for the great affection that is in it. And now when
Henriques and they had resolved, quod dilectio Dei, etc. that we must love God
above all things, quoad firmitatem, with a more manlike affection, so that
nothing may be able to draw or remove us from the love of Christ, yet it is not
necessary, that we should love God above all things with that Passionateness,
and ravishing, and tenderness of affection, because many are found, thus to
love the Creature, suppose their wives or their children more then God himself,
and yet would rather forsake wife and children, part with all things then
renounce God. And then secondly, because if thus both ways God may be loved
above all things, then the commandment Thou shall love the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy.
6. might be fullfilled in this life, contrary to what the Master and Austin and
Anselme determine, qui nolunt, quod hoc praeceptum sit nec quod teneamur illud
implere, sed quod implebimus.

. 26. Against this the subtle Doctor resolves that the masculine Love, that can
make us bold as Lions, and ready to die for Christ is the only true Love,
which is seated in the will, the other but a Gross material thing a Passion
of the sensitive appetite. And if any man love more tenderly and passionately
then others, and yet less firmly and strongly and valiantly, this proceeds not
from any height and excess of the true genuine intellectual love, but from a
mere effeminate and passionate delight, and melancholy temper or melting
complexion and disposition; as some Votaries and Recluses find many times more
ravishing joys in their contemplative course of life, then many more solid and
well settled and grounded Christians, that an hundred times more readily, and
cheerfully can suffer Martyrdom. A passion more frequently found in women then
in men, in newly recovered Penitents and Converts then well grown Christians,
nec dulcedo est actus voluntatis elicitus, sed passio quaedam actui retributa,
qua Deus allicit and nutrit parvulos, ne deficiant in via. The fragrancy of the
Apple, and the perfumes of the flaggons of wine wherewith Christ comforts his
beloved when she begins to swoon, and faint; the milk for new born babes, not
the strong meat for men.

. 27. And then secondly he resolves, God ought to be loved above all things as
well intensively as extensively, not only super omnia alia extensive, sed
etiam majori affectu quam aliquod aliud. Et dico majori simpliciter, quia scil:
magis repugnat effectui opposito, quia facilius posset inclinari ad oppositum
dilectionis cujuscunque alterius quam Dei, that is, if I rightly understand
him, according to Chamier, non solum comparate adres alias, sed etiam ad nos
ipsos, not only with a higher affection then that which we bestow on any thing
else (for that though the highest may be but low in it self) but also with an
affection as high as we can, because that is most opposite to sin, and most
repugnant to those effects and Acts that trash and hinder our love; and is
therefore most proper for this present state, wherein we are more easily
inclined to love sensual objects then spiritual, the creature, then God;
whence it follows, that we should love God, with such a height of affection,
that shall enable us and incline us with more readiness and ease to oppose and
withstand the love of any thing else, rather then the love of God.

. 28. And then he adds further, that the reason grounded on the authority of
Lumbard and Austin signifies nothing quia pari ratione fuisset dandum
praeceptum de visione Dei, non ut impleretur, sed ut sciremus quo esset
tendendum, cujus oppositum satis Patet, and they might have said as well that
there should have been a Precept to command us to see God face to face, not
that it should be fullfilled by us, but that we might know, whether to bend our
hopes and aims.

. 29. And now having thus plainly laid down all things, and fully cleared his
way he comes to give his resolution in the words our Refuter referrs to. But
then I must tell the Reader that he has pruned and pared off what makes against
himself, and is necessary to understand Scotus his opinion, and he has brought
him as well as he could to the size of his own Bed. Dico igitur quod illud
praeceptum extensive and intensive secundum viam praedictam potest impleri in
hac vita (which is the full resolution of the Question, according to the
Doctors exposition, and therefore these words were craftily left out by our
Refuter, lest he should be discovered by his Reader) sed non quantum ad omnes
conditiones, quae exponuntur per illas additiones ex toto cord, and ex tota
anima; quia non potest esse in vita tanta recollectio virium ut amotis
impedimentis possit voluntas tanto conatu ferri quanto posset, si vires essent
unitae, and non impeditae, and quoad talem intensionem actus expulsis
impedimentis and recollectis viribus debet intelligi dictum Augustini, and
Magistri, quod praeceptum illud non impletur in via, nam pronitas virium
inferiorum pro statu isto impedit superiores ab actibus perfectis. That is, we
are bound by the precept to love God above all things extensively and
intensively, and secundum viam praedictam, according to the exposition that we
have already given, it may be fullfilled (by Christians) in this life; although
it cannot be fullfilled according to all those conditions, which some
expositors give of those additions ex toto cord, the whole heart, and the
whole soul, etc. because there cannot be so great a recollection of strength,
that all impediments being removed, the will may so vigorously endeavor, as it
might, if the forces of the soul were all united, and not hindered: and
according to this intension, and fervor of the Acts of love, all impediments
being removed, and the strength and forces of the Soul being recollected and
joined, must the saying of Austin and Lumbard be understood, That this precept
is not fullfilled in this life. For the proneness of the inferior faculties
does for the present state hinder the superior from acting to a perfect
height. Thus Scotus.

. 30. And this is so far from serving our Refuters interest, that Scotus
directly resolves the contrary. For certain it is with him that nulla virtus
inclinatur ad actum impossibilem habenti, as he grants in his answer to the
second Argument. 21. And therefore he proving that according to S. Austins
exposition, it is simply, absolutely impossible to be observed in this life, he
must of necessity resolve the precept never aimed at it in the obligation. And
the Reader will consider that it is one thing to say, the precept cannot be
observed according to those conditions some give of it, and another thing to
say, that the precept obliges us to observe it, according to that, and those
conditions so given. This Scotus denies, and only affirms the former.

. 31. And so his Scholar and acute Epitomator understood him, Nicholaus
D'Orbellis I mean. For thus he in the Epitome Nic. D'Orbell l. 3. sent. did.
27. dub. 1. p. 24.
of the Question, where though he says it is Bonaventures answer, yet he gives
his Masters meaning. Quod amor Dei possidere totum cor potest intelligi
dupliciter, uno quod excludat omnem affectum contrarium: hoc est quod nihil
diligatur supra Deum, vel aequaliter cum Deo, and sic potest in hac vita
impleri per infusionem gratiae, quae est expulsiva omnis mortalis culpae, Deum
propter se and super omnia diligendo. Alio modo excludendo omnem affectum
extraneum, ita quod amor sic plene dominetur cordi, quod omnes motus Cordis per
amorem continue referantur in Deum, Et sic motus ille non obligat pro nunc ad
sui impletionem, secundum Augustinum, sed in illo praecepto exprimitur, quo per
amorem tendere debeamus, ut nemo se perfectum arbitretur, quousque illam
perfectionem fuerit assecutus. exponitur autem ab Augustino ex toto cord. i.
e. ex toto intellectu; ex tota anima, i. e. ex tota voluntate sine
contradictione; ex tota mente, i. e. ex tota memoria sine oblivione.

. 32. So also Scotus his Scholiast, H. Cavellus understood him. Scotus tantum
ait Deum super omnia amandum esse, extensive and intensive, sicut explicantur
haec ab aliis, id est tenerius and firmius, Deum plus caeteris amandum; quia
intensive illis duobus modis pro uno and eodem reputat, sed non dicit majore
Amore graduali eum esse amandum, sed solum majori affectu, ad quem sufficit
majoritas appretiativa, seu affectus magis exclusivus opposite. Praeterea 1. d.
1. q. 4. Et 3. d. 28. q. 1. in Report. ait quod eodem actu diligo Deum and
proximum, ergo non est hic comparatio unius ad alium. Item hac d. in Report.
loquens de dilectione intensiori Dei subjungit, non oportet hic amare Deum
super omnia, sc: illo modo.

. 33. And now having found the full meaning of Scotus from himself and his
followers, that best should know their Masters meaning, come we now to compare
the Inference of this subtle Doctor and our Refuter together. Scotus he thus
concludes. The Precept binds not us Christians to observe it in this life,
according to the strictness and exposition of S. Austin and others, because it
is impossible to be fulfilled in this life, according to those expositions. And
now our Refuter would conclude the quite contrary from Scotus. Thus, The subtle
Doctor says this precept cannot thus be observed in this life. And therefore
according to Scotus it obliges us in this strictness though it cannot be
fullfilled. And is not this Refuter a man of very rare Art, and
uncontradictible discourse, that by his all-commanding Logic is able to
conclude one contrary by another?

. 34. And now further to show how much our Refuter is mistaken in the sense of
Thomas and Scotus, I might add the consent of the ancient and the modern
Schoolmen, who all, at least that I have seen, in this unanimously agree with
the two great Masters, that divide the School between them. But I am quite
tired, and so I believe is the Reader. And yet for once I shall beg leave of
his patience to add Durands resolution, because of all the Schoolmen I have
read, he does it the most fully and distinctly, and with the least exception of
any.

. 35. First, l. 3. sent: d. 27. q. 2. he disputes utrum Amor Dei Bernard. l. de
diligend. Deum.
habeat modum? And resolves it in the Negative, from the Authority of S.
Bernard, Causa diligendi Deum est Deus ipse, modus autem, sine modo diligere.
And then he answers by a distinction, that in Actu dilectionis Dei potest
accipi triplex modus, sicut in Actu cujuscumque virtutis. 1. Secundum
limitationem Essentiae, and thus it is determined in its Essence, and has a
certain Modus, quia est in certo genere and certa specie, because it is in a
set predicament, and has a certain definition. 2. Secundum determinationem
circumstantiae and sic modum habet, quia malum oritur ex defectu debitae and
determinatae circumstantiae, bonum oritur ex causis integris. Determined it is
in respect of circumstances, because an Action becomes evil for want of its
due circumstances, and cannot therefore be good, unless it has all that are
required. 3. Quoad proportionem medii ad superfluum and diminutum, and sic non
habet modum: though virtues ordinarily consist in a middle point below which,
and beyond which, they cease to be virtuous, yet the love of God has no such
middle point or bounds

Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere,

But may be gradually intended and increased in infinitum. 1. Quia non potest
vitiari dilectio Dei per excessum per se loquendo, aut Deus nimis amari,
because it is impossible to love God too much, and offend him by excess of
affection, as properly considered. 2. Quia actus charitatis sequitur actum
fidei, nullus autem potest nimis credere in Deum, aut nimis inniti divinae
veritati. Because our Love is proportioned to our knowledge, and Charity
follows Faith, but we can never exceed in our faith and trust in God, or too
much rely upon the divine verity and Truth. In the next question, q. 3. l. 3.
d. 27. he enquires first, Quis sit ille modus quo jubemur diligere Deum, and
qualiter est intelligendus, and he resolves, art. 1. Intelligendum quod in modo
-- quo jubemur diligere Deum, quatuor includuntur, secundum quod patet ex
variis locis scripturae, sc: quod diligamus Deum, ex toto cord, and ex tota
anima, and ex tota mente, and ex tota virtute, quae est idem cum fortitudine,
unde in alio loco dicitur and ex fortitudine tua, and alibi ex omnibus viribus
tuis, quod est idem, and haec quatuor insinuantur, Mat. 22. Luc. 10. quamvis in
aliis locis scripturae aliqua horum omittuntur, hoc enim est, quia illud
omissum, ex aliis intelligitur. Ratio autem horum quatuor hic accipienda est ad
praesens, quia dilectio Dei de qua agimus actus est voluntatis, quae hic
significatur per cor. Nam sicut Cor, ut dicit, membrum materiale, est
principium omnium corporalium motuum; ita voluntas, quantum ad intensionem
finis ultimi, qui est objectum charitatis est Principium omnium actuum,
quarumcunque potentiarum, quae moventur a voluntate, hae autem sunt tres: sc:
intellectus, qui significatur per mentem; vis appetitiva inferior, quae
significatur per animam unde secundum eam dicimur agere vitam animalem; and vis
executiva exterior, quae significatur per fortitudinem seu virtutem seu vires.
Praecipitur ergo nobis ut tota intentio nostra feratur in Deum, quod est ex
toto cord diligere, and quod intellectus noster totaliter subdatur Deo, quod
est ex tota mente, and appetitus inferior reguletur secundum Deum, quod est ex
tota anima, and quod Actus noster exterior ordinetur ad Deum, quod est ex tota
fortitudine tua: i. e. virtute vel viribus Deum diligere. And this I hope will
please our Refuter. In the second Article, the question is An modus iste possit
in via totaliter impleri? And he resolves it by a distinction. Advertendum est,
quod sicut dicitur 3. Phys. totum and perfectum idem sunt, and ideo totaliter
diligere est perfect diligere: sicut ergo duplex est Perfectio ita duplex
totalitas; dicitur enim perfectum aliquid uno modo, quia nihil deest ei eorum
quae natum est habere; alio modo dicitur Perfectum, cui nihil deest eorum quae
debet habere secundum statum. Prima ergo Perfectio naturae humanae solum est in
gloria, quando natura habebit omnem Perfectionem, quam nata est habere. Sed
secunda Perfectio fuit in statu innocentiae, quando natura habuit quicquid
habere debuit secundum statum illum, and forte plus, quia habuit Justitiam
originalem gratuito naturae superadditam. Ab utraque autem Perfectione deficit
Perfectio, quam potest secundum cursum communem habere natura humana in statu
naturae corruptae, quia non potest totaliter vitare, quum incidat in aliquem
defectum rationis, saltem in aliquod peccatum veniale. Secundum vero hoc in
dilectione Dei potest attendi duplex perfectio and totalitas: una quando nihil
deerit de his quae homo potest expendere in amorem Dei, quin totum semper and
in actu in dilectione Dei ponat, and haec perfectio seu totalitas non ponitur
nobis sub praecepto pro statu viae quia nobis non est possibilis, status enim
viae non compatitur continuationem in actu, sed implebitur in Patria quando
semper Beati videbunt Deum, and diligent ipsum, and omnia in ejus dilectionem
referent ut in sinem. Alia est totalitas vel Perfectio secundum quam homo nihil
subtrahit de his quae debet ponere in dilectione Dei, and haec perfectio seu
totalitas non excludit interruptionem actus, nec amorem cujuscunque alterius a
Deo, etiamsi actu non ordinetur in Deum, dum tamen non sit contrarium vel
repugnans charitati, sicut est peccatum veniale, and haec totalitas praecioitur
nobis, ut nunc implenda, and constat quod impleri potest, quia homo diligit
Deum totaliter ex toto cord, etc. quicunque vitat omne peccatum mortale, quod
solum est charitati contrarium: sed quilibet homo hoc potest pro statu viae
facere: ergo, etc.

. 36. According to this he shapes his answers to the objections. Ad primum ergo
dicendum, quod Deus potest in via amari totaliter nisi quod disting uendum est
de totalitate dilectionis: hoc enim potest sumi vel ex part rei dilectae, and
sic totaliter diligitur res illa, cujus nihil est quod non diligatur, and sic
cum nihil sit in Deo quod non possit ab homine diligi Deus potest hoc modo
totaliter amari and in via and in Patria sed perfectius in Patria, sicut and
perfectius cognoscitur: and sicut dictum est de amore, sic intelligendum est de
cognitione. Alio modo potest sumi hic totalitas ex part diligentis, and sic
potest Deus totaliter diligi, and diligitur ab his qui sunt in Patria, qui
nihil de potestate sua subtrahunt, quin totum ponunt in dilectione Dei semper
and secundum actum: in via vero non sic potest diligi, sed solum secundum
habitum modo, quo est expositum, quod solum cadit pro nunc sub praecepto. Alio
modo potest sumi talis totalitas ex regulatione dilectionis ad diligibile, and
sic totaliter diligitur illud cujus bonitati aequatur quantitas dilectionis:
and sic Deus non potest diligi ab alio quam a seipso. And then to the second he
answers. Quod illud argumentum been probat, quod Deus non potest in via diligi
totaliter vel perfect prout totalit as vel perfectio excludit omnem defectum:
sed illud ut dictum est non cadit sub praecepto, potest tamen totaliter diligi
totalitate excludente omne repugnans and contrarium and hoc sufficit ad
impletionem praecepti. His reasons of this determination are first, quia nullus
potest ligari ad illud quod est sibi impossible. 2. quia actus charitatis est
magis necessarius in via, quam actus aliarum virtutum secundum illud, 1 Cor.
13. si charitatem non non habuero, etc. And since the Acts of all other virtues
may be performed, therefore much more the Acts of the Queenvirtue and grace,
without which all the rest are nothing; and since no Law obliges to that which
is simply now impossible, and yet we are obliged to love God, with all the
heart, while we are here in the body. It follows that we may so love God, as we
are bound to love him, which can only be according to the sense and exposition
above given. So Durand.. in contrarium arguitur. G.

. 37. But there is one thing more which I had almost forgotten to take notice
of in that Author. It is in his answer ad secundum in the former question.
Dicendum quod ^.
similem modificationem habet actus charitatis, sicut actus sidei, quia uterque
habet duas primas modificationes, and neuter Tertiam, saltem respectu
principalis Objecti, quod est Deus, quamvis fides respectu objectorum
secundariorum possit habere superfluum and diminutum and medium, potest enim
aliquis plus credere quam oportet, and minus quam oportet, and secundum quod
oportet, and sic est in actu charitatis, non quidem respectu Dei, sed respectu
aliorum: potest enim aliquis diligere propter Deum minus quam oportet, ut si
diligat propter Deum tantum amicos, and magis quam oportet, ut si malos in
malitiis suis, sic enim diligendi sunt homines, ut non diligantur eorum
errores, secundum Augustinum, and quantum oportet, ut cum diligitur Deus, and
omne bonum propter ipsum, ut ad Deum ordinatur. Thus far that good old
Schoolman.

. 38. And now let our Refuter consider and compare this with Aquinas and
Scotus, and then tell me whether there be not an exact harmony between them.
Nay let him tell me, what there is in all this determination he can justly find
fault with. I only except that passage, where he says, We are not bound by
this Law to avoid venial sins, whilst we are in the way to heaven. And yet if
this had been rightly expressed or understood according to the mind of the
Author, perhaps our Refuter might be persuaded not to condemn it. If then our
Author had said, that though by reason of our lapsed condition, it is
impossible we should arrive at an absolute sinless perfection, yet bound we are
by that Law to endeavor as much as in us lies to labor after this perfection,
and the shunning of all sin whatsoever, whether venial or mortal, which if we
sincerely labor after, and do not attain it, (as we possibly cannot now in
this present state) yet according to the Grace and Mercy and Tenor of the
Gospel Covenant through Faith and Repentance we shall be accepted in Christ, as
if we had actually arrived to this sinless perfection, I see not how our
Refuter could find fault, or else better state and determine the question then
this Author has done.

. 39. And now if it appear, that this was the sense of S. Austin and Bernard in
those very places that our Refuter himself hints at, I hope he will then the
less blame D. Hammonds opinion for the future; because it so exactly comes up
to the mind of those Authors he would have the Doctors opinion to be measured
by. And this is our last Task. And for this I shall only appeal to those very
places that Chamier himself has thought fit to urge against Bellarmine.

. 40. And first we shall enquire from S. Austin, what is, and ought to be by
this Law the Measure of our Love of God. And for this Chamier urges this l. 1
de Doctrina Christiana, c. 22. and he calls it luculentissimam disertissimamque
authoritatem. Chamier.
It is the very same that the Master of the Sentences has quoted to this very
purpose, l. 3. Sent. d. 27. E. de modo diligendi Deum. Haec regula dilectionis
divinitus constituta est. Diliges, inquit proximum tuum sicut teipsum, Deum
vero ex toto cord, and ex tota anima, and ex tota mente: ut omnes cogitationes
tuas, and omnem vitam, and omnem intellectum in illum conferas, a quo habes ea
ipsa quae confers: Quum autem ait toto cord, tota anima, tota mente, nullam
vitae nostrae partem relinquit, quae vacare debeat, and quasi locum dare, ut
alia re velit frui. Sed quicquid aliud diligendum venerit in animum illuc
rapiatur, quo totius dilectionis impetus currit. Thus far S. Austin. And thus
also the Doctor, as has already been demonstrated, and it shall be readily
subscribed by me what Chamier adds. Ex his quis non videt olim Christianis
persuasissimum fuisse debere se ita Deum amare, non tantum ut ei nihil
anteponatur, quod Bellarminus tanquam in Deum liberalissimus concedit, sed
etiam ut totus in amore Dei occupetur? Chamier Tom. 3. l. 6. c. 12.. 33. 34. p.
191.

. 41. Vid. August. Enchirid. cap. 121.
It cannot be denied, but that by this Law of holy Love we are bound to labor,
as much as in us lies, to please God in all things, to mortify every even the
least sin, and wicked thought and inclination, to repent, amend, and employ all
that is within us and without us in Gods service, so that whatsoever we do,
must all be done by us to the glory of God. And as this is the most that S.
Austin here in this place requires, and Chamier presses against Bellarmine, so
it is acknowledged in terminis by the Doctor, as has been proved, and our
Refuter may make what advantage he can by it, and he shall have my most hearty
leave and concession.

. 42. But there be two other places quoted by the same learned Chamier tom. 3.
l. 11. c. 14.. 1. which perhaps our Refuter may think more for his advantage.

. 43. The first is taken from the same S. Austin l. de perfectione Justitiae
responso 15. Peccatum est, cum vel non est charitas quae esse debet, vel minor
est quam debet, sive hoc voluntate vitari possit, sive non possit.

. 44. And this shall as easily be assented to by me as the Former, For without
doubt, it must needs be a sin, when any man performs not, what Gods Law
requires, whether it be now by reason of Original Sin in his power to fulfill
it, or whether by bad customs, and evil habits he has further rendered
himself unable to perform, what the Law requires. For thus the words The whole
passage in S. Austin lies thus. Peccatum est autem cum vel non est charitas,
quae esse debet, sive hoc voluntate vitari possit, sive non possit: quid si
potest, praesens voluntas hoc facit, si autem non potest, pr^ terita voluntas
hoc fecit: and tamen vitari potest, non quando voluntas superba. laudatur, sed
quando humilis adjuvatur. Augustine. de perfect. Justit. c. 6. respon. ad
Ratiocinat. 15.
may be (as they lie in that passage) expounded, unless our Refuter can show
from some other place in that Father, that he meant more then this. But then
what is the obligation of the Law, and the duty required by it, Saint Austin
determines not here. And therefore we must look further.

. 45. For this the learned Chamier insists on a passage taken out of his 29.
Epistle, and M. Cawdrey has borrowed it from him, and so does our Refuter. it
is this, Charitas quamdiu augeri potest, profecto illud, quod minus est quam
debet, ex vitio est. Ex quo vitio non justificabitur in conspectu Dei, omnis
vivens: propter quod vitium, si dixerimus quod peccatum non habemus nosmet
ipsos seducimus. To this I shall say nothing at present, but only that D.
Hammond in his answer to M. Cawdrey's Triplex Diatribe has abundantly answered
it. And because our Refuter has made use of it in his next Section, I shall
refer the Account of it unto its proper place.

. 46. We come now to enquire into S. Austins opinion concerning the obligation
of this Precept, and to examine whether he thought it may be fullfilled; or
whether he resolves that it does oblige believers now under the
Gospell-Covenant, in that sense he determines it cannot be fulfilled. And this
is the only business of moment to be insisted on, to satisfy to the full all
the pretenses of our Refuter.

. 47. And for this there are but two places produced by Chamier, and they are
both the same which Peter Lumbard makes use of in the distinction formerly
quoted. F. de impletione illius mandati, and, G. Quaest. de Praecepti Ratione.
The first is taken out of S. Austin de Spirit. and Litera. c. 36. sed fortasse,
quispiam putaverit nihil nobis deesse ad cognitionem Justitiae, quod Dominus
verbum consummans and brevians super terram, dixit in duobus praeceptis totam
Legem Prophetasque pendere, nec ea tacuit sed verbis apertissimis prompsit:
Diliges inquit Dominum Deum ex toto cord tuo, and ex tota anima tua, and ex
tota mente tua: and diliges proximum tuum tanquam teipsum. Quid verius his
impletis impleri omnem justitiam? veruntamen qui hoc attendit, etiam illud
attendat, quam in multis offendimus emnes, dum putamus Deo, quem diligimus,
placere, vel non displicere, quod facimus: and postea per scripturam ejus sine
certa and perspicua Ratione commoniti, cum didicerimus, quod ei non placeat,
poenitendo deprecamur ut ignoscat. Plena humana vita est documentis talibus;
unde autem minus novimus, quid ci placeat, nisi quia and ipse minus notus est
nobis? Videmus enim nunc per speculum in aenigmate, tunc autem facie ad faciem.
Quis vero existimare audeat, cum eo ventum fuerit, quod ait, ut cognoscam,
sicut and cognitus sum, tantam Dei dilectionem fore contemplatoribus ejus
quanta sidelibus nunc est? aut illo modo hanc illi tanquam de proximo
comparandam? Porro si quanto major notitia, tanto erit major dilectio: perfecto
tunc quantum deest dilectioni, tantum nunc perficiendae justitiae deesse
credendum est. Sciri enim aliquid vel credi, and tamen non diligi potest:
diligi autem, quod neque scitur, neque creditur, non potest. At si credendo ad
tantam dilectionem sancti pervenire poterunt, qua certe majorem in hac vita
esse non posset Dominus ipse testatus est, ut animam suam pro fide and
fratribus ponerent: cum ab hac peregrinatione in qua per fidem nunc ambulatur,
perventum erit ad speciem, quam nondum vitam speramus, and per patientiam
expectamus, procul dubio and ipsa dilectio, non solum supra quam hic habemus,
sed long supra quam petimus, and supra quam intelligimus, erit: nec ideo tamen
esse plus poterit, quam ex toto cord, ex tota anima, and ex tota mente: neque
enim restat in nobis aliquid, quod addi possit ad totum; quia si restabit
aliquid, illud non erit totum. Proinde hoc erit primum praeceptum Justitiae quo
jubemur diligere Deum ex toto cord, ex tota anima and ex tota mente, cui est
de Proximo diligendo alterum consequens, quod in illa vita complebimus, cum
videbimus facie ad faciem. Sed ideo nobis hoc etiam nunc praeceptum est, ut
admoneremur, quia fide exposcere, quo spem praemittere, et obliviscendo quae
retro sunt, in quae anteriora nos extendere debeamus. At per hoc quantum mihi
videatur in ea quae perficienda est Justitia multum in hac vita ille profecit,
qui quam long sit a Perfectione justitiae proficiendo cognovit. And a little
after, Ad illam vitam jam immortalem pertinet, Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex
toto cord and ex tota anima tua and ex tota virtute: ad hanc autem, non regnet
peccatum in vestro mortali corpore ad obediendum desideriis ejus. The second
place in the same Saint Austin that the learned Chamier urges. 3. is taken from
his Treatise de perfectione Justitiae ad Ratiocinationem 17. In plenitudine
charitatis Praeceptum illud implebitur, Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex toto
cord, and ex tota anima tua, and ex tota mente tua. Nam cum est aliquid
carnalis concupiscentiae, quod vel continendo fraenetur, non omnimodo ex tota
anima diligitur Deus. Non enim caro sine anima concupiscit, quamvis Caro
concupiscere dicitur, quia carnaliter anima concupiscit. Tunc erit justus sine
ullo omnino peccato, quia nulla lex erit in membris ejus repugnans legi mentis
ejus, sed prorsus toto cord, tota anima, tota mente diliget Deum, quod est
primum summumque praeceptum. Cur ergo non praeciperetur homini ista Perfectio,
quamvis eam in hac vita nemo habeat? Non enim recte eurritur, si quo currendum
est nesciatur: quomodo autem sciretur, si nullis praeceptis ostenderetur? Thus
far S. Austin as he is quoted by Chamier. The Testimony of Bernard follows, in
Cantic. sermon. 50. si placet tibi magis de affectuali charitate datum fuisse
mandatum, non inde contendo, dummodo acquiescas and tu mihi quod minime in vita
ista ab aliquo hominum possit adimpleri. Quis enim sibi arrogare id audeat,
quod Paulus ipse fatetur non comprehendisse? Nec latuit praeceptorem praecepti
pondus hominum excedere vires; sed indicavit utile ex hoc ipso, suae illos
insufficientiae admoneri, and ut scirent sane, ad quem Justitiae finem niti pro
viribus oporteret. Ergo mandando impossibilia, non praevaricatores fecit
homines sed humiles, ut omne os obstruatur, and subditus fiat omnis mundus Deo:
quia ex operibus Legis non justificabitur omnis caro coram illo. Accipientes
quippe mandatum, and sentientes defectum, clamabimus in coelum, and miserebitur
nostri Deus: and sciemus in illa die, quia non ex operibus Justitiae, quae
fecimus nos, sed secundum suam misericordiam salvos nos fecit. Thus far S.
Bernard as he is cited by Chamier. And as I must acknowledge the truth of those
two excellent Fathers doctrine all along in them, so I must acknowledge that as
they are urged by us against the Popish Doctrine of Merit ex condigno,
Justification by works, and supererogation, and the fulfilling of the Law
according to this perfect rule of Righteousness and the Covenant of works, they
are unanswerable, and I must also say with Chamier, Magnum hoc and inevitabile
telum est, senserunt adversarii momentum. Itaque omnem movent lapidem ut
eludant. Chamier tom. 3. l. 11. c. 14.. 1, 2, 3, 4.

. 48. But then I must add, that this nothing concerns the Doctors opinion, and
as little the Schoolmen, and that there is little or no difference between
theirs and Saint Austins and Bernards opinions, as the Reader will soon
perceive, if he be pleased to compare them.

. 49. All that is said in those passages, or that (as I conceive) can be
rationally inferred from them, I shall briefly sum up in these Theoremes.

1. That the Law of God is the perfect Rule of Righteousness.

2. That Perfection of Righteousness consists in an exact and sinless obedience
and conformity to this Rule.

3. That no man can be Justified by this Law according to the Covenant of works
that does not thus perfectly observe it.

4. That our Savior has briefly summed up this Perfection of Righteousness,
and the whole drift of the Law in these two precepts. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, etc. and our neighbors as our selves.

5. That he that perfectly keeps these has fulfilled all Righteousness.

6. That in our lapsed condition we do not, we cannot so observe it, because
experience, and Scripture teach us, that in many things we offend all.

7. That though we do not, we cannot now observe it, yet by Faith and
Repentance promised in the Gospel, according to the tenor of the second
Covenant we shall find mercy and grace.

8. That even Adam in innocence, though he had persevered in that state, could
not have arrived to the utmost perfection of Love, that is contained in those
precepts, because,

9. This utmost perfection of love depends upon a clear intuitive knowledge of
God.

10. That here we walk by Faith, and hereafter only in heaven we shall walk by
fight, where only we shall know as we are known.

11. That since our Love depends upon our knowledge of God, and the more that
increases, the more will our Love, then so much must be wanting to the
perfection of our Love as is wanting to this knowledge.

12. That though the utmost perfection of Love, that a Saint now in via and in
his Pilgrimage to heaven can arrive at, consists, as our Savior himself
testifies, in laying down our lives for the faith and the Brethren, yet that
perfection of love that the Saints now enjoy in heaven, and we hope and
patiently look for, far exceeds this, and all else that we can pray for, or
understand. And yet,

13. This love of the Saints now made perfect in heaven is no more, then what
is contained in this Precept; it is no more then a love of God with all the
heart, etc. Because nothing can be added to that which is perfectly the whole,
and if any thing might be added, as yet it were not the whole. And therefore

14. This of loving God with all the heart is the first great precept of that
all full all perfect righteousness, and the second it like unto it; and they
shall both then be perfectly fullfilled by us when we come to heaven, where we
shall see God face to face.

15. That this perfect Rule of righteousness and love, though it cannot be
fullfilled in our lapsed estate according to the perfection of innocence, much
less according to the perfection of glory, yet it was imposed upon us for this
end, that we might know what to aim at, and hope for, and endeavor after, as
much as we can, and forgetting what is behind, we might earnestly press toward
the mark set before us.

16. That this love in this utmost height and perfection which the Saints now
enjoy belongs not to sinners, but Saints, not to this frail mortal life, but
that other which is immortal.

17. That the righteousness and Perfection of Charity that belongs to believers
in this life, is, that we strive against sin, and suffer not sin to reign in
our mortal bodies that we should obey it in the lusts thereof. And therefore

18. Since this sinless perfection of Charity much less that Perfection of
glory is not possible to be attained by us in this our lapsed estate, God
imposed this impossible command on us (who well knew our frailty, and the
moment and weight of this Law) not to judge us by it as transgressors at the
last day, but only to humble us, and that every mouth might be stopped, and
the world be convinced, that by the works of the Law no flesh can be justified,
but that reading our own weakness, and frailties, and miseries, and sins, and
wants in this perfect Law, we might come to the throne of Grace, to find Grace
to help in time of need, from him in that day, who then not by works of
righteousness which we have wrought, but according to his mercy must, and will
save us.

19. That God saw it reasonable, even in this lapsed estate, to prescribe us
this rule of Perfection, though no man can attain unto it, that we might know
the end of our race, and the crown and reward of our endeavors, which awaits
us at the end of the Goal, and to what perfection of righteousness and
holiness we should aim at, and endeavor, and labor after, and consider not
what we yet have attained, and then lazily sit down, as if we had done
sufficiently, but still look forward, and consider what yet we want.

20. That he is the greatest proficient in this School of Perfection, and has
arrived highest to it, that considering the excellency of the mark set before
us, does humbly acknowledge how much he is short of it, and still labors to go
higher, so long as he continues in the race and way to it, so long as he is a
stranger and Pilgrim on earth and a traveller toward heaven.

. 50. This is the utmost those two Fathers drive at, and I desire our Refuter
to sit down, and consider, whether he can possibly make more of them then here
I have done. And if this will content him, I shall here subscribe to the truth
of every Theoreme, and so will the Doctor. Indeed there is nothing here, but
what is fully contained in the Doctors writings, especially in the Practical
Catechism, as the Reader will soon perceive, if he be pleased only to review
the places already quoted. And if Bellarmine, or any Papist else, deny the
truth of any one of these, or maintain any thing contrary to them, I shall lend
our Refuter my helping hand, if he will accept of such poor assistance, to
oppose him in his errors.

. 51. But then for all that I must tell him, that he will never be able to
prove, that S. Austin or Bernard ever imagined or determined, that this Law of
Perfect righteousness and love, according to the strictness of the Covenant of
works, much less according to the Perfection of Glory, is the rule whereby God
will Judge or absolve believers at the latter day, because they are not under
the Law but under Grace; and the Perfection of Glory was even in Paradise
impossible to Adam; absolutely, simply impossible; and by Gods penal decree,
the sinless perfection of righteousness in Innocence, is now according to Gods
ordinary power and grace impossible to believers, whilst they are yet in the
way.

. 52. Indeed plain it is, that both S. Austin and Bernard determine the
contrary; they say in express terms that here in this life we are bound not to
suffer sin to reign, that we be Vib. August. de perfect. Justitiae contra
Coelestium per tot.
humble, and repent, and rely on Gods mercy, and labor as much as possibly we
can, to press toward the mark, to be as holy as we can; and this is all, they
say, is required of us to Justification. And if they speak that more is
required, it is only to let us know our last hopes, and last end, and last
perfection, beyond which we cannot go, and after which we should pant, and long
for, as the Heart does after the waterbrooks. They tell us it is the Crown at
the end of the Goal which we must run for, and not the race it self to the
kingdom of heaven. For otherwise they must say that believers are now under
the Law, as well as Adam was, and not under Grace, which is directly contrary
to the Apostle, and those very writings from whence these passages are cited,
and the whole tenor of their works. And therefore all things being so fair and
clear it would be too great a torment to the Reader to trouble him with any
other places from those Fathers to this purpose.

. 53. And now being come to the top of the Hill, let us cast our eyes back, and
review our walk, and well consider how we are gone on in our way,

First then, plain it is that both the Fathers and Schoolmen quoted by our
Refuter against the Doctor, speak of an absolute sinless perfection, and more,
a freedom from sin, and a Love as large as heaven it self, and the fruition of
God can afford, when they say the Commandment cannot to that perfection be
fulfilled in this life.

Secondly as plain it is, that the Schoolmen in their discourses of charity, as
well Aquinas and his Scholars in secunda secundae, and the Master of the
Sentences in his third book, and the 27. Distinction etc. generally speak of
the habit of divine Charity, whereby we are enabled to fulfill Gods
commandments, and little or nothing of the Acts of this love, especially, when
they expound these two great commandments of Charity; and particularly they do
so even in these very places from whence our Refuters quotations are taken.

. 54. Now I shall desire the Reader to consider how this nothing at all
concerns the Doctor, and the Question in debate between him and his adversary.

For, 1. The Question is concerning the degree and graduall intension of the
Acts, not the habit of divine Charity, and now our Refuters proofs all concern
the latter, and not the former, which was never in debate.

2. The Question betwixt the Refuter and the Doctor concerns not the Acts of
that high transcendent Love, which is immediately planted upon God, but only
the Acts of charity as generally taken for the fruits and effects, and
demonstrations of this Love immediately planted on God, such as are the Acts of
mercy, and Almsgiving, zeal, and fervor in Prayer, and the like, and his
proofs belong nothing to this at all, but the former, if they concern that.

3. The Doctor oftentimes expressly declares in his answer to M. Cawdrey,
written in defense of the Treatise of Will Worship, which our Refuter now
undertakes to overthrow, that it is not that absolute sinless perfection that
he means or speaks of, when he says it consists in a latitude, and has
degrees, but only of the sincerity of this or that particular Act of virtue or
grace, when he says it consists in a latitude and has degrees, and may be
fullfilled by Gods grace, though a man arrive not to an absolute sinless
perfection, and exactly keep not all the Commandments of God, according to the
strictness of the Law. And yet our Refuters arguments and Quotations do all
belong to the former, and little or nothing concern the latter, alone in debate.

. 55. And therefore, if I thought I might any ways gratify our Refuter, I
shall grant him all he desires, and so eagerly pleads for, and yet undertake to
make good the Doctors argument and Position.

. 56. And yet for all that our Refuter is confident that (as if the Doctors
Treatise of will worship were like Archimedes his sphere though curious to the
eye, and made with great and subtle Art, yet the frame was but of Glass) he has
utterly dashed this excellent composure to pieces with this single blow; and
that though M. Cawdrey had failed, yet now nothing was left to secure the
Doctor from his all-conquering sword of discourse, but Bellarmines shield and
Buckler for his last refuge and defense. And therefore thus gravely he bespeaks
the Doctor, and with the mercy of a Conqueror.

JEANES.
The first that Bellarmine has to avoid these testimonies is not unknown to
me, viz. that they are to be understood of the Command, quatenus indicat finem,
non quatenus praecipit medium, If you think fit to adventure hereupon, I must
needs entreat you to remove first out of your way the Replies of Chamier and
Ames unto it.

. 5. 57. Well Sir, you have said; but how well advisedly I shall leave the
Reader to consider. For though what is known or unknown to you, I well know
not, yet this I know, that your knowledge and skill in Bellarmine and Aquinas
is not very great, and that no man of Ingenuity and Judgment, that had ever
read the places, either in Aquinas or Bellarmine, would have suffered such a
passage to drop from his pen. For what is the Relative to this (They) in this
passage? Is it not plain, that it refers to the places of Aquinas and Scotus?
you name indeed Austin and Bernard, but you cite them not atall. And will not
now any man that reads this passage against the Doctor, conclude, that this was
a trick of Bellarmines, on purpose invented to decline the force of these
Quotations of Aquinas and Scotus brought against him by Chamier? What else can
be the meaning of it? But now though it be true that this distinction is made
use of by Bellarmine, to declare what he thought of the meaning of Saint Austin
and Bernard in the passages already quoted by us from Chamier, yet was not this
distinction invented by Bellarmine, much less coined by him to evade the
testimonies of Aquinas and Scotus that are urged by our Refuter. Sir,
Bellarmine found this distinction made to his hands by Aquinas himself, and
applied it is by Aquinas in the very same manner as Bellarmine uses it, to
declare what he thought was the meaning of Saint Austin in those places, as
will be plain to any man that shall peruse the places formerly quoted from
Aquinas. And if those be not clear enough, I shall desire him to consult the
same Aquinas secunda secundae, q. 27. art. 6. in Corpore (a place too large to
be transcribed to so little purpose) where this is ex professo handled. If then
Bellarmine in answer to those two quotations of Aquinas, and Scotus, says they
are to be understood of the command quatenus indicat finem, non quatenus
praecipit medium, be the answer to Saint Austin, what it will, or the
distinction true or false, he says true in this, that Aquinas so is to be
understood (if Aquinas knew his own meaning) that says expressly that he meant
so. And whether Aquinas truly said that this was the meaning of S. Horum
testimoniorum aliqua currentes exhortamur ut perfect current, aliqua ipsum
finem commemorant, quo currendo pertendant. Ingredi autem sine macula non
absurd etiam ille dicitur, non qui jam perfectus est; sed qui ad ipsam
Persectionem irreprehensibiliter currit, carens criminibus damnabilibus, atque
ipsa peccata venialia non negligen^ mundare eleemosynis. Ingressum quippe, hoc
est, iter nostrum, quo tendimus in perfectionem, munda mundat oration. Munda est
autem oration ubi veraciter dicitur, Dimitte nobis sicut and dimittimus, ut dum
non reprehenditur, quod non imputatur, sine reprehensione, hoc est, sine
macula, noster ad persectionem cursus habeatur: in qua perfectione, cum ad eam
pervenerimus, jam non sit omnino quod ignoscendo mundetur. August. de perfect.
Justit. c. 9. vid. etiam c. 10.
Austin and Bernard in those places, though it concerns not the Doctor to
determine, who is not engaged in that controversy at all, yet I shall leave it
to the Readers Judgment, whether Aquinas says truly, and shall rest in
expectation till our Refuter shall tell us, what are the most material
exceptions in Chamier, and Ames against it, that he insists on. For if this be
his way of arguing, there will be no end of controversies, and when we have
obeyed him in his desires, he will yet be at liberty to say, that he meant not
these already considered, but some others.

. 58. Howsoever I shall not envy our Refuter any advantage he can make by these
Replies. If he thinks fit to make use of them, I am willing to be so courteous,
as not to forestall his market. And he has reason to thank me that I have
afforded him some materials to furnish his next answer. Yet I cannot but
observe that he is willing to teach young learners to construe Latin amiss,
and he would very fain persuade the world that Bellarminus Enervatus signifies
in English Doctor Hammond Confuted.

. 59. If our Refuter shall yet say, That if it be granted that the Law
requires, that we love God with all our strength, and as much as we can, then
consequently there will be no room for uncommanded degrees of love. To this I
answer him, That if what we have already said concerning this objection do not
satisfy, I shall desire him, because he is a Schoolman to look for an answer
in Cajetan, 2. 2. q. 184. art. 3. the Article from whence his second quotation
from Aquinas is taken, where in his Commentary he has both proposed, and
answered this Argument.

. 60. And thus at last to mine, and I doubt not to the Readers great
contentment, we are got out of a tedious digression that concerns not at all
the Treatise of will worship, much less the Ectenesteron.

SECT. 30.
The Refuters return. His Proof impertinent; weakens a known Truth. Christ's
Agony a fit season for heightning Ardency in Prayer. As Comprehensor he enjoyed
an Intuitive knowledge of the Divine Essence. Hence a Love necessary. Love as
viator. Beatifick Love hindered not the Free Exercise of this Love, and Graces:
nor his Happiness his Grief in the sensitive Appetite. Suarez. Hence a graduall
difference in the Acts of Love as Viator. Particularly in Prayer. Fallacy a
dicto secundum quid. His Confounding of Terms. Grounds. Motives. Occasion.
What. Christ as Comprehensor still had Cause to Love God, but no Grounds,
Motives, nor Occasions. As viator he had. Refuters Contradictions. Tautologies.
Love of Desire Complacency, distinguished, not divided. One often begins the
other. Bishop Andrews. Natural Love of Desire in Christ. What Hope in Christ.
Love of Concupiscence, though first in Men, yet otherwise in Christ. Threefold
Love of Complacency in Christ. Experimental Love of Desire and Complacence in
him capable of Increase. Both heightened at his Passion. Ardency of these and of
Prayer different. Of which the Doctor. Vanity of the Refuters Title page.

. 1. ANd now, with our Refuters good leave, we are come to our first argument,
The Ardency of Christ's Prayer. To this at his return he says,

JEANES.
Thirdly, you seem in the latter end of Section the 39. to intimate, that in
the time of Christ's Agony there was more occasion for the heightning of his
Love of God, then there was at other times. What you mean by these occasions of
heightning Christ's Love of God that you intimate, I will not undertake to
guess, but this I am sure of, that at all other times, he had sufficient
causes, grounds and motives to induce him to Love God with as heightened degrees
of Actual Love as the humane nature could reach unto; he enjoyed the
beatificall vision, a clear, evident, and intuitive knowledge of the divine
essence, that had in it all the fullness of goodness, and so was an object
infinitely lovely and amiable: Now such an object thus known, thus seen,
challenges such a measure of actual Love, as that it leaves no place for a
further and higher degree. The Thomists generally maintain that this most
intense Love of God is a natural and necessary sequel of the beatificall
vision, necessary quoad exercitium, as well as quoad specificationem actus; now
that which works naturally and necessarily, works as vehemently and forcibly as
it can, omne agens de necessitate, necessario agit usque ad ultimum potentiae
suae; therefore the inward Acts of Christ's Love of God were always as ardent,
and fervent as he could perform them, and therefore some were not more intense
then others: for if we speak of a liberty of indifferency, and indetermination,
he had no more liberty toward the intension of the inward Acts of his Love,
then he had toward the Acts themselves.

. 2. You have said, Sir, but I must tell you that though this argument is
wire-drawn to the utmost length, yet there is nothing proved all this while,
that is in debate betwixt you and your adversary. You need not have spent so
much time in proving, that Christ as Comprehensor did love God to the utmost
height possible. It should have been granted you for asking. It is a known
undoubted truth in the Schools, a Perfection that de congruo follows from the
Hypostaticall union, and therefore questioned by none, but the Socinians, and
those that deny the divinity of Christ.

. 3. But I see by experience, that Gold, the most solid, most ponderous of
Metalls, may be beaten so thin, that it may be moved with a breath, and broken
with a touch. And our Refuter is so unhappy, as to weaken an undoubted truth by
his overmuch proving it. For if the inward Acts of Christ's love were always at
the utmost height, because this most intense love is a natural and necessary
sequel of the Beatificall vision, then it necessarily follows, if his love
were always thus intense, that then he always enjoined the Beatificall
vision, the sole and necessary cause of such a love. For it is an undoubted
Maxim, That Positis aut sublatis effectu and causa necessariis, ponuntur and
tolluntur causa and effectus. And if so, what then shall we say to the Author
of a mixture of Scholasticall divinity with Practical, Henry Jeanes of
Chedzoy? For says he not expressly, That it is not to be denied, Mixture of
Scholast with Pract. p. 261.
but that by special dispensation, there was some restraint of the influence
of this happiness or beatificall vision, in the whole course of his
humiliation, and Particularly in the time of his doleful Passien? And now if
his fervor of love, were a natural issue of the beatificall vision, it will
necessarily follow that as that his happiness, and clear intuitive sight of the
divine Essence was restrained, so the fervor of his love was proportionably
abated also.

. 4. But not to trouble our selves much with any contradictions of our Refuter,
I suppose he meant well; whatsoeever he says. It was truly said by Saint Leo,
and all Antiquity has approved it, that at the time of our Saviors Passion,
Non dissolvit unionem, sed subtraxit visionem. And hence it comes to pass that
we read of our Saviors saying, My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death, and
his crying upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And I
believe our Refuter is not ignorant what M. Calvin has said of that
expostulation.

5. And why then might not this be a fit season for the heightning of the
Ardency of our Saviors zeal and devotion, when he prayed for the restoring of
those comforts and Joys that flowed from the Influence of the Beatificall
vision, which now was restrained? The more comfort and happiness he formerly
enjoyed from this clear intuitive knowledge, the more earnestly now, without
doubt, he would long for it. And had not now our blessed Savior in this
extremity, and bitterness of his Passion, and sufferings, when the manhood was
left naked, without any beams of comfort streaming from the Godhead, which now
by special dispensation, our Refuter grants, (as indeed it is most evident
from Scripture also) were restrained, had not now I say our blessed Savior
occasion enough for the heightning of his fervor in prayer, had he not now
grounds and motives sufficient to induce him to advance his ardency, and zeal,
when he prays for the restoration of those joys? For who so ardently longs
for a Repossession of happiness, as he that has once been satisfied with the
ravishing contentments of it? The loss of those comforts, which David formerly
enjoyed, was it, that made him so earnestly cry out, Psalm. 51. 12. Restore unto
me the joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit: Make me to
hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. The
Iron that has once been touched with the Loadstone, and enjoyed the benefit and
sweetness of that magnetic Love, and Influence, does more earnestly desire and
move stronger to a Reunion with that Loadstone, then it did before the
touching. And this is abundantly sufficient to demonstrate the utmost of the
Doctors pretenses in his Ectenesteron, who there undertakes only to show that
the fervency of Christ's zeal and devotion in Prayer was in his Agony
increased. But then because it is an Act of Piety and devotion, and
consequently of Charity and love to God, as that is commonly taken in the
Scripture (of which Love alone does the Doctor speak,) and so is not that Love,
that high transcendent Love, which flowed from the Beatificall vision, which
our Savior, as Comprehensor, enjoyed (and that which our Refuter here speaks
of) plain it is that by this Argument (if all were granted) he opposes not the
Doctor.

. 6. But then this is not only sufficient to acquit the Doctor, but also to
destroy all the truth in his Argument. For if now, especially in the time of
our Saviors doleful passion, the Influence of the Godhead, and beatificall
vision were restrained, then it evidently follows that now at least there was
more occasion then formerly even for the heightning of his love of God, as that
is properly taken. For our Love of necessity must bear a proportion and
correspondence to our knowledge, and therefore we shall love more, infinitely
more, when we see God face to face, then now possibly we can, when we see him
only in aenigmate, in speculo, by Faith as in a glass darkly. And consequently
so must it be with our Saviors love also, at least during this restraint. And
therefore (to grant to our Refuter what he adds in that Treatise immediately
after) though surely it seems very improbable, and no ways sortable unto the
state of Christ's blessedness, for his grace and holiness, the image of God in
him (his love of God in the habit) to be liable unto perpetual motion, and
augmentation, yet even there he himself expressly grants, that his Actual grace
and wisdom, and consequently his acts of divine love did increase, and
gradually differ: and if he should here deny it, this argument we have urged
from his own concessions, will necessarily enforce it.

. 7. The truth is he met with a common received truth, but for want of skill
and a right understanding of the Schoolmen, in whose shop this divine truth was
first struck out, and discovered, he has almost destroyed it, by his manner of
proof and laboring to defend it.

. 8. First then I grant, That Christ in the days of his Flesh was not pure
viator, but also Comprehensor.

2. That, as Comprehensor, he enjoyed a clear intuitive knowledge of the Divine
Essence.

3. That from this clear intuitive knowledge issued a Love answerable to it; an
Actual love, most perfect and in the utmost height, always uninterrupted,
always the same, because (as Suarez truly) erat simpliciter necessarius tam
respectu Dei Vid. Suarez tom. 1. in 3 par. Thom. disp. 37. Sect. 4.
quam respectu propriae beatitudinis, it was an Act simply necessary, flowing
from the beatificall vision, which Christ in the superior faculty of his soul,
the mind always enjoyed, and which de congruo flows from the hypostaticall
union. This Ibid. disp. 37. sect. 4 p. 518. Col. 1. D. E.
they call amor beatificus animae Christi, and simpliciter necessarius.

4. It is supposed by Suarez and others, that besides this beatifick Love,
there was also in Christ's soul an infused habit of Love, whereby he also loved
God in the days of his flesh, as well as he knew him by a twofold
supernatural knowledge, the beatifick and infused, as he declares and proves
at large. ibid. disp. 39. Sect. 7. p. 540.

5. Hence it is that the same Suarez says, Tertio suppono Ibid. disp. sect. 5.
p. 518. Col. 1. E. F. Col. 2. A. B.
Christum fuisse simul Comprehensorem and viatorem, ex qua mirabili
conjunctione consequenter effectum est miraculose, ut proprii actus beatifici
ita continerentur in suprema part animae, ut non redundarent in inferiorem,
neque perfectionem suam cum illa communicarent. Ad hunc ergo modum intelligi
potest, ita animam illam amasse Deum necessario, ut amor ille sisteret in sola
formali conjunctione and unione ad Deum, suo modo ad formalem beatitudinem
pertinente, and non se extenderet, nec communicaret (ut ita dicam) aliis
operibus and actibus, qui in Christum ut viatorem conveniebant. Cum enim haec
extensio, vel Communicatio fit per modum cujusdam efficientiae poterat facile
impediri, sicut fruitio beata impedita est, ne omnem tristitiam expelleret, nec
inferiori portioni communicaret. Hoc ergo supposito facile intelligitur illum
Dei amorem, quem anima Christi habuit, veluti consequentem scientiam infusam
and non beatam fuisse liberum, etc. ex quo ulterius facile intelligatur, ab
illo amore libero libere etiam processisse actus obedientiae, charitatis
proximi, and aliarum virtutum, quos Christus Dominus ut viator exercuit: tum
quid ille amor est sufficiens principium and causa illorum, tum etiam quia amor
beatificus, ut dictum est, veluti continebatur, ne influeret in hujusmodi
actus, sed relinqueret voluntatem operari modo accommodato viatori. Thus he.
Add to this what the same Suarez has demonstrated, ibid. disp. 39. Sect. 2. we
have already quoted the place at large, and shall therefore refer the Reader to
it.

6. I shall crave leave of the Readers patience to acquaint him what the same
author has further observed to our purpose in his Commentary on the 15.
Question of the third part of Aquinas, art. 6. utrum in Christo fuerit
tristitia? -- Quanquam ex divina contemplatione, quae erat in anima Christi
redundare posset haec delectatio in appetitum sensitivum, divina tamen virtute
impedita est, ne dolorem vel tristitiam sensibilem impediret: quam doctrinam
docuerat D. Thomas art. praecedenti, ad tertium solvens difficultatem, quomodo
anima Christi beata fuerit capax doloris, and tristitiae. Circa quam doctrinam
supererat difficultas, quia ex illa videtur sequi in voluntate Christi nullam
fuisse tristitiam, quia in illa fuit summum gaudium ex divina contemplatione,
and visione manans. Sequela patet, quia si appetitus sensitivus privatus est
delectatione quae in ipsum derivari posset in fruitione beata ne fieret incapax
tristitiae: ergo voluntas, in qua per se primo fuit gaudium illud beatificum,
per illud effecta est omnino incapax tristitiae. Respondeo, D. Thomam hoc loco,
ea tantum docuisse quae ad praesentem difficultatem solvendam sufficiebant, and
assignasse modum, quo evidentius constare poterat appetitum sensitivum Christi
fuisse capacem tristitiae: an vero alio modo potuerit voluntas esse capax
tristitiae simul cum gaudio D. Thomas hoc loco neque negavit neque asseruit,
quoniam ad rem not spectabat. Add praeterea D. Thomam non tantum voluisse
ostendere appetitum sensitivum Christi fuisse capacem tristitiae secundum quid,
seu secundum aliquam rationem sed absolute and simpliciter ita potuisse
tristitiam pati, ut omnis delectationis and voluptatis expers aliquando fuerit.
Quod in voluntate locum habere non potuit, quia licet secundum aliquam rationem
potuerit tristari, tamen quia secundum potiorem and superiorem rationem semper
fuit beata, non potuit omni gaudio privari: appetitus autem sensitivus fuit in
statu possibili, and caruit statu beatifico, and ideo fuit capax talis
tristitiae, quae omnem voluptatem excluderet: Caetera quae ad hanc
difficultatem pertinent tractabimus infra, q. 18. Suarez ibid. page 460. 461.

. 9. From all which well considered (if already we have not given a full and
satisfactory answer to all the pretenses of this discourse of our Refuter) it
will evidently appear; that though Christ as Comprehensor in the superior Part
of his soul, had always a clear intuitive knowledge of the divine Essence and
a natural and necessary love of God, thus clearly known, (which was always at
the utmost height, still one and the same uninterrupted Act, because simply
necessary) yet this beatifick knowledge, and Love of God was so miraculously
ordered, that it hindered not, nor any ways altered the Acts and operations of
the inferior faculties of his soul, nor changed the mannner of working of
those his infused graces, whether of knowledge or love of God, or his
neighbors, or the exercise of any other virtues and graces, necessary for him
in the state of a viator. To all which as in that state he had a true and
proper freedom, so he did truly merit by the free ezercise of them. And as the
happiness he enjoyed in this superior faculty of his soul, as Comprehensor,
did not hinder, but that at the time of his Passion, his soul, in the inferior
parts, was sorrowful unto death, and had no comfort from those supernatural
joys in the superior, which now by special providence and dispensation were
suspended: so this natural and necessary fullness of his beafitick Love nothing
hindered, but that there might be a graduall difference in the Acts and
exercise of his infused love of God, or at least in the Acts of love toward us
his neighbors, and the Acts of other virtues and graces. All which Acts of
Piety and devotion, and zeal to God, and love to his neighbors, and obedience
to Gods commands, in the exercise of all other virtues and graces, his will did
freely perform in that way, that was proper and most agreeable to the state of
a viator. And consequently since every man in the exercise of these virtues and
graces is bound to exercise them quoad debitas circumstantias, and since we
have clearly showed already, that the same ardour and fervency is not required
in every Act, it evidently follows, that, notwithstanding this superlative
height and fervor in this his Actual Love, as Comprehensor, yet in respect of
the other Acts of Love and holy Charity, and Piety and Obedience, and virtue
(which he exercised freely as viator) there might be a graduall difference of
fervor and intensness, according as the present exigence required. And
therefore if it appear (as it has already) that Christ in his bloody Agony had
now greater occasion for the heightning of his Fervor in Prayer, then
formerly, it also as clearly follows, that not only de facto he did pray more
earnestly, then at other times, but it was his duty to do so. And here for
avoiding of Cavells, I must mind our Refuter of Calvin's observation formerly
noted, that a time of affliction is a season for more then ordinary servency in
Prayer, and that God then calls for it, and Christ has instructed us in this
lesson by his own Practice and example.

. 10. And therefore be it now granted to our Refuter, that Christ, during his
abode upon earth, and the days of his flesh, enjoyed the beatificall vision,
and by reason of that clear intuitive knowledge loved God to the utmost height
possible; yet what will he thence conclude? will it follow, does he think, that
therefore in every respect, and as viator also he so loved him? Or at least
that he loved us, his neighbors so too, and that as necessary he did exercise
all the other Acts of virtues and Graces and Piety and Charity and Obedience?
If so, I must ask him, how then could Christ ever be in statu merendi, and even
whilst he was viator, be the meritorious cause and Author of salvation to all
them that obey him?

. 11. I must therefore mind him, that this his long Argument is no other then
the old fallacy and Sophism a Dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. Thus,
Because Christ as Comprehensor loved God always at one utmost height,
therefore as viator in every Act of divine Love and Piety and zeal and devotion
and love to us his neighbors, and in every Act of virtue and Grace, he did so
too; which how absurd and false it is, will appear at first sight I doubt not,
even to our Refuter himself. And therefore I deny the sequel of his discourse.
For though the Antecedent be true, that Christ as Comprehensor so loved, yet
the Consequence is false and fallacious, that therefore as viator he did so
too. And therefore the Doctors Position of the Contrary to the Consequent must
needs be true, That the Acts of Christ's Love or holy Charity, exercised by him
as viator, might be gradually different in fervor, notwithstanding our
Refuters Antecedent be granted, which is all the medium he here brings to
confute the Doctors assertion. And now let me ask our Refuter, suppose I should
say, If the Aethiop have white teeth, therefore the Aethiop is white, would he
not say it was a ridiculous Sophisme, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter? I suppose he would thus answer, and he would answer truly. And yet
such is his Argumentation here against the Doctor, and therefore so must be
answered.

. 12. But this is not all the misadventure of our Refuters discourse. In this
1. He betrays very much ignorance and want of knowledge of those Logical
terms of Art which he uses; and 2. His own discourse contradicts its self; and
3. He speaks most apparent tautologies, all unpardonable faults in one that
professes himself to write in a scholasticall way.

. 13. For first, he very inartificially confounds these terms, Occasion,
grounds, and Motives, and Causes. For thus he says, What you mean by these
Occasions of heightning Christ's Love of God, that you intimate, I shall not
undertake to guess; but this I am sure of, that at all other times he had
sufficient Causes, Grounds and Motives to induce him to love God with as
heightened degrees of Actual Love, as the humane nature could reach unto, he
enjoyed the beatificall vision, etc.

. 14. For the beatificall vision was a necessary Cause of this most heightened
Actual Love: and such an Object as God is, thus known, challenges (as himself
speaks) such a measure of Actual Love, as that it leaves no place for a
further degree. And he adds, The Thomists generally maintain, that this most
intense love of God is a Natural and Necessary sequel of the beatificall
vision, Necessary quoad exercitium, as well as quoad specificationem actus. And
it seems, he is of their opinion. For from hence he argues; Now that which
works Naturally and Necessarily works as vehemently and forceably as it can.

. 15. But then Grounds and Motives to induce one to Love are not Necessary
causes of Love. They are only suasoria, moral persuasions, and rational
inducements to persuade a man, that has a proper freedom and liberty of
indifferency and indetermination of the will (which yet expressly in this
discourse the Refuter denies of Christ, either to the Acts or degrees of divine
Love, of which he speaks) either to forsake that which he already embraces, or
to follow that, which now he neglects, or else to heighten and quicken him,
either in his flight, or embrace of any object, he declines, or persues.

. 16. And then as for the term (Occasion), that is nothing else but an
Opportunity and advantage of time and place that has some kind of virtue to
excite the Agent to work at this instant, when now all impediments seem to be
taken off. This is no other then a kind of Causa sine qua non, an accidental
thing, that not always happens, and because it stays not (for -- post est
occasio calva, and (...).) therefore it stirrs up the Agent more powerfully to
work at this instant, then otherwise it would. But then this and the former are
only Causae minus principales. And such a Cause Fr. Burgensdic Institut. Log
l. 1. c. 17. Theor. 21. in Commentar. sect. 1. Ibid. Theor. 24. in Commentar.
sect. 1.
as this, as a good Author will tell him, non tam efficit, quam subservit
principali causae ad effectum producendum. They are both of them Causae (...),
and inchoantes, and are thus defined by the same acute Logician, Occasio est
temporis locique commoditas ad agendum quod velis, quae and ipsae vim aliquam
movendi habet ad agendum, quatenus agendi impedimenta tollit. Author dicitur
hoc loco, qui causam principalem propositis rationibus ad agendum hortatur, aut
ab agendo dehortatur: vocatur etiam causa moralis. And consequently, according
to this Author, Grounds and Motives, sunt rations seu argumenta quibus
propositis Author causam principalem ad agendum hortatur seu moraliter excitat,
aut ab agendo dehortatur.

. 16. And therefore though Christ, as Comprehensor, had sufficient cause
always to Love God at the utmost height possible to the humane nature, to wit,
a clear intuitive knowledge of the divine Essence, yet he had no more Grounds
and Motives to this love, then he had occasions, because he always loved
naturally and necessarily to the utmost height, and it was impossible for him
to do otherwise. Will any man read a Moral Lecture of Persuasion to excite a
Stone to move downwards, or labor by Grounds and Motives to induce the Fire to
burn? A pair of bellows are worth all the Suasories in Seneca, or the
Declamations of Quintilian. The glorified Saints and Angels have Cause
sufficient to love God, the beatificall vision, and therefore as they need no
Grounds and Motives to induce them to love God, so they have none used to them
in heaven, because there they naturally and necessarily love God, and it is a
part of their happiness and a necessary fruit of their glorified natures to do
so. Grounds and Motives as well as Occasions, are proper only to those that
are in via, that are in the way to heaven, to stir up their spirits, and
flagging dull Motions, and quicken them in the Race, as also to dehort them
from those things, that may be an occasion either of their fall, or slow motion.

. 17. But then this nothing hinders, but, as considered in the state of a
viator, he might have both Occasions to heighten his Love and ardency in
Prayer, (as the Doctor affirms he had, and we have already demonstrated the
Truth of his assertion, and shall by and by further clear it) and also Grounds
and Motives to strengthen and confirm him in his love, and magnanimity and
Patience in the midst of his bitter agony. For we have already observed from
the Schoolmen, and best Interpreters, that the Angel that was sent to Comfort
our blessed Savior, and strengthen him in his bitter Agony, did it by Moral
Arguments and Suasories, and Rational Grounds and Motives, Remonstrating him
the transcendency of his Love to Mankind, and the Glory of the Acquest, his
obedience to God his Father, and the Crown and Reward laid up for him; The
Advancement of the honor of Gods Mercy, and the magnifying his Name in the
salvation of mankind, and the like.

. 18. But then secondly, by this Confusion he falls upon the Rock of palpable
contradiction, and one part of his discourse confutes the other. For if Christ
had always sufficient Causes, Grounds and Motives to induce him to love God,
etc. then he did not love him naturally and necessarily; as he says he did: Or
else if he always loved God to the utmost height naturally and necessarily,
then he had not always sufficient Causes, Grounds and Motives to induce him to
love God to the utmost height. For Causes, Grounds and Motives to love suppose
an absolute freedom and liberty of indetermination and indifferency to love,
which is perfectly contrary to an absolute necessity of loving, and therefore
incompossible with it. Let him choose which part he will, and avoid the Rock if
he can.

. 19. If he says that Christ as viator had sufficient causes grounds and
motives to induce him to love God to the utmost height, because as Comprehensor
he enjoyed the beatificall vision, and naturally loved him; I deny his sequel;
because then it would also follow, that he had sufficient causes, grounds, and
motives to love God in that height, which was incompossible with his state of
viator, to wit, with as heightened degrees of Actual love, as the humane nature
could reach to, which is the state of a Comprehensor; and consequently implies
a kind of contradiction in adjecto.

. 20. And then thirdly he not only speaks contradictions, but palpable
Tautologies. For he says Christ naturally and necessarily loved God to the
utmost height of Actual Love, and then adds in the close by way of proof; For
if we speak of a liberty of indifferency and indetermination, he had no more
liberty toward the intension of the inward Acts of his Love, than he had
toward the Acts themselves. It is just, as if I should affirm, the Aethiops
skin to be black, and then add for a further confirmation; For if we talk of
any color in his skin that was disgregative of the sight, he had none, which
were a most ridiculous tautologicall argumentation, and prooving idem per idem.

. 21. And therefore having now showed the weakness, and very inartificiall
proceeding of our Refuters discourse, I am at leisure to tell him, what were
the occasions of heightning our Saviors Love of God, at the time of his
Passion, more then he had at other times, which the Doctor intimates, and our
Refuter (out of his great Scholasticall modesty, and profound Christian
humility and tenderness to our blessed Saviors honor, I suppose he means)
will not undertake to guess at. But first I will tell him, what Love it was the
Doctor means, that so all occasions of Cavil may be avoided.

. 22. The Schools ordinarily distinguish of a twofold Love of God; one they
call Amor Concupiscentiae, or Amor desiderii. The other they call Amor
Amicitiae or Amor Complacentiae. The first is a Love of God for the benefits we
hope, and are to receive from him; and arises out of an apprehension and
sensibleness of those wants and needs, that he alone is able to supply. The
other is a Love of God, purely for his own goodness. This is the most genuine
and transcendent Love; but the other more natural. For Nature it self teaches
us in all our wants, to have recourse to God, or something we mistake for God.
And hence it is, that the most acute Father Tertullian Vid. Suarez tom. 1. in
tert. part. Tho disp. 39. sect. 2. p. 542. col. 1. C. Et ibid. disp. 34 sect.
3. page 457. col. 1. F. and 2. A.
makes use of this Argument, and in contemplation of it cries out, O Anima
naturaliter Christiana! This is proper only to the viator. The other, in the
most transcendent manner, agrees to the Comprehensor, and in a lower degree,
also to the viator, according to the Perfection and excellency of his habitual
grace. Yet these two, says the most incomparable Bishop Andrews, though they
may be distinguished, yet Pattern of Catechist. Doctrine at large com. 1. c.
12. page 155..
are not always divided. For the one oftentimes is the beginning of the other,
both in our loves to God and man. For those that have been beneficial to us,
though we love them at first for the benefits we receive by them, yet
afterward we come to love them for themselves. The first arises from hope,
because a man being cast down by fear conceives hope upon Gods promises; then
sending forth prayer, receives fruit, and says, Praised be the Lord for he
has heard the voice of my humble petition. And Psalm. 28. 7. 21.
thou have given me my hearts desire: which fruit stirs up the first love,
and this Amor Concupiscentiae the love of concupiscence, which goes before
Amorem gratuitum free Love. For as the Apostle says, that is not first which
is spiritual, but that which is natural or carnal, and then that which is
spiritual: so free Love of God for himself is not first, but first we love him
for his benefits, and then for himself, and this is true love, etc. That which
is natural will be first, concupiscentia before Amicitia or benevolentia, and
this is the inchoation of the other. Perfect love is not attained at first; for
nemo repent fit summus: Now Saint Chrysostom wondreth how men can slip
themselves out of this Love, for if they will love any for his Benefits, none
bids fairer for this Amor mercenarius then God, for he offers for it the
kingdom of heaven, etc. (And therefore) it is lawful to Love God for his
benefits; for God uses them as motives to stir us up to love him, and the best
of Gods servants have so practiced: Moses looked at the recompense: Heb. 11.
but we must not rest there, nor love him only or chiefly for them, but for
himself, etc. -- I love the Lord, says the Psalmist; and why? He is my
defense, Psalm. 18. 1. And in another place, Because he heard my voice: yet
seeing David did not Love God only or chiefly for his benefits, his love was
not properly mercenary, but true though not Perfect. Thus far this most
excellent Bishop, whose words I have made use of, as Jewels and ornaments to
this discourse, and because I think it impossible (to me I am sure) to express
it better.

. 23. Now Christ being made like to us in all things, sin only excepted, he
must also have in him this natural love of God for his benefits and
protection, and assistance, that he had, and might have from him; and the
Schools do resolve so. For it was in its self natural, and therefore not
sinful; and his present slate of a viator in the days of his flesh required
it. For though the Foxes have holes, and the birds of the Air have nests; yet
the son of man had not where to lay his head. He was truly vir desideriorum, a
man of desires, as well as a man of sorrows. This, as it was natural to the
flesh, and proper to him in the state of a viator, so it agreed to him in
respect of the Inferior part of the Will, and the sensitive Appetite, which
desired things natural and necessary for it self, but yet only those things,
that were lawful and fit. And therefore the Schools, though they resolve, that
there was not that hope Vid. Estium l. 3. sent. d. 26.. 8. and alibi. Aquin 3
part. q. 7. art 4. Et Cajetan. Suaresium alios in Loc.
in Christ, which is virtus Theologica Deum ipsum, ut principale Objectum,
spectans, yet there was in him another lower kind of hope, bona quidem and
vera, good, and lawful, and true in it self, which respected those things, he
had not yet obtained in the days of his flesh, as his Resurrection, the
Glorification of himself in the humane Nature at the right hand of God, and the
honor of his Name, and Enlargement of his kingdom. In which respect says the
Psalmist in the Person of Christ in the Passion-Psalm 22. 10. I was cast upon
thee from the womb, thou art my God from my mothers Belly. So again in the
eighth and ninth verses. He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him, let
him deliver him seeing he delighted in him. But thou art he that took me out of
the womb, thou did make me hope when I was upon my Mothers breasts. there are
many other places in Scripture to this purpose, but these are sufficient to our
business. This hope as it was the ground of his Love of God, for the benefits
he did expect, and the assistance he stood in need of in the days of his
flesh, so it was the foundation of all his prayers, either in regard of his
present pressures and wants and reliefs he stood in need of, or else in respect
of the future blessings, he expected after his resurrection. As then (as
Aquinas tells us) Christus habuit spem respectu aliquorum quae nondum erat
adeptus, so he did Aquin. 3. part. q. 7. art. 4. in corp.
truly in this respect, divinum auxilium expectare. In the midst of his
afflictions, and in the height of his Passion he trusted in God, and he was
heard in that he feared, or delivered from it. And as he trusted in God, hoped
in him, and expected aid and assistance from him; so he truly had a natural
love of God, a love of desire, and concupiscence toward God, for the benefits
and assistance, he daily received and hoped from him. And out of the abundance
of this Love, he cries out upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?

. 24. But then, though this Love of concupiscence be ordinarily first in men,
and then afterward the Love of Complacency, though we love God first for his
benefits, and goodness to us, and afterward for himself, yet it was not so in
Christ; For first, as Comprehensor in his mind, he loved God naturally and
necessarily, with the highest degree of complacency, benevolence and
friendship. And this from the first moment of the souls union with the body.
And secondly, as viator, by reason of the fullness of the habit of Divine
Grace, he loved him always as high with this love, as the present state was
capable of. Though he loved God always for his own sake, yet this
supernatural divine Love was not the fruit of his love of concupiscence, and
because he was sensible of Gods blessings and favors; but it was the effect of
the Beatificall vision, and the fullness of divine Grace supernaturally infused
from the first moment of his conception, and de congruo both flowed from the
Hypostaticall union.

. 25. But then, as the Schools distinguish of a threefold knowledge in Christ,
the one which they call beata, the other infusa, and the third Experimentalis
and Acquisita; so there is also observed by them, a threefold love of
complacency in Christ. The first is the beatifick Love, proper to him as
Comprehensor, the second the Acts of the infused habit of divine Love; And the
third, a Love of Complacency, flowing from the frequent experiences of Gods
goodness to him in the days of his flesh. For he also did taste and see how
good and gracious to him the Lord was in that state, when he was truly that man
of sorrows. This was Acquisite and experimental; and this we may without any
dishonor to Christ, or the least disparagement to divine truth, say, was the
issue of that other Love, a Love of God for his blessings, and gracious
assistance. This was a ravishing contentment arising in the Inferior part of
his soul; a sweet delight and complacency in God from the experience of his
goodness, answering and satisfying those desires in these faculties.

. 26. Now these two Loves of God, proper to Christ as viator, the natural love
of God for the blessings, we hope, and receive from him (this love of desire,
and that experimental, acquisite love of Complacency, arising in the Inferior
faculties of Christ's soul, from the experiment of Gods gracious goodness) may
without any derogation to the height and Perfection of his supernatural Love,
be said to be capable of increase and augmentation. And of these the Doctor
must be understood to speak,. 39. when he says, that in the time of our
Saviors Agony, there was more occasion for the heightening of his Love of God
and Trust, then there was at other times. He never before now had such occasion
to Love God, and earnestly long for his assistance, as in his bloody Agony,
when the comfortable beams and influence of the Godhead, were now miraculously,
and by special providence pro tempore withheld. This made him to cry out upon
the Cross with a loud voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? this
made him to call up all the faculties of his soul, and to heighten his Ardency
and zeal and fervor in Prayer, proportionable to the height of his Agony. As
he never was in such a Passion till now, as he never sweat drops of blood
before down to the ground; so he never had such occasion to heighten his
Ardency, and that his Love of desire toward God and his goodness, in respect
of his present aid and support, should be more advanced. The more we are in
want and distress, the more nature instructs us to love those that help us; and
the heightning this love, and our hope, and expectation of aid and assistance
advances and quickens our Ardency and fervor in Prayer; and the more we want,
we love, we hope, we desire, the higher will our zeal and devotion in Prayer be
inflamed; and this Saint Luke meant, when he tells us, that our blessed
Savior, being in an agony, (...), he prayed the more earnestly. And now since
in the days of his flesh he offered up Prayers and supplications, with strong
crying and tears, etc. and was heard in Heb. 5. 7.
that he feared; since he had an Angel sent to comfort him; from this
experience of Gods goodness, the Inferior faculties are so ravished, and
satisfied, that now his love becomes bold as a lion, and we hear no more now of
these natural desires, prompting him to pray for a removal of that bitter
cup. Now boldly as the Lion of the tribe of Judah, he says to those that came
to apprehend him, I am he; and again, I have told you that I am he. If
therefore ye seek me, let these go their way, Joh. 18. 5, 6, 7, 8. Now he
willingly meets death, and gives those that came to apprehend him leave to take
him. Now was this experimental Love of God in the Inferior faculties advanced
to the utmost height. And now his Love was as strong as death it self.

. 27. But then though this be abundantly sufficient to satisfy all pretenses
in this, or any part of our Refuters discourse: yet I must remind the Reader,
that there is a great deal of difference between the heightning Christ's Ardency
in Prayer (of which the Doctor speaks) and that advancement of Christ's actual
love as Comprehensor, immediately terminated on God himself, of which our
Refuter speaks in this discourse, and never the Doctor, either in his
Ectenesteron, or his Treatise of Will Worship, or the defense of it against
Master Cawdrey.

. 28. And thus at last is demonstrated the vanity of our Refuters Title Page,
and showed it is to be like the Apothecaries glorious titles on his Empty
boxes. For he has proved nothing he there pretends against the Doctor, and if
he had proved all, he pretends to, he had not so much as opposed, much less
refuted the Doctors Ectenesteron, which always speaks of another thing, then
himself does. For all opposition must be ad idem, as this of our Refuters is
not, as has all along been demonstrated. And so I come to the next Section.

SECT. 31.
Poor Refuter. Doctor digresses not. Affliction a fit season to heighten
Devotion. Christ's Ardency our Instruction. The Doctor Heightning Christ's
Actual Love derogates not from his Habitual fulness. Charitas quamdiu
augeri potest, etc, variously cited. The Doctors mistake. The words not
Jeromes, but Austins. This lapse how possible. Venial. Occasion of Austins
writing to Jerome. His several proposalls of solving the doubt. His own upon
the Distinction of Righteousness Legal, Evangelicall. Place in Austin at
large. How applied against Papists. How not. M. Baxters censure of our
differences in point of Justification. Place impertinent to the Refuters
Conclusion. Ex vitio est how here understood against M. Cawdrey, and the
Refuter and the Doctor. Denotes Original Corruption. This how called by
Austin. Signally vitium in Opposition to a saying of Pelagius. Parallel places
for this meaning. Pelagius objection. Answered. Austin and the Doctor accord,
but not the Refuter. Doctors Exposition of Austin. Corrected. Dilemma's.
Confidence springs from Ignorance. Chedzoy-Confidence. Learned Protestants and
Papists, and Himself assert, what he says, all else deny, but the Doctor. A
new Jury of them against him for the Doctor. Erasmus, Cajetan, Tolet. (Outward
works of wisdom and Grace in Tolet what) Estius, Jansenius, L. Brugensis,
Beza. Piscator. Deodate. Assembly notes. Cameron. Raynolds. How Christ grew in
Actual Grace, the Habitual still invariable. Illustrated by two Instances.
Erasmus and Doctor Eckhard assert Christ's growth in Habitual Perfection. This
charged on Luther, Calvin, etc. by Bellarmine with probability on Calvin. How
they acquitted. Refuters Conclusion complyes with the sowrest of Jesuits.
Maldonates censure of the Lutherans and Calvinists. Answered. Stapletons like
censure. Answered. They and Bellarmine, if they speak consequently, must mean
the same with us. Whole recapitulated. Refuters unhappiness. Doctors safety.

Doctor HAMMOND.
. 40. OF this I shall hope it is possible to find some instances among men (of
whose graces it can be no blasphemy to affirm that they are capable of
degrees). Suppose we a sincerely pious man, a true Lover of God, and no
despiser of his poor persecuted Church, and suppose we, as it is very
supposable, that at some time the Seas roar, the tempest be at the height, and
the waves beat violently upon this frail brittle vessel, may it not be a fit
season for that pious man's Ardency to receive some growth? for his zeal to be
emulous of those waves, and pour it self out more profusely at such then at a
calmer season? I hope there be some at this time among us, in whom this point
is really exemplified; if it be not, it is an effect of want not fullness of
Love. But I need not thus to enlarge. It is not by this Refuter denied of the
Person of Christ, and that is my entire (...) in reference either to M. C. or
to him, the utmost that I undertook to demonstrate then, or to justify now.

JEANES.
This Section your poor Refuter had passed over as a digression, had he not
found himself named in the close of it, it is not by this Refuter denied of the
Person of Christ. I suppose etc.

. 1. YOur Poor Refuter! In great humility no doubt! Sed male ominatis parcito
verbis! you in a proud Sarcasticall Irony, and scornful undervaluing call your
self the Doctors poor Refuter, and the event has declared, that you are his
poor Refuter indeed.

. 2. But you say, you had passed this Section over as a digression, unless you
had found your self named in the close of it; It is not by this Refuter denied,
etc.

. 3. Well Sir, I see you are proud of the name Refuter, and you account you
deserve it. But some have worn the names of Caesar and Alexander the great,
that have been the veriest Cowards in the world; and some Popes have assumed
the Titles of Clement and Pius, that have least deserved them of the whole
Pack. If Refuter be your name, I assure you, Sir, the world will now see, that
you are very much miscalled. I have proved you to be of the Family of the
Dixies, that were never good Schoolmen, good disputants, nor Refuters.

. 4. But why, I beseech you, Sir, had you passed over this Section as a
digression? Has the Doctor here left the Question? If he has, you should have
shown it. For we must have other Arguments to prove it a deserting of the
discourse, besides your bare word, because you have all along given us cause to
distrust your most confident Assertions. But consider Sir I pray, and once
again read it, least your virgula censoria strike it forth without desert. I am
sure if it be not a proof, yet it is a very apposite instance to illustrate the
Doctors meaning. And if Instances and Illustrations be Digressions in
discourse, then dark and intricate phrases and sayings are not the only
Dialect and proper language of Oracles, and he keeps closest to the subject
matter, not that labors to speak clearly, but that endeavors to be least
understood.

. 5. But yet look again Sir, and you will not only find it an Illustration,
but a Proof too. For if a time of affliction be a fit season for the
heightening our Devotion, and more then ordinary fervor in Prayer; If God
Almighty has commanded that then especially we call upon him, and if therefore
he scourges us to bring us nigher to him, and nature it self teaches us in our
affliction to seek him early, why then should that in your Judgment be
unbeseeming the Person of Christ in the time of his Agony, that is every man's
duty else? If secondly, every true lover of God, and sincerely pious man, then
more especially lifts up his soul to God, when he calls upon him de profundis,
if then still his zeal multiplies, as his miseries increase, and in a kind of
pious emulation the fervency of his devotion strives to grow higher then the
waves, that beat upon him, if now he need no Instructor, no Monitor to mind
him; If all men every where, that have any sense of a Deity or Providence, then
more especially lift up the voice like a Trumpet, if the secret Tutor in the
bosom, Conscience, non quae Scholis formata, bibliothecis exercitata,
Academiis and Tertul. l. de testim: Animae c. 1. p. 80. D*
porticibus Atticis pasta, but that which is simplex and rudis, and impolita,
and idiotica, illa ipsa de compito, de trivio, de textrino, if this teach all
men, if this, without the assistance of Scripture, stir them up to pour out
their devotions more profusely at such then at a calmer season, why then should
we not believe this of Christ, who was made like to us in all things, sin only
excepted, especially when the Evangelist himself, who gives us a Narrative of
the fact, plainly says, that being in an Agony he prayed (...) more earnestly?
Certainly Tertullian said truly, Haec testimonia animae, quanto vera, tanto
Tertul. de testim: Anima c. 5. page 83. C. edit. Rigalt.
simplicia; quanto simplicia, tanto vulgaria; quanto vulgaria, tanto communia;
quanto communia, tanto naturalia; quanto naturalia, tanto divina. And therefore
as he said in the like case, so say I. Novum testimonium advoco, imo omni
lituratura notius, omni doctrina agitatius, omni editione vulgatius, toto Ibid.
c. 1. p. 80. C. D.
homine majus, id est, totum quod est hominis. If thirdly, none but those, that
are Atheists in heart, those that think there is no God, do not tremble at the
voice in the cloud, and the hand upon the wall; if it be a certain argument of
want of true Piety and religious Devotion, now to be careless and cold in our
Prayers, if it betray, that we either care not for Gods assistance, or believe
he cannot help us, or that this evil in the city is not of his sending, then
certainly the multiplying and redoubling of our calls and cries to God, the
growth of our fervor and Ardency and zeal in so proper a season, as this, is
so far from prejudging the fullness and Perfection of the habit of divine grace
that it most evidently demonstrates it, and I should rather conclude a defect,
and want of true love of God in that soul, where I should not observe a more
than ordinary heightened devotion and ardency of Spirit in such a tempestuous
season.

. 6. Without doubt our blessed Savior, that suffered for us, leaving us an
example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21.
did in this his Prayer and Devotion, and more then ordinary fervor and
ardency in Prayer, read us a lecture, and taught us what to do in such cases.
In this bloody scene, and part of his bitter Agony in the Garden there can no
other end, and aim be observed, but only our instruction; all was only to
prove him to be truly man, and to teach us what frail flesh and blood in the
midst of such agonies and afflictions, is of it self apt to do, and what we by
the assistance of Grace may, and ought to do in such cases. Pray we may, and
pray earnestly for the removal of that Cup, that is so dreadful to nature;
nor must we conclude, that if the hand tremble and shake; when it takes the
deadly potion, that we therefore now are less Christians, because we are more
Men. Nay we should show our selves not to be men, but senseless stocks and
stones if we were not apprehensive of the present pressures we labor and groan
under; and we should show our selves less then Christians, direct faithless
Infidels; the disciples, not of Jesus, but of Zeno or Epicurus, if we should
not now in a time of need come, not only with boldness, but more than ordinary
zeal and devotion to the throne of Grace, to find help in time of need. Our
Savior in this has left us an example, and he has further given us
instruction, that though nature teaches (without any other Tutor) that we now
especially should multiply our Prayers and heighten our ardour and fervency,
yet from his great example, and Precept, and instruction we should also learn
still to close up our most ardent most heightened devotions, with a submission
to Gods will, though in such an Agony as this of our blessed Savior, we may
pray the more earnestly for the removal of this bitter cup; yet still, when we
cry out, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, we must add with
him, yet not mine but thy will be done. And this is the entire (...) a Perfect
clear demonstration of all that the Doctor undertook, in Reference either to M.
C. or this Refuter. And I wonder how he should not see it; and if he did see
it, why he so should cavil at it.

. 7. We go on then with our Refuter.

JEANES.
I suppose the antecedent to the relative is in these words May it not be a
season for that pious man's ardency to receive some growth? for his zeal to be
emulous of those waves, and pour it self out more profusely at such then at a
calmer season? And then there be two things that you affirm, that I deny not of
the Person of Christ.

1. That a tempestuous time (a time of affliction) was a season for Christ's
ardency to receive some growth.

2. That 'twas a season for his zeal to pour it self out more profusely at
such then at a calmer season.

As for the first sentence, a time of affliction was a season for Christ's
ardency to receive some growth, if by Ardency, you understand the ardency of
his Love of God, I deny that it did receive any growth: for to ascribe growth
unto it is to charge it with imperfection. Charitas quamdiu etc.

. 8. I wonder, Sir, that after so long a dispute with the Doctor, you should
yet be to seek of his meaning. Review the whole section, and tell me, whether
the Doctor has not fully cleared his intention. The Ardency he speaks of, is
the Ardency and fervor of Prayer, which he says in this so proper season (as
now our Saviors bloody Agony) did receive some heightning and growth. And this
he affirms from the Authority of Saint Luke. This is the utmost, he ever
undertook to demonstrate, from the first to the last of this discourse, and his
very Title Page will make it good. And therefore here Sir, you oppose not the
Doctors position, but another of your own framing. For though Ardency in Prayer
be an act of Piety and devotion, and consequently of Charity, and the Love of
God, as that is commonly taken in scripture (because by a Metonymy, it is an
effect and fruit of our Love of God) yet the Love of God properly and formally
taken for that transcendent Love, that is immediately fixed on God, is formally
and really distinct, and clean another thing from Ardency in Prayer, as
properly and formally taken. Of the last, and such like Acts of Charity, as
these, the Doctor speaks of; of the former only our Refuter. And therefore
though it were granted that the Acts of this Love, as properly taken, were not,
could not be gradually augmented, yet this notwithstanding Christ's Ardency in
Prayer might upon a just occasion be heightened. The opposition here, as it is
plain, is not ad idem.

. 9. But then I deny, that to ascribe growth, or rather graduall heightning and
increase even to the Acts of this love in respect of his state of viator will
argue any imperfection in this love, as respecting this state, or derogate any
thing from the Perfection of his habitual fullness of Grace, as has most
evidently been already demonstrated, and I shall further instantly confirm from
our Refuters own assertions.

. 10. But though he has very little reason on his side, yet at last he has met
with great Authority, the Authority of S. Austin.

JEANES.
For to ascribe growth unto it (Christ Love) is to charge it with imperfection.
Charitas, quamdiu augeri potest (says Austin) profecto illud quod minus est
quam debet, ex vitio est.

. 11. The words I acknowledge to be Saint Austins, but I observe they be
diversely quoted by learned men. Chamier Chamier tom. 3. lib 11. c. 14.. 1.
Davenant. de Justit. habit. and Act. c. 17. p. 286. et c. 24. p 327. Master
Cawdreys triplex Diatr. p. 110.
and Bishop Davenant both cite it from the 29. Epistle of Saint Austin; and
rightly, as we shall see anon. But M. Cawdrey he quotes it from the 62. Epistle
of S. Jerome. But there it is not, and I believe not in any part of that
volume, that contains the genuine Epistles of that Father. And therefore I
conceive that he might possibly take the place upon Trust, unless he followed
some more ancient edition. For I find in Marianus victor's censure of the ninth
Tome among S. Jeromes works, that all those pieces there digested, which were
formerly ascribed to S. Jerome, were put heretofore in the fourth volume of his
works, and read in another Order, then now they are. Doctor Hammond in his
Account to the triplex Ham. Account c. 6. Sect. 8.. 33, 34.
Diatribe, he quotes it from the ninth Tome of S. Jerome page 159. and rightly
as to the place, for in my Colen Edition of 1616. I find it in that page 159.
col. 2. G.

. 12. But then I must withal acknowledge a mistake of the learned Doctors. For
the place is not in Jeromes Epistle to S. Augustine, as he supposes, and says
all along.

. 13. For first this appears, by the Inscription of the Epistle, Hieron. Tom.
9. epist. 44. p. 157. edit. Colon.
as it lies in the ninth Tome among S. Jeromes works. For it is, Augustinus
Hieronymo de eo quod scriptum est, Qui totam legem observaverit. And the
inscription of Augustinus Hieronymo is to be found in the top of every leaf all
along that Epistle in that very edition.

Secondly, it appears from the very beginning of that Epistle, quod ad te
scripsi, honorande mihi in Christo frater Hieronyme, quaerens de Anima humana,
etc.

Thirdly, it is evident from the body of the Epistle. For the Author twice
quotes S. Jeromes treatises against Jovinian, Quam eorum vanitatem in Joviniano
illo qui hac sententia Stoicus erat -- de Scripturis sanctis dilucidissime
convicisti. ibid. 158. Col. 1. D. Nam tu quidem in eodem ipso opere splendide
contra Jovinianum etiam hoc de Scripturis sanctis diligenter probasti. ibid. p.
159. Col. 1. A.
and highly commends them.

. 14. The truth is, the Epistle is S. Austins, and extant in the second Tome of
his works, his Epistles, those which by Erasmus and all, are censured and
acknowledged to be genuine. Aug. tom. 2. Ep. 29. p. 42. Paris. 1635. And this,
and the former de Origin Animae, as they were written by him to Saint Jerome
for his resolution in two such high and difficult points, so they are owned by
him in his Retractations, and styled not Epistles, but books. And he gives this
account of the Scripsi etiam duos libros ad Hieronymum Presbyterum sedentem in
Bethleem, unum de Origin Animae bominis, alterum de sententia Jacobi Apostoli
ubi ait, Quicunque totam legem servaverit offendat autem in uno, factus est
omnjum reus, de utroque consulens eum: sed in illo priore quaestionem quam
propofui ipse non solvi in posteriore autem quod mihi de illa solvenda
videretur non tacui; sed utrum hoc approbaret etiam ille consului. R^scripsit
autem laudans eandem consultationem, meam, sibi tamen ad rescribendum o^ium non
esse respondit. Ego vero quousque esset in corpore hos libros edere nolu^, ne
forte responderet aliquando, and cum ipsa responstone ejus potius ederentur.
Illo autem defuncto ^d hoc e^id^prior^m, ut qui legit admoneatur, etc. --
Posteriorem vero ad hoc, ut quaestion^ de qua ibi agitur etiam quae nobis visa
est solutio ipsa noscatur* August: Retract: l. 2. cap. 45.
writing, and publication of them. That in both he had a desire to provoke S.
Jerome to declare his resolution and Judgment, and though he himself had not
solved the former Question, yet he thought in his own Judgment, that he had
sufficiently done the latter, and though he had proposed his own Judgment by
way of doubt, and enquiry to gain Saint Jeromes opinion, and resolution, yet it
was that which he conceived, was proper for the unriddleing the doubt, And
therefore now since S. Jerome was dead, and had not answered it, he had
published it to the world, to declare his own opinion, how that difficult place
was to be solved.

. 15. The words then are not Saint Ieromes but S. Austins. But the mistake is
not material, and that which any man might be guilty of. I suppose the ground
and occasion of it might be this. For the Doctor minding his answer to M.
Cawdrey and finding the quotation not among S. Ieromes Epistles, as M. Cawdrey
had cited it, but in the ninth Tome of Ieromes works, he minded not these
minute circumstances, but addressed himself to the business of the Epistle, and
finding it not to satisfy the pretense of his adversary, but aiming at another
thing, he took out what was fit for his turn, and writing in haste, and having
much business before him, and the ninth Tome of S Ieromes works now in his eye,
he might easily forget the inscription of the Epistle, and put down S. Jerome
for S. Austin among whose works he now found it. Or else, which I rather
believe, the Doctor having formerly read this Passage in this volume of Jerome,
and considered the full purpose of it, he might extract, and put down in his
Adversaria, that part in short which might serve as a Clavis to unlock the
meaning of the whole, and for brevity sake (as the custom is) set down the
place thus, Hieren. tom. 9. p. 159. which Passage he reviewing in his
Adversaria, upon this occasion, and finding it quoted thus from S. Jerome, and
M. Cawdrey agreeing also with him, without further consideration, and a new
recourse to the place, he might take it for the writing of Saint Jerome.

. 16. But be the occasion what it will, the most that can be made of it is
(...), either a lapse of memory, or have and inadvertencie. For plain it is
from the Doctors answer to M. Cawdrey, that he had read the Epistle, and has
given the true and genuine sense of the place (except in one particular,
wherein I differ from him, and shall shortly give my reasons for it) which he
could not have done, unless he had read it all over, and well considered the
purport of it. And therefore since the Doctor is not deceived in the meaning of
the place, (except in that particular) the mistake in the Authors name is not
material to the present business and argument he had in hand, and therefore
the lapse is but venial, Ipsa enim re (as Marianus victorius in his censure of
this Tome of S. Jerome says very well) non scriptoris nomine veritas aut
probatur, aut adulteratur. And now let our Refuter himself when the names are
changed of Jerome into Austin, and Austin into Jerome, sit in Judgment upon
the Doctors account of that place, and condemn it if he can.

. 17. But to come to the place it self, and the use our Refuter makes of it.
The conclusion and inference he makes from it is this, To ascribe growth to the
ardency of Christ's actual Love, or say, that one Act of his Love of God, was
gradually heightened and more intense than another Act of the same Love, is to
charge it with imperfection, because Saint Austin says, Charitas quamdiu
augeri potest, profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, in vitio est. The
words I acknowledge, but the Inference or sequel I deny; because it supposes
clean an other thing then Saint Austin ever meant, which thus I prove.

. 18. The Father writes in that Epistle to S. Jerome, to resolve him in a
difficulty of some concernment, and which it Jac. 2. 10. Quae res talis ac
tanta est, ut quod hinc tibi jam non olim scripsi, multum me poeniteat. De
agenda namque praesenti vita, quomodo ad vitam perveniamus aternam, non de
praeterita perscrutanda -- haec vertitur Quaestio. Aug. Ep. 29. p. 42. Col. 2.
D. Ib. p. 44. Col. 1. C. D.
repented him, that he had not long since consulted him about. It is concerning
the sense of that place in S. James c. 2. 10. Whosoever shall keep the whole
Law and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. The ground and rise of
the difficulty was this, because the same S. James c. 3. 2. says, in many
things we offend all; Non enim ait, offenditis, sed offendimus omnes, cum
Christi loqueretur Apostolus. And S. John also, 1. Ep. 1. 8. says the same, If
we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves. And this S. Jerome also himself
had observed against Iovinian, that pleaded for absolute sinless perfection.
And therefore since we all sin in many things, and as S. James says, he that
offends in one is guilty of all, how then can any believer of the many
thousands, that truly and in simplicity of heart acknowledge their own sins,
have any thing of goodness and sanctity in them? But then he subsumes, Absit ut
dicamus, tot and tantos fideles and pios homines Dei non habere pietatem, quam
Graeci vel (...), vel expressius and before (...) vocant, etc. And therefore
how shall we unfold this difficulty?

. 19. For the solution of it therefore, he proposes diverse things, and this
only tendandi gratia, to draw S. Jerome to give him his opinion.

. 20. As first, whether S. James refer not to the sins mentioned in the
context, verse. 2, 3. etc. ut qui dixerit diviti sede hic, and pauperi sta
illic; huic non honorem, quem illi deferens, and idololatra, and blasphemus,
and adulter, and homicida, and ne (quod longum est) cuncta commemorem reus
omnium criminum Ibid. p. 43. col. 1. B. C. D.
judicandus est: offendens quippe in uno, factus est omnium reus. This he
seeming to doubt of, as appears by this Parent hesis (nisi alio modo
intelligendum ostendatur) he proceeds to a second, which is this.

. 21. Whether secondly the doubt may not be solved upon the opinion of the
Peripateticks, who maintained virtutes esse inter se connexas, and consequently
that he that wanted Ibid p. 43. col. 1. D. and col. 2. A, B, C, D. page 44.
Col. 1. A, B.
the habit of any one virtue, suppose of Justice or Temperance had only the
vizor and shape of the rest, and not the substance: for no man will call
Catiline virtuous (because he was a traitor to his Country, though frigus,
sitim, famem far poterat, eratque patiens inediae, algoris, vigiliae, supra
quam cuiquam credibile est, ac per hoc and sibi and suis magna praeditus
fortitudine videbatur. This he positively resolves against. Ibid. p. 44. col.
1. B.
Non enim and ista divina sententia est, qua dicitur, qui unam virtutem
habuerit, omnes habet, eique nulla inest, cui una defuerit, sed hominibus hoc
visum esi, multum quidem ingeniosis, studiosis, sed tamen hominibus, etc. And
therefore he goes on to another, and enquires.

. 22. Whether, thirdly, it may not be solved upon the Ibid p 44. col. 2. A, B,
C.
Opinion of the Stoics, that maintained all sins to be equal, because as they
instanced, it was all one if a man were drowned whether he had a hundred
fathom of water above his head, or only three inches, since he could be but
drowned, and therefore it must be so in respect of sin, which whosoever commits
does but transilire lineas, quas ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum, and
he that has gone beyond the line was as much out of the right way, as he that
wandered a thousand miles from it. But this also he resolves against from
Scripture. Itaque and non justificabitur in conspectu Dei omnis vivens: Ibid.
col. 2. C. Psalm. 142. 2. Hab. 2. 4.
and tamen justus ex fide vivit. Et induti sunt sancti justitia alius magis,
alius minus. Et nemo hic vivit sine peccato, and hoc alius magis, alius minus:
optimus autem est, qui minimum. And now here he takes occasion to proceed to
give his own Judgment, but modestly, warily and rather by way of enquiry then
determination; for he well knew the temper of S. Jerome, to whom he writes, sed
quid ego tanquam oblitus cui loquor, Doctori similis factus sum, cum
proposuerim, quid abs te discere velim? sed quia de peccatorum parilitate, unde
in id quod agebam incidit quaestio, examinandam tibi sententiam meam promere
statueram, jam eam tandem aliquando concludam.

. 23. And now having prepared the way, and casually, as it were, and only to
confront the opinion of the Peripateticks and Stoics proved from the
Scripture, that there was Ibid. p. 44. col. 1. C. D. and col. 2. A. andC. D.
a twofold Righteousness, one Legal the other Evangelicall, and that
believers, though we all sin, did truly worship God, which they could not do
without Charity; and that in respect of this he was most perfect, most holy,
and righteous that most mortified the deeds of the flesh, and came nighest to a
legal sinless perfection, he comes to give his own Judgment, but still by way
of enquiry. And it is this, whether Ibid p. 45. col. 2. part. tot.
since the Scriptures mention a twofold righteousnese, Legal and Evangelicall,
a justification by the works of the Law, and another by Faith, and the Grace
and Righteousness of the Gospel, this difficulty may not be solved, and it may
not be true according to the Covenant of works, that he that offends in one as
S. James speaks, offends in all, and as certainly by that Covenant of works
does incur the curse annexed to the least transgression, as well as if he had
broken all: and yet it may be true, that the just shall live by Faith, though
the same S. James says, in many things we offend all. Ac per hoc qui totam
legem servaverit, si in uno offenderit, fit omnium reus, quia contra charitatem
(that universal virtue of goodness, like the Arist. infracitat.
Philosophers universal justice, that consists in an absolute sinless
perfection, that consists in keeping all Gods commandments, briefly summed up
by our Savior in these two, Thou shall love the Lord, etc. and thy neighbor,
etc.) facit, unde tota lex pendet.

. 24. From hence he proceeds to show, that in respect of Evangelicall
righteousness and sanctification, there might be a difference of holiness, and
a difference also of sins in opposition to the Peripatetick and Stoic,
according as they approached to the absolute sinless Perfection, or complete
and Perfect Charity. Quae si vera sint, eo modo and illud absolvitur, quod ait
homo etiam Apostolicae gratiae, in multis offendimus omnes. Omnes enim
offendimus, sed unus gravius, alius Jac. 3. 2.
levius. Quanto quisque gravius leviusque peccaverit, tanto in peccato
committendo major, quanto in diligendo Deo and proximo minor. Et rursus tanto
minor in peccati perpetratione, quanto major in Dei and proximi dilectione.
Tanto itaque plenior iniquitatis, quanto inanior charitatis. Et tunc perfecti
sumus in charitate, quando nihil restat ex infirmitate, etc. This opinion he
amplifies, and prosecutes, and labors to prove by diverse passages in S. James
to be the true meaning of that difficult place, and then concludes his Epistle.

. 25. And now from this Analysis and Scope of the Author in this Epistle it
will be no hard matter to understand S. Austins mind in this text, so often
insisted on by us in our controversies with the Papists, and to show how much
besides the purpose of Saint Austin and other Protestants, both Master Cawdrey
and our Refuter have urged it against the Doctor.

. 26. I shall with the Readers patience give the place a little larger then
either our Refuter, or M. Cawdrey, or Chamier, or Doctor Hammond himself has
done, for the clearer satisfying all scruples. And it shall not repent me of my
pains spent in the satisfying of the ordinary Reader in a doubt, which perhaps
may often trouble him.

. 27. The distinction then of Legal and Evangelicall holiness and purity,
being the ground work of S. Austins opinion for the satisfying and reconcileing
this difficulty in S. James, like a wise Master Builder, the good Father very
artificially and clearly explains and confirms it, before he comes to make his
application and inferences from it. And this passage so long insisted on, is a
part of it. Ibid. page 44. col. 2. C, D.


. 28. Whereas then the Stoics had compared sin to a deluge of water, he
disliking that, compares it rather to darkness, and Grace to light; and then
adds, Profecto ita ut quis que illustratione piae charitatis affectus est, in
alio actu magis, Ibid. D. and p. 45. col. 1. A. B.
in alio minus, in aliquo nihil: sic potest dici habere aliam, and aliam non
habere, aliam magis, aliam minus habere virtutem. Nam, and major est in isto
charitas, quam in illo, recte possumus dicere, and aliqua in isto, nulla in
illo, quantum pertinet ad charitatem, quae pietas est; and in ipso uno homine,
quod majorem habuit pudicitiam, quam patientiam, and majorem hodie, quam heri,
si proficit: Et adhuc non habeat continentiam, and habeat non parvam
misericordiam. Et ut generaliter breviterque complectar, quam de virtute habeam
notionem, quoad recte vivendum attinet, virtus est Charitas, qua id quod
diligendum est, diligitur: haec in aliis major, in aliis minor, in aliis nulla
est. Plenissima vero, quae jam non possit augeri, quam diu hic homo vivit, est
in nemine: quamdiu autem (this is the fragment our Refuter insists on) augeri
potest, profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est. Ex quo vitio
non est justus in terra, qui faciat bonum, and non peccat. Ex quo vitio non
justificabitur in conspectu Dei omnis vivens. Propter quod vitium, si 3 Reg. 8.
46. Psalm. 142. 1 John 1. 8.
dixerimus, quod peccatum non habemus, nosmetipsos seducimus, and veritas in
nobis non est. Propter quod etiam, quantumlibet profecerimus necessarium est
nobis dicere, Dimitte nobis debita Mat. 16. 12.
nostra, cum jam omnia in baptismo dicta, facta, cogitata dimissa sunt. Quid
itaque? qui recte videt, videt unde, and quando, and ubi separanda (it should
be read speranda, and so the sense requires, and so it is printed in the ninth
tome of S. Jerome in the Colen edition, where this Epistle is extant) sit illa
perfectio, cui non sit, quod adjici possit? si autem praecepta non essent, non
utique esset, ubi se homo certius inspiceret, et videret, unde averteretur, quo
conaretur, quare gratularetur, quid precaretur. Magna est ergo utilitas
praeceptorum, si libero arbitrio tantum detur, ut gratia Dei amplius honoretur.
Quae si ita se habent, unde fiet omnium reus si in uno offendat, qui totam
legem servaverit, etc.

. 29. By this it plainly appears, not only what is the design of the Author,
but how fitly it is urged by the Protestants against the Papists in the
questions of Full-filling of the Law, according to the strictness of the first
Covenant of Justification by works, Merit ex condigno, and supererogation. For
as long as this place is extant in S. Austins works, it will be impossible to
prove any justification by works in this sense, any merit in this sense, any
fullfilling of the Law in this sense, much less any works of supererogation.
And if the Papists undertake to make good the contrary, so long as the Epistles
to the Romans and Galathians are in the new Testament, and this Epistle of S.
Austin's is extant, all the Bellarmine's and Suareze's, and Jesuits and
Conclaves in the world will never be able to make it good.

. 30. But if they mean not to be tried by the Covenant of works, but the
gracious Gospell-Covenant, that requires faith and Repentance and growth in
grace, and striving after Perfection, and endeavoring to mortify every
sinful lust, and promises a reward to be given according to every man's works
(as Vid. Council. Trident. Sess: 6. cap. 1, 2, 3, 7, 11, 16. and canon: 1, 10,
26. and alibi passim. Bellar. Judic: de lib: concord: Mendac: 4, 5, 6, 8, 20,
22, 27, 29, 30, 31, 49. and l. de Justif: c. 3. and 13. and l. 2. c. 2. and l.
4. c. 3, 4. and l. 5. cap. 12. de Poenitent: l. 1. c. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. I do also
profess upon a Survey of their (the Papists) writings, that many hot brained
Incendiaries on both sides do persuade the world, that our distance is greater
in the doctrine of Justification and Merit, then indeed it is: And I do believe
it would be a useful work of any that write against the Papists on these
points, to gather the Nominall Controversies by themselves, and then let us see
all the real doctrinall differences by themselves, when the verbal
differences are laid by, that we may know how far we differ in deed in the
matter, and how far in meet words. To which purpose Master Wooton de
Reconciliatione, has said somewhat, etc. Vide Baxter's Confession of his
Faith, etc. c. 6. sect. 1. p. 133. Et ibid: passim per totum cap. sect. 1, 2,
3, 4. p. 143, 144, etc.
they do say, and it concerns them, I am sure, to make it good) The difference
then, as M. Baxter thinks, may not be so large, as at first sight it seems, and
in many things, perhaps, it may be more about a contention of words, then any
real difference. And the same learned man in his Aphorisms of Justification
has presumed to tread out a Path, that may help to reconcile, not widen, not
only these differences, but also those others of Antinomianisme and
Perfection, so rise among us at this time. And it were well for the peace of
Gods Church, if wise men would set down, and with moderation consider the true
grounds of difference, and separate them from verbal disputes, and
misunderstanding, That so the Lord might be one, and his name one among us. But
to return to our Refuter.

. 31. We have seen the place as it lies at large in S. Austin, and beheld his
scope and design in that Epistle: It remains now we show, how our Refuter
mistakes it.

. 32. The conclusion he should prove is, that to ascribe growth to the Ardency
of any Act of Christ's love, is to charge it (that is, the habit of divine Grace
in him) with imperfection, because Austin says, Charitas quamdiu augeri
potest, profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est.

. 33. And now, not to trouble the Reader with our Refuters Lurking, and hideing
himself under the Covert of the Ambiguity of this Phrase, The Love of God,
Plain it is that the place in Saint Austin is wholly mistaken by him, and will
never serve his interest, nor prove his conclusion.

. 34. For first the Charity S. Austin speaks of, is a habit; now our Refuter
speaks of the Acts of Charity, which differ at least specie, but he himself
(maintains though falsely) do differ toto genere, and so the attributes of the
one, unless they be genericall, cannot agree with the other.

2. The Charity S. Austin speaks of, is not a single Grace, but an universal
Virtue, such as the Philosophers universal Vid: Aristot: Eth. l. 5. c. 1.. 9,
10.
Justice, that contains all virtues and graces in it, as appears from his own
definition.

But this of our Refuter is a single Act of divine Love, a single Act of one
branch or habit of this universal Charity, or virtue. And this makes the
difference greater then formerly.

3. The Charity, which S. Austin says, cannot be increased is Perfectissima,
quae quamdiu homo hic vivit est in nemine, That absolute sinless perfection of
Innocence, and complete obedience to all Gods Commandments. Of this the Doctor
declares himself expressly not to speak, but only of the sincerity of this or
that virtue or grace in this or that performance. And it is of the graduall
difference of the earnestness in Christ's prayer in his Agony, beyond what it
was at other times, that our Refuter here disputes against by this Authority of
S. Austin. How fitly now let any man Judge.

4. The Augmentation of that more imperfect habit of Charity of which S. Austin
speaks is extensive to the acquisition of more graces, as of Piety, Patience,
Chastity, and the like, as well as intensive: a growth in all Grace, as much as
we can, toward a sinless perfection, and exact conformity to all Gods
Commandments. But then the Doctor has declared that he speaks of another thing,
and only of the graduall advancement of the Acts of those Graces above the
Particular Commands, which a man in some cases, and at some times may fulfill,
though he have not the habit of sinless Perfection.

. 35. And therefore though none in this life may be absolutely free from sin,
as the good Father constantly maintains against the Pelagian, and though that
righteousness which is still in the growth, falls short of such Perfection, yet
thence it will not follow, that a man can do no one Act in it self agreeable to
Gods Law, or that he may not in some particular Act do something more, in
respect of graduall intention and fervor, then what any particular Law, at all
times and in all Cases, and from all persons requires. And as this was all the
Doctor undertook in that place to make good, so it will never be convinced by
this saying of S. Austins. For we have already most clearly demonstrated, that
Gods Law requires a greater fervor and height of Ardency in some Acts, and
toward some Objects, then in others; and also at some Times; (as to instance
in our Acts of zeal and devotion in a time of more then ordinary trouble or
Calamity. Then not only David has his Psalm de Profundis, but every Christian
must else. This is a season when signally God calls for it, and we sin, if we
do not now in obedience to his thundering voice, as well lift up our Hearts, as
our cries and tongues to him.) And this is so far from being contradicted by S.
Austins Charitas perfectissima, as that it supposes and requires it, as the
same Et haec est perfecta Justitia qua potius potiora, and minus minora
diligimus. Aug. de vera Relig. c. 49. vide eund. lib. 1. de Christiana Doct. c.
27.
Father determines, because unless the Acts were now intended, our Charity
would fall short of what Gods Law requires.

. 36. Fifthly, whereas M. Cawdrey understands this Passage, Profecto illud quod
minus est quam debet, ex vitio est, thus; That Charity, whether in the Act or
Habit, that comes not up to the highest degree or point of graduall intension,
is imperfect, and faulty; and so thence concludes that there be set degrees to
the Perfection of the Habit and the Act, and our Refuter upon the same score,
that there are eight degrees of graduall intension for the Acts, and that the
Perfection and sinlessness of every single Act of divine Charity consists in
this highest degree; this is most erroneous in it self (as we have already
demonstrated) and clear besides the meaning of S. Austin.

. 37. For here the phrase ex vitio est, is not to be understood in a formal
sense, as if the Father meant, that the growing Charity were it self a sin or
faulty (for then it should be in vitio est,) but in a Causall sense, Thus: That
most absolute righteousness and Legal sinless perfection, beyond which in that
Fathers sense, a man cannot go (for let him do all that is required, he can be
but innocent and keep Gods Commandments) is not in any man in this life, but as
long as we are growing on to it, the Cause, why by the Evangelicall
dispensation of Grace we attain it not, arises only from our Original
Corruption, or inbred Concupiscence and proness to evil, the Law in our
Members, which though, for the Reatus, it be done away in Baptism; yet not to
the Fomes of it, as here immediately, and elsewhere Vid. Aug. l. 1. de Peccat
merit. and remiss. l. 1. c. 39. and l. 2. c. 4. 7. de nupt. and concupis. l. 1.
c. 25, 31. and con: duas Epist. Pelagian. l. 1. c. 13.
he frequently determines. For it follows, Ex quo vitio non justificabitur in
conspectu Dei omnis vivens. Propter quod vitium, si dixerimus, quod peccatum
non habemus, nosmet ipsos seducimus, and veritas in nobis non est. Propter quod
etiam, quantumlibet profecerimus, necessarium est nobis dicere, Dimitte nobis
debita nostra, cum jam omnia in Baptismo dicta, facta, cogitata dimissa sunt.

. 38. That this and this only is his meaning of Ex vitio est, will appear from
two other places even in the very same Epistle, where he Paraphrases the word
Vitium, as we have done. The one preceeds our Refuters quotation, thus, Quis
autem sine aliquo peccato? Quis ergo sine aliquo vitio, id est, fomite quodam,
vel quasi sine radice peccati, cum clamet, qui supra Domini pectus recumbebat,
si dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus, nos ipsos decipimus, and veritas non
est in nobis? And thus also our learned and judicious August. Ep. 29. Quis sine
aliquo peccato? quis ergo sine aliquo vitio, id est, fomite quodam vel quasi
radice peccati? Duo hic asserit Augustinus, neminem esse sine aliquo peccato,
sc. actuali, and neminem esse sine vitio, nimirum insito and originali, quod
vitium est radix actualium. Davenant. de Just. habit: and Act: c. 19. p. 299.
Bishop Davenant 1 Jo. 1. 8.
understands him. The other follows it thus: In multis enim offendimus omnes --
sed unus gravius alius levins, etc. Tanto itaque plenior iniquitatis, quanto
inanior charitatis. Et tunc perfecti sumus in charitate quando nihil restat ex
Infirmitate. The whole has already been quoted, and is but a paraphrase of the
Passage insisted on by our Refuter.

. 39. That this and no other is the meaning of S. Austin will further appear
from several other passages of his writings, where treating of the same
argument, especially against the Pelagians (whom most industriously and
zealously he opposes) he constantly resolves it for Catholic doctrine, that
though the Law requires exact unsinning obedience, and the absolute Perfection
of righteousness (which Augustine. l. 2. de peccator. merit. and remiss. c. 6.
and de not. and great. c. 42. and de great. Christi. and origin. peccat. l 1. c.
29. and 48. This he asserts and defends. l. de Spirit. and litera. c. 1. 2. and
35. and for it writ that treatise. And though in his 95. Epist. ad Innocentium
(mihi p. 164.) he seems to qualify and explain that Tenet, yet as it appears
in his Censure of that Passage in his Retractations he never recalled it.
Rescripsit mihi (Marcellinus) se fuisse permo^um, quod dixerim, fieri posse ut
sit homo sine peccato, si voluntas ejus non defit, open adjuvante divina,
quanquam nemo in hac vita vel fuerit, vel sit, vel futurus sit; Quaesivit enim
quomodo dixerim posse fieri, cujus rei desit exemplum. Propter hanc ejus
inquisitionem scripsi librum, cui titulus est de Spiritu and litera. Aug.
Retract. l 2. c. 37.
he allows to be possible by the Omnipotent power of Grace working in man's
will) yet Vide Augustine. l. 2. de Peceat. merit. and remiss. c. 6, 7, 8. etc.
etc. 17, 18, 19, 20. etc. De Nature. and Great. c. 42, et 66. De Great. Christ.
and Origin. peccat. l. 1. c. 49, 50. De Perfect. Justit. c. 8. Epist. ad
Innocent. 95. (mihi) page 164. col. 1. Retract. l. 1. c. 7. (mihi) page 6. col.
1. C. D.
by reason of our original corruption, which will be in us, so long as we
live, no man ever did, or shall attain it here, but is therefore kept in an
imperfect growing inchoate state and condition; so that the best men that ever
were, or are, or shall be, have need constantly to pray for the assistance of
Grace and pardon of sin, and daily to say as our Savior has taught us, Dimitte
nobis debita nostra, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us: And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil.

. 40. This Original Corruption sometimes he calls Originis Labes L. de Spirit.
and lit. c. 6. de peccat. mer. and remiss. cap. 26. de Nupt. and concupis. lib.
2. cap. 34. and con. Jullan. lib. 6. cap. 16.
, and Languor, and Morbus L. de Spir. and lit. c. 10. and alibi.
, and Vetustas de Spirit. and lit. c. 17. and alibi.
, sometimes Concupiscentia De Nupt. and concupisc. l. 1. c. 25, 35. and alibi.
Carnis and Carnalis and Caro, sometimes De Nature. and Great. c. 55, 63.
Lex Peccati and Caro De Peccatmer. and remiss. c. 28. de nuptiis and
concupisc. l. 1. c. 12. 31.
peccati, and Peccatum in Membris, and often de Nature. and Great. c. 56. de
Great. Christi et origin. Peccat. l. 2. c. 19. de Nupt. and concupisc l. 1. c.
20, 23. cont. duas Epist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 13.
Peccatum absolutely, sometimes de perfect. Justit. c. 18.
Infirmitas, and other while Propaginis vitium, con. duas Epist. Pelagian. l.
2. c. 5.
Originis vitium, de Great. Christ. and orig. Pec. l. 2. c. 15, and 39.
and de Great. Christ. and orig. Pec. l. 2. c. 33.
Naturae vitium, l. de Pec. mer. and remiss. c. 36.
Vitiosa Natura, de Pec. mer. and remiss. l. 3. c. 8.
Vitiosa primordia, and de Not. and Great. c. 48, 49, 52. and alibi passim.
Vitiata Natura, but most commonly and signally de Spir. and lit. c. 27. de
Nature. and Great. c. 3, 19, 20, 23, 38, 39, 52, 54, 55, 57. de Great. and origin.
pec. l. 1. c. 19, 20. and l. 2. c. 12, 13, 15, 33, 35, 37, 39, 40. de Nupt. and
concup. l. 1. c. 23, 32 l. 2. c. 4, 8, 9, 29, 33, 34. Cont. Julian. l. 2. c 9.
Et l. 6. c. 7, 18, 19. cont. duat Epist. Pelag. l. 2. c. 4. l. 4. c. 3, 10. De
perfect. Justit. c. 4. Epist. 105. p. 178. Epist. 106. page 184. Retract. l. 1.
c. 7.
Vitium absolutely, and this in opposition to a saying of Pelagius, who
asserted Omne bonum ac malum, quo vel laudabiles vel vituperabiles sumus, non
nobiscum oritur, sed agitur a nobis, capaces enim utriusque rei, non pleni
nascimur, and ut fine virtute, ita and sine Vitio procreamur, Atque ante
actionem propriae voluntatis id solum in homine est, quod Deus condidit.
Pelagius Haresiarcha. l. 1. de origin. Pec. apud August. de Great. Christ. and
original. pec. l. 2. c. 13. upon which Saint Austin. thus, Nempe cernitis in
his Pelagii verbis, quod dogma contineatur amborum (Caelestii sc. and Pelagii)
de parvulis fine ullius vitii ab Adam contagione nascentibus August. ibid. vide
ibid. l. 2. c. 4.
sicut sine virtute, ita nos sine vitio procreari. For that this Phrase was
signally in use in the Catholic Church to express the Doctrine of Original
Sin before Pelagius and p S. Austin, we learn both from Omnes homines sub
peccato nascimur, quorum ipse ortus in vitio est dicente David, Ecce in
iniquitate -- etc. Ambros. de Poenitent. l. 1. c. 11.
S. Ambrose and And Hilary before him calls it Peccati originem, peccati legem,
peccata humanae naturae, Originem carnis, and more expressly Originis vitium.
vid. Hilarium edit. Basil. p. 501. 522.
Hilary, which the Arch-heretick in that saying eminently opposed; and he and
his Scholar Caelestius, were the Vid. Vincent. Lyrinens. advers. Haeres. cap.
34.
first that durst do it.

. 41. Of the many places that might be quoted to our present purpose, even from
my very small reading and acquaintance in S. Austins writings, I shall only
cite two or three for the full acquitting of the exposition we have given. Nor
should I in a case so clear have troubled the Reader with these unless I had
found the Place to be commonly otherwise understood, even by very learned men,
and by Doctor Hammond also, and through this misconstruction frequently urged
to far different purposes from what the Father intended.

. 42. The first shall be taken out of his 200. Epistle to Asellicus. p. 310.
Col. 1. B. C. D. Vt autem sit Spiritalis, qui legem impleat Spiritalem, non fit
ipsa lege sed gratia, hoc est, non imperio, sed beneficio, non jubente litera,
sed adjuvante Spiritu. Incipit autem homo secundum gratiam in interiore homine
renovari, ut mente agat, quod amat, nec carni consentiat agenti, quod odit, id
est, ut omnino non concupiscat, sed ut post concupiscentias suas non eat. Quod
quidem tam magnum est ut si omnimodo sieret, and quamvis insint dum sumus in
corpore mortis hujus desideria peccati, nulli eorum tamen adhiberemus assensum,
non esset unde diceremus Patri nostro, qui est in Coelis, Dimitte nobis debita
nostra. Nec tamen ideo tales jam essemus quales erimus, cum mortale hoc
induerit immortalitatem. Tunc enim non solum nulli desiderio peccati obediemus,
sed nulla erunt desideria talia, quibus non obedire jubemur. Nunc ergo ubi
dicitur, Jam non ego operor illud; sed illud quod in me habitat peccatum, de
concupiscentia carnis dicitur, quae Romans 7. 18.
operatur in nobis motus suos, etiam quando eis non obedimus, dum non regnat
peccatum in nostro mortali corpore ad odediendum desideriis ejus, nec exhibemus
membra nostra arma iniquitatis peccato, in qua Iustitia nondum consummat a
perseveranter proficientes, ad ejus consummationem quandoque veniemus, ubi
peccati concupiscentia non cohibenda, atque fraenanda sed nulla sit. Hoc enim
Lex posuit dicendo, Non concupisces, non quod hic valeamus, sed ad quod
prosiciendo tendamus.

. 43. The second shall be taken out of his book de perfectione Iustitiae. c. 8.
p. 511. col. 1. B. C. D. In qua oratione (Dominica) si contentiosi esse
nolumus, satis nobis propositum speculum est, ubi inspiciatur vita justorum,
qui ex fide vivunt, and perfect currunt, quamvis sine peccato non sint, Vnde
dicunt, Dimitte nobis, quia nondum quo curritur pervenerunt. Hinc dicit
Apostolus, Non quia jam acceperim, aut jam perfectus Philip. 3.
sim: fratres, ego me non, arbitror apprehendisse, unum autem, quae retro sunt
oblitus, in ea, quae ante sunt extentus, secundum intentionem sequor ad palmam
supernae vocationis Dei in Christo Jesus. Quot quot ergo perfecti hoc sapiamus:
id est, quotquot perfect currimus hoc sapiamus, quod nondum perfecti sumus ut
illic perficiamur, quo perfect adhuc currimus, ut 1 Cor. 13.
cum venerit quod perfectum est, quod ex part est destruatur: id est; non jam
ex part sit, sed ex toto: quia fidei and spei jam res ipsa, non quae credatur,
and speretur, sed quae videatur, teneaturque succedet. Charitas autem quae in
his tribus major est, non auferetur, sed augebitur, and implebitur contemplata,
quod credebat, and quod sperabat adepta. In qua plenitudine charitatis
praeceptum illud implebitur, Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo, and
ex tota anima tua, and ex tota mente tua. Nam cum est adhuc aliquid carnalis
concupiscentiae, quod vel continendo fraenetur, non omnino ex tota anima
diligitur Deus. Non enim Caro sine anima concupiscit, quamvis Caro concupiscere
dicatur, quia carnaliter anima concupiscit. Tunc erit justus sine ullo omnino
peccato quia nulla lex erit in membris ejus repugnans legi mentis ejus, sed
prorsus toto cord, tota anima, tota mente diliget Deum, quod est primum
summumque praeceptum.

. 44. The third and last, which I chiefly insist on, because it is so exactly
parallel, and almost the same with that we are now upon, is taken out of his
book de Natura and Gratia, cap. P. 319. col. 2. A. B. edit. Paris. 1635.
38. An forte peccata non sunt, de quibus generaliter cavendis atque cohibendis
admonemur praecepto Apostolico, ubi dicit, Non regnet Peccatum in vestro
mortali corpore ad obediendum desideriis Romans 6. 12.
ejus? His quippe ne obediamus ad ea quae non licent, vel minus decent
quotidiana and perpetua conflictatione certandum est. Nam utique ex hoc vitio
mittitur vel dimittitur oculus quo non oportet. Quod vitium si convaluerit and
praevaluerit etiam adulterium perpetratur in corpore, quod in cord tanto sit
citius, quanto est cogitatio celerior, and nullum impedimentum morarum. Hoc
peccatum, id est, hunc vitiosae affectionis appetitum, qui magna ex part
fraenarunt, ut non obedirent desideriis ejus, nec exhiberent ei membra sua arma
iniquitatis etiam justi appellari meruerunt, and hoc adjutorio Dei. Verum quia
saepe in levissimis and aliquando in cautis obrepit peccatum, and justi
fuerunt, and sine peccato non fuerunt. Postremo si in Abel justo charitas Dei,
qua una vere justus est, quicunque justus est, adhuc erat quo posset and
deberet augeri, quicquid minus erat, Ex vitio erat. Et cui non minus sit donec
ad illam ejus fortitudinem veniatur, ubi tota hominis absorbeatur infirmitas?

. 45. The case I think is beyond all possibility of exception plain. The whole
is an answer to an Objection of the Pelagians, that urged that the full
Perfection of righteousness must be granted to be attainable in this life, that
had actually been attained by holy men, particularly by Abel, for of him the
Scripture testifies that he was righteous, but no where speaks of his sin,
which sure it would have done, as well as that of Adam and Eve and Cain, if he
had been any way guilty.

. 46. To this S. Austin answers first; That there were many things done that
are not recorded; and so Abel might sin though the Scripture mentions it not,
and therefore there is no arguing from Scripture negatively.

. 47. But because he foresaw this would not satisfy the Pelagian, that urged
by way of reply, that though this may be possible in respect of other men, when
the world was grown populous, yet it was not probable it should be so in the
story of only Vid. de Not. and Great. c. 37.
four persons, especially since the Scripture takes notice of Abels
righteousness, but not of his sin; of Adams and Eves and Cains sin, but not of
their righteousness. And therefore as the holy Spirit of God bears witness
expressly to Abels righteousness, so there is no ground but empty conjecture, or
more improbable and vain Traditions (if any) for his sin; which may with equal
reason be denied as it is urged. Credamus igitur, as the Pelagian concludes,
quod legimus, and quod non legimus, nefas credamus.

. 48. To this in the second place he answers, That though there is no Record
extant in Scripture of Abels actual transgression, yet many there be
(particularly that of Romans 6. 12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies,
that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof Aug. de Nupt. and concupisc. l. 1.
c. 23. and 26. De Not. and Great. c 56. De Nupt. and Concupisc. l. 1. c. 25. Rom
5. 12.
, which he constantly interprets of Original corruption) that speaks of every
man's Original, and consequently of Abels also. But lest this might be too
short, in the following chapter he adds, O utinam non dico aliud quam in illis
literis legit, verum contra id quod legit, nihil vellet astruere, fideliter and
obedienter audiret, quod scriptum est. Per unum hominem peccatum intravit in
mundum, and per peccatum mors, and ita in omnes homines pertransiit in quo
omnes peccaverunt: and non infirmaret tanti medici gratiam, dum fateri non vult
naturam humanam esse vitiatam. O utinam sicut Christianus legeret, praeter
Jesum Christum, nullum esse nomen sub coelo in quo oporteat salvos fieri nos,
and non possibilitatem naturae humanae ita defenderet, ut homo per liberum
arbitrium, etiam sine isto nomine salvus esse posse credatur.

. 49. Secondly he answers, that we read, it is the duty of every one of the
household of faith (of which number the Scripture records Abel to be) to labor
to grow in Grace, which growth implies want and imperfection, that springs from
our Original corruption.

. 50. For the full acquitting of this sense, besides the whole scope and design
of S. Austins answer, I shall desire here to add what the same Father had
before replied in answer to another objection of the Pelagian. c. 30. of this
book. For whereas it had been urged against Original sin, that, suum non est
si necessarium est, aut si suum est voluntarium est, and si voluntarium est,
vitari potest; He thus replies, Non respondemus suum est omnino, sed vitium,
quo committitur, nondum omni ex part sanatum est: quod quidem ut inolesceret,
de non recte usa sanitate descendit. Ex quo vitio jam male valens. vel
infirmitate, vel caecitate plura committ it. Pro quo supplicandum est, ut
sanetur, and deinceps in perpetua sanitate vivatur, non superbiendum, quasi
homo eadem potestate sanetur, qua potestate vitiatus est. And this I suppose,
will fully clear the true sense and import of the Phrase, Ex vitio est.

To return.

. 51. Charitas perfectissima then in S. Austin here, and Charitas quae non
potest augeri, is no other but the universal habit of all virtues whatsoever,
an absolute Legal Perfection, and that all perfect Charity which falls short of
that is not in S. Austins sense a sin (for that were the direct Opinion of the
Peripateticks and Stoics which had but now been refuted by him) but is kept in
this imperfect, and yet growing condition by reason of our Original
Corruption, our natural and sinful infirmity, the foam, the root of sin, the
lust in our members, which will be in our natures, and our fleshly condition,
so long as we live, and the more we sin, and suffer this corruption to reign,
the more we shall fall short of this absolute Perfection.

. 52. And as this is the true and full meaning of S. Austin, so it very well
accords with the Doctors assertion, but no way serves to the interest of M.
Cawdrey, much less to this more absurd position of our Refuter.

. 53. But before I quite leave this place, I must crave leave of the Readers
patience to acquaint him either with the very great ignorance, or carelessness,
or uningenuous dealing of our Refuter. For this very place of S. Austin had
been urged by M. Cawdrey to a purpose not much unlike. And to this the Doctor
in his Account gave a large and very full Answer. That our Refuter may appear
what he is, as also to correct in it a lapse, or two of the learned Doctors, I
shall set it down at large, though I be censured as tedious. It is this.

. 33. This matter he (M. Cawdrey) desires to speak his D. Hammonds Account of
the triplex Diatribe. c. 6. Sect. 8. page 213, 214.
own sense in S. Jeromes words, Charitas quae non potest augeri, etc. citing
Ep. 62. for it. But this Citation is sure mistaken, there is no such thing in
that Epistle. The place sure is in S. Jeromes Epistle to S. Austin. (the
Epistle is indeed extant in Hier. Ep. tom. 9. p. 159.
the ninth Tome of S. Jeromes works, Ep. 44. the very Page the Doctor has
quoted in the Margin, Edit. Colon. but it is not Saint Jeromes but S. Austins
Epistle, for that Tome contains only those pieces that are falsely ascribed to
S. Jerome, and therefore read, The place sure is in S. Austins Epistle to S.
Jerome) where he desires his sense of those words, James 2. 10. He that keeps
the whole law, and offends in one point is guilty of all. On which occasion he
discourses a great while, how one virtue may be found in them, which yet are
guilty of other sins, and so from one thing to another, not by way of defining,
but raising of difficulties to provoke S. Austins read S. Jeromes) solution of
them.

. 34. And on these terms he proposes the Notion of virtue, that it is the
loving of that which is to be loved, and is in some greater, in some less, in
some none at all, and then he adds, plenissima vero, quae jam non possit
augeri, quamdiu homo hic vivit, est in nemine; quamdiu autem augeri potest,
profecto illud quod minus est, quam debet, ex vitio est, Ex quo vitio non est
justus in terra, qui faciat bonum, and non peccet, etc. But the most full
virtue, and such which cannot be increased is in no man, so long as he lives
here; But as long as it may be increased, that which is less than it ought to
be is faulty, whereby it is that the Scripture says (Here I agree not with the
learned Doctor, It should be thus translated (and I have already given my
Reason for it) Certainly that which i^ less than it ought to be (viz: by the
rule of Perfect Righteousness and Charity, the Law) is caused or arises from
our inbred Corruption, Ex vitio est, it is, By reason of which inbred
corruption it is) that there is not a just man upon earth which does good and
sins not (Fro. which inbred corruption it is) that in thy (Gods) sight shall
no man living be justified. By reason of which inbred Corruption it is, that if
we say we have no sin me deceive our selves, etc.

. 35. By this view of the place, it is evident that the virtue which on
occasion of the Place in S. James he speaks, being an universal, impartial
observation of the whole Law, and consequently every failing in that a vice
(for to that all the proofs belong, that there is no man but sins sometimes)
there is no reason to extend his speech any further then to this, and then it
will be no more applicable to our business, which is only of the degrees of
this or that Particular virtue, which it is certain a man may have, who yet is
guilty of some other sin, in other particulars.

. 36. This therefore I willingly acknowledge, that he that fails of any part of
his duty, is therein faulty, or this is Ex vitio in him (proceeds, I understand
it, from his natural inbred Corruption) and if of that only, S. Hieromes
(read S. Austins) words (quamdiu augeri potest) be understood (as it is most
reasonable it should,) whether we judge by the occasion, or the Proofs of his
speech, or by the express words, (quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est) that
which is less then he is bound to do, is faulty (read, proceeds from his own
corruption, ex infirmitate est, as he elsewhere in the same Epistle) then as I
fully consent to the truth of them, so when that is granted, no man can hence
infer, therefore every regular Act of Obedience, which comes short of the
highest degree of Perfection is a sin, for besides many other inconveniences
formerly noted, this fresh one will be observable from S. Hieroms (read S.
Austins) own words, that then every Act of virtue in this life is a sin, for as
for that fullest perfection, which cannot be increased, the beginning of this
Testimony acknowledges, that it is not to be found in any man in this life.

. 37. In a word, the word Perfection, is capable of two Notions, either it may
signify the perfect obedience of never sinning, and of this only S. Hierome
(read S. Austin) speaks, both when he says it is not attained in this life,
and when he adds, that whatsoever is less then this, is sinful (read, proceeds
from our Natural corruption) or else it may signify any higher degree of
exercise of any Particular virtue, Chastity, Mercy, fortitude, etc. And of this
only it is that I speak, and S. Hierome Arist. Eth: l. 5. c. 1.. 9, 10.
(read S. Austin.) in the words cited from him appears never to have thought of
it (for he indeed as we have already demonstrated speaks only of the habit of
Charity, or obedience to the whole Law, like that of the Philosophers,
Vniversalis Justitia est obedientia erga omnes leges, and ideo dicitur
universalis quia complectitur sub se omnes virtutes de quibus leges
universaliter praecipiunt. Mag^r: Com. in loc.
Universal Justice, not at all of the graduall intension of any single Act of
any Particular Virtue or Grace) and to this only my affirmation belongs, that
there are degrees in that Perfection, and that he that has attained to any of
these degrees, sins not against Christ's precept of Perfection, though he has
not arrived to the highest degree.

Thus far the learned Doctor.

. 54. And now I shall make bold to desire our Refuter to answer me these
Dilemma's. Either he read this Account to M. Cawdreys Triplex Diatribe, or he
read it not; If he read it not, how comes he then so confidently in the next
sentence but one to this, to say (I cannot but extremely wonder, that you
affirm this to be the utmost you undertook to demonstrate to M. Cawdrey, or to
justify now against me? If he read it, how comes it then to pass, that he
takes no notice of this answer of the Doctors to this very passage of S.
Austin, but crudely thrusts it upon the world, and obtrudes it upon the Doctor,
as if it were unanswerable? If he read not this whole Account in defense of the
Treatise of will worship, how then is he fit to oppose that Treatise (as he
does) which the Doctor had so largely defended? And if he read it, how comes it
so to pass, that he is so ignorant every where of the Doctors meaning, and
still talks of another Love, and other Acts, then those the Doctor had fully
and expressly declared himself to speak? If he both read, and well weighed, and
considered the Treatise and Defense, and understood the Doctors meaning, where
then was his Judgment to impose another sense upon the words, than the Doctor
ever dreamed of? Why was he so discourteous to his Reader to trouble him with
Arguments, that had already been answered, without affording the least Reply to
demonstrate their weakness? Let him choose which part he please, and he will
either betray his own weakness and Ignorance, or his Partiality and double
dealing; and consequently manifest how unfit he is to manage a Controversy in
Public, especially against so able, so learned, so acute, and modest an
adversary as the Doctor.

. 55. But yet all this notwithstanding, our Refuter is now with this single
sentence of S. Austin so proud and secure of his victory and Acquests against
the Doctor, as ever Tamerlane was when he rode in his Triumphall Chariot drawn
by Bajazet and the Asian Kings. And therefore he goes on, and thus
magnificently bespeaks the Doctor.

JEANES.
And I am very confident, that besides this Replyer, no learned man, either
Protestant or Papist, has ascribed any such growth unto the Ardency of Christ's
actual Love of God. As for the second sentence, etc.

. 56. Not to speak of your prevaricating again with the ambiguity of this
Phrase, Christ's actual love of God, I shall for the present suppose, but not
grant, that the Doctor had so said, and in the very words and sense you impose
upon him and your Reader. What then will be the issue? why, very great! For
swelled with success and scorn, he says, I am very confident, that besides
this Replyer, no learned man, whether Protestant or Papist says so.

. 57. Well Sir! you may be very Confident, I confess, but never a whit the more
knowing. For by experience I find in my little observation, both of my self and
others, that Confidence is most commonly the Bastard of Ignorance, and very
rarely, the genuine and legitimate Issue of true knowledge. Admiration and
Confidence are most frequently begotten by (...).
Ignorance upon Folly. And the great Philosopher in his Moralls, enquiring into
the Nature of true Valor tells us that (...), that the Ignorant are a most
Confident generation, because they are nigh of kin to Arist: Eth. l. 3. c. 8..
9.
the Hopewells. And in his Rhetoricks describing the different manners and
behaviors of young men and old, he tells Arist: Rhetor. l. 2. c. 2.
us, that the one are bold and confident, for want of Practice and Experience,
but the other are Ibid. l. 2. c. 13.
(...) very diffident and distrustful by reason of their knowledge, and much
Observation. And therefore because they have lived long and have often been
deceived, and have had great trials of their own and other men's mistakes, they
are Cautious, and wary how they confidently affirm any thing, and think all
things to be far less, or otherwise, then they ought to do, (...), still
speaking with a Perchance, and If it be so, being peremptory in nothing. And
therefore upon this so sure Observation, I am the more easily persuaded you
will be mistaken, because you are so confident.

. 58. For how is this Sir, what, no learned man, either Protestant or Papist
ascribe any such growth unto the Ardency of Christ's Actual Love of God?

-- Nemo hercule? nemo? Pers.
What none of all those numerous Author's that in all parts of the world have
published their Conceptions? Not any even in Japan, or the University of Mexico
excepted? For the Jesuits have many Colleges in the East Indies, and the
Spaniards have also their Universities in America. Strange! wondrous strange!
we formerly heard of a Chedzoy-Challenge, and now we shall hear of a
Chedzoy-Confidence!

. 59. But not to travel far for Authors, what think you Sir, of Master Henry
Jeanes Minister of Gods word at Chedzoy in Somersetshire? what is he nor
Protestant nor Papist? nor of the number of the learned? what thinks he of the
exquisite Hugo Grotius, who though no Protestant nor Papist, but a religious
Hermaphrodite, a Grotio-Cassandrian, yet he deserves a name at least among the
Learned of the Age? But what thinks he of our own Judicious Hooker, our
profound Doctor Field, of his own Ames, and Vorstius, nay of Luther and Calvin?
Are not these all learned and Protestant enough? What thinks he of his own
accurate Suarez of the Order of Jesuits? Of Estius, Prime Professor of
Divinity, and Chancellor of the University of Doway? Are not these learned
Papists? And yet all these with many others Ancient and Modern, Schoolmen and
Fathers, Protestants and Papists, and learned to boot, and himself among the
number, have all (...) and in Terms terminant affirmed, what here he says, all
else do deny, as we have already demonstrated. And though I might well content
my self with the Authors produced, yet not to put him or the Reader to the
trouble of looking back, and to give a Check-mate to his Confidence for ever, I
shall now acquaint him with some fresh observations, not from Writers
Scholasticall but Practical, and Expositors of Scripture both Protestants and
Papists, and those as learned as any.

. 60. To begin with the great Erasmus, whom though the Jesuits allow not to be
either Protestant or Papist, and therefore picture him hanging between Heaven
and Hell, not knowing where to rank him either among Heretics or Catholics,
yet he cannot be denied a prime seat among the Learned.

Et Jesus proficiebat] Non me fugit quibus rationibus explicuit Erasm. Annot.
in Luc. c. 2. v. ult p. 143, 144. Edit. Froben. Basil: 1521.
hunc Locum interpres, Christum profecisse, non quod illi quicquam accesserit ^
tempore quo conceptus est in utero matris, sed quod dotes suas quibus erat
cumulatissimus magis ac magis expromeret exereretque, idque tum apud homines,
quorum saluti consul^bat, tum apud Deum cujus gloriam illustrabat. Rursum sunt,
qui sic expediant, ut dicant, Christo dotes easdem aliter contigisse, and quod
prius afflatu tenebat, mox usustudioque humano comparasse; Quorum ego
sententiam non refello, tamen illud velim expendat lector, number incolumi fidei
sinceritate sentiri possit, cum extra Controversiam sit, dotes omnes quibus
praeditus fuit Jesus ut homo, beneficentiae suisse divinae, Dictatemque per
Gradus quosdam eas impartisse nature humanae assumptae, praesertim cum id apud
Lucam eodem capite bis legamus, ait enim paulo superius, Puer aut em croscebat,
and confortabatur, plenus sapientia. Quod enim corroboratur, auctu quodam
virium fulciri videtur. Ac rursum apertius hoc loco. Et Jesus proficiebat
sapientia and aetate and gratia apud Deum and apud homines. Cum enim tria
conjungat, sapientiam, aetatem, and Gratiam, sicut vere profecit aetatis
accessu, ita vere profecisse videtur dotium incrementis. Nam quod asserunt
quidam Jesum ab initio Gratia plenum fuisse, non impedit profectum, cum idem de
Joanne deque aliis dictum sit, quibus gradus and accessionem virtutum nihilo
secius tribuimus. Neque vero pereinde nos moveat, si id pugnet cum aliquo
placito Scholasticorum, aut alicujus hominis opinione, sed an quod aperte
scripsit Lucas fidei sincerae adversetur, cui semper est modis omnibus
adhaerendum, etc. Thus far Erasmus.

. 61. Cardinal Cajetan his Contemporary, shall succeed for the learned among
the Papists, Thus then he.

Et Jesus proficiebat sapientia and aetate and gratia] Non est Cajetan:
Comment: ad quatuor Evangel. Paris. 8 1540 ad Luc. 2. verse. ult.
immemor suorum verborum Ezangelisia: ut quem paulo superius dixerat plenum
sapientia, modo oblitus dicat proficere sapientia. Plenus siquidem fuit semper
habitu Sapientiae, proficiebat autem actibus sapientiae, procedendo a
sapientibus actibus ad sapientiores. Et similiter intellige de profectu
Gratiae. Apud Deum and apud homines] quoniam erat in veritate progressus ad
ampliora merita apud Deum, and apparebant apud homines. Thus far Cajetan.

. 62. The learned Tolet, the first Cardinal of the Order Tolet. Com. in Luc.
c. 2. verse. ult p. 212, 213 214, 215. edit. Colon. 1611.
of the Jesuits shall follow. Thus then he.

A duodecimo aetatis anno, usque ad trigesimum, quid Christus gesserit
brevissimo compendio Evangelista percurrit triplicem progressum ejus
describens. Primus est in sapientia proficiebat, inquit, and augebatur in dies
Sapientia, non quod habitus ipse in se sapientiae augmentum reciperet, sed quod
indies sapientiora verba and opera proferret: verba enim and opera sapientiam
Evangelista appellat. And then in the Close of his Annotation on that place he
adds. At quantum ad ostensionem (etiam Divinae Naturae dici etiam posset
profecisse, quia verbi sapientia paulatim se prodebat per humanitatem illam tum
etiam, quia impropria est significatio verborum, proficere, id est, videbatur
proficere seu paulatim se ostendebat; ad impropriam autem significationem
verborum non est revertendum, nisi impellente necessitate aut urgente ratione:
cum autem possimus interpretari verba accommodatissime, servata proprietate non
est cur improprietate utamur. Idcirco aliter mihi accommodatius dicendum
videtur: sapientiam enim non ipsum habitum sapientiae appellat, sed opera ista,
and verba quae a sapientia procedunt. In his autem vere Christus, secundum
aetatis incrementum, proficiebat, quia opera sapientiora edebat, and verba
sapientiora loquebatur, non enim omnia externa opera aequalem sapientiam
habent, contingit sapienter, and sapientius loqui. Christus autem licet
plenitudinem intus sapientiae haberet, exterius tamen verba and opera
sapientiora proferebat, etc, Dicta ergo and facta sapientia procedentia nomine
appellantur sapientiae, in hac Christus ratione humanae naturae progressum vere
fecit. Atque haec explicatio mihi sane accommodatior and proprior videtur, etc.
Et Gratia] hic est tertius profectus, nimirum Gratia, qua Deo gratus erat,
illique acceptus and sanctus, non quod sanctior aut gratior (habitu sc:)
progressu temporis factus fuerit, qui ab oxordio incarnationis plenus gratia
erat, sed quod per aetatis incrementa, perfectioribus gratiae and sanctitatis
operibus incubuerit, quamvis enim quodvis opus and verbum Christi ratione
personae operantis esset aequalis sanctitatis, non tamen ratione ipsius operis
and verbi: gratius enim opus fuit ratione operis, Iejunium quadraginta dierum,
quam unius tantum, etc. And then in his Annotation on that Commentary he adds
-- licet (Catholici Doctores) qui perfectum in ostensione sapientiae explicant,
idem dicunt de gratia: Nos vero Gratiam opera ipsa gratiae explicamus, etc. --
In his ergo profectus fuit, non autem in gratia secundum Habitum, etc. -- Apud
Deum and homines] Haec verba ad praecedentia tria referuntur, nimirum
(proficiebat sapientia, aetate and gratia apud Deum and homines.) apud Deum
quidem, quia erat augmentum and profectus non solum in apparentia respectu
hominum, sed re ipsa apud Deum; erant enim sapientiora and gratiora in se
indies, sicut and aetas provectior. And then in his Annotation on that
Commentary it follows, Titus Bostrensis hunc Profectum interpretatur secundum
ostensionem, and demonstrationem, etc. -- Nos vero, qui non solius Ostensionis,
sed re ipsa profectum hunc esse diximus, scil: operibus ipsis, and verbis, quae
nomine sapientiae and Gratiae appellantur explicuimus istud (Apud Deum) pro eo
quod dicitur vere, saepe enim hominibus, aliud videtur, quam est, at Deo ipsi
nuda veritas adstat, idcirco dicitur profecisse apud Deum, quia vera opera
sapientiae and gratiae faciebat. Additum est (Apud homines) quia saepe
contingit, quod verum est apud Deum, non ut tale ab hominibus recipiatur.
Christus prosiciebat and apud Deum and apud homines, magnificabatur enim ab iis
and a Deo. Thus Tolet.

. 63. The only doubt that can be raised of the sense of the Cardinal must
arise from the words, Externa opera sapientiae and gratiae. The outward works
of wisdom and Grace wherein he says Christ only increased.

. 64. But for the clearing of this, Observe we must, that here all along Tolet
does carefully distinguish these three. First habitum sapientiae and gratiae,
wherein he allows no increase. Secondly, opera Sapientiae and gratiae, wherein
he allows a true increase, and Thirdly, ostensionem sapientiae and gratiae, the
outward sensible demonstration, which he allows to be but an improper increase,
and no whit agreeable to the words of the Evangelist, who speaks of a true and
real increase as well in wisdom and Grace, as in Stature, and that in respect
of God as well as Man. And consequently by the works of Wisdom and Grace he
must of necessity mean, the inward and the outward Acts, both which the one, as
the Form, and the other as the matter do concur (as the Moralists and Schoolmen
grant and acknowledge, as we have formerly noted) to the completing of the
moral Acts of wisdom and Grace as considered in genere moris. And these he
calls opera externa sapientiae and gratiae in a double respect. First because
the inward Acts themselves that make up the Formal part of the Action, or work
in a moral sense are though immanent in respect of the will, yet Extrinsecall
to the Habit from whence they flow, because the Habit is the cause, and these
the effects; and secondly, because the outward Acts and sensible
demonstrations, that are the Material part of the Moral work, are truly
extrinsecall and exposed to the view and apprehension and cognizance of the
Exterior senses. And thus also the learned and very accurate Suarez
understands his master Thomas, who as Tolet here, acknowledges though Christ
increased not according to the Habit of wisdom and Grace, yet secundum opera
sapientiae and gratiae, according to the Moral Acts and works of wisdom and
grace he did truly increase, and not only in show and outward demonstration.
That the outward sensible expressions only and with exclusion to the inward
Acts themselves cannot here be understood is plain from the Authors own words,
and we need not further insist upon it. Go we on then.

. 65. To Tolet I shall add the learned Professor of Doway, Guil. Estii Annotat.
in praecip. and difficilior: Scripturae loc. ad Luc. 2. v. 42 and 52. Duaci
fol. 1629.
Estius. Puer autem crescebat and confortabatur plenus sapientia. Et infra v.
52. and Jesus proficiebat sapientia. Resp. Plenus sapientia, quia perfect
sapiens, nec quicquam sapientiae illi deerat. Proficiebat autem sapientia
quatenus majora indies opera sapientiae apud homines exercebat. Proficiebat
ergo* quoad actum non quoad habitum; actus enim erant paulatim majores habitu
eodem and immutabili manente. And upon the 52. verse (to which he here refers)
he adds, Et Jesus proficiebat sapientia and aetate and gratia apud Deum and
apud homines. Illud (apud Deum and homines) ad solam gratiam videtur
referendum. Nam dicere non solemus, quempiam proficere aetate apud Deum and
homines, nec sapientia apud Deum sed Gratia apud Deum and homines, vide
Iansenium and nostra in 3. sent. distinct. 13. These words we have already
cited at large, and they are clear and express to our present purpose.

66. And because he referrs to Iansenius, that learned man Cornel. Jansenii
Commentar. in Concord. Evangel. c. 12. p. 90. col: 1. B. et 2. A. B. p. 91.
col. 1. A. B. Lugd. 1606.
shall follow. But the whole is much too long to be transcribed. I shall
therefore set down what more immediately concerns the purpose. Apparet ab
aliquo rejectam hoc loco dictionem (Spiritu) quod offenderetur illo quod
Christus diceretur secundum Spiritum confortari, cujus Spiritus ab initio
plenus fuerit omni gratia, verum offendi hinc non oportet, cum and postea
dicatur profecisse sapientia and aetate etc. -- Plenitudo enim gratiae non
impedit profectum, cum ea Ioanni, aliisque tribuatur, quibus gradus and
accessionem nihilo secius tribuimus. Itaque cum scripturis sacris and fidei
sinceritate non obstare videatur si dicatur Deitas per gradus quosdam dotes
suas impartisse humanae naturae assumptae, and Lucas id aperte hoc loco bis
dicat eisdem verbis, nunc loquens de Christo, quibus prius de Ioanne, putat
quidam (Erasmus he means) haec Lucae loca simpliciter accipienda ut vere
Christus significetur profecisse sapientia sicut profecit aetate. Nam quod
plerique veteres dicunt Christum ab initio fuisse plenum sapientia nec potuisse
proficere, magis videntur respexisse ad sapientiam ejus divinam quae competit
Christo quatenus Deus, ut patet in Hieronymo, etc. -- Et Ambrosius hoc loco
fatetur Christum secundum quod erat homo profecisse. Secundum carnem, inquit,
utique sapientia Dei implebatur and gratia. Et sub nomine Theophili in catena
aurea sic legitur, verbum in carne passum fatemur, quamvis sola caro fuerit
passa, quia caro verbi erat, quae patiebatur: ita proficere dicitur, ex eo quod
humanitas proficiebat in ipso, verum haec a Scholasticis, and been quidem
intelliguntur dicta esse de sapientia Christi ipso usu and experientia
acquisita, cum prius ab initio conceptionis fuerit infusa animae ejus omnium
rerum cognitio, etc. -- Porro quomodocunque intelligantur haec loca Lucae,
illud certum his verbis Puer crescebat and confortabatur etc. illum voluisse
ita notare veritatem assumptae ab eo naturae humanae, ut tamen etiam in eo
significaret abiquid homine majus apparuisse, etc. -- Esse tum in eo aliquid
homine majus, satis declaratum est, quod simul cum aetate augebatur and robur
spiritus, and sapientia, non enim obnoxious erat iis vitiis quibus ea aetas
solet laborare, ineptia, lascivia, inconstantia, stultitia: sed robur spiritus,
caelestisque sapientia indies, magisque sese exerebat vultu, incessu, sermon
and factis in quibus nihil erat quod non spiraret modestiam, castitatem,
suavitatem, sapientiam. And then upon the last verse thus he again, Porro quod
Idem ibid. page 94. col. 1. E. et 2. A. B. E. and p. 95. col. 1. A.
dicitur profecisse sapientia and gratia ab antiquioribus interpretibus fere
intelligitur, non quod illi quicquam accesserit a tempore quo in utero matris
divinitas humanitati in ipsa conceptione est counita, sed quod sapientiam suam
and gratiam magis ac magis declaraverit, and declarando magis ac magis habitus
sit ab hominibus profecisse. Quod idem est cum eo, quod a recentioribus
dicitur, profecisse Christum non secundum habitum sapientiae and gratiae, sed
secundum Actus sapientiae and gratiae eo quod processerit ab actibus
sapientibus ad sapientiores. Aliter tamen etiam a recentioribus de habitu
sapientiae acquisitae, qui auctus sit in Christo, cum habitus sapientiae illi
infusae, aut sapientiae beatae non sit augmentatus, verum cum sapientiam hanc,
quae Christo tanquam homini ab initio conceptionis sit infusa, quaque omnia ab
initio cognovisset, etiam ut homo, quidam putent non posse ex Scripturis
probari, putant ut superius dictum est, simplicius hunc locum sic explicandum,
ut dicatur Christum secundum sapientiam divinam, hoc est eam, quae ei competit
tanquam Deo, non profecisse: secundum sapientiam autem humanam, hoc est, eam,
quae ei ut homini competit vere profecisse, hominum quidem more sed tamen supra
modum humanum. Nec metuenda hic videtur Damasceni sententia etc. -- proinde
locus hic and aliter ei similis apud Lucam superius explicandus est catholice
altero illorum modorum prius positorum. Porro -- Dictio Gratia anceps est,
potest enim accipi pro dono Dei quo illi grati efficimur, and been vivimus, and
tunc eodem modo oportet intelligi Christum profecisse gratia quo modo profecit
sapientia. Aut -- pro acceptabilitate and favore, ut significetur eum
gratiosiorem factum tum Deo tum hominibus commendatione virtutum sese in eo
proferentium. Quanquam and secundum hanc acceptionem non potest intelligi
profecisse gratia apud Deum, quasi acceptabilior and gratior postea factus sit
illi, sicut enim non crevit in eo gratia Habitualis, ita nec gratior factus
est. Sed tantum quod semper magis ac magis fecerit acceptabilia, grata atque
meritoria opera. Thus far Jansenius.

. 67. I shall conclude the Suffrages of the learned Papists with the testimony
of the excellent Lucas Brugensis. Proficiebat] augebatur indies Sapientia]
rerum divinarum humanarumque cognitione. Iterum hic (ait Titus) Evangelista
progressum in sapientia and gratia secundum corporis augmentum assignat,
respicit enim Titus ad v. 40. superiorem. Sed quemadmodum illic Sapientiam, non
interiorem habitam sapientiae, sed exteriorem demonstrationem sapientiae
intellexerat, ita ut hic intelligit suffragantibus aliis enarratoribus Graecis,
Origin and Theophylacto scribentibus in hunc Locum, and Gregorio Nazianzeno
oratione in Basilii magni vitam, ubi ait de Domino Jesu; sapientia apud Deum
and homines proficiebat, non ut augmentum aliquod acciperet, cum ab initio
gratia sapientiaque absolutus esset, sed quod haec ab hominibus ignaris
paulatins apparerent. Quare Theophylactus, Emicatio sapientiae ejus, profectus
ipse est, inquit. Hanc interpretationem perfecit ea, quae est D. Thomae
Aquinatis (p. 3. q. 7. a. 13. ad 3.) and aliorum posteriorum Doctorum
profecisse scientia, non quod ad habitum sapientiae interiorem (qui ab initio
conceptionis it a fuit perfectus, ut nihil amplius ei potuerit addi) sed quod
ad effectus seu actus exteriores ex interiori illo habitu Elicitos, quotidie
enim sapientiora verba proferebat, and opera sapientiora edebat, ita
proficiebat actibus sapientiae, progrediendo de sapientibus actibus (sive
verbis sive factis) ad sapientiores; ut autem non tantum habitus, sed and
Actus, verba inquam and opera nomine sapientiae appellentur ubique obvium est
tam in vulgari sermon quam in sacris literis, etc. -- Gratia] qua gratus fuit
and acceptus, non tamen interiori (qua ab initio incarnationis fuerat plenus
and perfectus) sed externis Gratiae operibus ex interioris gratiae habitibus
Elicitis, non enim per incrementa aetatis evasit aut sanctior aut gratior, sed
perfectioribus gratiae sanctitatisque operibus incubuit, qer quae and majora
merita sibi comparavit, Quamvis enim quodvis opus and verbum Christi ratione
personae operantis filii inquam Dei, esset aequalis sanctitatis ac meriti non
tamen ratione ipsius operis aut verbi, gratius enim fuit opus Iejunium
quadraginta dierum, quam fuisset Jejunium trium dierum and passio majoris
meriti fuit quam Circumcisio (almost the very words of the Doctor, that our
Refuter so quarrels at) Profecit ergo exterius verbis factisque eminentioris
sanctitatis and amplioris meriti. Nam and Gratiae nomen in scripturis usurpari
pro verbis factisque ex interiori gratia emanantibus manifestum est etc. --
Apud Deum] Deo test, judice and approbatore. Refertur ad omnia tria
praecedentia, quod Jesus exterius profecerit, prout aetate; ita and sapientiae
and gratiae actionibus perfectioribus (Let the Refuter mark it) non ficte and
simulate, sed Deo ipso Iudice, vere and sincere, ita ut ex praeclaris gestis
cum aetate crescentibus accreverint and apud Deum ampliora merita, and
consequentia praemia.

. 68. And thus besides the Schoolmen formerly quoted to this purpose we have
brought in six of the most learned among the Papists, and most eminent Literal
and Practical Expositors among them, attesting Christ's true and real increase
in the Acts of wisdom and Grace.

. 69. Come we now to the eminently learned among the Protestants.

. 70. And among them let Reverend Beza lead the Van. Luc. 2. v. 40.
Implebaturque (...) vulg. plenus, (...). Beza major. Annotat. in novum Testam.
in Luc. 2. v. 40. 52. f^l edit. 1598.
Erasmus autem recte expressit vim Participii quo significatur; Deitatis
effecta pro aetatis progressu in assumpta vera humanitate sese exeruisse, And
then upon the 52. verse he thus adds, Sapientia (...), quum enim licet anima ab
ipso exortu perfectissima donatus, tamen per omnia nobis, solo excepto peccato,
conformis fuerit: adolescente demum ipso exeruerunt sese omnes animi tum
corporis facultates. Imo and ipsa (...) plenitudo sese prout and quatenus ipsi
libuit humanitati assumtae insinuavit: quicquid garriant mataeologi and novi
ubiquitarii Eutychiani.

. 71. To him I shall annex Piscator, another eminent Expositor. Jo. Piscat.
Commentar. in n. T. in Scholiis ad cap. 2. Luc. v 40.
Puerulus autem crescebat, and corroborabatur Spiritu] (...). id est, animo,
vel Spiritu sancto, id est, donis spiritus sancti, Implebaturque sapientia]
(...). Ep^xegesis.

. 72. The learned Deodate shall succeed, Luc. 2. 40. Deodat. in Luc.
Waxed strong] whereby is shown, the fullness of the gifts of the holy Ghost
showed themselves in him, and brought forth extraordinary effects according to
the progress of his age, and the increase of his bodily strength, and its
organs, he having every way made himself like unto man, except sin.

. 73. The notes of the Assembly of Divines will be of moment Assembly Notes in
Luc.
in this case, and therefore will deserve our next consideration. Luc. 2. 40.
Filled with wisdom,] with admirable wisdom showing it self in him as he grew
up: this was the effect of the Deity dwelling in him from under the veil of his
assumed humanity. To the Deity nothing could be added: an infinite cannot
increase: in the humanity he was as without sin, Heb. 4. 15. and so had a
native ignorance of some things, from which he grew as he increased in Age. For
though the Deity and Humanity were but one person, yet were not the
incommucable Properties of the Deity given to the humane Nature: the Deity was
infinite, omnipresent, etc. so was not the humanity etc. verse. 52. Increased in
wisdome] as a child, lege humanae naturae as Euthymius says well, but
increased by little and little, for as God he was absolutely perfect: because
he assumed a reasonable soul, as well as a humane body, the Deity thereto
united, was so veiled, that the graces thereof showed themselves by certain
degrees, according to the maturity of his humane faculties: and so he increased
in wisdom though the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him. Col. 2. 9. And
stature] (...). In stature of body, the Greek word also signifies Age, so he
as man increased in body and soul. Nam sicut carnis est aetate proficere, sic
est animae sapientia and gratia profecisse. Fulgent. de Myster. Mediat. ad
Thrasimund. l. 1. So these.

. 74. But to ease my self and the Reader in this flat and heavy work, I shall
next in one Cameron tantamount and upon the matter quote the whole Reformed
Church of France. For this Cameron, and his Doctrine, was of such high esteem
among them, that they ordered by a decree of the National Synod held at
Helvorum Castris.
Castres, that his works, as many, as could be had, should be gathered together
and printed at the public charge. And the learned Triumvirate, S. Boucherell,
L. Capellus, and M. Amyrald were employed by Authority of the Provincial Synod
of Anjou and Tours, etc. to set them forth, which they carefully performed.
Thus then he Joan. Cameron (...): ^ract. de Eccles. 2. c. de Gratia p. 240.
col. 1. 2. edit. Genev. sol. 1642.
and in a work formerly published in his life time, and here reprinted among
his Remains. Sed duplex est Dei favor, alius qui misericordia est proprie dicta
-- qua miseros prosequitur peccatores -- Alius est -- quo prosequitur
Creaturam, qui favor dicitur, quia Creatura, qua Creatura -- subdita est
Creatori suo, secundum hanc significationem etiam Christus crescebat gratia
apud Deum and apud homines, non qua Deus est, sed qua homo est, Nam quo
illustrior est imago Dei etiam in Creatura eo Deus creatura magis delectatur.
Porro illustrior fuit imago Dei in Christo adolescente quam in puero: itaque
crevisse dicitur Christus gratia, quod nihil detrahit (ut calumniantur
Pontificii, and let our Refuter mark it) dignitati Christi; hoc enim, factum
est per Oeconomiam in gratiam nostri, alioquin exclament indignum fuisse
Christo ut puer fuerit, sed Christi indignitas nostra dignitas est, non enim
exinanivit semetipsum in sui sed in n^stri gratiam, quemadmodum docet Paulus
Christum non quaesivisse sua, sed aliena. Thus far the learned Cameron.

. 75. I shall conclude with Doctor Reynolds, a very learned man, it is in his
Treatise of the life of Christ. Thus.

Lastly, our holiness must have a growth and proficiency with Ed. Reynolds life
of Christ. p. 423. edit. 5. quarto. Luc 2. 40, 52. Heb. 5, 8.
it, Grow in Grace. Let these things be in you and abound, as it is said of
Christ that he increased in wisdom and favor with God and men, and that he
learned obedience by the things that he suffered. If it be here objected, that
Christ was ever full, and had the spirit without measure, even from the womb;
for in as much as his divine nature was in his infancy as fully united to his
humane as ever after, therefore the fullness of grace which was a consequence
thereupon was as much as ever after. To this I answer, that certain it is, that
Christ was ever full of Grace and Spirit, but that excludes not his growth in
them proportionably to the ripeness, and by consequence capacity of his humane
nature. Suppose we the Sun were vegetable and a subject of augmentation, though
it could be never true to say that it is fuller of light then it was, yet it
would be true to say that it has more light now then it had when it was of a
lesser capacity: Even so Christ being in all things save sin, like unto us, and
therefore like us in the degrees and progresses of natural maturity, though he
were ever full of Grace, may yet be said to grow in it, and to learn, because
as the capacity of his nature was enlarged, the spring of Grace within him did
rise up and proportionably fill it. Thus far D. Reynolds.

. 76. But because this impossible supposition of a vegetable Sun may seem too
obscure an instance, though borrowed from the fountain of light, I shall
presume by that learned man's leave, otherwise to explain his meaning.

. 77. The soul of man we know, and it is generally believed, Vid. Scal exer.
307. sect. 29. mihi p. 941. Sennert Epit. Not. Scien. l 6, c. 1. p. 410. Ruvio
de Anim. l. 2. q. 4.
as it is spiritual in its nature so it is also indivisible; whence the
philosopher has left it for an undoubted Maxim, that it is tota in toto, and
tota in qualibet part. As then the soul of an Infant, though in it self
indivisible, and Essentially perfect according to the first Act, does yet
successively, though still indivisibly in it self, as I may say, coextend it
self to all the really augmented dimensions of his Stature, till he comes to a
full age and growth, and successively, though still indivisibly according to
the first Act grow in actual perfections of Rationality: so the infused Habit
of wisdom and Grace in our blessed Savior, though it were indivisibly and in
it self perfectly communicated to the humane nature according to the first Act,
yet successively, though still indivisibly in it self did extend it self, and
really increase and grow in respect of the second Act, or Actual wisdom and
grace. Or if this be yet too short, I shall borrow another playner, because
Ocular Demonstration from the Mathematics. Suppose we then a Center fixed upon
a Plain, and from that Center A, a circumference B drawn, and eight or nine
circles successively also drawn from the same center between A and B: Then let
an hundred several Radii more or less be drawn through A. and every
intermediate circle to both sides of the circumference B. plain it is that
every Diameter that passes from one side of the circumference B to the other,
does also pass through every intermediate lesser circle, and also through the
center A. And yet Reason and the Eye tells us, that there is a greater and more
perfect distance of the Rays in B. then there is in any of the intermediate
circles, and none at all in the center A. and yet for all that there are, nor
indeed can, no more Diameters pass through B. then through A. nor can any Ray
pass from B, but it must also come from A: So is it in respect of the Habitual
perfection of Christ's wisdom and Grace. Whilst yet the Manhood was, as I may
so speak in the Embrio-centre at his first conception in the womb, he was
equally full in respect of the Habit of wisdom and Grace, as he was when he
first entered on his Prophetic office, or indeed after his glorious exaltation,
yet as he grew in years and stature successively though still indivisibly, he
may be said to grow in wisdom and Grace, according to the second Act, and to
learn actually what he knew not actually before (in particular, the day of
Judgment) because as the capacity of his nature was enlarged, the spring of
Grace within him did rise up and proportionably fill it, as the Rays passing
through and arising from the center A, are proportionably, as I may so speak,
enlarged, according to the Proportion of every circle, and do proportionably
fill them. It is with the Habit of divine Grace in Christ in respect of the
successively more perfect Acts of Grace performed by him in a more perfect
manner, as it is with the center A. in respect of all the Rays that pass
through it, and all the intermediate circles to the Circumference B. It is
potentially every Ray, and all arise from it, and as the capacity of the
circles are enlarged, so does that spring within them rise up, and
proportionably fill them.

. 78. If here our Refuter shall reply, that these Instances do confirm his
assertion against D. Hammond, and that thence it evidently follows, as he
maintains, that there was no real augmentation in respect of the Acts of
Christ's wisdom and Grace, no more then in respect of the Habit, as there can
be no more Rays in the circumference B, then what pass through A, and all the
intermediate circles: and consequently it will follow that though he really
increased in the perfection of his stature, yet he did not so increase in
respect of the inward and elicite Acts of wisdom and Grace; no more then in
the Habit, but only in regard of outward appearance to men, and in respect of
the outward sensible imperate Acts of his wisdom and grace.

. 79. To this I answer, that thus indeed Bellarmine and Maldonate and others of
that party, maintain in opposition to the Divines of the Reformation. But then
this cannot possibly agree with Doctor Reynolds his words. And since that
learned man is yet alive, he may please to consult him, and if he shall declare
himself, as I believe he will not, to be of Bellarmines Judgment, I shall then
strike him out of my Catalogue, as having no need of his Testimony, since so
many learned men, both Protestants and Papists, are so clear for Doctor
Hammond, and against our confident Refuter.

. 80. But then secondly, I must tell him that there are few or no similitudes
four-footed; and when he shall be able to show me in that miracle of the
Mathematics that the center A, and the several intermediate circles are all
of equal dimensions with the circumference B, and that the Embrio in the womb,
and the Infant in swaddling clothes is equal as in stature, so in Rational
Acts with a Man, I shall then begin to doubt mine own eyes, that really discern
a difference greater in the distance of the Rays in B, then in any of the
intermediate circles, which is none at all in A. and to question the constant
experience of the world, that naturally finds a sensible difference in respect
of the perfection of the Rational Acts of a Child and a Man.

. 81. And thus we have brought in a full Jury of Authors, Protestants and
Papists, and all very eminent, and the great Erasmus for the Foreman. And
therefore in a case so clear, it were in vain to heap up more Testimonies
against our confident Refuter, though many, many might be had.

. 82. The truth is, though it be a problem at Rome, and variously disputed,
whether Christ did really and truly increase though not in respect of the
Habit, yet in respect of An Scientia habitualis and alia, istiusmodi dona,
quibus Christi humanitas a primo statim incarnationis momento imbuta fuit (...)
and incrementum admiserunt? Affirmatur contra Bellarminum, primo, quia Christus
in omnibus naturalibus quae ad ostensionem verae humanitatis pertinent, and cum
fine incarnationis non pugnant, fratribus factus est similis, at in scientia
atque sapientia magis magisque proficere est natural. Ergo socundo, quia eodem
modo profecit quoad sapientiam and gratiam, quomodo quoad aetatem. At Christus
non tantum secundum opinionem hominum, sed revera profecit quoad aetatem, ergo.
Tertio, quia Christus qua homo in statu exinanitionis diem Judicii ignoravit,
ergo tantam rerum notitiam Habitualem non habuit, quin majorem adipisci
potuerit. Henric. Eckhard. Pandect. controvers. Relig. par. prim. cap. 3. q. 8.
p. 191, 192, 193. 8o Lipsiae 1622.
Actual wisdom and Grace, yet it is the general Tenet of Protestants that he
did so. And some, as Erasmus by name, and D. Henry Eckhard superintendent
General of Aldenburge do plainly, as some of the Ancients also maintain, that
according to the humane nature he did really increase, not only in Actual,
but also in habitual wisdom and Grace, as he did in stature, and the words of
Beza and Piscator already cited seem to import as much. And the same is charged
upon Luther and Calvin and Zuinglius and Bucer and Beza, by Bellarm. tom. 1.
Controvers. 2. de Christo lib. 4. c 1. mihi p. 422. Calvin. Insti. tut. l. 2.
c. 14.. 2: Luc. 2. 52. Marc. 13. 32.
Bellarmine, how truly I cannot yet discern for want of Books. But if the
places he cites be rightly quoted, the words seem to come up to that purpose,
and I shall leave our Refuter to tell me what he thinks of this passage in
Calvin's Institutions. Quod Primogenitum Paulus asserit universae creaturae qui
ante omnia extiterit etc. -- haec and similia peculiariter divinitati attribui
certum est. Quod autem servus patris vocatur, quod crevisse narratur aetate and
sapientia apud Deum and apud homines, quod gloriam suam non quaerere, nescire
diem ultimum etc. -- solius humanitatis id totum est. Siquidem quatenus Deus
est, nec augeri ulla re potest, and omnia propter se operatur, nec quicquam eum
latet.

. 83. But howsoever these words and the rest, quoted by Bellarmine, may sound
in other men's ears, yet I should rather understand them, as our profound and
Judicious D. Field -- There are other (of the Schoolmen) of as good Judgment
and great learning, who think that howsoever he had the habit of all knowledge
from the beginning, and brought it with him out of the womb, yet not the Act and
use of it: and this is all that either Luther or Calvin say: and yet we know
how clamorously some inveigh against them, as if they had broached some
heresy. -- And a little after -- howsoever some in heat of their distempered
Passions lay a heavy imputation of horrible impiety upon Luther, Calvin and
others, for that they say, there were some things, which Christ in his humane
soul did not actually know from the beginning, yet Maldonate, etc. D. Field of
the Church l 5. p. 437. fol. Oxon. 1628. Vid. Jansen. Commentar. in harmon.
Evangel. supra citat.
does, as speaking of a real augmentation and increase not of the habit of
wisdom and Grace, but only of the Acts, and in respect of the use and
exercise; because their words may according to the general current of our
Doctrine, bear this sense, and they do not positively and expressedly maintain
any habitual increase in them, at least in respect of the infused habit of
wisdom and Grace. But yet if any shall otherwise understand them with
Bellarmine, I must tell him that the learned Jansenius allows the exposition to
be Catholic, and leaves it indifferent which of the two be followed, and the
great Cardinal Tolet could not condemn it as heretical in Tolet Commen. in
Luc. 2. ver. 52 supra citat. Maldonat. Commentar. in Evangel. Luc. 2. v. 40. p.
993. c. infracitat.
Erasmus, whom he cites though he does not follow him. And then withal I must
add that even Maldonate himself does expressly grant, that many of the ancient
Fathers, as Athanasius, Epiphanius, Ambrosius, Cyrillus, Fulgentius, Beda and
Euthymius were of that opinion, which is sufficient at least to make the
opinion tolerable, howsoever otherwise erroneous.

. 84. And here if I list to recriminate, and to bring the Jealous Reader into
suspicion that our Refuters mixture were popishly affected, I could justly
charge him (though he does falsely accuse the Doctor) that as the Assertion he
quarrels at in Doctor Hammond is the general Tenent of Protestants, so his
own he opposes to it, ta^^s high and rankly of the leaven of the sowrest of
Papists, and those that make it their business to carp at any thing in Luther
and Calvin and the Protestants, not so much for love of Truth, as in hate and
opposition to the Persons they call Heretics.

. 85. And now to acquit my self of calumny, I must crave the Readers pardon and
patience, If I trouble him with a Passage or two out of Stapleton and Maldonate
to this very purpose. And let Maldonate begin. Objiciebant Arriani Deum non
esse qui Spiritu sapientiaque profecisset. Respondebant vario Maldonat.
commentar. in Luc. 2* v. 40. p. 993 col. 1. C. D.
Catholici: quidam, profecisse quidem vere, sed humana, non divina sapientia,
and profecisse ut hominem non ut Deum Athan. term. quarto con. Arrian.
Athanasius, In Anchorat.
Epiphanius, Lib. de incarnat. Dom. Sacram* c 7.
Ambrosius, Lib. 10. The. c. 7. and lib. derect. sid. ad Reginas.
Cyrillus, L. 1. ad There.
Fulgentius, In locum.
Beda, and Euthymius, libenter hanc sententiam Lutherani and Calviniani amplexi
sunt, magis ferendi, si eorum quos nominavimus, Patrum authoritate commoti
fecissent; sed, ut puto, nesciebant, eam aliquorum Patrum fuisse sententiam,
non secuturi fortasse, si scivissent tantum contra illos bellum susceperunt:
nunc autem cum sola id impietate seducti fecerint, quae non sanctis modo, sed
Christo etiam, quantum possunt, detrahunt, ferendum profecto non est. Thus
Maldonate.

. 86. But our comfort is, that we neither stand nor fall by the harsh censures
of such Masters, and it will appear, at least at the last day, who have most
consulted the true honor of Christ and the Saints, they or we. In the mean
while, notwithstanding his soul language, the Genuine sons of the Church of
England are not ashamed of the Doctrine of the Fathers, but make it their
glory, that they were born of that Mother, whose doctrine and discipline comes
up so high, and so home to the platform of the first and purest Antiquity. And
then as to the error by him charged upon the Lutherans and Calvinists at
large, I shall presume to say this in their defense, that were it granted to be
true (as it is apparently false, in respect of the greater part of them at
least) yet it can be a mistake of no great danger, which, by his own
confession, has so many of the Ancient Fathers to back it, and that they, of
that opinion, will more easily reconcile themselves with the plain Narrations
of S. Luke, then he, or Stapleton or Bellarmine shall their own, that make
Christ to increase in Grace in respect of outward sensible manifestation only,
and in the opinion of men; and when they have answered the reasons of Erasmus
and their own Cardinal Tolet, and Jansenius against Hoc loco sapientia, gratia
and aetate Christus dicitur profecisse, quamvis non eodem modo sapientia and
gratia quo aetate profecerit, Nam aetate quidem vere, sapientia and gratia sola
hominum opinione profecit. Maldonat. Commentar. in Luc. c. 2. v. 4. p. 994. C.
To the same purpose Bellarmine tom. 1 contro. 2. l. 2. de Christi anima c. 5.
p. 427. C. D.
it, I shall not envy their Triumph. In the mean time I shall wish them first
to agree among themselves before they quarrel with their neighbors.

. 87. Come we in the next place to our angry Countreyman Tho. Stapleton.
Antidot Evangel. in Luc. 2. v: 52. mihi page 157.
Stapleton. Quod autem Lucas de Gratia dicit, intelligendum est illam in
Christo eandem and invariabilem fuisse, nec in ea aliter profecisse, quam quod
eam magis ac magis per actus excellentiores demonstraret et explicaret ut docet
D. Thom. 3. p. q. 7. ar. 12. Quam etiam ob causam gratiam posuit Lucas ultimo
loco and post aetatem, volens insinuare non juxta aetatem in ea profecisse, sed
in externa tantum demonstratione apud Deum and homines, faciens viz. opera Deo
and hominibus magis grata. Erasmi explicationem de augmento donorum Spiritus
Sancti in Christo absurdam and temerariam sequitur Calvinus, quam refutat
Medina, in 3. p. q. 12. ar. 2. Nec pudet Calvinum ignorantiam positivam ponere
in Christo, quae accedente cum aetate sapientia informaretur, quia etiam mortem
subiit peccati poenam. Atqui mors nec plenitudini gratiae, nec plentitudini
scientiae, quae in Christo fuit, opponitur, sicut ignorantia. vide Medinam 3.
p. q. 15. ar. 3. sed utinam sola rerum theologicarum ignorantia laborasset
Calvinus, ac non pleraque studio and cauteriata conscientia depravasset.

. 88. Though this calumny has in part been answered already, yet I have
somethings to add. And first, it were Christianly to be wished that Passion and
virulence did not rage so much on both sides, that holy Truth might appear
unmasked, and free from those clouds that anger and carnal zeal, and worldly
Interest have thrown about it, and that himself and many of his party had not
made it their business to rail at Calvin without cause, and, as I fear,
oftentimes even against their own light and conscience. Secondly,
notwithstanding this course language, I must say that if the opinion were
Calvin's, as it is most certainly the great Erasmus's, yet it deserves not the
harsh censure of temerarious and absurd, that by his own brother Maldonates
confession has its Original and Authority from so many learned Fathers, and in
their disputes with the Arrians. Thirdly, though Calvin makes Christ to be
truly ignorant of some things, in particular of the day of Judgment, yet he
has the Letter of the Scripture for it; and many of the ancient Fathers (as is
acknowledged also by some of their own side) interpret that text as Calvin
does. Fourthly, since it appears to all the world, that Calvin was a person so
acute and Judicious, notwithstanding Stapletons unworthy Censure, I cannot be
persuaded that he should ground his Assertion or confirm it, by so weak and
shallow a proof. And therefore I shall suspend my Judgment till the place in
Calvin be produced, which I believe never will. Fifthly, that if Stapleton
himself mean the same with Aquinas, as he says he does, we have already
demonstrated, that the Schoolman means by the works of wisdom and Grace, the
whole moral Act that consists of the inward elicite Acts of the will as the
Form, and the outward Imperate sensible works, as the Matter of it, as is
acknowledged by his brother Suarez in his Commentary on that place, and by
Lucas Brugensis in his Commentary on S. Luke formerly cited. And this is more
then an increase in regard of Ostension and the opinion of men, a real
increase in the inward and Elicite Acts themselves, as is acknowledged expressly
by many learned men of their own already quoted. And if he and Bellarmine speak
sense, and Christ did grow in favor with God and man, as he expressly (and
Secundo peropera plena sapientiae and gratiae, quae edebat, vere prosiciebat
sapientia and gratia apud Deum and homines, quia faciebat opera dignissima and
maxim meritoria tam Judicio Dei quam hominum: Bellar. de Christ: l. 4. c. 5.
p. 428. A. Vide Durand: l. 2. sent. distinct. 42. q. 2. per tot.

Aquin. 1. 2. q. 11. art. 4. and q. 18. ar. 6. in Corp. q. 20. ar. 3, 4.
Cajetan in loc. Suarez in 3. p. Thom. tom. disp. 39. sect. 2. p. 540. col. 1 C.
infracitat.


Bellarmine speaks to like purpose) faciens videlicet opera Deo, and hominibus
magis grata, they themselves must mean as much.

. 89. For it is a generally received truth amongst the Moralists and Schoolmen,
that as the inward and the outward Act do both concur to make up and complete
a Moral work or Act, so all the goodness and dignity and meritorious
acceptableness of it arises only from the interior and Elicit Act, and not at
all from the Imperate and exterior. For as in Naturalls so in Moralls, it is
the Form that gives being and worth to the thing Formed. And for this we have
already quoted Aquinas and Durand and Suarez and others, and I think no
rational man doubts it.

. 90. And therefore, if as Stapleton and Bellarmine both grant, that Christ did
daily more and more gracious works in the sight and Judgment of God and man,
and if it be true, (as Tolet and Lucas Brugensis positively say) that Christ's
Fast of forty days was more meritorious and acceptable to God, then one of
three would have been; and the blood shed at his Passion was in the real
Physical value more acceptable and meritorious, then that shed at his
circumcision, as the same Brugensis (which neither Bellarmine nor Stapleton I
suppose will deny) and Suarez has largely demonstrated; then it evidently
follows, that there was (and by themselves, if they will speak consequently, it
must be granted) a true and real increase in the inward Acts themselves, and
where the whole moral work is more physically valuable and meritorious and
acceptable in the sight of God and Man, there the inward and elicite Act
proceeding from the habit must also be more noble. And then if this be their
meaning, they had little reason to quarrel with Calvin, that in the Judgment
of our Field, means the same, and so in this they may be friends, at least with
the greatest part of Calvin's followers, who declare this to be their meaning.

. 91. But if they understand no other proficiency and increase, then only in
regard of Outward seeming appearance and manifestation, as yet I know of no
Protestant of their Judgment, but our Refuter, and uncertain I am, whether
(unless he will absolutely run from himself in his Mixture, where he quarrels
at Bellarmine for this doctrine) he will long continue their Proselyte.

. 92. And now being come to the Foot of our Account, it is fit we cast up our
sum total; that we may truly balance and state the difference between the
Refuter and the Doctor.

. 93. First then the Refuter says, he is confident that no learned man, either
Protestant or Papist, besides this Replyer, has asserted any such growth unto
the Ardency of Christ's Actual Love of God.

And now upon the Account we have found, that this is the General Doctrine of
Reformed Divines and many learned Papists, and opposed by none, but such as
Bellarmine and Stapleton and Maldonate, that vent any thing in their anger
against those they call heretics, and by these not indeed, but only (...) and
in show, if they will speak consequently to themselves, and the received
Maxims of their own Schools.

Secondly, we have found that Erasmus clearly and (...), and D. Eckardus, and
upon the matter Beza and Piscator and others do expound S. Luke of a real
increase of the very habits of wisdom and Grace in the humane nature of our
Savior, and that the same Doctrine is charged by Bellarmine and Stapleton and
Maldonate, upon Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Bucer, Beza, and generally on the
the Calvinists and Lutherans, and that M. Calvin in his Institutions does seem
to say as much.

Thirdly, we have found that the learned Cardinal Tolet, though he does not
approve, yet he does not condemn that exposition, and Jansenius allows it as
Catholic, and leaves Jansen. supra citat.
it as indifferent to his Reader, whether he follow this or the other.

Fourthly, it is acknowledged by Jansenius that Ambrose Maldonat. supra citat.
and Theophile; as also by Tolet, that Athanasius and Cyrillus; and by
Maldonate, that besides these, Epiphanius also, and Fulgentius and Beda and
Euthymius; and Tolet adds Tolet. in Luc. c. 2. v. ult. Annot: 86. p. 112. col.
1. 2.
S. Austin also, sometimes were of this opinion, and the same Tolet, let me
add, observes that Origin goes higher in his first Homily on Jeremy, that the
Word it self did increase in Wisdom and Grace, non quidem in se, sed in humana
natura, inasmuch as the humane nature increasing in knowledge, the Word it self
did increase in wisdom, inasmuch, as it knew things after a new manner, which
by his divine wisdom he did formerly know.

. 94. And now let our Refuter himself and the whole world Judge, does he not
appear most unfortunate in his confidence? And has not his Ambition to be read
and accounted a Confuter of D. Hammond betrayed him to the ruin of his Credit?
And has not his use of Confutation, and the defense of that use brought an
umbrage and a Cloud on his whole Mixture, howsoever otherwise learned? and the
Practical Divinity confuted the Scholasticall? And therefore I must tell him,
that I truly Pity his misfortune, that has as much sullyed his Fame and
learning, by his confidence as wavering, and that, Herostratus like, he should
set fire to Doctor Hammond's glorious structure to gain himself an inglorious
name.

. 95. But then withal I must add, that if he had not been mistaken in his
Confidence, yet he had been very much mistaken in his Judgment. For the Doctor
no where ascribes any such growth, as he here means, to the Ardency of Christ's
Actual Love of God. And I publicly challenge him to show it, in the sense
that he speaks of. And so the Doctor is secure and still safe, notwithstanding
his Reason, his Authority, and Confidence. Go we on then to the next.

SECT. 32.
Zeal and loud noise different. M Cawdrey grants all in Controversy.
Heightning outward expressions a posteriori conclude the increase of the inward
Acts. Outward and Inward Acts, both complete the Moral Action. How
proportioned. Difference of Christ's obligation to Purity and ours. All born in
sin. First Covenant how in force, how not. Cannot oblige to sinless Perfection.
Man Reprieved from the final execution of its curse by Christ. Objections.
Answered. New Covenant how aggravates Damnation. What required by it. Law holy.
How a Rule. The subject matter as well of the second as the first Covenant.
Difference of obligation to its purity under the first and second Covenant. Law
abrogated not as a Rule, but as a Covenant. Second Covenant allows growth
toward perfection, which the first did not. What the Doctor speaks of. Refuters
first Reason. Terms of the first part of his Assumption distinguished. Applied.
Second part of his Assumption. Answered. Aquinas serves not the Refuters
interest. Exterior Acts of Charity here signify not outward sensible
expressions, but moral duties. Proved from Aquinas. Cajetan. Suarez. His
second Reason. His Ignorance and Confusion in it. Necessity, Liberty of three
kinds. What. He denies Christ to be the meritorious Cause of our Salvation. He
confounds Christ's natural liberty of Will with the moral liberty of the
Action. Contradicts Scripture. Christ how no more free to the outward
Expression, then the inward Act. How indifferent Actions determined. Christ how
free to the use of outward Expressions, how not. Proof from Suarez examined.
Grossly misunderstood. What Suarez intends. Defenders advise to the Refuter.

JEANES.
As for the second sentence, that a Tempestuous time, a time of Christ's
affliction, was a season for his zeal to pour it self out more profusely then
in a calmer season. This is not (I grant) denied by me, if by this more profuse
pouring out of his zeal, you only understand the outward expressions of his
zeal: but I cannot but extremely wonder, that you affirm this to be the utmost,
that you undertook to demonstrate to M. Cawdrey, or to justify now against me.
For first in your answer to M. Cawdrey etc.

. 1. SIr, I must here declare to all the world that I am quite tired with your
Impertinencies. What? The Doctor so weak and shallow as to think zeal and the
more profuse pouring it out at such a time, to be nothing else but a louder
Noise, and a deeper sigh, and perhaps a Groan? Is this all the honor our
Refuter will allow to this heightened Ardency of our Saviors Devotion? Is this
the increase and all the Earnestness of it? was this worth the recording by the
Evangelist for our after-instruction? No Sir, the Doctor knows too too well the
difference between true zeal and loud noise. He knows this is a Fruit of the
Spirit, a Flame in the soul, that mounts up to the throne of Grace, a Flame
that is quickened and made active, and vigorous by the Wind and Storms of
Affliction that blow upon it. It is of the heightening these inward Acts of
Piety, and zeal and fervency in Prayer, that the Doctor understands Saint Lukes
(...), and the graduall Intention of these and the like Inward Acts, the Doctor
has not only justified against M. Cawdrey, but I also all along have
demonstrated against you. And therefore your following Reasons to prove a
difference between the Inward Acts, and the outward Expressions might have been
spared, and you lose time to no purpose in evidencing that which was never
denied, and is so plain in it self, that it needs no confirmation.

. 2. But let us hear Reason howsoever, for now perhaps we shall find it at
parting.

JEANES.
For first in your answer to M. Cawdrey, you affirm by If it be not a fault in
the Printer, Master Jeanes is much mistaken, for it should be (by consequence)
if I understand Logic.
consequent, that Christ's Love of God was capable of further and higher
degrees, but Love is predicated of the outward expressions thereof only
analogically, Analogia attributionis extrinsecae, sicut sanitas dicitur de
urina.

Secondly, In this your reply etc.

. 3. To the first I could wish Sir you had told us the Place; for as yet I know
not where to find it. I remember indeed the Doctor asserts, and makes good in
his Treatise of will worship, that Christ's Ardency in Prayer was heightened in
his Agony, and M. Cawdrey in his Triplex Diatribe acknowledges Cawdrey Triplex
Diatribe p. 116.
the Proof, and says, Christ was above the Law, and did supererogate in many
his Actions, and Passions, and so in the degree of affection in Prayer it self
etc. -- And as this is all the Ardency that the Doctor either directly or by
consequence affirms of Christ, so this of M. Cawdreys is the very distinct
confession of all that the Doctor in his (...) contends for. And will you be so
cruelly passionate, to wound a Friend, that you may strike him you count an
Enemy, because he tells you the truth? If M. Cawdrey be Orthodox, then surely
Doctor Hammond is unjustly opposed, and if the Doctors Tenet be erroneous, then
M. Cawdrey himself must fall under that use of Confutation, that was first
written in his Defense. Either then Sir take in your bloody flagg of defiance
that you hang out with such Terror and Menace in your Title Page, or let the
world plainly understand your new and exquisite Policy to confute by an
Apology, and though you name only Doctor Hammond, yet you also mean M.
Cawdrey, though as the world now goes, you must seem to abet him. Compare your
Title Page, and this very passage together, and see whether it fits best, M.
Cawdrey, or the Doctor. But, not to intrude upon your secret thoughts and
designs, you plainly here manifest to the world, that you have read the Doctors
Account, and Answer to the Triplex Diatribe. And therefore I must proclaim you
inexcusable, as well for not understanding, if not plainly perverting the
Doctors sense, so expressly there declared, as for not taking notice at all of
the Answers he made to many of your Objections, before you undertook to Refute
his (...).

. 4. And therefore what you add. But love is predicated by the outward
expressions thereof only analogically, Analogia attributionis extrinsecae,
sicut sanitas dicitur de urina, is nothing at all to this purpose.

. 5. For the Doctor confounds not the Outward Expressions with the Inward Acts,
but only a posteriori concludes the heightening of the one, by the multiplying
and aggrandation and growth of the other. As then the Philosopher collects and
demonstrates the Cause by the Effect, as the Mariner portends the greatness of
the storm by the leaps and playing of the Porcpisce, and other signs and
observations, as the Mathematician from the print of Hercules foot in the sand
or snow did find out the true dimensions of his Body: so S. Gregory has told
us, that probatio dilectionis, exhibitio est operis, that the performance of
the outward work, is the true Index and Touchstone and proof of our Love. And
nature it self teaches us, without any other Tutor, to conclude the Inward
Affection to be greatest, where the Outward Expressions of Love are most
eminent.

. 6. Though then Love as you say is predicated of the Outward Expressions
thereof only analogically, analogia attributionis extrinsecae, sicut sanitas
de urina, yet since the Outward Expressions, if true and genuine, and not
hypocritical and counterfeit, are the Fruits and signs of the Inward
Affection, we may then, by the Graduall difference of them, conclude the Rise
or Abatement of that Love, as the Physician judges of the health or sickness of
his patient, by his urine and other symptoms.

. 7. And therefore Sir, if you will but grant me (as you do the Doctor) that a
Tempestuous time, a Time of Christ's affliction, was a season for his zeal to
pour it self out more profusely, even in Outward Expressions, then at a calmer
season, I shall not doubt to conclude that his Inward Devotion was also then
more enlarged. I never read of any but the Hypocrite and Crocodile that have
Tears at command, and can assume a sad countenance, and at pleasure disfigure
their faces, and counterfeit a passion. True zeal and devotion knows no other
expressions, then what are Natural and Genuine. Gods Spirit gives no Rules, no
Examples for the heightening of our Outward Devotion only, nor to make a Trade
of lifting up the eye, and smiting the breast, and making the Tears full and
raising of our Cries and Noise. They were the Pharisees only that did teach
and practice such Arts; and I read of miscreant Jews that were professed
Praeficae, and hired mourners at funerals. We need no Tutors nor Instructors
to teach us to express the true passions of the heart. They, whether we will or
no, uncommanded, unthought of, rise and fall, as the soul it self is affected.
Nature teaches us this lesson, and it is the first that we practice. The Child,
the more it longs after the Mother or the Nurse, the more it cries and sheds
tears; and the further they go from it, the louder still it calls, and the more
earnest, more violent are the Shrikes and lamentations. If a man be fallen into
a Pit, or have lost his way among the Woods, the deeper he finds the Pit, and
the more remote from any Village, or company, that he conceives himself to be,
the louder he calls, and the more multiplies his cries. It is just so with a
truly sanctified soul. The more eager and violent is her Love of God, the more
earnestly it longs and Psalm. 51. 1, and 12.
yearns after him, and the comforts of his presence: and when God withdraws
himself from it, the further that he seems to remove, the deeper still is the
sigh, the more humble the Prostration, the more dejected the countenance, and
the more earnest are the Cries, and more plentiful the Tears, and the more
ardent still the Prayers. Our earnest Longings and Psalm. 42. per tot.
pantings after God and the Joy of his countenance, without any other Monitor
and Instructor can advance and heighten our devotions. Indeed nothing but Love,
and more then ordinary Affection can quicken and raise them, as nothing but
Moses Rod could make the Waters flow, and gush forth from the Rock in the
Wilderness. Love is often compared to Fire: As then the Fire must raise the
Spirits in the Alembick before any water can distill, and drop; and as the more
Spirits are raised by it, the more Water issues forth: so the Flames of holy
Love must first raise the spirit of zeal and devotion in us, before it will
dissolve into Tears, and breathe out in Sighs, and as that spirit of zeal and
true devotion does increase, the deeper will be the Groan, the more vehement
will be our Prayers. And therefore S. Mat. 27. 46. Mar. 15. 34.
Matthew tells us, that our Savior, when Subtraxit visionem non dissolvit
unionem. Leo.
now the comfortable Influence of the Deity was suspended, he cried with a loud
voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. And of this devotion this
Ardency it is the Doctor speaks, and of this only he understands S. Lukes
(...), he prayed the more carnestly.

. 8. And therefore you to no purpose add, when the case already is so plain.

JEANES.
Secondly, In this your reply unto me you expressly averr that the inward Acts
of Christ's Love of God were more intense at one time then at another, Sect. 21.
and I hope you have more Philosophy then to confound the inward Acts and the
outward expressions of Love. That which herein has occasioned your mistake,
etc.

. 9. What the Doctor so expressly averrs in his 21. Section has already been
cleared, and sufficiently demonstrated. And though you beguile your self and
others with the ambiguity of this Term, the Love of God, yet the Doctors
meaning is so plain, that it is impossible for any man to be deceived in it,
that resolves not to be willingly mistaken.

. 10. But you are not deluded in your hopes. The Doctor has more Philosophy,
then to confound the Inward and Outward Acts and Expressions of Love, though
you betray so little Ethics to divide and sever them. For though the
Metaphysician and Naturalist may precisely and abstractly consider them, yet
the Divine and Moralist know, that as the Soul Vid. Durand. l. 2. sent. did.
42. q 1. A. B. C and q. 2. ib. Aquin 1. 2. q. 11: art. 4. and q. 18. art. 6. in
Corp. and q. 20. art. 3. in corp. Suarez infra citat.
and Body make a man, so the Inward and the Outward Act concur to make up one
complete Moral Action. Without this, the Outward Expressions are but empty
Paint and Varnish, and all that they can do is but to dress and tire an
Hypocrite to make him truly more ugly, because it only makes him more
handsome to the eye, and appear otherwise then he is.

11. And now our Refuter as if he were some Licentiate in Physic, having cast
the Doctors Water, and as he conceives, discovered his distemper, he proceeds
to acquaint him with the Procatartick cause of his Malady.

JEANES.
That which has herein occasioned your mistake, is I believe a supposal that
the inward acts of love, and the outward expressions thereof, are if they be
sincere, always exactly proportioned in point of degree, but this proposition
has no truth in it, as you will easily find, if you attempt the proof of it,
who almost but may easily etc.

. 12. That the Inward Acts of Love, and the Outward expressions thereof, if
they be sincere, are always exactly (that is Arithmetically) proportioned in
point of degree (so as they be equal and parallel in graduall intension,
Jeanes Answer to the Ectenest. p. 16.
as you formerly express your self) is an imaginary phantasm, and Creature of
your own brain, and no supposall of the Doctors. But that the Ardency of the
Inward Acts does ordinarily rise and fall according to Geometrical proportion,
as the Outward Expressions gradually do, though the increase and decrease is
not Arithmetically parallel in both, is a most commonly received Truth in the
practice and opinion of all sorts of people in the world, for ought I find to
the contrary, and has been already demonstrated, and therefore needs not
further Proof.

. 13. What follows is a very clear mistake, and belongs not to the matter you
would prove by it, When therefore you ask the question and say,

JEANES p. 38.
Who almost but may easily conceive how it is very ordinary for the outward
expressions of Love to be gradually beneath the inward Acts thereof? He is no
hypocrite in expressing his Love, that loves inwardly more then he expresses
outwardly: the inward Acts of Love may not only equal but also transcend the
most sincere expressions of Love. It may be so in all men, and I shall allege
two reasons, why in Christ etc.

. 14. To your first question I return, that it is readily granted. For every
prudent Father does often deal so with the child, he most loves; and God
himself sometimes in mercy hides his face, and withdraws the light of his
countenance from his dear children and servants, when yet with an everlasting
Love he affects, and with everlasting kindness will have Jer. 31 3. Isa. 54. 8.
mercy upon them. But will you thence conclude against the express letter of
the Gospel, that Christ's earnestness in prayer was not greater in his Agony,
then at other times? Sir, you must consider that you are not now to
remonstrate, what may possibly come to pass, or what in other men, at other
times, and in other cases happens, but what de facto then was at the time of
our Saviors bloody Agony. And who sees not, at first glance, that your Proofs
fall a hundred short of your Conclusion? For we are not now upon the
disquisition and enquiry of what was Physice and naturally possible, but what
was Morally such, and what de facto, according to S. Lukes plain Narration, and
the ordinary course and Practice of men, did then come to pass. And therefore
since the Rule of the Law is, that illud possumus quod Jure possumus, if it has
already appeared, and clearly been demonstrated, that the Christian Grace of
Sincerity does ordinarily and in most cases require it, and usually, where the
Charity is true and perfect, and not counterfeit, or innocently concealed for
the advantage of the beloved, there is, and ought to be a proportionable
correspondence between the Outward and the Inward Acts of Love, and as the one
falls or rises, so also in Proportion do the other, then it will not be enough
to infer (which yet is all you conclude) that the degrees of the inward Acts
of Love may not only equal, but also transcend the most sincere expressions,
you must prove that they still must and ought to do so, which I think will be
impossible. But yet let me tell you, that if you should perform this more then
Herculean Task, you will still be very far short of concluding any thing
against the Doctor. For again I must remember you, that we are not now speaking
of the Elicite Acts of the Formal virtue of Charity, and the Love of God
properly taken, but only of the Imperate Acts of that Charity the Ardency of
Prayer, which is only Tropically such, and this will yet make your task more
impossible.

. 15. And therefore whereas you add for a Confirmation that he is no hypocrite
in expressing his Love, that loves Inwardly more then he expresses Outwardly,
I answer, that this is manifestly impertinent to the matter in debate, Christ's
Ardency in Prayer. And though in some cases I shall make no scruple to grant
it, yet mind you I must, that the Christian Grace of sincerity requires that in
the Ordinary Course of humane affairs, as our Love should not be Personate, so
it should be fruitful and operative, otherwise it would in this be lame and
imperfect, as well as in the other it would be counterfeit. And this further
manifests, that from such, not only vain and impertinent, but also false
allegations, as understood according to the ordinary course of morality and
practice among men, you will never be able to demonstrate, that our Savior in
his Agony did not more earnestly according to the inward Act and Fervor
deprecate his last bitter cup then any other worldly cross and affliction, to
which he was exposed in the days of his flesh.

. 16. But yet he will essay to make good his undertaking.

JEANES.
It may be so in all men, and I shall allege two reasons why in Christ the
inward Acts of his Love were always equally intense, though the outward
expressions thereof were gradually different.

. 17. And if you can make this good in the sense that the Doctor understands
all along the Phrase, The Love of God, nay, if you can clearly prove it in your
own, I am so great a friend to any Reason, you shall bring, that though you
have failed in all your other undertakings, yet I shall give you the whole
cause for that single Reasons sake.

. 18. Let us weigh then your reasons to this Purpose, and try them at the
touchstone.

JEANES.
The first reason agrees unto Christ in common with other men. Christ as man
was always obliged unto the most intense, ardent, and fervent inward acts of
Love of God, But he was not etc.

. 19. Say you so Sir? Nay then I do not doubt, but notwithstanding my fair
proffer, you yet will fall short, and so lose the golden Ball at last.

. 20. For Christ as Mediator, and one that had undertook to pay our debt, was
not only Privileged in the humane nature, by virtue of the hypostaticall
union, to be holy harmless, undefiled, but by virtue of the Covenant and
contract betwixt him and the Father, as well as by that First made with all
mankind in Adam, was obliged to be spotless and innocent: otherwise he could
never have been that Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. But
then Man, though in his integrity, by virtue of the first Covenant he were
bound to sinless perfection, yet now since the Fall, and the Fatal curse
incurred, and in Part inflicted on him, he may as justly by that or any other
New Covenant be obliged to be Immortal, as the Condition of his Salvation, as
to be absolutely sinless, and pure from all even Original Pollution, since his
Corruption as well as his Mortality is an equal fruit of the first Sin, and it
is a part of the Curse, and Punishment of Adam even inflicted on him by God,
that all his posterity should be left to be born after the similitude of his
fallen nature. For by one man sin entered into the world, and death Romans 5. 12.
by sin: and so death (by that one) passed upon all men to condemnation, for
that all have sinned, or as S. Austin constantly reads it, in quo omnes
peccaverunt, in whom all have sinned.

. 21. As then God may justly though not by Positive infliction, yet by
spiritual desertion, and Penal decree, punish one sin with an other: so the
Scripture assures us, that this original guilt and pollution, and the vicious
effects of it, seize on us as a part of our punishment, and Praeludium of
eternal damnation: and all the sons of Adam for their transgression in him,
are by virtue of the first covenant as certainly dead in Law, and in some
measure also executed, as the damned are now in Hell, though not so absolutely,
so irreversibly, as they. I would not be mistaken, I say by virtue of that
Covenant, so certainly dead in Law, though not so irreversibly. And if the
Mediator of the new Covenant had not stepped in between Gods wrath and us, no
flesh living should be saved. In this sense it is the Apostle tells us, that we
are by nature Ephess. 2. 3. Romans 5. 12. 1. Cor. 15. 22. Jo. 3. 3. 18.
the children of wrath, and all dead in Adam, and our Savior assures us, that
except a man be born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, because,
he that believes not, as he says in another place, is condemned already.

. 22. Though then the first Covenant continues still in force, as to the
condemning power of it, to all the sons of Adam, yet it continues not in force
as to Life and Justification by it. Nor was it for that end that the Law, and
first Covenant was revived and given by Moses, but only to manifest Jos. 1. 7.
our guilt, and the purity we fell from, and our necessity of a Savior. The
Law, says the Apostle, was added Gal. 3. 19.
because of transgression: And in another place, Moreover the Romans 5. 20. Romans
7. 13. Gal. 3. 22.
Law entered. that the offense might abound, and that sin might appear exceeding
sinful. But now the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise
by Faith of Jesus Christ (made to Adam and Abraham) might be given to them that
believe. For if there had been a Law given which could have Gal. 3. 21.
given life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law, and if
righteousness come (or were) by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. And here
the same Apostle assures us that no man is justified by the Law, because the
Law, as he says Gal. 3. 11. Romans 4. 15. Romans 8. 2.
elsewhere, works wrath, and brings along with it, in the same Apostles
Phrase, a law of sin and death.

. 23. The Law then, as taken by our Apostle, for a Covenant of works, and exact
unsinning obedience, is no longer in force as to life, and Justification by it,
since now (not so much that it is impossible that Righteousness should be
obtained by it, but because) Mankind is already for transgression Actually
under the curse of it; and he that is already damned, cannot possibly be
obliged not to be damned, upon the self same Penalty and Censure of Damnation.
And I see not yet, why it may not as rationally be said, that even the
Reprobates in Hell are still obliged, by virtue of that Law or Covenant to
sinless perfection upon pain of that Damnation, which now they groan under, and
shall continue to do so, as well as the lapsed sons of Adam, that are already
under the same fatal Curse, though (thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our
Lord) not under the same irreversible Punishment. The difference here between
them is only this, that both are under the Curse of the Law, but both are not
under the same final irreversible execution. They are actually plunged in
Hell, and these yet in via should as certainly have fallen into the same
bottomless pit, if the Mediator had not stepped in, and procured a Respite of
the Execution, and a possibility to these, by virtue of his Passion and
Intercession, through the means of a new Covenant of Faith in his blood, to
escape the final vengeance of it.

. 24. Since then Mankind in Adam is by the tenor of the first covenant damned
already, there seems no reason it should stand in force to require of the
condemned that Perfection of righteousness, it at first required of them,
whilst they were in their Integrity and had Power and Grace sufficient to
perform it; for can their after-multiplyed sins add any whit to the certainty
of their damnation by that Law, and Covenant, or to the Aggravation of it? If
it adds any thing to the certainty, where then is the force of the Curse
threatened? If it adds to the aggravation, why not also to that of the damned?

. 25. If it here shall be replied, these are yet but in via, and a state of
trial and Probation, but the other are now extra statum merendi, and he that
is dead is freed from the Romans 7. 1, 2, 3.
Law.

. 26. I shall answer this is true; but then I must cry out with our Apostle,
Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ Romans 7. 25.
our Lord. Otherwise, O wretched men that we are, who, Romans 7. 24.
who, should deliver us from the body of this death! This arises not at all
from the Nature, and Tenor, and Condition of the first Covenant, that allowed
no more Respite to Man, then was granted to the fallen Angels: but only from
the Intercession and Mediation of the Son of God, the Lamb slain Revel. 13. 8.
1 Pet. 1. 20.
from, nay before the foundation of the world, who took not on him the nature
of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. And Heb. 2. 16.
therefore since this Respite of Execution arises not at all from the first
Covenant, but from the Grace of the Mediator, and this further state of Trial
and Probation that here belongs to the sons of Adam, of necessity supposes a
new Covenant made, and promised and promulgated (as the Scripture testifies,
that it was immediately after Adams fall, and Genesis 3. 15.
as soon as the Curse of the first Covenant was by God the Judge pronounced,
and in part executed against him) it evidently (at least to me) seems to
follow, that both are equal in Respect of the Curse of the first Covenant
incurred, though both are not equal in respect of the full, and final, and
irreversible execution, which makes the one Capable of the blessings of a new
Covenant, of which the other are not.

. 27. If it here shall be replied; how comes it then to pass, that since, as
the sins of Infidells are multiplied, so also shall their torments, and levius
Cato quam Catilina, as S. Austin?

. 28. To this I have nothing else at present to reply, but that since our
Savior assures me, that he that believes not, is condemned already, and
therefore since all, not Infants excepted, are dead in Adam, because they
sinned in him, I must conclude with S. Austin that the Infidel, by the tenor
of the first Covenant, would as certainly be damned, if even in his infancy he
dyed, out of the Pale of the Church, as in his riper years, and though his
punishment should be the lighter, yet I know no reason in respect of the first
Covenant, that as he lives longer, his hell shall be the hotter. Nor can I for
the present apprehend how this should come to pass, but only upon the Promise
and Promulgation of the second Covenant. Not that God sent his son into the
world, to condemn Joh. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20.
the world, but that the world through him might be saved. For he that
believes on him is not condemned, but he that believes not, is condemned
already; because he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of
God. And this is the condemnation (the aggravation and heightening of it) that
light is come into the world, but men loved darkness more then light, because
their deeds were evil. For every one that does evil hates the light, neither
comes to the light, least his deeds (by the light of the Gospel) should be
reproved, or (as our margin has it) be discovered. For as when the Law was
added because of transgressions, sin, that it might appear exceeding sinful,
Romans 7. 8. 13.
took occasion by the And the Serpent said unto the woman yea, has God said,
ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden. Genesis 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. nitimur
in vetitum semper cupimusque negata.
Law to work in us all manner of concupiscence: So was the second Covenant of
Life and Mercy no sooner promised, and promulgated, but sin, that it might
become exceeding sinful, took occasion to aggravate our damnation by
multiplying our guilt, in turning this grace of God into wantonness, and making
that which was intended for our welfare, a Trap, and our very Reprieve, and
new Capacity of Salvation, an Instrument of more sin, and consequently more
death. And though this for the (...), that it is, and in Justice ought to be
so, seems to me very plain, yet for the (...) the ground and reason of it, the
contemp of Gospell-light, which never shined on the people that (as God
knows) yet sit in darkness, and the shadow of death, is not so easy to
discern. And though it be a high and noble disquisition (whether Christ and the
Gospell-Covenant in all Ages of the world have been so sufficiently published,
that none can justly plead Ignorance in excuse for their Contempt) and well
worthy our enquiry, yet because it requires some time to discuss, and is not
necessary to our present purpose, I shall, least we lose our selves in a
digression, for the present wave it, and return.

. 29. Since therefore by Gods fatal, but just and penal decree, Man is now
since the fall born sinful, as well as mortal, and by reason of this his
Original Corruption it is now impossible, at least by the ordinary Power of
Grace, for any man to arrive at Legal absolute Perfection, and since it is
Christ's sole Prerogative to be holy, harmless, undesiled, separate from
sinners, God now under the Gospell-dispensation, and the New Covenant made with
Man in his fallen Condition, is pleased graciously to require no more to Life
and Justification, then what by the assistance of Grace, which the Gospel holds
forth, he is able to attain; namely true Faith and Repentance from dead works,
and sincere and holy endeavors after Righteousness, as much as ordinarily he
can in this his lapsed condition. And if man shall make use of that Grace, that
God bestows upon him, and labor to grow in Grace, and the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ, God shall then give Mat. 13. 12. and 25. 29. Luke 8. 18. and
19. 26. Revel. 21. 3, 4.
more Grace and greater assistances toward Perfection in this life, and that
full and absolute Crown of Righteousness in the next, and as well wipe all
stains and pollution of sin from the soul, as all tears from the eyes, and all
sorrows from the heart.

. 30. Romans 3 31.
Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid, yea we establish it
rather. For the Law as it is the Psalm. 19. 7.
Rule of Righteousness, and the Measure and standard of all just and holy
Actions, is still Romans 7. 12.
holy, just and good, and being the Transcript and Copy of Gods eternal Purity
and goodness, it must therefore still continue unchangeable, as God is. Since
then that 1 John 3. 8.
Christ came for no other end but to destroy the works of the Devil, and Tit
2. 11, 12
the Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared unto all men, teaching
us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live godly,
righteously and soberly in this present world; it must necessarily follow, that
believers, though not under the Law as a Covenant of works, yet are obliged by
it as a Rule of holiness and purity, and so shall continue to all eternity. The
same * spiritual Law, as the Apostle in this sense calls it, is as Romans 7. 14.
well the subject matter of the second Covenant as it was of the first. But
then though the Obligation in this sense be equal, and our conformity to it,
as a Rule, is and must be still the same, yet in respect of the Performance
there is a vast distance. For the first Covenant required an absolute, perfect
and exact Performance of it, as the Condition of man's salvation: In the day
that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely Genesis 2. 17. Levit. 18. 5. Ezech.
20. 11. Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 10, 11. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Luke 2. 74, 75.
dye. Fac hoc and vives; Do this, and thou shall live, Cursed is every one that
continues not in every thing, that is written in the book of the Law to do it.
And consequently allowed of no Mercy, no Pardone, no after-amendment. But then
the Gospel, though it also requires, That we being delivered out of the hands
of our Enemies might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life, yet by the tenor of it, it supposes Man's
Fall, and the Merit of a Mediator, and high Priest, and Faith in his blood; and
though it require the very Perfection of holiness and conformity to it, as a
Rule, yet it admits of Repentance from dead works, and amendment, and growth in
Grace, and pardon of sin. And therefore though the one part of the Condition of
the New Covenant, be as the Apostle observes out of Jeremy, that God will put
his Laws into our minds, Heb. 8. 11, 12. Jer. 31. 33.
and write them in our hearts, and he will be to us a God, and we shall be to
him a people, for that all shall know him from the greatest to the least, yet
the reason of this abundance of purity and holiness now under the Gospel
dispensation is built upon his Mercy. For (as it follows, says God) I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities will I
remember no more. And it is observable to this purpose that the Scripture never
speaks of the Abrogation of the Law, but only with respect to the Condition
and fatal Curse annexed, and as a Covenant and Testament, and not as a Rule.

. 31. In short, though Man by the Legal Covenant were bound to absolute
sin-less perfection, yet Romans 6. 34.
believers being not under the Law but under Grace, by the tenor of the
Gospell-Covenant, they are bound not to Legal, but Evangelicall perfection, to
faith and repentance, and sincere endeavors after holiness, as absolute, as
their present state will admit (of which the Romans 7. 12.
law still holy, and the Commandment holy just and good, is the eternal Rule)
as the full condition of their Justification here and Salvation hereafter.

. 32. And thus is evidently showed the great difference between the Obligation
of our Savior to holiness and purity, and that of all other Men besides.

. 33. Though then it is readily granted to our Refuter, that Legal sinless
perfection did admit of no degrees, nor growth, nor proficiency, nothing less
then what was absolutely sin-less, yet, since even M. Cawdrey himself grants
that Cawdreys Triplex Diatribe p. 116.
our Savior still innocent and spotless did yet supererogate in many his
Actions and Passions, and do more then the law required, particularly in the
degree of affection in prayer, if not in the prayer it self, it evidently
follows, that such Perfection as this will not (at least according to this
doctrine of M. Cawdrey) conclude, that the inward Acts of our Saviors Charity
were always equally intense, but only that they were equally innocent, which
as the Doctor does in that very place (...) and expressly grant, so it is so far
from infringing his Assertion of the greater ardency in Christ's prayer, that he
lays it down as the very Basis and foundation of his Argument.

. 34. But since M. Cawdrey's concessions may be of little moment to our
Refuter, whose Apologist yet he is, I shall only mind him that it is not
legal, sinless perfection, that the Doctor any where speaks of, when he says
it consists in a latitude and has degrees, but only the sincerity of this or
that particular grace in this or that particular performance (suppose of prayer
or alms-deeds or the like) above what any particular Law requires of all
persons at all times, and in all Cases. And therefore his following Reasons
might very well have been spared, that concern so distant a purpose.

. 35. But, at least for our promise sake, we will hear his Reasons for all that.

JEANES.
The first Reason agrees unto Christ in Common with other men. Christ as man
was always obliged unto the most intense, ardent and fervent inward Acts of
love of God, but he was not always obliged unto the most intense expressions
of these inward Acts, the reason of the difference between his obligation unto
the intension of the inward Acts of his Love, and his obligation unto the
intension of the outward expressions thereof, you may fetch from what is said
by Aquinas secunda secundae, q. 27. art. 6. ad tertium. Nec est simile de
interiori actu Charitatis, and exterioribus actibus. Nam interior actus
Charitatis habet rationem finis, quia ultimum bonum hominis consistit in hoc,
quod anima Deo inhaereat, secundum illud Psalmi, mihi adhaerere Deo bonum est,
Exteriores autem actus sunt sicut ad finem, and ideo sunt commensurandi, and
secundum charitatem, and secundum rationem.

The second reason is peculiar unto Christ, etc.

. 36. The Argument stands thus; If Christ as man were obliged to the most
intense Inward Acts, but not to the most intense Outward expressions, then
there may be a graduall difference between the Inward Acts and the Outward
expressions of Love. But Christ was obliged, etc. ergo.

. 37. The Assumption consists of two parts, and therefore cannot be answered at
once.

. 38. To the first part then I say, that this Proposition, Christ as man was
always obliged unto the most intense inward Acts of Love of God, is very
ambiguous, and therefore must be distinguished.

First then Christ as Man, may be considered according to his twofold state,
either of Comprehensor in the superior part of his soul, or as Viator.

Secondly this term, The love of God, may be diversely understood. For first
either it may signify the Love of God properly, and as taken in a Formal
sense, for that which the Schools call Dilectio Dei, and Aquinas and the
Schoolmen call Charitas ut finis; or Metonymically, and in a Causall sense for
the Love of our Neighbor for Gods sake, or any other virtue or Grace of the
first table, suppose of Religion, and the like, that springs from the Love of
God, and is in order to him. And this is that which the Schools call Charitas
ut medium and Charitas Praecepti.

Thirdly, this phrase, the most intense, ardent and fervent inward Acts of
love, may be variously taken. For first, either they may signify the most
intense absolutely and simply, that the humane nature of Christ, either by the
omnipotent power of God can, or else de facto shall ever arrive at. Or
secondly, Comparatively; and that either first in respect of the Law, or
secondly, in respect of the present State, or thirdly, in respect of the grace
or quality precisely and abstractly considered.

. 39. Now unless these be distinctly considered, it is impossible to give a
true and satisfactory answer. And for want of this distinct consideration it
is, that our Refuter all along is so confused in his discourse, and exposed to
so many errors and mistakes.

. 40. First then Christ as Man considered in the state of comprehensor, and
enjoying the beatificall vision in his mind, was not under any Obligation to
love God, because as the learned Chamier well observes, Precepts are not given
to Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect, because they Chamier
Panstrat. tom. 3. l. 6. c. 12.. 35. p. 191. Col. 2. D. Vid Suarez in 3. P.
Them. ^o: 1. disput. 37. sect. 4. p. 516. col. 2. B.
are extra statum merendi, in a state not of Trial, but of Trust, not in the
way, but at the end of their Race. And the Schools resolve that this Beatifick
love of God, was simpliciter necessarius, whereby our Savior loved him to the
utmost height possible for that state, as a natural and necessary consequent
of the beatificall vision.

Secondly, Christ as considered in the state of viator, was not obliged to the
most intense Act simply and absolutely attainable, or as enjoyed by him as
Comprehensor, for this implies a contradiction in Adjecto, that he should be
Comprehensor and viator in one and the same respect.

Thirdly, Christ as viator, was obliged to the most intense love of God
formally taken, that he in that state could possibly arrive at, by the
assistance of grace.

Fourthly, Christ as viator, was obliged to the most intense Acts of Charity
Metonymically taken, that the Law of God still required.

Fifthly, The quality and grace of the love of God, properly taken, as
precisely and abstractly considered, has no set limits, and periods, beyond
which it cannot be increased, no such gradus ad octo, as all other Natural
Qualities, capable of intension and remission, have. And consequently, nor
Christ nor any Man else, is obliged to any one such highest degree.

Sixthly, the love of God, as Metonymically taken, for the love of our
Neighbors, has its set bounds and limits. For we must love them as our selves,
and some more, some less, according to their nearness of alliance and kindred,
and Country, and the grace of God shining in them, and the like. And therefore
it is resolved in the Schools, that datur ordo in charitate. And then for the
other virtues and graces, they have all (except the three Theological Graces
of Faith, Hope, and Charity, that have an infinite Object, God, and therefore
can have no limits) their excesses, as well as defects, they have their set
periods and bounds, they consist as Aquinas resolves in a middle point between
two extremes. But then this middle point also is not like the Eclipticke, but
the Zodiac, and consists in a Latitude. And therefore

Seventhly, in these last the Law requires not at all times the most intense
degree of the Act, but only such a degree as befits the Object at this time,
and with relation to all other Circumstances.

. 41. And hence it is that the Doctor speaking only of some of these Acts in
particular, affirms them to consist in a latitude, and that in respect of the
particular Law obliging all men to the performance of them, there may be
degrees above that particular command, that God leaves to our Liberty freely to
exercise, that so we may have something to offer to him freely, out of those
very graces, which himself has freely bestowed upon us. And consequently that
Christ in the Acts and Exercise of these, (in particular the Ardency of Prayer)
was not always obliged to one equal uniform highest degree of intensness. And
therefore the first part of his Assumption as confronted to D. Hammonds
Assertion, is unsound.

. 42. All these in their several orders have been largely prosecuted and
confirmed, and therefore nothing now remains, but that we proceed to the second
part or Proposition contained in the Assumption.

. 43. And it is this; But Christ was not always obliged unto the most intense
expressions of these inward Acts of his Love.

. 44. To which I answer; that if by the Expression of these inward Acts, he
means the outward sensible expressions of the inward acts, it is thus far
granted, that nor Christ, nor any man else is obliged to any one particular act
or kind of outward expression, suppose in prayer, to use any one particular
gesture, or language, or form, and the like, but by Gods law is left
indifferent to use any, that is quoad specificationem decent and fitting.

. 45. But then I must add that Aquinas his authority comes not up to this
purpose, nor am I moved to this concession for any reason, that I, or any man
else can gather from the passage cited to confirm it. For Aquinas here means
not by the exterior acts of charity the outward sensible expressions of it,
but only the performances of those duties and graces of the first and second
table, quae sunt in ordine ad finem, which God requires us to perform in order
to our last end, and happiness, our eternal union and sight, and love, and
enjoyment of God in heaven. The exterior acts of charity, he there means, are,
I say, no other, then the acts and performance of all virtues and graces
whatsoever, as no man, that is any way versed in that Author, can be ignorant.

. 46. But because our Refuter is a Schoolman and a Soldier, and resolves to
dispute every inch of ground with us, I shall for a full displaying of his
Ignorance proceed to make it good.

. 47. Thus then I lay down the full sense of the place. By this interior actus
charitatis the inward act of divine love, the Schoolman means the immanent and
elicite act of that love, that is immediately fixed on God, in which love man's
last happiness consists. This other where he calls finis praecepti from S. Paul
in his Epistle to Timothy, the end of the commandment; because all the
commandments only drive at this, and aim to bring us unto God. And in the
place here urged he says, it has rationem finis, because man's last happiness
consists in this love, and this union of the soul with God in heaven. By the
exterior acts of charity he means not the material sensible expressions (as
for instance, the more abundance of tears, deeper sighs, more patheticall
phrases, and forms, and expressions, more humble gestures of the body in
prayer; which is all the heightening and advancement our Refuter will allow to
our Saviors ardency in prayer in the garden) not the outward acts, but moral
duties and gracious works and performances of any virtue, or grace, that the
law of God prescribes.

. 48. The first are elicite acts of divine love, and therefore immanent and
interior to it. But these latter moral duties are imperate acts of that love.
And therefore though they are or may be intrinsecall to the will, wherein they
are subjected; yet are they extrinsecal to charity, belong not to the formal
essence and nature of it, but are outward fruits, and effects and symptoms of
it; because the more the man loves God, the more he will labor to keep his
commandments, and the more sincere and cordial he is in the exercise of any
duty or grace, the more it appears that he truly loves God, that has commanded
it. But then though these be exterior (because imperate) acts of divine love,
yet in their formal nature and essence, they are immanent acts of the will,
because they are the elicite acts of the virtuous habits there seated; and
consequently they are not, as our Refuter very ignorantly, outward corporeal
sensible tokens and expressions. For the exterior Acts of Charity, he speaks
of, he says are siout ad finem, such which God has commanded us to perform, as
the way and means that we may be perfectly united to him, and see and enjoy his
goodness in the land of the living, and love him eternally, and ideo sunt
commensur andi, and secundum charitatem and secundum rationem, and therefore
are to be measured and proportioned according to charity and reason; which
words cannot possibly have any sense after the meaning of our Refuter.

. 49. Now that this and no other is the meaning of Aquinas, will appear from
the very question it self, the answer in corpore, and the beginning of this
answer ad tertium which our Refuter warily omitted. The question is, utrum
charitas habeat modum, whether charity has any set bounds or limits, any gradus
ad octo, as M. Cawdrey and our Refuter says it has? He resolves it in the
Negative from the authority of S. Bernard, Causa diligendi Deum est Deus ipse,
modus sine modo. His answer in corpore is this, Dicendum quod -- modus importat
quandam mensurae determinationem -- In omnibus appetibilibus, and agilibus
mensura est finis -- Et ideo finis secundum seipsum habet modum, ea vero quae
sunt ad finem habent modum, ex eo quod sunt fini proportionata -- Finis autem
omnium actionum humanarum and affectionum est dilectio Dei per quam maxim
attingimus ultimum finem, ut supra q. 23. art. 6. dictum est. Et ideo in
dilectione Dei, non potest accipi modus, sicut in re mensurata, ut sit in ca
accipere plus and minus, sed sicut invenitur modus in mensura in qua non potest
esse excessus, sed quanto plus attingitur regula, tanto melius est, and ita
quanto Deus plus diligitur, tanto est dilectio melior -- Et sic, (as he goes on
in his answer ad primum) etiam charitas quae habet modum sicut mensura,
praeeminet aliis virtutibus, quae habent modum sicut mensurata. And so ad
tertium, Dicendum, quod affectio illa cujus objectum subjacet judicio rationis,
est ratione mensuranda, sed objectum divine dilectionis, quod est Deus, excedit
judicium rationis, and ideo non mensuratur ratione, sed rationem excedit. Nec
est simile de interiori actu charitatis (which is the passage our Refuter
insists on) and exterioribus actibus, etc. Nor is there the same Reason for the
love of God, and the acts of all other virtues and graces, which have their set
bounds and limits proportionable to charity and right reason. Though a man can
never love God too much in respect of the formal act, yet his neighbor he
may, as has already been showed from Durand on this very Question.

. 50. And thus also Cajetan in his Commentary on the Cajetan in loc.
place understands his Master. Author, says he, comparat interiorem actum
charitatis, ad actus exteriores imperatos, qui sunt ad finem.

. 51. But let Aquinas explain himself in the places he himself referrs to, 2.
2. q. 23. art. 6. in corp. art. 7. in corp. vid. etiamque 44. art. 1. in corp.
art. 2. and art. 3. in corp. where also in his answer ad secundum, he says,
Alii actus charitatis consequuntur ex actu dilectionis, sicut effectus ex
causa, ut ex supra dictis patet: unde in praeceptis dilectionis virtute
includuntur praecepta de aliis actibus, etc. And this will also further appear
from the places already quoted from Aquinas.

. 52. And now that this doctrine may not only appear full and home to the
meaning of Aquinas, but commonly also received among the Schoolmen, I shall for
confirmation add a passage or two from the very accurate Suarez, as our Refuter
himself calls him, and one as well acquainted, I suppose, with the meaning of
this Author, as any Commentator, new or old. Duplices esse solent, says he,
virtutum Suarez de Relig. tom. 1 l. 2. c. 1.. 1.
moralium actus, interni sc: and externi. Quoniam vero hae voces varias habent
significationes, ut supra attigi: in praesenti per internos actus solum
intelligimus eos, qui proxime, ac per se fiunt, vel fieri possunt ab ipso,
habitu, proceduntque ex immediata inclinatione ipsius, quando ex habitu fiunt,
aut si illum praecedant, ipsum secum afferunt, vel efficiendo, ut in
acquisitis, vel proxime ad illum disponendo, ut in infusis. Externos autem
actus voco omnes illos, qui non fiunt ab habitu, nisi mediantibus his prioribus
actibus. etc. And then in his second Chapter of that book he adds further to
this purpose. Et juxta hunc loquendi modum, hi exteriores actus distingui
Suarez*ibid. c. 2.. 2. utrum praeter actus internos habeat Religio actus
externos and qui illi sunt?
possunt: nam quidem sunt corporales, quidam vero spirituales. Rursus
spirituales distingui possunt, in actus intellectus and voluntatis, nam
utrisque coli potest Deus, ut infra dicetur, and latius dixi in 1. tom. ad 3.
Partem Aquin. Hic autem cultus qui per actus mentis fit, communi usu interior
potius appellatur, ut distinguatur ab illo qui exhibetur per actus corporis,
nos autem explicuimus proprium respectum quem tales actus habent ad ipsam
virtutem. Quanquam adverti potest, aliud esse loqui de cultu sub nomine cultus,
aliud vero sub nomine actus: Cultus enim solum dicitur cultus internus vel
externus, quia intus in anima vel extra per corpus fit: uterque autem cultus
dici potest actus externus ipsius Religionis, quia sic denominatur per
habitudinem ad virtutem tanquam ad principium suum quodam modo extrinsecum seu
remotum. Actus autem ipse immediate procedens a religione, quem vocamus
internum, non est proprie cultus, neque intrinsecus neque extrinsecus, sed est
affectus celendi Deum, qui a cultu distinguitur, sicut actus a materiali
objecto. Nihilominus saepe confundi solent hae voces ita ut omnis cultus
interior dicatur etiam actus interior religionis, quomodo nos saepe cum multis
loquemur, advertendo illa duo non converti, quia non omnis actus internus
potest dici cultus, sed ille tantum, qui remotus and imperatus est, nam alius
qui est propinquior and elicitus, non est cultus sed affectus cultus. Est enim,
as he had before delivered, maxim advertendum, Suarez ib. l. 1. c. 7. S. 2.
quod supra indicavi, in his virtutibus moralibus eosdem actus externos (qui a
virtute fiunt, and sunt effectus internorum actuum elicitorum a virtute)
secundum se sumptos, and ut priores inordine intentionis (ut sic dicam) esse
objectum seu materiam talium virtutum. Thus he.

. 53. The case is very clear: let the terms only be changed and it will as well
fit the place of Aquinas, as the subject matter he is upon. And I doubt not,
but he that shall consult the same Authors Commentary on that very place of
Aquinas here cited by our Refuter, shall find it thus expounded. But for want
of books I must content my self with what is here produced.

. 54. And now let the world judge! Is not our Refuter a very profound
Schoolman? And does he not read Aquinas to purpose? That after his acquaintance
with that Author, and his very accurate Suarez, cannot learn to distinguish
between actus dilectionis Dei extrinsecos, and actus voluntati extrinsecos?
That is so easily captivated in his intellect, and confounded with the
ambiguity of a word, and cannot perceive a difference between the outward
sensible expressions of the acts of divine love, and the imperate acts of it,
the interior and elicite acts of all virtues and graces performed at the
empire and command of this love; and therefore called the exterior acts of
this love, because that is the outward and remote cause and principle of them.

. 55. How then can I hope that his second reason should prevail, when he has
betrayed so much weakness and ignorance in the first? But we will consider it
howsoever.

JEANES p. 39.
The second reason is peculiar unto Christ above all other men: whilst he
lived here upon earth, he enjoyed the beatificall vision; and the natural and
necessary consequent thereof is a most intense actual love of God, and
therefore the inward acts of his love of God were equally intense at all times,
but as for the outward expressions of his love of God etc.

. 56. Sir how often, and often have we heard of this to no purpose? Only let
me ask, what is all this to Christ's love and holy charity as viator? you must
now remember you talk of obligation and duty. But then this Beatifick love of
Christ, was simpliciter necessarius. And therefore this is still the old
Sophism a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. But enough and enough of
this. For though you are not at all troubled still to repeat the same
objections, yet I am very much ashamed that I should be forced still to return
the same Answers, and say I must as he in Plautus, in a very like case,

-- vi'n tibi adferri noctuam
Quae Tou! Tou! usque dicat tibi, nam nos jam, nos defessi fumus.
JEANES.
But as for the outward expressions of these acts, Christ had to them a proper
freedom, taking the word (freedom) for an active indifferency in sensu
diviso, and therefore they might be more intense at one time then another. But
of this you may, if you please, see further in Suarez in tertiam partem Thomae
disp. 37. sect. 4. where the question debated is, Quomodo voluntas Christi ex
necessitate diligens Deum in reliquis actibus potuerit esse libera?

. 57. Here is ignorance upon ignorance, and confusion upon confusion, and I am
quite tired with cleansing this (...). Lucian Pssudomant.
Augean Stable. A They say Hercules cleansed it by the turning of a River into
it. Vid. Erasm: Adag: and Diodor. Sicul.
River of Ink must do it. I see the * Basket in Lucian is to very little
purpose.

. 58. To acquit this harsh censure of calumny, and to remonstrate the charge,
it will be fit I reduce his discourse into Form.

. 59. The whole supposes a Prosyllogisme, and this which he calls his second
Argument, is a proof of the Assumption. Thus then it stands. If the inward acts
of Christ's love of God were equally intense at all times, but the outward
expressions of these Acts might be more intense at one time then another, then
the outward expressions, and the inward Acts are not always exactly
proportioned in point of degree, but may not only equal, but also transcend
the most sincere expressions of Love; (and consequently S. Lukes (...) must be
understood of a graduall heightening of the outward expressions only, not of
the inward ardency in prayer.) But the inward acts of Christ's love etc. Ergo
etc. The assumption consists of two parts, and is here severally proved. The
first, that the inward acts of Christ's love of God were all equally intense at
all times, he thus proves, because Christ whilst he lived here upon earth
enjoyed the Beatisick vision, the natural and necessary consequent whereof is
a most intense actual love of God. But then as for the outward expressions of
these acts (which is a proof of the second part) Christ had to them a proper
freedom, taking the word (freedom) for an active indifferency in sensu
diviso. And of the truth of both these may be further seen in Suarez. Ergo etc.

. 60. And this his second reason, he says, is peculiar unto Christ above all
other men.

. 61. Plain then it is, First that here he confounds the state of Christ as
comprehensor, with his state of viator, Secondly, plain it is, that he
confounds the beatifick and necessary acts of Christ's love of God, agreeing to
him as comprehensor, with the free and meritorious acts of his love agreeing to
him as viator. And then thirdly, plain it is, that he confounds the inward acts
of Christ's love of God, as properly taken with the inward acts of other virtues
and graces, suppose of religion, and ardency in prayer, which because they are
the effects and signs of that former love of God, are Metonymically so called.
And fourthly, as plain it is, that he confounds all these three very distinct
acts, and takes them one for another.

. 62. But then, as if this were not sufficient, he fifthly further confounds
the outward sensible expressions of charity largely taken, with the acts of
virtue and piety, that, as we have formerly manifested, are extrinsecall to the
love of God strictly and properly taken, and makes the inward acts of religion
and devotion, of chastity and temperance, of patience and brotherly kindness
and the like, to be, upon the matter, all one with the outward sensible
expressions of these virtues and graces. And then sixthly he confounds the
natural necessity and freedom of the Agent with the moral necessity and
freedom of the action.

. 63. For the better opening of which last (for the former need not further
clearing) know we must that the Moralist and Divine distribute necessity and
freedom into three kinds. The first is that they call necessitas naturae, and
this arises from a natural determination of the form and faculties of the
Agent to one uniform kind of working, and is intrinsecall to it. To this they
oppose that freedom which they call natural, which arises from an
indetermination of the rational appetite, called the will, to one uniform kind
of operation, and supposes it naturally left at liberty either to act or not
act, (which they call libertatem contradictionis or Exercitii) or else to do
this, or that, which is contrary to it, (which they call libertatem
contrarietatis, seu specificationis) and this at its own free election and
choice. Thus stones and vegetables and the like are called necessary agents,
but Men and Angels are called agentia libera, free agents: and this freedom is
as essential and natural to these, as the other necessity is to the former.
The second they call necessitas praecepti, a necessity of duty arising from the
moral obligation in the action requiring it to be performed, or omitted by a
free creature, that is lord of his own actions. And to this is opposed that
moral liberty and freedom, and indifferency of the act, whereby it comes to
pass, that it may be done, or omitted without sin, no law here interposing, to
command or prohibit it. Thus whatsoever the law of God has enjoined or
forbidden, is necessary, and whatsoever is not thus forbidden or commanded is
of a middle nature, secundum speciem indifferent and morally free to be done,
or not done. And this is a liberty extrinsecall to the Agent. The third they
call necessitas coactionis, arising from outward violence and compulsion. But
because the will cannot possibly be enforced, it is improperly called
necessity, and though in respect of the outward danger impending the will moves
against its own genuine inclination, yet in the act and exercise it voluntarily
chooses that, which if the force were not impending, it would not have embraced.
And therefore the great Philosopher in his Moralls Arist. Ethic. l. 3. c. 1. S.
3.
does truly call such actions as these (...), because they are made up and
compounded of violence, and choice. To this they oppose that kind of freedom,
which they call signally spontaneity, that arises from the inward (...) and
impetus, and inclination of the agent, without any outward force and compulsion
to rouse and quicken it, and is common, at least in some proportion, and
inferior degree, to Beasts as well as Men.

. 64. When therefore our Refuter says that the inward acts of Christ's love of
God were all equally intense, because they were the natural and necessary
consequents of the beatificall vision, clear it is, that he takes the word
necessary, for that which is naturally such, and so by consequence he destroys
the merit of our Saviors death and Passion, which was the first stone of
offense, and rock of stumbling to that Arch-heretick Socinus. For plain it is,
that the Saints in Heaven, and Comprehensores in Patria (among which number
Christ on earth must be reckoned, in regard of the Beatificall vision) love not
God by way of duty, and election and choice, but by a necessity of their
glorified natures, and they cannot choose but do it, and consequently, as
themselves are now extra statum merendi, so these acts of their love are no
more rewardable and meritorious, then the natural motion of heavy bodies
downward, or light bodies upward. For as Laws are prescribed to free agents
only, and rewards and punishments are only proposed to those that are lords
of their own actions, and are left at their own liberty and election and
choice; so one of the conditions necessary to make an act or acts Meritorium
opus dicunt Scholastici quod potius dicendum remunerabile apud Deum Forbesii
Iren. l. 1. c. 3. S. 2. page 77. Secunda conditio in opere meritorio necessaria
estut sit liberum, quoniam per ea quae naturalia sunt and quorum Domini non
sumus nec meremur, nec demeremur. Quam conditionem locum etiam habuisse in
actibus voluntatis Christi, satis fuse in praecedenti. q. 18. (which is the
very disputation our Refuter here referrs to) disputatum est etc. Quinta
conditio ex part etiam personae merentis est, ut sit viator, quam necessariam
esse saltem ex lege Dei ordinaria (quicquid fit de absoluta potentia) omnes
Theologi docent. ut latius videbimus statim sect. 3. ubi simul oftendemus
conditionem hanc etiam in Christo Domino fuisse necessariam. Suarez in 3. part.
Thom. tom. 1. disp. 39. sect 1. p. 536. col. 2. E. and p. 537. col. 2. F.
meritorious or remunerable, is, that it be free, and not natural and
necessary, and performed by a person that is in via, because such persons only
and such actions are remunerable by God. And consequently our Refuter that
makes all the inward acts of Christ's love to be the natural and necessary
consequents of the Beatificall vision destroys the merit of his whole life and
death, and sufferings, and eo ipso denies him to be the meritorious cause of
our justification.

. 65. But then secondly, whereas he says that Christ had a proper freedom
(taking this word (freedom) for an active indifferency in sensu diviso) to the
outward expressions of these acts, though he had not such freedom to the
inward acts themselves, and therefore these might be more intense at one time
then another, though the inward acts might not, Plain it is that here he
confounds the natural liberty and freedom of the will of Christ, with the
moral liberty and freedom of the actions themselves. For that freedom which is
taken for an active indifferency in sensu diviso, and is here by our Refuter
opposed to those natural and necessary acts, which were the consequents of the
Beatifick vision, is no other, but that natural liberty and freedom of the
will essentially determined either in respect of contrariety or contradiction.
And so the Vid. Suarez. in tertiam part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 37. sect. 2. p.
512. col. 1. E. F. sect. 3. p. 513. col. 1. C. etc. and p. 516. col. 1. B. C.
words in Suarez are to be understood, who frequently makes use of this
expression, whence our Refuter borrowed it, though plain it is he mistakes it.
But then the freedom that he speaks of in the conclusion, is a moral freedom
and indifferency of the action. For thus his Argument must stand: Christ in
respect of the intention and fervor of the outward expressions was under no
obligation, nor necessity and duty, and therefore they might be more intense at
one time then another.

. 66. But then this is not all the misadventure of his discourse; in the next
place he splits himself upon the rock of downright falsehood and contradiction
to Scripture.

. 67. For whereas he says, Christ had a proper freedom or active indifferency
in sensu diviso to the outward expressions though he had none to the inward
Acts of them, plain it is, that his words must be understood either of the
natural liberty of the will of our blessed Savior, the active indifferency
and indetermination of that to the outward expressions, or else of their moral
liberty and indifference in respect of any Law, or divine precept, determining
these outward acts and expressions. If he understand his assertion in the first
sense; plain it is, that Christ's will was thus equally free to all the inward
acts of divine love, and piety, and religion, and other virtues and graces, as
to the outward expressions of them, and no more liberty he could have to the
one then he had to the other. For since Suppono ex 1. 2. q 20. and 21. proprium
et formale meri^um esse in actu elicito a voluntate, actus vero externos per se
non addere meritum actui voluntatis, neque esse formaliter and intrinsece
meritorios, sed solum per extrinsecam denominationem ab actu meritorio
voluntatis. a quo imperantur and extrinsece seu moraliter informantur, ficut
etiam ab illo denominantur liberi and studiosi. Suarez in 3. Part. Thom. tom.
1. disp. 39. Sect. 2. page 540. col. 1.. C.
freedom of the will, and liberty of election and choice are essential to
merit, and since all the moral goodness, and virtue, and honesty and
rewardableness in the work arises only from the inward act, which is the form,
and gives being to the whole, it evidently follows, that Christ's will must be
as free and actively indifferent to the inward acts, nay rather more, then to
the outward expressions of them, otherwise he could not be the meritorious
cause of our salvation.

. 68. If here he shall reply; though this be true in respect of all other men,
yet the case is otherwise with Christ; The reason here is peculiar unto him
above all other men: whilst he lived here on earth, he enjoyed the beatificall
vision, and the natural and necessary consequent thereof is a most intense
actual love of God; I accept of his answer. But then withal I must desire him
to tell me how he can reconcile this position with the many Scriptures, that so
clearly assert the meritoriousness of our Saviors whole life, and glorious
example, as well as of his death and passion. For if Christ had only a proper
freedom of will and active indifferency to the outward expressions and not to
the inward acts of virtue and charity, but did perform them all ex necessitate
by a necessity of his glorified state and condition, and clear intuitive sight
of God, it was not possible he should merit by any of them, as has already been
observed.

. 69. If he understand his assertion in the second Notion of liberty, for a
moral indifferency of the action it self, plain it is, that Christ had no more
moral freedom and indifferency to many, if not to most of the outward
expressions, then to the inward Acts themselves. For where the outward act and
expression does aeque cadere sub praecepto and is as well the object and matter
of duty commanded, as the inward act, there both outward and inward act are
equally necessary to be bone or omitted. I desire him to tell me, what greater
liberty and indifferency there was to Christ in respect of the outward acts of
all the negative precepts of the moral law more then to the inward acts? what
liberty and indifferency, there was in respect of the outward acts of many of
the affirmative precepts more then to the inward acts? was he not as well bound,
at least in most cases, to the outward acts of adoration, of honoring Gods
name, of reverence to parents and the like, as he was to the inward acts? But
then what thinks he of all the Mosaicall rites and ceremonial observances,
which clearly consisted in the exterior Act? As he was born of Abraham's seed,
and under the law, so was he not bound upon pain of excision to be circumcised
the eight day? And consequently being thus circumcised did he not become a
debtor to the whole Mosaicall law, ceremonial and judicial (that consisted
chiefly in the outward acts) as well as to the moral, and this upon condition
of the curse annexed to the very least breach of the least tittle that was
written in the book of Moses law? was he not bound to the outward
sanctification of the Sabbath, the rites and ceremonies of the Passover and the
like, as well as all other persons circumcised? Once more, what thinks he of
our Saviors obligation to the outward acts and exterior expressions and
performances of his prophetic office? As the spirit of the Lord was upon him
anointing him to preach the Gospel to the poor etc. So an Joh. 12. 49, 50. and
cap. 18. ver. 37. Luke 2. 49.
obligation from God his Father lay upon him to do it. And Luke 4. 18, 21.
therefore says he to his parents that found him in the Temple disputing with
the Doctors and asking them questions, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not
that I must be about my Fathers business? To conclude, what thinks he of the
death and passion of our Savior? was it not an high act of charity and love
both to God his Father, and us Men? and yet plain it is, that an absolute
necessity lay upon our Savior for performance of the outward act and
manifestation of this love. Bound he was to suffer, and to lay down his life
for his sheep. For ought not Christ to suffer these things and then to enter
into Joh. 10. 49. Luke 24. 26, 27. Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
his glory? For what says he himself, Sacrifice and burntoffering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared me. Then said I, lo I come (in the
volume of the Book it is written of me) to do thy will O God, by the which will
we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus once for all. And
it is observable from Suarez even in this very question, to which our Refuter
here referrs, that this Precept did directly and immediately first fall upon
the outward act and expressions, Quod maxim declarari potest in praecepto illo
moriendo pro hominibus -- nam illud praeceptum direct cadit in actum ipsum
exteriorem, qui est objectum interioris actus voluntatis, qui etiam
consequenter praecipitur, quatenus cum exteriori componit unum actum moralem
and liberum. Suarez: in 3 part. tom. 1. disp. 37. sect. 4. where the question
is, Quomodo voluntas Christi ex necessitate diligens Deum in reliquis actibus
potuerit esse libera? p. 519. col. 2. A.
and immediately and by consequence only on the interior, inasmuch as the
outward is the object of the inward act of the will, and together with it, does
compound and constitute one complete moral action.

. 70. If here he shall reply that he spoke not of the outward expressions that
were matter of duty and under command, but only of those expressions of the
inward acts, that were left indifferent, such as are the outward prostrations
and gestures, the words and other signs of the inward ardency in prayer;
(though it is evident that his words indefinitely proposed must reach to all
the outward acts and expressions of the inward acts of divine love, that
necessarily issued from the beatificall vision, yet) I shall for the present
accept of this answer, (though nothing at all to the words and the purpose of
this his second reason, which he says is peculiar to Christ above all other
men). But then withal I must tell him that this grant and acceptance will do
him no service.

. 71. For though it be true even in respect of the outward acts and expressions
of the inward ardency and devotion in prayer, that no law of God has interposed
to determine and necessitate the outward act of devotion either quoad speciem
or quoad exercitium, either for kind or degree, as that we should use this
gesture, suppose of standing, kneeling or prostration, etc. this form of words,
these lifting up the eyes, or hands to heaven, and the like, but has left us at
liberty to use what we shall see fit in either kind, whenever we pray, yet
since the law of God and religious prudence requires, that all things be done
decently and in order in Gods worship; it evidently follows, that whatsoever
outward gestures, or words, or signs, or expressions he should make use of they
were of necessity to be decent and fit, and proportionable to the present
ardency and inward devotion and affection in prayer. And therefore in this
sense he had no more liberty to the outward expressions then to the inward acts
themselves. For still when he exercised them, he was bound to exercise them all
quoad debitas circumstantias, which, as the Moralists determine, do specificate
the action in genere moris, and make it good or bad, and this because malum
oritur ex quolibet defectu, bonum autem ex causis integris, neither was he left
at liberty to use any other posture in prayer, then what was decent, any deeper
sighs and groans, or louder cries, or more patheticall expressions, then what
was suitable to the inward ardency and the present occasion, and what the
subject matter of his present petition and devotion did require.

. 72. I shall not here determine whether every individual voluntary act,
though quoad specificationem and in respect of the kind, it be mediae naturae
and indifferent, be yet quoad exercitium good or bad with Aquinas, or whether
as Vid. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 18. art. 9. and 1. sect. did. 1. q. 3. and 2. sent:
did: 40. q. 5. ad 6. Scot. 2. sent. did. 41. Bonavent. ibid. Durand. 2. sent.
did. 40. q. 2.. 11. Forbesii Iren. l. 1. c. 13.
Scotus and Bonaventure and Durand and others maintain, there be some not only
quoad speciem but also quoad exercitium and in individuo indifferent, yet
certain it is that every individual act of religion and piety and charity,
that is as they speak remunerabilis ad vitam, and such as God accepts of to
that end, is either morally good or bad, by reason of some accidents and
circumstances, which in the practice and exercise do make it good or bad, and
require it to be done or omitted pro hic and nunc. And therefore though I shall
make no scruple to grant, that no one gesture, or form, or sighs, or tears, and
the like outward expressions be either Etsi autem media secundum speciem suam
spectata neque bona sint, neque mala* quandoque tamen eorum indivi dua, non
quidem ex natura sua, sed per accidens ex circumstantiis in ipsa praxi induunt
rationem boni aut mali: prout sc: vel necessitas adhaerescentis boni, vel
iniquitas adhaerescentis mali ea fieri vel non fieri, usurpari vel non usurpari
postulat. unde evenit nonnunquam ut quod heri facere, idipsum hodie omittare
expediat, quod tamen poftea, vel facere vel non facere poteris arbitratu tuo.
Exemplo sit trina mer^^o vel tinctio in Baptismo. etc. Joan, Forbesii Iren. l.
1. c. 12. S. 16. p. 74.
quoad speciem or individuum determined by the law of God: yet evident it is,
that by reason of some extrinsecall circumstances the action in the practice
and exercise must of necessity be so determined, that it would not be religious
or prudent or rational to use any other, then what at this time in regard of
all circumstances are decent, and fit, and agreeable.

. 73. Whence it evidently follows, that Christ had not a moral liberty and
indifference to use what outward expressions he pleased, but only such as were
prudentially fit and proportioned to the expression of his inward ardency and
devotion at this time; and upon this occasion. And therefore the Doctor might
justly conclude from Saint Lukes testimony of the heightning of our Saviors
ardency in prayer, even according to the outward Act and expression, as our
Refuter will have it, a greater heightning and aggrandation of the inward
devotion and affection. And nothing that our Refuter has yet said or can say,
for ought I find, will be able to overthrow it.

. 74. But the truth is, our Refuters notions, here at least, float up and down
as confusedly, and with as little coherence in his brain, as Epicurus his
Atoms did in vasto Jnani before they casually met together in a lump and mass.
And when I consider their multiplied absurdities, and illogicall confusion, I
cannot choose but wonder, that any man, who pretends to School-learning, should
thus unhappily pitch upon them. Nay I am almost persuaded that the Author
himself, that penned them, cannot be able to give any tolerable account of
them, or make them intelligible.

. 75. Howsoever I have according to his advise consulted Suarez in the place he
referrs to, as hoping that he might afford me some light to understand our
Refuters meaning. And more then this, I have perused the whole thirty seventh
disputation, as also his thirty ninth disputation in that tome, where he treats
de merito Christi, and yet I am more unsatisfied then formerly. And I can think
of no other probable ground of the Refuters mistakes but only his writing at
random, and conjecture upon other men's short notes and suggestions. For me
thinks it is impossible that he that read that Author (as clear, as he is
accurate) should be so extremely deceived in Suarez's meaning, as our Refuter
is.

. 76. To give the Reader a taste. In the first Section of that disputation he
enquires utrum in Christo fuerit voluntas humana? And he resolves it first,
that he had a created humane will; and then secondly, that this humane will was
in him, not only according to the faculty and first act, but also according to
the second Act, and exercise, and that it was prompt and expedite ad operandum,
and eliciendum proprios actus secundos distinctos ab actu increato divinae
voluntatis. In the second Section he enquires whether this humane will of
Christ were libera ad operandum? And then having distinguished of liberty from
necessity and Coaction, he resolves first that the humane will of Christ was
proprie and perfect libera in suis actibus, that is, not only free from
coaction but necessity and determination also, as he inferrs in the second
conclusion. Quia haec libertas seu indifferentia, and dominium propriarum
actionum est naturalis proprietas hominis, and magnam dicit perfectionem, and
ad meritum maxim necessaria est. Nam ut recte dicit D. Hieronymus l. 2. contra
Jovinian: ubi necessitas ibi nec corona; ideo liberi arbitrii condidit nos
Deus. From hence in the third Section he proceeds to enquire how the will of
Christ being altogether impeccable by virtue of the hypostaticall union could
be possibly free and indetermined in its operations. And then having proposed
the distinctions of liberty and indetermination and indifferency in sensu
diviso and composito, and absolute and simpliciter, and ex hypothesi, and
suppositione, and found them, as explained by some, not home to the solution of
the question, he proposes diverse other answers, and rejects them as
insufficient, and at last gives his own resolution to this effect, that though
since Christ were by virtue of the hypostaticall union impeccable, and
therefore would infallibly perform whatsoever God had commanded him, yet this
outward moral determination of the action by the precept would not at all
hinder the natural liberty of the will, but remain it would free as before,
supposing no such command. And when he had explained and confirmed this
assertion, he at last concludes, Sic igitur expositus sensus divisus and
compositus sufficienter solvit difficultatem hanc. In the fourth Section he
further proceeds to enquire, Quomodo voluntas Christi ex necessitate diligens
Deum in reliquis actibus potuerit esse libera? And this is the question our
Refuter referrs us to for our further satisfaction. And here in the first place
he proposes a difficulty indeed, drawn from the beatifick love of Christ's soul
qui erat simpliciter necessarius tam respectu Dei, quam respectu propriae
beatitudinis. To this he proposes diverse answers, which he rejects, as
unsatisfactory. And then in the fifth place gives his own.

77. I shall set it down at large, that the Reader may perceive for a close,
how hand over head our Refuter does referr us for instruction to the Schoolmen.

Propter haec, says he, potest excogitari quintus respondendi Suarez. in 3.
par. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 37 sect. 4. p. 518. col. 1. D. E. F. and 2. A. B.
modus: ad quem suppono Christum non habuisse praeceptum proprium charitatis
amandi Deum (that is a precept alone peculiar to himself as comprehensor, and
distinct from that obliging other men) tum quia cum voluntas ejus esset
necessario determinata ad hunc amorem, non indigebat tali praecepto: tum etiam
quia hac ratione alii beati non habent hujusmodi praeceptum, quia de
necessariis non dantur praecepta. Secundo suppono praeter amorem Dei beatificum
esse potuisse in anima Christi alium amorem Dei: nam sicut anima Christi
duplici supernaturali scientia cognoscebat Deum, beata and infusa: ita potuit
duplici actu amoris illum amare, ut infra q. 19. (disp. 39. de merito Christi)
latius dicam. Tertio suppono Christum fuisse simul Comprehensorem and viatorem,
ex qua mirabili conjunctione consequenter effectum est miraculose, ut proprii
actus beatifici ita continerentur in suprema part animae, ut non redundarent
in inferiorem, neque perfectionem suam cum illa communicarent. Ad hunc ergo
modum intelligi potest, ita animam illam amasse Deum necessario, ut amor ille
sisteret in sola formali conjunctione et unione ad Deum, suo modo ad formalem
beatitudinem pertinente, and non se extenderet, nec communicaret (ut ita dicam)
aliis operibus and actibus, qui in Christum ut viatorem conveniebant. Cum enim
haec extensio vel communicatio sit per modum cujusdam efficientiae, poterat
facile impediri, sicut fruitio beata impedita est, ne omnem tristitiam
expelleret, nec inferiori portioni se communicaret. Hoc ergo supposito facile
intelligitur illum Dei amorem quem anima Christi habuit, veluti consequentem
scientiam infusam and non beatam, fuisse liberum, quia neque ab intrinseco
habuit necessitatem, cum non versaretur circa Deum clare visum, ut sic, nec ex
praecepto, quia ostensum est Christum non habuisse speciale praeceptum amandi
Deum. Et ulterius probari potest, quia nec tale praeceptum est, veluti
connaturale and intrinsecum ipsi charitati, quia illi satis est unico actu
diligere Deum, unde si habeat unum actum necessarium dilectionis Dei, ex natura
sua non obligat ad alium actum: nec vero est cur fingamus datum esse Christo
speciale praeceptum de hujusmodi actu, quia ad hoc asserendum nullum est
fundamentum, and positiva praecepta sine fundamento multiplicanda non sunt:
erat ergo ille amor liber. Ex quo ulterius facile intelligitur ab illo amore
libero, libere etiam processisse actus obedientiae, charitatis proximi and
aliarum virtutum, quas Christus Dominus ut viator exercuit: tum quia ille amor
est sufficiens principium and causa illorum, tum etiam quia amor beatificus, ut
dictum est, veluti continebatur, ne influerit in hujusmodi actus, sed
relinqueret voluntatem operari modo accommodato Viatori. Et ita videtur fieri
satis omnibus difficultatibus positis. This he further confirms and explains.

. 78. And now I appeal to the whole world, whether any thing could be said more
high and full to the Doctors position, and what we have delivered in the
clearing and confirmation of it, and more contrary and destructive to the
pretenses of our Refuter in his second argument, in every part and parcel of
it. For first plain it is that Suarez here distinguishes Christ's state of
Comprehensor, from his state of Viator. Secondly, he distinguishes the
necessary acts of his Beatifick love from the free acts of his love springing
from the infused habit of charity. Thirdly he asserts that the Beatifick
necessary love had no influence upon the infused love, and consequently this
might be most free and meritorious in the act and exercise, though the other
were not. Fourthly that this free infused love was a sufficient cause and
principle of all the inferior acts of obedience and piety and virtue, which as
Christ in the state of viator did freely exercise, so they did as freely issue
from that free meritorious love, properly so called, as their first spring and
issue. And then lastly it appears from the words, that these elicite acts of
virtue, piety, obedience, and the like, are the exterior acts of charity that
Suarez here means, and not the outward sensible expressions, as our Refuter
suggests.

. 79. And therefore since he has been so extremely unhappy in the quoting of
Suarez, Aquinas and other Schoolmen, my advise for the future shall be to him,
that he let the Schoolmen and Scholastic Divines alone, and content himself
only with the Practical, wherein I hope he will be more happy.

. 80. Much more to our present purpose might be observed out of the following
question Sect. 5. where he determines Quomodo Christus videns semper in verbo
omnes actus suos eos libere exercere potuerit, as also from his 39. disputation
de merito Christi, where he proves that Christ did merit, though not by his
Beatifick and necessary love of God, yet by the elicite acts of the infused, as
also by the elicite act of charity to his neighbor, and all other infused
virtues and graces and the like. But because we cited part of this disputation
already, and our Refuters gross mistakes need not further conviction, I refer
the studious Reader to it, where he shall find some things worthy his perusal.
For now

-- extremo in fine laborum
Vela traho, and terris festino advertere proram.
to mine and the Readers great contentment, I haste to the L'envoye and close.

SECT. the last.
The close. Refuters deliberate answer abortive. His civility. His appeal to
the Readers judgment. His stiling himself the Doctors Refuter. His challenge
of the Doctor to a rejoinder. Clearness in dispute approved by the Defender.
Why the Refuter plainly dealt with. The Libeller his own Executioner. Defenders
proposal and promise. The Refuter may take his leave for the present, and if
he please rest for ever. Refuters strange complement at parting. Why the
Defender, as the Refuter, subscribes not his name, but keeps unknown.

Doctor HAMMOND.
. 41. And so I shut up this hasty paper, hopeing that he which invited and
promised it a welcome, in case it were given in a fair and Scholasticall way,
having nothing to accuse in it as to the first Epithet, will abate somewhat in
reference to the second, and allow it a friendly, though but unqualified, it
pretend not to a more hospitable reception.

. 1. TO this so civil parting, the Refuter returns a very confident appeal to
the Readers judgment, and an unsavory challenge to a second Reply.

JEANES.
Unto this your hasly paper (as you call it) I have given a deliberate answer,
and I hope it may contend with your reply for civility and fairness in carriage
of the controversy between us. As for the Scholasticalness of either paper, it
were a very vain thing for me to say any thing of it, for we must be tried by
the learned Readers, unto whom we both have, by thus appearing in public,
appealed, and unto their judgment I shall contentedly submit my self. And thus
your Refuter for the present takes his leave of you, hoping when your more
pleasing and profitable employments shall permit, to hear further from you, in
the mean time he shall rest;

your most humble servant HENRY JEANES.

. 2. And thus Per varios casus per tot discrimina rerum
Tendimus in Latium!


But Sir, before you take your full leave of the Doctor, and lay your self down
to rest in the bed of fame, take my farewell along with you.

. 3. Whereas then you say, that to the Doctors hasty paper (as he calls it) you
have given a deliberate answer, I must tell you, it had been better that you
had written in haste too, that so at least you might have had the common excuse
of bad Writers. For this your Audivi saepe hoc vulgo dictum dicier sole^e
Elephantem gravidam perpetuos december esse annot. Plaut. Stickus. act. 2. sc. 1.
December annis gestare (Elephantem) in utero vulgus existimat. Aristoteles
biennio, nec amplius quam semel gignere, Plin. not. hist. l 8 c. 10.
Elephantine production proves Abortive, and in the language of the Latin
Ganis festinans caecos parit ca^ulos vid Erasm. Adag. [canes] gerunt uterum
sexagenia diebus, Gignunt caecos: and quo largiori aluntur lacte eo tardiores
v^sum accipiunt: Non tamen unquam ultra vicesimum primum, nec ante septimum.
Quidam tradunt, si unus gignatur, nono die cernere: si gemini decimo. Idemque
in singulos adjici. ^o^idemque esse tarditatis ad Lucem dies. Plin not hist. l.
8. c. 40. Massurius Author est L. Papyrium Praetorem, secundo haerede lege
agente bonorum possessionem contra eum dedisse, cum matter partum se XIII
mensibus diceret tulisse etc. Plin. not. hist, l. 7. c. -- quosdam and cum
dentibus nasci sicut M. Curium, qui ob id Dentatus cognominatus est. Et Cn.
Papyrium Carbonem. Plin not. hist, l. 7. c, 16. Vid Schenckium l. 4 observat.
Sennert. Institut: med. l. 1. c. 10. and ejusd. Pract. medicin. l. 4. part. 2.
sect. 6. c. 6. and authors ibi citatos, mihi p. 532.
Proverb is a very deliberate whelp, nor could your hasty teeming fancy have
brought forth a blinder, if in a quarter of the space it had precipitately cast
a whole litter of Answers.

. 4. But then though it be so extremely dark, that not only nine days, but
nine ages are too short to make it see, yet as Schenckius and others report of
some very slow and unnaturally late productions of women, it comes forth
toothed and nailed and is no sooner born, but it can bite and scratch and be
angry.

. 5. But yet he hopes it may contend with the Doctors for civility, etc. but
what fast ground, I pray Sir, has this your Anchor to six on? Is it because you
somewhere strike sail and call him the learned Doctor, and say, it is your
desire and purpose to have fair wars with him, and that your pen shall not drop
a disrespective syllable of him? But would call your self mannerly, because you
first wipe your mouth, before you spit in ones face, and after cry your humble
servant? For though you rail not in down right terms, as others do, yet scarce
S. W. otherwise called William Sergeant in a Controversy Vid. Schism disarmed.
that concerns the very copyhold of his Church does more slightingly
undervalue the Doctors judgment and learning, then your self in every page
almost, nor more frequently put him to School for the learning the most
trivial notions in the world. And a short Catalogue of your respective
language and carriage to the Doctor I have gathered and represented in the
Dedicatory Epistle. Sir, if this be your civility, and fairness in carriage, I
pray what is your Satyr? And therefore if you hope to contend for this Laurel
of fair carriage and civility in controversy, it must not be with Doctor
Hammond, but with Bolsec and Schioppius and the black-mouthed Feuardentius in
his Theomachia Calvinistica or our Countryman William Reinolds in his
Calvino-Turcismus.

. 6. As for the Scholasticalness of your Paper, though you profess it were a
very vain thing for you to say any thing of it, yet you are so vainly
self-conceited to appeal to the judgment of the Reader for it, and to that
judgment of his, you profess, you shall contentedly submit your self.

. 7. But though I have nothing to rely on but the Readers favorable
construction, yet since our Refuter has been pleased to appeal to his judgment
for the Scholasticalness of his discourse, to that Judgment let him go. And if
I have not made good my first undertaking, let him censure as severely as he
please, and if he pardon my other weaknesses, let him not spare me for that.

. 8. And thus after this appeal he conceitedly tells the Doctor Your Refuter
for the present takes his leave of you, hoping when your more pleasing and
profitable employments shall permit, to hear further from you, in the mean time
he shall rest, your humble servant, etc.

. 9. Your Refuter! In good time Sir! But how long I beseech you have you been
called by that name? If it be a title of your own choosing, I doubt not but the
world will see, you are mistaken, and that you had very little reason to take
your leave of the Doctor with a challenge to a second encounter. Sir, It is
honor enough to such a writer as your self that you have fallen once under the
Doctors fatal pen. And whatsoever you jeeringly think of his Vid. D. Hammonds
(...). 1.
more pleasing and profitable employments, yet well assured I am that wiser
Judges then your self are persuaded, that his time and abilities will be more
usefully employed, then in drawing of a saw with such Schoolmen, as your self;
and therefore his friends did not unseasonably advise him wholly to withdraw
himself a foro contensioso to some more pleasing and profitable employment.

. 10. And now Sir you may take your leave of the Doctor if you please, and rest
as long as you think fit. I shall not be so confident as you are, to send
challenges, nor rest for the present in expectation of new duels. Yet if you
shall think fit to return an answer, I shall not fail by Gods blessing to
reply, but only so far forth as truth and justice go with me. For it is not
victory I contend for, but that. And such is a worthy Christian contention
indeed. For as there is nothing I love more then civility and clearness in
disputes, so me thinks, there is nothing so becoming a Christian, as
conviction, not calumny. Nor am I better pleased then when errors not persons
are arraigned and condemned, and reason not passion steers and guides the whole
controversy.

. 11. And if in some places I may seem not to have kept to this rule, it was
because I foresaw I could not otherwise check your confidence, nor sooner make
the Peacock to veil and sink his train then by bringing his eye to behold his
black feet. If you had not all a long so undervalued and slighted your
adversary (whose worth and great parts, the world has long since admired) I
should not so much as have been angry with your errors, nor have been more
displeased that you differed from me and the Doctor in judgment then in
complexion and stature.

. 12. Perhaps you may be offended with this my plain dealing. For some persons
are of such intemperate passions, that they can be angry with their glasses,
and break them, because they faithfully reflect and represent their
deformities. Pinxi^ et Antigoni Regis imaginem altero lumine orbam, primus
excogi^ata ratione visia condendi obliquam namque fecit ut quod corpori deerat
picturae potius deesse videretur tantumque eam partem e facie ostendit, quam
totam poterat ostendere. Plin. not. hist. l. 35. c. 10.
I know it was looked upon as a piece of most artificial flattery in that
great Master in painting who to conceal the want of Antigonus his eye, first
invented the way of drawing the face by halves. And therefore because I had no
Temptation to please you by concealing your defects, lest Apelles fate should
have been mine, and your self and your friends should have been offended with
me, as you were with Doctor Hammond for his civil addresses, I have not
forborne in my own defense to display your ignorance at large.

. 13. And if now in your anger you shall instead of answering my reason fall to
libell and railing and call that a Refutation, though my ink as well as yours
is made of copperace and galls, and that to answer a Satyr is the easiest
thing in the world, yet I shall in this leave you to be your own executioner,
nor envy you the honor of being your own defamer. For he that only libels
another man's Fame, does but hang and draw himself in the effigies of an other,
and paints his own deformities under the shape of his adversary.

. 14. But if as you pretend to Scholasticall discourse you shall manage your
Reply in such a way (and I have started many noble worthy Theams and well
befitting the best Schoolmens consideration) I shall not drop a word in
dishonor of your mistakes, but keep close to our Ob. and Sol. which as it will
make short work, so I doubt not, if it be rational and solid, but it will be
more pleasing to the Reader then the most witty Declamation or Satyr can be
made.

. 15. Or else if you have received it in 1 King. 22. 31,
charge to fight neither with small nor great, but only with the King of
Israel, or if as nothing but the Vid: Plin: not hist: l: 8, c. 40. mihi p. 390:
Lion and Elephant could rouse the generous courage of Alexanders Albanian
Mastiff, so you shall undervalue all other Adversaries, and think none worthy
your confutation but only Doctor Hammond, or if you shall answer me in short,
with a quis leget haec? and give out among your friends, that I have
artificially spun out this Rejoinder beyond the patience of a Refuter, or if
for any other Reason, you think fit to take your leave of the Doctor, without
hopeing when his more pleasing and profitable employments shall permit to hear
further from him, and be contented, not only in the mean time, but for ever to
rest, I shall not triumph over your silence but commend your discretion. For
well assured I am, that the world may be better employed, then in perusing the
Disputes of such Schoolmen, as you, and I.

. 16. I have done Sir; but because I am no Italian, but an Englishman, I shall
not imitate your courtship, nor follow you in the mode of the Hectors of the
age. Though you close up your challenge to the Doctor with, your most humble
servant, yet I never met with such complements among the Schoolmen I converse
with: nor can I otherwise count it then a strange piece of Rhetoric for
Duellers in the field to cry your humble servant when they make thrusts at one
another. Much less shall I, as you do, subscribe my name in great letters,
because as I am not ambitious of fame, so I know I deserve it not. Nor could I
look upon it as material to the Controversy, to know the Author of this
Rejoinder, but have found by experience that when reason cannot carry, then
railing against the Author shall serve for an answer. And therefore not as
ashamed of my name, or distrustful of the cause I undertake to defend, but as
for other very good Reasons, so for this (among the rest) that you might not
wave the present argument, and run into personal declamation, I have for the
present concealed it, desiring to keep unknown, And so I leave you to rest from
your labors in confuting Doctor Hammond.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 29. in marg. (...) r. (...). p. 30. l. 17. intentissimum r.
intensissimum. p. 73. l. 8. (...) r. (...). p. 76 l. 21. (...) r. (...). p. 89.
l. penult. nno r. non. p. 98. l. 23. proved r. proud. p. 131. l. 25.
proposition r. proportion. p. 194. l. 19. dicir. diei. p. 230. l. 33. onoc r.
once. p 304. l. 1. 28. as every r. as of every. p. 341. l. 27 partialis sit
aequalis, r. partiali deficiente deficiet effectus, licet reliqua causa sit
aequalis. p. 365. l. 32. mortalium r. moralium. p. 383. l, 4. to 4. to r. by.
l. 22, (...) r. (...). p. 392. l. 17. sinners r. sins. p. 396. in marg. (...)
r. (...). p. 417. l. 13. externum. r. extremum. p. 430. l. 6. his great, r.
this great p. 483. l. 18. our r. your. p. 484. l. penult, vices r. vires. p.
501. l 14. opposite r. oppositi. p. 504. l. 10. quum r. quin. p. 508. l. 11. in
his r. not in his. p. 527. l. 8. possibili r. passibili. p. 564. l. 2. in
cautis r. incautis. p. 566. l. 12. foam r. fomes. p. 598. l. 13. by the r. of
the. p. 621. l. ult. dilectionis r. dilectioni.

A TABLE of the QUESTIONS here handled.
WHether Doctor Hammond be guilty of a direct, or consequentiall denial of the
fullness of Christ's habitual Grace? neg.

Whether all actions, as well immanent as transient have their terms? affir. p.
26. etc.

Whether the immanent acts of the habit of divine Grace or holy charity in
Christ, are terminated in the quality of his actual holy love? affir. p. 30.
etc.

Whether immanent acts are dispofitions, and ranged under the first species of
quality? aff. p. 33. etc. 120.. etc. 126.

Whether grace may physically and effectively by humane endeavors be
augmented, or dispositively only? p. 35. etc.

Whether the acts of divine love in Christ are, and justly may be called
dispositions? aff. 37. etc. 127. etc.

Whether acts and habits are specifically distinct? aff. p. 38. etc. 73, 74,
75. 126.

Whether the perfection and in being of the habit, can any other way be
rationally discovered then by the perfection of the Acts? neg.

And consequently Whether the Doctor has not taken the best course to
demonstrate the fullness of Christ's habitual grace? p. 53, 54, etc.

Whether there were an all-fulness of habitual grace in Christ? aff. p. 58,
etc. 195, 571, etc. 586, 587, 588.

Whether though the habit of divine grace in Christ concretively considered
were always so full that it was incapable of increase, yet precisely and
abstractly considered it were capable of intension, at least by the
extraordinary power of God? aff. p. 60, 61, 214, 215.

Whether the love of Christ were more intense at some times in some acts viz.
in his agony and death, then at other times in other acts, viz. in his
suffering, hunger, etc. And whether his death be the greatest act of his love
to us men? aff. p. 57, 63, 66, 67.

Whether a graduall heightning in the Acts of Christ's love could possibly
intend and augment the habit of his love? neg. 65.

And consequently,

whether an intensive increase in the inward acts of wisdom and grace in
Christ, will argue and conclude an intensive increase in his habitual grace,
and whether the Doctor asserting the one, does by consequence assert the other?
neg. p. 63, 65, 184, etc. 201, 202, 248, 249.

Whether our charity to God and our neighbors be one and the same habit? aff.
p. 70, 233, 234.

Whether the distinction of love into the habit and the act be not only
legible in the Doctors writings, but love is also truly a genus to the habit
and the act? p. 81, etc. p. 116, etc.

Whether love as a genus does equally comprehend the habit and the outward
sensible expressions of it? neg. p. 84, etc. 89, 90.

Whether criticisme be not highly useful to complete the Divine? aff. p. 97,
etc.

Whether the intension of the act be so proportioned to the intension of the
habit as still to equal it in perfection? neg. p. 109, 110, 111.

And consequently Whether the actual grace of Christ be so exactly proportioned
to his habitual grace, as still to equal it in fullness, height, and intension?
neg. p. 101 177, 178.

Whether any thing naturally and ab intrinseco hinders but that several outward
expressions of love in themselves gradually different, may sometimes flow from
the same or several acts of inward love gradually equal? neg. p. 139.

Whether though the outward acts of Gods favor be different, yet the inward
act of his love is still one and the same substantial act, no other then
himself? aff. against the Socinian. p. 141, etc.

And confequently,

Whether any thing but God himself can be the proper object of Gods love? neg.
p. 145, etc.

Whether the gradual intension, and remission in the outward expressions of
love in men do most commonly argue and infer a proportionable increase and
decrease in the inward acts of love? aff. p. 155, etc.

And consequently,

Whether we are obliged ordinarily to afford the greatest expressions and
demonstrations of our love, where we are bound most to love? aff. 161, etc. 165.

Whether the gradual intension and remission of the inward and the outward acts
and expressions of love must be so exactly proportioned in point of degrees, as
to be always equal or parallel? neg. p. 168, 169.

And consequently Whether the Doctor did rightly conclude, that that act of
internal love expressed by his dying for us was superior to those former,
which only expressed themselves in his poverty? aff. p. 166, 167, 168, 170.

Whether the Schoolmen, particularly Aquinas affirm, that the intension of
Christ's actual grace is exactly equal to that of his habitual? neg. p. 180,
etc.

Whether a moral work or action consists of the inward and the outward act as
the two essential parts? aff. p. 183, 184. 591. 601.

Whether the Fathers and Schoolmen, Protestants and Papists, and the Refuter
among the number affirm that Christ did truly and really increase in the
perfection of the inward acts of wisdom and grace and holy love? aff. p. 188,
etc.

Whether the acts of Christ's love were primario, and per se, and not only
secundario and per accidens capable of degrees? aff. p. 209, etc.

Whether D. Hammond by the phrase the love of God, means any thing else then
the grace of divine charity in its general notion and comprehension? neg. 216,
etc.

Whether the acts of the grace of divine charity in Christ were not only de
facto different in graduall perfection among themselves, and from the habit,
but ought also thus to differ? aff. 216, etc. 245, etc.

And consequently,

Whether the first great law of holy charity binds all in every act to the
same equal intenseness and utmost degree of love and holy charity? neg. 240,
241, etc. 360, 361, 433, 464.

Whether when the number of degrees of any quality is multiplied in the same
subject, the quality it self also is proportionably intended? aff. p. 253, 254,
255, 256.

Whether the multiplication of the outward acts of prayer, and a longer
continuance in them, and a repetition of the same words, argue a greater
ardency of inward affection, and true devotion? aff. 257, etc.

Whether though the merit of every act of Christ were infinite in regard of his
person, yet it were finite in regard of the real physical value of the works
themselves? And consequently,

Whether one work of his might in this respect be more valuable and meritorious
then another? aff. p. 270, etc. 574, 580.

Whether the English Translation of (...) he prayed more earnestly, be just and
best? aff. 279, etc.

Whether the ardency of Christ's inward devotion were heightened in his agony?
aff. 283, etc. 322, etc. 328, etc. 543, etc.

Whether Christ in the state of his humiliation was both comprehensor and
viator? aff. 292, 346, 347, etc. 525.

Whether Christ, being always comprehensor upon earth, were in a capacity to
pray? aff. 293, etc.

Whether Christ being still God as well as man, it were convenient for him to
pray? And God had so decreed? And Christ de facto did pray? And for himself as
well as others? And with a difference? aff. p. 296, 297, 298, 299, 300.

Whether Christ in truth and reality and not in show did pray for a Removal of
that cup of his passion which he knew his Father had determined he should
drink, and when himself came into the world for that very purpose? aff. p, 301,
etc.

Whether Christ's agony and prayer for a removal of this bitter cup employed any
unwillingness in him to suffer, or contrariety of desires in himself, or
repugnance to the will of God? neg. p. 306, etc.

Whether Christ (and consequently we from the authority of this great example)
might lawfully and rationally pray for a removal of that cup, which God had
absolutely decreed he should drink? aff. p. 315, 316, 317, 318, 319.

Whether as the greatness of our Saviors agony in the garden exceeded all his
former sufferings, so his ardency in prayer for a removal of it were
proportionably intended? aff. 322, etc. 537, 538.

Whether affliction be a fit season for the heightning our devotion, and more
then ordinary fervor in prayer? And God now calls for it? And Christ by his
own example has instructed us what to do in such cases? aff. 327, 328, 522,
523, 528, 542, 543, 544, 545.

Whether the inward acts of Christ's habitual grace were always in termino,
and at the highest? and belonged to him as comprehensor? neg. 3^7, 338.

Whether Aquinas, Capreolus, Scotus assert that the inward acts of Christ's
habitual grace were all equally intense in gradual perfection? neg. 334, etc.

Whether Aquinas and Scotus assert the contrary? and that which the Doctor
maintains? aff. 342, 343.

Whether it were possible for Christ to merit, and only as viator? aff. 348,
349, 525, 526, 527, 626, 627, 628, And by what acts? 365, 366, 367.

Whether he that affirms that the inward acts of Christ's love of God or holy
charity were less intense at one time then another, does deny Christ to be
happy in his soul at those times? neg. 351, etc.

Whether he that affirms that the acts of Christ's love or holy charity were
more intense at one time then another does by consequence make him guilty of
the breach of the first great law of love? neg. 361, etc.

Whether Christ as viator had the same abilities to love God as he had as
comprehensor? and the charity of the Saints on earth can possibly equal in
perfection the charity of the Saints in heaven? neg. 369, etc.

Whether he that makes use of any Scripture exposition to be found in
Bellarmine or other Popish writer is eo ipso guilty of a compliance with
Papists? neg. 378, 379, 380.

Whether D. Hammonds exposition of the first great commandment of love be the
same with Bellarmines? neg. 386.

Whether the Doctors exposition be agreeable to that of the Fathers and most
learned of Protestants? aff. 400, 401, 402, etc. How reasonable it is, 433, 434.

Whether the state of Adam in innocence were a state of proficiency? aff.
against M. Cawdrey. 421, 456, 612.

Whether the Saints and Angels in heaven all love God to the same indivisible
degree? neg. 423, 466.

Whether the Saints and Angels in heaven differ in degrees of glory? aff. 423,
424, 425, 466, 467.

Whether Christians are now bound sub periculo animae to that degree of
innocence, and prudence, and perfection of Adam in paradise? neg. 425, 426,
429, 430, 446, 447, 605, 606, 607, 608.

Whether Christians are now bound by the first great law of love to all the
degrees of love either in this life or the next, so that whatsoever falls short
of the utmost height is sinful, as Chamier asserts? neg. 431, 432, 486, 487. Or
to as high a degree as is possible to the humane nature, as the Refuter? Neg.
433, 445, 446.

Whether the first great law of love excludes all possibility of
freewill-offerings? neg. 442, 443, etc.

And consequently,

Whether there be certain acts of religion and degrees of piety to which no man
by any particular law is obliged, which yet when spontaneously and voluntarily
performed are approved by God and accepted of him as freewill-offerings, over
and above what any law in particular requires, as the Doctor maintains? aff.
383, 442, etc. 446, 447.

Whether this Doctrine of Gospel-freewill-offerings inferrs the Romish Doctrine
of supererogation? neg. 448, etc. And whether the Doctor has freed it from this
charge? aff. 436, 437.

Whether the Doctor asserts lukewarmness in love? neg. How it differs from
sincerity? And whether Christianity be a state of proficiency and growth? aff.
438, etc. 455, 456.

Whether God is to be loved above all things objective, appretiative,
intensive? And whether the Doctor approves all? aff. 442, 443, 444, 496, etc,

Whether the Christian is bound to aspire to and endeavor after the loving of
God according to the perfection of the Saints in heaven? aff. 446, 447, 448,
467, 472.

Whether the modus of virtue and charity falls under the precept? neg. 453, 454.

Whether charity may be increased in infinitum? aff. 458, 468, 469, 502.

Whether the creature may be obliged to love God as much as he is lovely? neg.
459.

Whether we are bound to love God as much as we can in this life? and
infinitely and without measure? aff. 460, 464, 465, 474, 475, 476, 505, 619.

Whether the quality or grace of divine charity or holy love admits of an eight
or any set highest degree, to which all are bound to arrive at? neg. 467, 468,
469, 470.

Whether Aquinas maintains that the first great commandment of love requires of
Christians by way of Duty, that perfection of love that is only attainable in
heaven? neg. 485, etc.

Whether perfection of state according to Aquinas admits of uncommanded acts
and counsels, but perfection life does not? aff. 491, 492, 493.

Whether Scotus maintains that the first great law of love requires that
perfection of Christians by way of duty, that is only attainable in heaven?
neg. 496, etc.

Whether Durand maintains the same? neg. 504, etc.

Whether S. Austin and S. Bernard do assert the same? neg. 509, etc.

Whether the distinction of Quatenus indicat finem, and quatenus praecipit
medium were invented by Bellarmine to avoid the Refuters testimonies of Aquinas
and Scotus? 517, etc. and whether it is agreeable to the sense of S. Austin?
aff. 519.

Whether the clear intuitive knowledge and happiness and necessary love of
Christ as comprehensor, had any influence on, or altered the nature and
freedom of the acts of his love, and virtues and graces as viator? neg. 522,
etc, 529, 634, 635, 636, 637.

Whether Christ as comprehensor, though he had always sufficient cause to love
God to the utmost height, yet could have any more grounds and motives thus to
love then he had occasions? neg. 530. 531.

Whether as viator he might have occasions, grounds and motives to heighten his
love and ardency in prayer? aff. 532, 533.

Whether as viator he were capable of hope? aff. 535, 536.

Whether the love of desire and complacency immediately fixed on God were in
Christ as viator capable of increase, and de facto augmented? aff. 533, 534,
535, 536, 537, 538.

Whether it may be rightly inferred from this saying of S. Austin, Charitas
quam diu augeri potest, profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est,
that to ascribe growth to the ardency of Christ's actual love is to charge it
with imperfection and sin? neg. 550.

Whether the phrase ex vitio est, be to be causally understood, as denoting our
original corruption? aff. 558, etc.

What was S. Austins opinion concerning original sin? and whether all born in
it? aff. 560, etc. 605, 606, etc.

Whether the Refuter be very unjustly confident that besides this Replyer, D.
Hammond, no learned man either Protestant or Papist has ascribed any such
growth to the actual love of God? And whether several eminently Learned both
Protestants and Papists have asserted it? aff. 570. etc.

How Christ might increase in actual grace, the habitual still continuing in
one equal fullness? 583, 584 585.

Whether the first Covenant since the fall of man were ever in force to
justification, or obligatory by way of duty to any but Christ? neg. 605, etc.

Whether God under the second Covenant requires sinless perfection to the
justification of believers? neg. or only faith and evangelicall righteousness?
aff. 460, 462, 610, 611, 612.

Whether from the more profuse pouring out of the outward expressions of
devotion, at the time of our Saviors agony may rightly be concluded the
increase of his inward ardency? aff. 598, etc.

Whether Aquinas means by the exterior acts of charity, moral duties, and not
outward sensible expressions? aff. 617, etc.

Whether the will of Christ had the same equal natural and proper freedom to
the inward acts of love and the outward expressions of it? aff. 628, 629.

Whether Christ had more moral freedom and indifferency to many or most of
the outward acts and sensible expressions then to the inward acts of charity?
neg. 629, 630, 631. Or might indifferently use any outward gestures, or actions
or expressions in prayer, then what pro hic and nunc were prudentially decent
and fit? neg. 632, etc.

Whether every act of piety and charity that is meritorious or remunerable is
quoad exercitium, and in individuo determined in respect of outward
circumstances? affirm, 632.

Whether Suarez asserts that the will of Christ had a natural and proper
freedom or active indifferency in sensu diviso to the outward sensible
expressions only, and not to the inward acts of the love of God, or holy
charity? neg. 633, etc.

Authors omitted in the Catalogue. Petrus S. Joseph. Suarez, F. Errata.
Epist. ded. p. 4. l. 26. Raunandus, Raynaudus

Treatise. p. 123. l. 21. love, good. 139, 8. intrinseco extrinseco. 167. 13.
inward outward. 377. 23. perfectly, perfect. 387. 24. aliud, aliud nisi. 393.
23. the form and, that form of. 415. 32. Deum ex part, De um amari ex part.
422. 6. de quibus praecepta, de quibus dantur praecepta. 562. 11. ut omnino,
non ut omnino. 581. 24. as with out, as we in all things without, 640. l. 12.
would call, would you call.

Smaller literal escapes the Reader will amend and pardon.

THE END.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivy-lane, London.
Books written by Doctor Hammond, and Printed for Richard Royston, and Richard
Davis.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by Hen.
Hammond, D. D. in fol. the second Edition enlarged.

2. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the books of the Psalms briefly
explaining the difficulties thereof, by Hen. Hammond D. D. fol. new.

3. The Practical Catechism, with other English Treatises, in two volumes in 4.

4. Dissertationes quatuor quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and
Primaeva Antiquitate adst^uuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum in
4.

5. A Letter of Resolution of six Queries in 12.

6. Of Schism. A defense of the Church of England against the exceptions of the
Romanists, in 12.

7. Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to practice, in 12.

8. Paraenesis, or a seasonable exhortation to all true sons of the Church of
England, in 12.

9. A Collection of several Replies and Vindications published of late, most of
them in defense of the Church of England, now put together in four volumes.
Newly published, in 4.

10. The Dispatcher Dispatched, in Answer to a Roman Catholic Book, entitled
Schism Dispatched, in 4. new.

11. A Review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on all the Books of the New
Testament, with some additions and alterations, in 8.

12. Some profitable directions both for Priest and people, in two Sermons in
8. new.

Books and Sermons written by J. Tailor D. D.
(...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the year; together with a
discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol.

2. The History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, third
Edition in fol.

3. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12.

4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12.

5. The Golden Grove, or A Manual of daily Prayers, fitted to the days of the
week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12.

6. The Doctrine and Practice of Repentance rescued from popular Errors, in a
large 8. newly published.

7. A Collection of Polemical and Moral discourses, in fol. newly reprinted.

8. A Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in 12. new.

9. A Collection of Offices or forms of prayer fitted to the needs of all
Christians, taken out of the Scriptures and Ancient Liturgies of several
Churches especially the Greek, together with the Psalter or Psalms of David
after the Kings Translation, in a large octavo newly published.

10. Ductor Dubitantium, or Cases of Conscience, fol. in two vol. Now in the
Press.

Books written by Mr. Tho. Pierce Rector of Brington.
THe Christians Rescue from the grand error of the heathen touching the fatal
necessity of all events, in 5. Books in 4. new.

The new Discoverer Discovered by way of Answer to Mr. Baxter with a rejoinder
to his Key for Catholics, and Disputations about Church government. 4. new.

The Sinner Impleaded in his own Court, whereunto is added the grand
Characteristick whereby a Christian is to be known, in 12. newly printed.

The Lifelesness of Life on the hither side of Immortality, with a timely
caveat against procrastination.

Books in Fol.
(...), Ecclesiae Anglicane Suspiria, The Tears, Sighs, Complaints and Prayers
of the Church of England: setting forth her former Constitution, compared with
her present condition; also, the visible Causes, and probable Cures of her
Distempers, by John Gauden D. D. of Bocken in Essex. fol. new.

The Royalists defense printed at Oxon. 4.

The Regal apology printed at Oxon. 4.

Sacro-sancta Regum Majestas by the Archbishop of Tuam 4. printed at Oxon

The Image unbroken, or a vindication of his Majesty's Book entitled A
Pourtraiture of his Sacred Majesty in his solitudes and sufferings, in 4. by B.
Bramhall in a reply to Milton.

Reliquiae Sacrae Carolinae, or the Works of that Great Monarch and Glorious
Martyr King Charles the first 8. with a short view of his Life and Death.

Place this CATALOGUE at the end of the Book.

The End.

