AN APPENDIX, TO A CONFESSION of FAITH, OR A more full Declaration of the Faith
and Judgment of Baptized Believers.

Occasioned by the inquiry of some w^-affected and godly persons in the Country.

Written by BENJAMIN COX, a Preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Published for the further clearing of Truth, and discovery of their mistake
who have imagined a dissent in fundamentals where there is none.

MATH. 10.27.28. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what
ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the house-tops.

And fear not etc.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1646.

A more full DECLARATION OF THE FAITH and Judgment OF Baptized Believers:
BE ready always, says the Apostle Peter, to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear, 1 Pet.
3.15. It is therefore our duty in meekness and love to give an answer to those
godly persons, which desire to be fully informed of our judgment concerning
Religion and the ways of our God: To those therefore that have expressed a
desire to be so informed, I thus answer.

In a book lately reprinted, entitled, A Confession of faith of seven
Congregations or Churches of Christ in London, etc. is a plain and sincere
expression of our judgment in the things therein spoken of, in 52 Articles:
And if our judgment touching some particulars, wherein we seem, or are
supposed, to dissent from some others, do not appear clearly enough in that
confession, I hope the same shall somewhat more eleerly appear in this ensuing
Appendix.

1. We believe that the punishment due to Adam for his first rebellion, and due
to all men for their sin in Adam, and for all their sins against the Law, was
not a lying of the whole person of man in the dust, or grave, eternally without
life or sense; for then the punishment of man that sinned, should not have
differed from the punishment of the brute beast that sinned not. But the
punishment due to man, as aforesaid, was indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish; and that eternal: And consequently the Redemption which we have by
Christ from the curse of the Law, is a Redemption from eternal misery and
torment: this we learn from these places of Scripture compared together; Romans
2.8, 9. Jude 7. Gal. 3.13. Hebr. 9.12.

2. We believe that the eternity of the punishment of the vessels of wrath, is
an absolute eternity, knowing no end; as well as the eternity of the life of the
Saints: Mat. 25.46. This we maintain against those that affirm that all men
shall be saved at the last.

3. Although all the power of the creature to act be from the Creator, and
there is a providence of God always extended to every creature, and to every
action of the creature; yet we judge that the sinful corruption of the
creature, and the sinfulness of the creature's action, is from the creature,
and not from God: and that it is a great sin to say that God is the author of
sin: Eccles. 7.29. Habak. 1.13. James 1.13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 14.33. 1 Ioh. 2.16.
As touching that place which is here objected against us, viz: Amos 3.6. Shall
there be evil in a City, etc. We conceive that it is either to be rendered
according to the last Translation in the margin; Shall there be evil in a City,
and shall not the Lord do somewhat? or else that it is to be understood only of
the evil of punishment, and not of the evil of sin.

4. We teach that they only do, or can believe in Jesus Christ, to whom it is
given to believe in him by a special, gracious, and powerful work of his
Spirit: and that this is (and shall be) given to the Elect in the time appointed
of God for their effectual calling; and to none but the Elect: Ioh. 6 64, 65.
Philip. 1.29. Ierem. 31.33, 34. Ezekiel. 36.26. Romans 8.29, 30. Ioh. 10.26. This we
hold against those that do maintain a freewil and sufficient ability in all men
to believe; and do deny Election.

5. We affirm, that as Jesus Christ never intended to give remission of sins
and eternal life unto any but his sheep; ( Ioh. 10.15. Ioh. 17.2. Ephesians. 5.25,
26, 27. Revel. 5.9.) so these sheep only have their sins washed away in the
blood of Christ: The vessels of wrath, as they are none of Christ's sheep, nor
ever do believe in him, so they have not the blood of Christ sprinkled upon
them, neither are partakers of him: and therefore have all their sins remaining
upon them, and are not saved by Christ from any of them under any consideration
whatsoever; but must lie under the intolerable burden of them eternally. The
truth of this appears unto us by the light of these Scriptures compared
together, Hebr. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1, 2. Hebr. 3.14. Math. 7.23. Ephesians. 5.6. 1 Timothy
1.9. Ioh. 8.24.

6. Though some of our opposers do affirm, that by this doctrine we leave no
Gospel to be preached to sinners for their conversion; yet through the goodness
of God we know and preach to sinners this precious Gospel; God so loved the
world, (that is, has been so loving to mankind) that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life; Joh. 3.16. and this faithful saying, worthy of all acceptance, That
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. viz. all those
sinners (how vile and grievous soever) not only which already do, but also
which hereafter shall believe on him to life everlasting, 1 Timothy 1.16. and that
to Christ all the Prophets give witness, that through his name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. Acts 10.43. And this is
called The Word of the Gospel; Acts 15.7. This is the Gospel which Christ and
his Apostles preached, which we have received, and by which we have been
converted unto Christ. And we desire to mind what Paul says in Galat. 1.9. If
any man preach any other Gospel unto you then that ye have received, let him be
anathema.

7. Though we confess that no man does attain unto faith by his own good will;
Ioh. 1.13. yet we judge and know that the Spirit of God does not compel a man
to believe against his will, but does powerfully and sweetly create in a man a
new heart, and so make him to believe and obey willingly, Ezekiel. 36.26. Psalm.
110.3. God thus working in us both to will and to do, of his good pleasure;
Philip. 2.13.

8. Though all our workings for life be in vain, irregular, and not accepted of
God, (Jesus Christ being our life, who is freely given to us of God,) yet we
believe and know that being made partakers of Jesus Christ, we do, and shall,
and must, through him, and walking in him, bring forth the fruit of good works,
serving God (in true obedience, and love, and thankfulness unto him) in
holiness and righteousness, being his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which he has before ordained that we should walk in them; Ephesians.
2.10. Luke 1.74, 75.

9. Though we that believe in Christ, be not under the law, but under grace;
Romans 6.14. yet we know that we are not lawless, or left to live without a rule;
not without law to God, but under law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. The Gospel of
Jesus Christ is a law, or commanding rule unto us; whereby, and in obedience
whereunto, we are taught to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world; Titus 2.11, 12. the directions of Christ in his Evangelical word
guiding us unto, and in this sober, righteous, and godly walking, 1 Timothy 1.10,
11.

10. Though we be not now sent to the Law as it was in the hand of Moses, to be
commanded thereby, yet Christ in his Gospel teaches and commands us to walk
in the same way of righteousness and holiness that God by Moses did command the
Israelites to walk in, all the Commandments of the second Table being still
delivered unto us by Christ, and all the Commandments of the first Table also
(as touching the life and spirit of them) in this epitome or brief sum, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, etc. Math. 22.37, 38, 39, 40.
Romans 13.8, 9.10.

11. Though no sin be imputed to those that believe in Christ, nor any sin do
totally or fully reign over them, or in them; yet in them the flesh lusts
against the spirit; Galat. 5.17. and in many things they all offend; James 3.2.
where the Apostle speaks of offenses that one believer may take notice of in
another. Thus there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins
not, Eccles. 7.20. and if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us, 1 Ioh. 1.8.

12. Though there be no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, yet are
they taught, and that effectually, to be ashamed of their sins Romans 6.21. and
to be sorry for them after a godly sort, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10, 11. yea to loath
themselves for them; Ezekiel. 36.31. Because that sin is an evil and a filthy
thing, and in its own nature tends to the provoking and dishonoring of God,
being disobedience against God, and a thing which the most holy GOD declares
himself to loath and abhor; so that nothing but the blood of Christ could purge
us from our sins, and reconcile us to God, whom by sin we had offended.
Therefore the Saints both are, and must be grieved, and must judge themselves,
because they have sinned against their holy and glorious God, and merciful and
loving Father, 1 Cor. 11.31.

13. Though nothing be hid from God, and God imputes not iniquity to any
believer, yet ought we to confess our sins unto God, and to beseech him to deal
with us according to his own promise; viz. to be still gracious and merciful
unto us though we have sinned against him, not being wroth with us, nor
rebuking us, nor ceasing to do good unto us because we have sinned, Isa. 54.9.
Hebr. 8.12. Dan. 9.18, 19, 20. Psalm. 32.5. Psalm. 25.7. Ezekiel. 36.37. James 5.15.
Thus according to Christ's direction, we pray unto God ^o forgive us our sins;
Luke 11.4. yet still we are to look upon God as our Father; Luke 11.2. and
consequently upon our selves as his children; and so not short of
justification, or under wrath, but washed in Christ's blood from all our sins.
In such confession and petitions we show obedience to God, and do also exercise
faith toward God, and repentance, or godly sorrow for sin by which we see and
confess that we for our parts have deserved wrath.

14. Though they which are once really engraffed into Christ, shall certainly be
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation; 1 Pet. 1.5. yet ought
they to beware, lest being led away with the error of the wicked, they fall from
their own steadfastness; 2 Pet. 3.17. They ought therefore to seek continual
support from God. Yea they ought to seek at Gods hand (in prayer, and in the
right use and study of his Word, and in the right use of his Ordinances) not
only continuance, but also growth in grace; 2 Pet. 3.18. First, because this is
Gods Command. Secondly, because God who will establish them, will do it in this
way; viz: giving them grace to be obedient to this his Command, and blessing
them in this obedience.

15. As we mind that our whole salvation is given unto us of the Father by
Jesus Christ, and for his sake; so we likewise mind, that the Fathers giving
Jesus Christ for us, and to us, and so saving us in him, and for his sake, is
the acting and manifesting of that free love of his toward us, which was in
himself from all eternity, John 17.23. Ephesians. 1.4, 5.

16. Although a true believer, whether baptized, or unbaptized, be in the state
of salvation, and shall certainly be saved: yet in obedience to the Command of
Christ every believer ought to desire Baptism, and to yield himself to be
baptized according to the rule of Christ in his Word: And where this obedience
is in faith performed, there Christ makes this his Ordinance a mean of
unspeakable benefit to the believing soul, Acts 2.38. Acts 22.16. Romans 6.3, 4.
1 Pet. 3.21. And a true believer that here sees the command of Christ lying
upon him, cannot allow himself in disobedience thereunto, Acts 24.16.

17. Believers baptized ought to agree and join together in a constant
profession of the same doctrine of the Gospel, and in professed obedience
thereunto, and also in fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers,
Acts. 2.42. And a company of baptized believers so agreeing and joining
together, are a Church or Congregation of Christ, Acts 2.47.

18. As the preaching of the Gospel, both for the conversion of sinners, and
the edifying of those that are converted; so also the right use of Baptism,
and of the Lords Supper, ought to be till the end of the world, Matt. 28.19.20.
1 Cor. 11.26.

19. A disciple gifted and enabled by the spirit of Christ to preach the
Gospel, and stirred up to this service by the same spirit, bringing home to his
soul the command of Christ in his word for the doing of this work, is a man
authorized and sent by Christ to preach the Gospel, see Luke 19.12. etc. Mark.
16.15. and Matt. 28.19. compared with Acts 8.4. Philip. 1.14.3. Ioh. 7. And
those gifted disciples which thus preach Jesus Christ who came in the flesh,
are to be looked upon as men sent and given of the Lord, 1 Ioh. 4.2. Romans
10.15. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. And they which are converted from unbeli^fe and
false-worship, and so brought into Church Fellowship by such Preachers
according to the will of Christ, are a feale of their ministry, 1 Cor. 9.2. And
such preachers of the Gospel may not only lawfully administer Baptism unto
believers, and guide the action of a Church in the use of the Supper, ( Matthew.
28.19. Acts 8.5-12. 1 Cor. 10.16.) but may also call upon the Churches, and
advise them to choose fit men for officers, and may settle such officers so
chosen by a Church, in the places or offices to which they are chosen, by
imposition of hands and prayer, Act. 6.3-6. Acts 14.23. Titus 1.5.

20 Though a believers right to the use of the Lords Supper do immediately flow
from Jesus Christ apprehended and received by f^^th; yet in as much as all
things ought to be done not only decently, but also in order; 1 Cor. 4.40. and
the word holds forth this order, that disciples should be baptized, Matthew.
28.9, Acts 2.38. and then be taught to observe all things (that is to say, all
other things) that Christ commanded the Apostles, Matthew. 28.20. and accordingly
the Apostles first baptize^ diseiples, and then admi^ted them to the use of the
Supper; Acts 2.4.42. we therefore do not admit any to the use of the Supper,
no communicate with any in the use of this ordinance, but disciples baptized,
lest we should have followship with them in their doing contrary to order.

21. Although we know that in some things we are yet very dark, and in all
things as yet we know but in part, and do therefore wait upon God for further
light; yet we believe that we ought in our practice to obey, and serve, and
glorify God in the use of that light which he has given us; and not neglect
the good using of that light which God has already given us, under pretense of
waiting for more, 1 Cor. 13.9. Acts 18.25.

22. As Christ does not teach, nor allow that we should be without natural
affection, or unsociable; (see Romans 1.31.) so our being made partakers of
Christ, does not discharge us from the duties of our relations. Believing
servants must perform the duties of servants toward their masters though
unbeleeving; 1 Timothy 6.^. So believing children must perform the duties of
children toward their parents; Coloss. 3.20. believing wives, the duties of
wives toward their hu bands; 1 Pet. 3.1. and believing subjects must be
subject to principalities and powers, and obey Magistrates, Romans 13.1, etc.
Titus 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. But still they must remember that their fear
toward God must not be taught by the precept of men; Isaiah 29.13. that they
ought to obey God rather then men, Acts 5.29. and that the submission that must
be given to men, must be given to them for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2, 14.

Thus I conclude with the Apostles words (in 2 Timothy 2.7.) a little varyed, but
not misapplyed; Consider what we teach: and the Lord give you understanding in
all things.

FINIS.

