The Copy of a LETTER Written by COLONEL CROMWELL, To the Committee at
Cambridge.

Dated on Monday last being the 31 of July.

Concerning the raising of the Siege at Gainsborough, with the Names of those
that were Slain, and the Number of the Prisoners taken.

This is licensed according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Blackmore, at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard.
August the 3. 1643.

The Copy of a Letter written by Colonel Cromwell, to the Committee at
Camebridge, the 31 of July, 1643.
GENTLEMEN,
IT has pleased the Lord, to give your Servant and Soldiers a notable Victory
now at Gainsborow; I marched after the taking of Burl^y house upon Wednesday to
Gratham, where I met about 300. Horse and Dragoneers of Nottingham, with these
by agreement with the L^ncolneers, we met at North-Scarle, which is about ten
miles from Gainsborow upon Thursday in the evening, where we tarried until two
of the clock in the morning, and then with our whole body, advanced toward
Gainsborow, about a mile and a half from the Town. We met a forlorn hope of
the Enemy, of near a 100. Horse, our Dragoneers labored to beat them back,
but not a lighting of their Horses, the Enemy charged them, and beat some four
or five of the moff their Horse, our Horse charged them, and made them retire
unto their maine body: We advanced, and came to the bottom of a steep hill,
upon which the Enemy stood, we could not well get up but by some tracts, which
our men assaying to do, the body of the Enemy endeavored to hinder, wherein
we prevailed, and got the top of the hill, this was done by the Lincolneers,
who had the Vanguard when we all recovered the top of the hill, we saw a great
body of the Enemies Horse, facing of us at about a Muskets shot or less
distance, and a good reserve of a full Regiment of Horse behind it, we
end^avoured to put our men into as good order as we could, the Enemy in the
mean time advanced toward us, to tak^ us at dis-advantage, but in such order
as we were, we charged their great body. I having the right wing, we came up
Horse to Horse, where we disputed it with our Swords and Pistols a pretty time,
all keeping close order, so that one could not break the other: at last they a
little shrinking our men, perceiving it, pressed in upon them, and immediately
routed this whole body, some flying on one side, others on the other of the
Enemies reserve, and our men persuing them, had chase and execution about five
or six miles. I perceiving this body which was the reserve, standing still
unbroken, kept back my Major Whaley from the chase, and with mine own Troop
and the other of my Regiment, in all being three Troops, we got into a body,
in this reserve stood G^nerall Cavendish, who one while faced me, and her while
faced four of the Lincoln T^oopes, which was all of ours stood upon the
place, the rest being engaged in the chase, at last the G^nerall charged the
Lincolneers and routed them, I immediately fell on his rear with my three
Troops, which did so astonish him that he gave over the chase, and would feign
have delivered himself from me, but I pressing on, forced them done a a hill,
having good execution of them, and below the hill drove the General with some
of his Soldiers into a Quagmire, where my Captain Lieutenant slew him, with a
thrust under his short ribs, the rest of the body was wholly routed, not one
man staying upon the place.

We after the defeat which was so total releived the Town, with such powder
and provision as we brought, which done we had notice that there were 6. Troops
of Horse and 300 foot on the other side of the Town, about a mile of us, we
desired some foot of my Lord Willoughbyes, about 400. And with our Horse and
their Foot marched toward them, when we came toward the place where their
Horse stood, we beat back with my Tropes about 2 or 3 Troops of the Enemies,
who retired into a small village, at the bottom of the hill, when we
recovered the hill, we sawin the bottom about a quarter of a mile from us, a
Regiment of Foot, after that another, after that New-Castles own Regiment,
consisting in all, of about fifty Foot Colors, and a great body of Horse
which indeed was, New-Castles army: which coming so unexpectedly, put us to new
consultations: My Lord Willoughby and I being in the Town, agreed to call of
our Foot, I went to bring them off, but before I returned, diverse of the Foot
were engaged, the Enemy advancing with his whole body, our Foot retreated in
some disorder, and with some loss got the Town, where now they are, our Horse
also came off, with some trouble being wearied with the long fight and their
Horses tired yet faced the Enemies fresh Horse and by several removes got off,
without the loss of one man, the Enemy following the Rear with a great body,
the honor of this retreat is due to God, as also all the rest, Major Whalley,
did in this carry himself withal gallantly becoming a G^ntleman and a
Christian. Thus have you this true Relation as short as I could, what you are
to do upon it is n xt to be considered, the Lord direct you what to do.

Huntington. July, 31. 1643. Gentlemen I am Your faithful servant Oliver
Cromwell.

A List of those that were slain and taken at the raising of the Seidge at
Gainsborow, on Friday last, by Colonel Cromwell.
General King slain, as is supposed. General C vendish certainly slain.
Colonel Beton, slain. A Lieutenant Colonel, slain: A Sergeant Major. slain,
Captain Hussy, slain. 100 Dead upon the place. 150. Prisoners taken. A total
defeat not ten men being seen stand in a body. 200. slain in the persute of
them.
FINIS.

