A DECLARATION AND ORDER Of his EXCELLENCY the LORD GENERAL Cromwell, AND HIS
COUNCIL OF OFFICERS: For the continuance of the Assesment for six months,
from the 24th. of June 1653. to the 25th. of December following; at the rate of
one hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the month, toward the maintenance
of the Armies and Navies of this Common wealth.

seal of the Commonwealth

June 9. 1653.
Ordered by his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL with the advice of his
Council of Officers, That this Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

WILLIAM MALYN Secret.

LONDON. Printed by and for H. Hills, G. Calvert and T. Brewster, and are to be
sold at the Black Spread-Eagle, and at the Three Bibles near the West end of
Paul's, 1653.

A DECLARATION AND ORDER Of his EXCELLENCY the LORD GENERAL CROMWELL, AND HIS
COUNCIL of OFFICERS: For the continuance of the Assesment toward the
maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth for six months,
from the 24th. of June 1653. to the 25th. of December following; at the rate of
one hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the month
ALthough we are very sensible of the great and heavy Taxes, and other public
burdens, which for the present are lying upon this Nation, and that nothing is
to be more wished and endeavored, next after the glory of God, and securing of
this great Cause, than the ease of the People in this particular: Yet
considering the great and important occasions and engagements of this
Commonwealth at this time, both at Land and at Sea, requiring greater sums
of money, than can be answered out of other public receipts, which through
the former improvident management of affairs, are either exhausted, or clogged
with vaste anticipations; and that without a supply of money by continuing of
the monthly Assesment for some time longer, the Armies in England, Scotland
and Ireland, would be necessitated to burden the People with free quarter, the
War with the united Provinces of the Netherlands, of so much concernment to
the welfaire of this Nation, be put in danger of miscarrying; and the other
affairs of this Commonwealth, fall into disorder and confusion.

And because the Persons to whom the Supreme Authority, according to our former
Declaration is to be committed, cannot assemble time enough to take care
therein, the Act of Assesment expiring the 24. of this present June.

In this exegency, and upon this extraordinary occasion, it is thought
necessary to Declare and Order, and it is hereby Declared and Ordered by the
Lord General, with the advice of his Council of Officers; That the last Act
of Assesment beginning the 25 of December, and ending the 24 of June: whereby
one hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the month is laid upon the several
Counties, Cities, Towns, and places therein mentioned, and every Clause
therein contained, the several Taxes and Payments therein expressed, and the
Powers and Authorities thereby given to all and every the Commissioners,
Committees, or Persons, or any of them named or mentioned in the said Act,
shall endure and have continuance for six months longer, from the said four
and twentieth day of June 1653, unto the five and twentieth of DECEMBER next
following, to all intents and purposes, as if the said Act had been at first
made to have continuance for twelve months from the said five and twentieth
day of December 1652.

And all persons impoured by, or by virtue of the said Act as Commissioners or
otherwise, are hereby required and enjoined, to rate, assesse, levy and collect
the said six months Assesment, and to execute and do all matters whatsoever
relating thereto as fully and amply to all intents and purposes, as they are
enabled by the said Act, to levy and Collect the last six months Assesment.

And further, that the said Commissioners for the several and respective
Counties, Cities and Towns, do meet at the most common and usual place of
meeting in each of the said Counties, Cities and Towns, for which they are
Commissioners, respectively on or before the four and twentyeth day of this
instant June; and the said Commissioners, or so many of them as shall then and
there attend, and be present, shall cause this declaration to be put in
execution, and shall thereupon send out their Warrants for the Assessing,
collecting, and paying, the said six months Tax, so as the first three of the
said six months Assesment, be paid into the Receivers General, upon or before
the 30 day of July next ensuing, and the last three months be paid, as
aforesaid, upon or before the first day of November following.

And for that it is intended that an exact account shall be given of all moneys
which shall be Assessed, Leavied, and Collected throughout this Nation by
virtue hereof, It is hereby required, That the several Receivers General of
this Assesment in the respective Counties and places, do within fourteen days
after the end of the said six months, return a perfect account of all the
moneys they shall receive thereupon, to the Committee for the Army.

And seeing the said Assesment is continued upon no other grounds then are
before expressed, It is not doubted, but the good and well-affected people of
this Nation, who still retain sound and honest Principles, will cheerfully act
in their several places and stations, to promote and further this service.

And if any, upon what pretense soever, shall refuse to pay the said Assesments
or discourage or weaken the hands of others therein: Allthough we doubt not,
but all their endeavors in this kind will prove ineffectuall, yet they are to
be looked upon, and proceeded against as those who from a Spirit of Malignity
and opposition to the Cause of God in this Land (though upon other pretenses)
have endeavored, as far as in them lies, to subject the People of England,
Ireland, and Scotland, to free quarter, and to bring the Navy into discontent
for want of pay at this time, when this Nation is engaged in so great a War
at Sea: hoping thereby to plunge these Nations again into troubles, and give
new advantages to the Common Enemy.

And in case any of those who have formerly been Instrumental and Helpers in
this great Cause, shall be found in their number, although it will be matter of
great trouble and grief to us to see men thus by degrees fall short, divide,
and withdraw themselves from public ends; Yet as the Apostasy, and turning
away of many amongst us formerly, who at first seemd to be zealous promoters of
this work, has not been able to keep it at a stand, so our trust and
confidence is, that now through the grace and goodness of God; neither the
neutrality and indifferency of some, nor the defection and opposition of
others, no, though so gross and open, as to close with the Enemies of the
power and life of godliness, shall be any hinderance or prejudice thereunto:
But that the same Spirit and presence which has hitherto helped us in our
greatest difficulties, and most eminent dangers; will still own us and the
rest of his People in this Land, and enable us to persevere unto the end
against all discouragements whatsoever.

And it is hereby further declared, That all and every the Commissioners,
Committees, and other persons whatsoever which shall act, do or execute any
thing by virtue of, and in pursuance of this Declaration and Order, shall be
saved harmless and indemnified.

Signed by the appointment of his Excellency the Lord General, with the advice
of his Council of Officers. Will. Malyn.

I Do hereby appoint, that the Declaration of the Army, for the continuance of
the Assessment for six months, be printed by and for Henry Hills, Giles
Calvert, and Thomas Brewster, and that no other Printer do presume to print
the same, or any part thereof, without my special Order, as they will answer
the contrary. Given under my hand the 9th of June, 1653.

O. CROMWELL.


