SAD NEWS from the County of KENT, (VIZ) Showing how 40. Armed, Resolute,
Desperate Fellows plundered Sir NICHOLAS CRISPS House, after they had set a
watch over his Servants, at Twelve a clock at night, July the 18. 1657. and
carried them to the waterside to be transported to Dunkirk.

With Sir Nicholas Crispe his escape from them upon terms.

Sent in a Letter by young Mr. Crispe of DOVER to his Kinsman in London, Mr.
Kathern, who desired the truth might be published to prevent misinformation.

London, Printed for Richard Harper in Smithfield near to the Hospital-Gate.
1657.

SAD NEWS from the County of KENT. Sent in a Letter by young Mr. Crispe of
Dover, to his Kinsman in London.
IN that famous and fertile Soil of Kent, a near neighbor to the City of
London, and a handmaid to furnish her with all Commodities which she in a
plentiful manner is possessed withal.

In the Isle of Tennet, a house called by the name of Queax, about eight miles
from Dover lived a worthy Knight, and a good Benefactor to the poor, famous for
his acts of piety and Charity, and therefore the more envied and wronged, as by
the abominable outrage, and violent actions committed upon his house, himself,
and his goods, the like has not been for such a bold desperate design scarce
committed in our Age, unless though formerly in the late Kings days the
Turkish Pirates set in Cornwall a part of their Mahumetan Seamen, and did for
two or three Families sweep them all away, children sucking at their mothers
breasts, and forced them into their Ships to Sea with them, robbing and
plundring their houses of Goods, and their fields of Cattle. Now here I present
you with a Letter written from a worthy Gentleman at Dover, near allied and kin
to the worthy Sir Nicholas Crispe, the house going by the name of Queax; about
eight mile from Dover, and has a creek of water from the Sea, which uses to
ebb and flow with the tide, and of this creek these merciless men (villians I
may say) made use, in a shallop, to the number of forty resolute renegadoes,
entered Sir Nicholas Crispe his house, breaking open the doors, setting a watch
over the servants urging the fearful maid servant, else to deprive her of
life presently, if she would not bring them to Sir Nicholas his Chamber, and
his aged Uncles, for the fearful Maid not knowing their intents brings them to
the two Chamber doors where the Gentlemen going to take their natural rest
without the least thought of any mischief to any; but by a desperate deboist
company of land Pirates I am sure notorious Robbers, Sir Nicholas had his house
plundered, himself amazed, and person surprised, with the aged Gentleman his
Uncle, whom they have forced to Bridges in Flanders, and by way of entreaty
upon a Parlie did release Sir Nicholas, but upon condicon, that he should send
1000. pound for the old Gentleman his release, else he to be detained there
prisoner at Dunkirke, which cannot be but a great grief to that worthy
Gentlewoman hie Lady and the rest of his friends; this old Gentleman that's
carried away being mist for his charitable releeving of many poor already: Oh
let every honest heart desire of the Lord that these either foreign or do
mestick Thieves and Robbers may be found out, for the report of people is
general, that they, or some of them must formerly know the house or way unto
it very well.

And therefore, Oh discontented party, leave off the use of such abhorred
actions, which are in the sight of God and good men an abbomination; Gods
command is thou shall not steal: The Levitical Law says he that steals shall
restore four fould. Many theives on earth Rob themselves of the joys of
Heaven: Many well in good health this day, to morrow sick, the third day in the
grave; oh ^areless Christian what is the glory of this World, but a flower that
continues for a little season? and then vanishes away, where there is no
remembrance where his place was; therefore grant us all grace to live so here,
to keep our selves unspotted from the world, that we may work out our salvation
with fear and trembling, and by the alone merits, death, and passion of our
Crucified Lord Jesus, attain to that eternal Kingdom which is endless, that
he has purchased to all them that love him. Amen.

Hereafter follows a Copy of a Letter sent from M. Crispe the younger from
Dover, which is 8. miles from Sir Nic. Crisps house called Queax, which is
about a mile or more distant from any Town in Kent.

Directed to his Kinsman and loving friend, Mr. Kathern, Porter of Ludgate.

Supersciption.
For my loving Cousin Clement Katherns, Porter of Ludgate, at his house in
Cradle-Alley, London.
Cousin Katherns,
MY kind love remembered unto you and my Cousin your good wife; I know you have
heard of that sad news from Queax, the manner thus; Upon the 18. of July last
past there came about 40. men well armed with Carbine, Pistol and Sword, and
Poleax every man there, it is thought they came from Dunkirke, thus coming to
the house they quickly broke the lock of the outward gate, so entering into the
outward court, they secured all the servants lay without doors, then came to
the dwelling house and knocked very loud, one asking who was there, being about
12 a clock at night, they told him they must come in, and the party that spoke
to them being but new laid down in his clothes, before he could come down with
four blows at the hall door, with a two-hand Sledg the door gave way, and
entered the hall before him, secured him and the rest of the servants
immediately that lay within the house, then caused the maid to show them my
Uncles Chamber and Sir Nich^lases, when they were entered there, they told them
they wanted money, and that they knew they well could supply their want, which
was done after three hours time in the Plundering the house, and had what they
could get, they then told my Uncle and Sir Nicholas, that they must go along
with them, and to that purpose carried the Coachman to put horses in the Coach
to carry their Plunder, and Uncle, and Sir Nicholas to the waterside, and upon
the way they had a Parlie with Sir Nicholas about leaving him behind, it was
agreed immediately that he engaging to pay to them 1000. pound in 28. days time
at Bridges to one they named; then he should be free to come home again, which
was done: So Sir Nicholas returned home again, but my old Uncle they have
inhumanely carried away in his old age, and as yet we hear not any one word of
the least thereof how he does or where he is.

Thomas Smith the Butcher, went voluntarily along with him, I could not well
sooner give you this account, for we knew not the certain truth of things till
my Father came home about the middle of last week. My Father, wife, and self
present our kind love unto you: I am sure if he return not speedliy we shall
want him dearly, for he is very good to my aged parents. In haste with thanks
for all your favor I remain.

Dover, 27. July, 1657. Your affectionate Kinsman, to command, Henry Crispe.
I pray at your leisure convey this Letter unto my Father-in-Law's Lodging.




TO conclude, Consider likewise what sad effects and prodigious abortives this
sinful Nation has produced of late years by war, yet are we not bettered, but
like Iron put into the water out of the fire, to be hardened for the Judgments
of God has hardened our-hearts, in our fullness of bread and comtempt of his
Word, every one following his own fancy in matters of Religion, so much, that we
have almost lost that ancient Protestant Religion, which so many Martyrs blood
did seal and confirm, whom our Ancestors so highly advanced, but now so much
slghted and contemned that many do hate the name of Protestant.

Now great God, since it has pleased thy holy Name in mercy to sheath the
devouring sword from the 3 Nations England, Scotland, and Ireland, and that we
have the Enjoyment of peace again, let them fall by the sword that would any way
seek to introduce it again in our days to this Nation, now we may praise the
Lord that we are not troubled with burning of Towns, Plundering of Houses,
pitcht-Battells, nor flying fightings, though unhapyly a worthy, a godly, and
noble Knight has lately been struck with a terible blow of it.

As tending to the danger of his life, the surprizall of his near and deer
kinsman, the loss of his goods, the frights of the good Lady, the fear and
danger the poor servants sustained when they could not help themselves, nor
their Mr. himself, no not, but all let open to the height of their intended
domination and destruction, this being the effect of War, the fruit it
(produces, at the best) but beggary. This disign of their wretched act sure
must be begot by some who has been free of the use of theft or Plunder, and
will assuredly obtain his reward at the Gallows, else dye desperately by the
sword, as the Famous Thief of late has done, Hind, that had as many cuts
on's head, face, and arms, as many more as he had fingers and toes twice over,
yet the Gallows was ordained his end as deservedly.

FINIS.

