THE DECLARATION Of Lieutenant-Generall CROMWELL CONCERNING The Kings Majesty,
and the Citizens of London, and his Pretestation for peace, and re-inthroning
of the King: Together with his Propositions to the Army, and their resolution
thereupon.

Likewise three Letters from the said Lieutenant General, to the Kings
Majesty, the Prince of Wales, and the Trained Bands of the City of London: and
his Demands to all those who are enemies to the King, and the peace of the
Kingdom.

Signed O. CROMWELL.

For PEACE depiction of a man on horseback And TRVTH

Printed in the Year of joy, November. 17. 1648.

THE DECLARATION Of Lieutenant-Generall CROMWELL CONCERNING The Kings Majesty,
and the Citizens of London, and his Protestation touching the Prince of WALES.
Right Honorable,
LIeutenant General Crumwell, and diverse other Officers of the Army, upon a
General council held the 11. of this instant November, debated the Proposals
of the Army, in reference to the Resentm nts, touching the King and his
Representments; and after some dispute in an Argumentary way, they unanimously
declared their resolutions to adhere thereunto, and to live and dye, and stand
and fall with the Army in the South, for preservation of the Rights and
Liberties of the Freeborn people of England, and the establishing of the Laws
of the Land, and confirming of certain Rules for the execution thereof between
the people and their Representatives.

And upon the close of their consultations, the Lieutenant General further
demonstrated, that he thought it requisite, that all possible means should be
used for the faciliating and obtaining a speedy grant and condescension to the
Desires of the Army, both from King and Parliament; and that a Letter be drawn
up, and expedited to his Majesty, to desire his Gracious condescensions to the
Desires of his two Houses, for the settling of a safe and well-grounded peace;
as also pressing his Majesty to take the Covenant, and to sign the
Propositions.

These Proposals were with much alacrity and amity embraced, and a Letter is
said to be forthwith drawn up, to be presented to his Majesty, together with a
Declaration and Representation in behalf of the Army.

The Lieutenant Genesis has declared his resolution to the Governor of
Pontefract, and has sent this ensuing Message (or Summons) for the surrender
thereof, viz.

Sir, Being come hither for the reduction of this place, I thought fit to
summon you, to deliver your Garrison to me for the use of the Parliament: those
Gentlemen and Soldiers with you may have better terms, then if you should
hold it to extremity, I expect a speedy answer, and rest Yours etc.

O. CROMWELL.


But notwithstanding the said Demands, the Kings party has returned a very
peremptory answer, and are resolved to oppose us.

Pontefract 14. November. 1648.
By Letters from the Isle of Wight it is advertized, That his Majesty has sent
a Letter to Genesis Fairfax, intimating, His earnest desires for peace, requiring
his Excellency, and the Council of the Army to be instrumenall therein,
promising upon his Royal Word to satisfy all things by them desired, and to
enact and make proclamation thereupon, throughout all Cities, Counties, and
Market towns, within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales.

And it is further demonstrated, that his Majesty has promised on his Royal
Word to grant power to His two Houses (by an Act) to nominate Officers of State
for 20 years. As also to grant an Act to confirm the lesser Catechism, (agreed
upon by both Houses) to be read and published in all Churches throughout the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales..


The Armies Representation.
Gentlemen, and Fellow-Commoners,
Whereas there are many false suggestions and evil aspersions cast upon the
Army, by the insolent and corrupted Spirits of the adverse party, and their
Abettors, and whose hearts are still inflamed, against all those who
countenance or embrace our Cause, as is plainly evidenced by their late
Designs throughout the City and Kingdom, and their spreading of the black and
dismal Cloud throughout all the corners of the Nation, for the making of the
Army odious to the sight and judgment of all men; as also their present drawing
of the Curtain, to make vent and way for the uttering of their false and
abominable caluminations against us, in saying that our counsels and
consultations tends to nothing else, but the utter subversion of all Kingly and
Monarchical Government, and that our endeavors are for the obstructing of the
Treaty, and ruling the Kingdom by the power of the Sword.

Therefore, for vindication of the Army from these unparaleld calumniations, we
do demonstrate and declare, that our hearts are free from the least thought or
action for the subversion of Authority or Government.

Protesting to live and dye in the true maintenance and preservation of the
same.

And as we have heretofore demonstrated our great and earnest desires for
peace, so we do again declare, that nothing shall be wanting in Us, for the
promoting of the said happy and blessed work; and that notwithstanding all
aspersions whatsoever) we shall use our utmost endeavors for the accomplishing
of a true and lasting peace, which wce have so dearly bought by the price, and
ransom, of so many thousand innocent and precious souls, who have sacrificed
their lives in these eight years wars.

And as for the present Treaty in hand between the King and Parliament, we do
declare that we shall not obstruct the same, nor meddle therein; provided, that
we may be assured of security for the future, our arrears paid, the great
burden of the Kingdom removed and taken off, Religion settled, and the Subject
freed from all tyranny and oppression either from Prince or Representatives.

These things being enacted, and confirmed to all future Generations, we do
unanimously declare, that none shall be more willing to enjoy that which we
have so dearly purchased then our selves; and that we shall endeavor the
re-inthroning of our Sovereign, the calling home the Prince and the Duke of
York, and the composing of all other differences, in Church and State.

Signed by diverse Agents of the Army, in the Name of themselves, and all the
freeborn people of England, and commanded to be forthwith printed and
published. This day diverse of the Officers of the Army met at the Bull-head,
where they debated many excellent things tending to peace; and upon the close
of their consultations declared their most pious and unanimus resolutions for
peace, referring the further results thereof till Thursday.

St. Albans 16 November. 1648.


Sir, We hear that Lieutenant General Cromwell has sent a Letter to the
Prince of Wales, dehorting his Highness to come in to the Parliament, and to
mediate with his Royal Father for a speedy union and compliance with his two
Houses, etc.

The Lieutenant General has further declared, that he will leave no means
unassayed, for the composing of all differences between the King and people;
and for the better effecting thereof, has sent a Message to the Citizens of
London, purporting his earnest Desires for peace, and re-inthroning of the
King, and that future provision be made for the people of England, to preserve
them from tyranny and oppression, requiring them to be isntrumental therein,
which Letter is said to be signed

O. CROMWELL.

FINIS.

