THE DECLARATION Of Lieutenant-Generall CRUMWEL Concerning the Levellers; And
His Letter and Representation to the Agitators of the respective Regiments who
have deserted and declared against the Parliament, the Council of State, and
the late proceedings of the High Court of Justice.

WITH The Declaration, Resolution, and Proposals of the said Levellers,
presented to the view of the World, intimating the Grounds and Reasons of their
Engagement, and to die as one man with their swords in their hands, rather then
to be inslaved.

ALSO, Two Fights between the Levellers and the parliamenteers, near Worcester
and Banbury, the particulars thereof, and the number killed; with the Levellers
Summons to the City of COVENTRY.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London, for G. H. May 14. 1649.

THE DECLARATION Of Lieut-General CRUMWEL Concerning The Levellers; and the
particulars of a Fight near Banbury, and the City of Worcester; With the
Levellers Summons to the City of Coventry.
Right Honored,
THis morning his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, and Lieutenant General
Crumwell, randezvouzed with their Horse and Foot near Andover, where the Lieu.
Genesis rode to the head of each Regiment, declaring, That He was resolved to live
and die with them, and that as he had often engaged with them against the
common Enemy of this Nation, so was he resolved still to persist therein,
against those Revolters which are now called by the name of Levellers; not
doubting but that they would as one man unite, and with unanunous spirits
follow him, for the subduing of them, and bringing the chief Ringleaders
thereof to exemplary punishment.

Many declared a great willingness to engage with him: Others rejected it,
saying, they would not fight against their friends: But they are now upon their
march toward Salisbury, for the reducing and bringing of those Regiments to
obedience and subjection that have declared against them: from whence we hear,
that they are resolved rather to die, then yield to any thing which shall
infringe their liberty, or pervert the freedom of their Nativity.

Many of the said party have agreed upon a Declaration, containing these
ensuing heads: First, they declare against the present Parl, and their
proceedings. 2 Against the Council of State. 3 Against the General Council
of the Army. And 4. against the proceedings of the late Court of Justice
Their chie^ Ring leader is one Capt. Tompson, who was formerly condemned by a
Council of War to be hanged, but by the goodness and compassion of the Lord
Genesis he was spared: this is the man who draws all men after him, his number is
conceived to be about 400. and in his warch up and down he daily gains new
Proselites to him: On Wednesday last he marched to Coventry, where he found
re^istance, and the Gates shut against him demand^^ ^f the Gates were so holy
that he might not enter;) and after the exchange of two or three Vollies, he
left the place, and marched thence to Tossiter, where coming in very late at
night, he seized upon captain Farmer the Post master there, who, after they had
carried him as a prisoner up and down with them, they were content to release
him upon his Parol to come up to London to the Council of State, to procure the
release of three of their Brethren, who were taken posting up of their papers
about Banbury; if he could not procure this he was to return as their prisoner
to Banbury.

Some blows have been already disputed near Banbury between 100 of the Lord
Genesis horse, and 2^0 of the Levellers, and after a sharp conflict, the Levellers
declining engagement, retreated toward Oxford, but no great harm done on
either side: there is a body of horse about Oxford ready to join with them,
commanded by Mr. Everard, after uniting, its said they intend Westward.

Some difference has also been in the City of Worcester, and the Levellers who
had entered the City forced to retreat out again with t^^ loss of five men: the
General and the Lieutenant General has sent a Letter to the Agitators and
Commanders in chief of the said party, for preventing of the ^ffusion of blood,
and healing of the present breach, and quenching those flame of Discord, which
are ready to break forth in several parts of this Nation; and its hoped a
happy and mutual econciliation will be embr^ced, before the involving and
shedding of any more blood within the Rowels of this Nation.

Andover 12 May, 1649.
SIR,
IN the midst of all our calamities and distractions, great are the
differences in these parts; new coals are even now kindling, and the turbulent
spirits and affections of men begin to break forth in a most violent and
visible flame; for the common people slight the authority of Magistracy, and
say they will no longer walk under the vail and shadow of reformation, but
endeavor the speedy reforming thereof; and in order thereunto, many have
declared, that they will join with the Levellers, for the restoration of the
peoples freedoms to its just splendour and propriety, etc. The foundation
whereof, takes its first Rise from the present actings of certain troopers in
this county, who have declared, and remonstrated to the people, That the
present transaction of affairs, are both arbytrary and tyrannical, and that
they will have a new Parliament, in the dissolving whereof, an equal
Representative shall be freely chosen and elected: But it is hoped that all
these vapors will be soon expelled and blown over: For some discoveries are
already made, That they had a design to surprise the Cities of York, Oxford,
Bristol, Gloucester, and many other places in the West of England, and that
they had an intent to draw into a body and randezvouz, where they resolved to
set up a standard of Seagreen Colors; they declare, that they have a great
influence in diverse Regiments of the Army; but care is taken to prevent their
Designs, and it is not doubted but the well affected of Col. Scroops Regiment,
Col. Harrisons, and diverse others wherein they bussie, will be undeceived, for
many thousands have declared against their present actings, and are resolved to
sacrifice lives and fortunes for the Parliament against all opposition
whatsoever.

But yet notwithstanding all opposition, they are resolved to proceed, and to
insist upon further particulars, a breviate whereof I shall here insert,
according to the full demonstration thereof, viz.

How happy were England were men's designs of enslaving here at an end, how
gladly should we here break off, and praise the Lord for his goodness to
England? but alas the peoples hearts, are full of grief, and their eyes are
full of tears, as ever, they cry out, they are deceived, their expectations is
frustrated, and their liberty betrayed; they take up David's complaint it is not
an open enemy that enslaves them, not damme Cavaliers, nor rigid envious and
surly Presbyters, but Religious and Godly friends, that have prayed, declared
and fought together for freedom with them, that with their swords have cut in
sunder the chains of other Tyrants, and yet now are become the greatest
Tyrants over their brethren themselves, which when they can refrain from
fighing and sobbing, they in their broken and rustic language thus expatiates:
all the form of Government being corrupted and abused, the Law and
administration perverted, and the peoples liberties betrayed; it was promised
that a new foundation should be laid by an agreement of the people, to such
righteous Principles of Justice and common right, that as to human reason it
should be impossib for any Tyrants in this or future generations to introduce
bondage upon the people.

^^oclamation has been lately made in the name of the Levellers, throughout
the Counties of Oxford, Gloucester, Worcester, etc. for all free born people to
come in to their assistance; the disgesti^^ ^^^reof is very hard, and few have
little appetite to that engagement.



Abbington 12 May, 1649.
The Levellers new and ultimate proposals.
First, That honesty is the best policy: the deep plots and witty contrivances
of men in power, when inconsistent with the will of God, requiring them to do
Judgment and Justice, and to take the yolks from the oppressed, have always
been abortive, for God will not be mocked; and experience tells us, that
self-seekers though otherwise Godly and gallant men, yet are and shall be saved
as by fire; witness many worthy members of Parliament, who endeavoring by a
Treaty to secure themselves, are by the Lord with disgrace laid aside; he
thereby no doubt intending much good to their souls, Foelix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum, he is a happy man that takes warning by other men's
harms.

Secondly, Carnal mixtures with corrupt interests, are destructive to them that
make them.

FINIS.

