THE DECLARATION Of Lieutenant-Generall CROMWELL CONCERNING His present Design
and Engagement against Col. Poyer and his Adherents in South wales, and his
Resolution and Protestation thereupon.

Delivered at the head of each Regiment upon Monday last* being the 8. of this
instant May, at a Randezvouz near the City of Glouce^^er.

And the Soldiers Resolution touching the Lieutenant General, and Colonel
Poyer.

Also, very sad News from the Isle of VVight, concerning the Kings Majesty.

May 9. 1648.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbott.



London, Printed for G. Wharton, 1648.

A DECLARATION Of Lieutenant-Generall CROMWELL Delivered At the Head of each
Regiment upon Monday last being the 8. of this instant May, at a Randezvouz
near the City of Gloucester.
Honored Sir,
YOur last, dated the 5. of May I received; for which I return you thanks, and
according to my former obligements, to your vouchsafed clemency and goodness I
can do no less, then to impart my self at this present, and present to your
view these ensuing lines, viz.

Sir, Upon Satterday last we received intelligence, that Lieut. Genesis Cromwell
was upon his march with a considerable party of horse and foot, and that he
intended to have a general Randezvouz near this city upon Monday and so to
advance with all expedition toward South Wales, against Poyer and his
confederates, which report was soon made apparent; for upon Monday morning
about 9. of the clock in the fore noon, we discovered the Horse, and immediately
the Foot marched after them, who had a randezvouz within 2. miles of this city,
and continued in the field till about two of the clock in the afternoon; but in
the intrim, several passages worthy your observation, passed amongst them; for
as each Regiment marched up to the place appointed, they demeaned themselves so
civilly and came up in such an excellent posture of Discipline, that it was
admired; for as each Regiment came into the field they drew up into several
distinct bodies, and so soon as the Rear was come up, and each Regiment placed
in order, Lieut. Genesis Cromwell rode to the head of each, making a short speech
touching their present Design and Engagement, which done, he further declared,
that he had often times ventured his life with them, and they with him, against
the common Enemy of this kingdom, and a far more potent power and strength
then now they are to engage withal; and therefore desired them to arm
themselves with the same resolution as formerly, and to go on with the same
courage, faithfulness, and fidelity, as sundry times they had done, and upon
several desperate attempts and engagements and that for his part, he protested
to live and die with them: the Lieut. Gen had no sooner declared himself, but
they all threw up their caps, giving a great shout and hallow, crying out with
one unanimous consent, that they would ventrr their lives and fortunes under
his conduct and command, against any enemy either domestique or foreign. After
the Lieut. Genesis had taken a view of each Regiment, he gave Orders to march and
accordingly about 3 of the clock they advanced: their number does consist of
about 6500. Horse and Foot, exceeding well armed, and brave resolute men.

We doubt not but to hear of their happy success very suddenly, for it is very
probable, there will be speedy action.

Diverse of our Glosterians listed themselves at the Randezvouz, under the
command of the Lieu. General, and there marched about 100. Volunteers with him
from this City, with blew Ribbands in their hats, which is all for the present;
from

Your obliged friend and servant, John Hancock.
Gloucester the 8. of May, 1648. SIR, Upon the close of this Letter, here
arrived a Messenger from Swansey, who certified, that col Powel is retreated
from thence with all his Forces, but upon what grounds we cannot learn, unless
it be occasioned by the advance of L. Genesis Cromwell that way, who now is upon
his march. Col. Horton is said to be about 3000. and has had several
skirmishes with the enemy, but will not engage* till the additional Forces come
up.

Vale, vale.


Letters from the North.
SIR,
Sir Arthur Haslerig is very diligent in fortifying of Newcastle. Some
Gentlemen of these parts are gone up to London, to acquaint the Parliament with
the affairs and conduction of these Northern Counties, and we hear the Parl.
are about to associate these Counties again, and to put 10000. men more into a
posture of defense against the Cavaleer party, which are entered Berwicke, and
begin to overspread the Country. By the next, I pray, let us hear what news at
London, for which you shall command

Your affectionate friend, S. J.

Some English are already come to Barwick, their Leader is Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, a great Malignant; but formerly a Justice of Peace in this County;
they intend to fortify the town, that if they are put to the way, they may
with the more convenience run into Scotland: the coming of these Forces to
Barwicke, is almost like to overjoy the malignants in these parts; so that they
begin to s^andalize the parliament, and use their endeavors to insence the
country both against the parliament and army; but the Forces appointed to
secure the North may do much good, then the malignants will be glad to pull in
their horns again, and may be made to repeat their monstrous slanders.

A Committee has already met to consider of the affairs of this and the
Northern Counties, they have likewise appointed a day and place of meeting;
upon which time they will consult about the condition of the North, and of
putting those parts into a posture of defense: this is all for the present I
can acquaint you with, only one thing I shall further make mention of, that the
Northern Counties ingeneral have jointly declared, that they will rise as one
man against the Scottish Army, and that they will use their utmost endeavors
for the preservation and defense of those parts, against all opposition
whatsoever.

Sir Marmaduke Langdale, sir Charles Lucas, and sir Tho. Tilsley, with diverse
other Royalists do increase, their number is said to be about 600. Horse, they
have lately possessed themselves of the Town and Castle of Carlisle, and are
now very active in fortifying and strengthening of the said place.

Diverse of the Gentry in these parts resort unto them, especially those who
have formerly engaged for the King, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale erects new
Officers, and gives them Commissions in Prince Charles his name. We hear that
Sir Philip Musgrave is with a party of 500. Horse between Carlisle and Appleby,
and that he has a design for surprising of the said castle.

Richmond 6. of May, 1648.
The Copy of a Letter from the Isle of Wight, touching the state and condition
of the Kings Majesty.
SIR,
SInce my last, bearing date the 3. of May, here has been a great alteration
in these parts, and the Inhabitants are much perplexed, occasioned by the great
distractions both in the West and North of England; but that which does the
most trouble Us, is, the great melancholiness which has now possessed his
Majesty; for indeed, he is not half so merry as formerly, and takes little
delight in walking abroad, but gives his mind to much study and reading. He
discourses very little, unless it be now and than with Sir Oliver Cromwell,
which is all for the present, from

Your assured friend to serve you, F. W.
Imprimatur

G. M.


Newport 8. of May 1648.
FINIS.

