THE VANITY AND MISCHIEF OF Making Earthly, Together with the NECESSITY AND
BENEFIT OF Making Heavenly TREASURES Our chief Treasure:

Opened in a SERMON at Mary Spittle, Before the Right Honorable the Lord Major
and Court of Aldermen, of the City of London, and diverse worthy Citizens at
their solemn Anniversarie meeting, on Tuesday in Easter Week, being the 17
April 1655.

By John Crodacott, Preacher of Gods Word a^ Saviors Southwark, and Sepulchers
London.

1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this World, that they be not
high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives
us richly all things to enjoy That they do good, that they be rich in good
works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate. Laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on eternal life.

Printed for A. Kemb, at Margarets Hill in Southwark. 1655.

Tuesday, April 23th. 1655. PACK Major,
ORdered, That Mr. Crodacott be desired from this Court to Print his Sermon at
the Spittle on Tuesday in Easter-week last.

SADLER.

To the Right HONORABLE Christopher Pack, LORD MAJOR: AND The Right Worshipful
the Aldermen of the City of London.
WHen first I received your Summons to this work, I might have apologized for
my self with Elihu, I am young, and ye are very old, wherefore I was afraid,
Job 32.6, 7
and durst not show you mine opinion. I said days should speak, and multitude
of years should teach wisdom. But out of the mouth of babes and sucklings has
the Lord ordained strength, etc. and his strength is usually perfected in the
creatures weakness. 2 Cor. 12.9.
He can make a few barley loaves yield toothsome and wholesome nourishment unto
many thousands; He can make the words of Naamans faithful servants greater in
operation, then the words of a great and good Prophet. Indeed many in our days
look upon Preaching and Preachers, as Naaman did upon the waters of Jordan,
with Syrian eyes. Preaching is foolishness in the worlds estimation, and
Preachers are bablers; Saint Paul that great Apostle was so reputed and
censured: the despicablenesse of the carthen vessel does too often (through
Satan's subtlety and innate corruption) prejudice hearers against the
heavenlinesse of the Treasure I cannot accuse any of you; 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
surely, what the Apostle says of the Thessalonians I may say of you in a
judgment of charity, (I hope also of verity) When ye received the Word of God
which ye heard, ye received it not as the word of man, but (as it is in truth)
the Word of God. But where is the fruit of your so receiving the Word of God?
The Word of God so received by them wrought effectually in them; has it
wrought also effectually in you? Happily your faith may be as 'twere in travail,
and ready to bring forth some works of mercy and charity: Now if the
midwifery of this Sermon (in the Review) may expedite the birth, I have what I
levelled at, and shall bless God for your summons (though as much unexpected
as undeserved) to the Pulpit and Press: Believe it Sirs, 'twere better for you
to have the stone in the bladder or kidneys then to have such a stone in your
hearts or bowels, and such a cramp in your hands, as does utterly indispose you
for the doing of good with your goods. I could name you some eminent Saints,
Mr. Nicholas Bifield, Vide Dr. Go^ge his Epistle to the Reader before Mr.
Bifields Commentary upon the second Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Peter.
And Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker, who lately died in the Lord, and now rests from
his labors, etc.
that for some years lived, and at length died, laboring under those bodily
distempers; but not any that lived and died, laboring under this soul-disease.
He that refused to give a crum of bread on earth, was denied a drop of water in
hell: Unmerciful men shall find no mercy. There Is fullness of bread, but o
that I could say, There Is fullness of good works in this famous City! The
former (though a good blessing of God in it self) was one of Sodoms (O that it
were not one of Londons) Vices. The latter was one of the Macedonians (O that
it might be one of Londons) Virtues, to cool your affections unto earthly
treasures, and enkindle them unto heavenly, and unto works of charity (which
even to a Proverb is grown cold) is the faithful endeavor and aim of this
Sermon. I know, not any man willingly (though many deservedly) when he is dead
would have those two words for his Epitaph, infoeliciter foelix, unhappie in
being so happy; 'twere better have these two, foeliciter infoelix, happy in
being unhappie. O then let the zeal of your faith sparkle forth in works of
charity: All men have not the honorable capacity of being Almoners of the
King of Heaven and Earth, as you have, who can better spare two talents then
some can two mites: The Lord grant, that as he has been unto you, so you may
be merciful and bountiful unto others: That as you are rich in worldly goods,
so you may be rich in faith and good works, and in Gods set time be personally
and fully possessed of the heavenly Kingdom which he has prepared for, and
promised to them that love him; So prays

The meanest and unworthiest of the Lords Servants, and Yours in the Lords
Work, John Crodacott.

The vaniy and mischief of making earthly Treasures Together with The
necessity and benefit of making heavenly Treasures Our chief Treasure. Opened
in a SERMON at Mary Spittle, Before the Right Honorable the Lord Major and
Court of Aldermen, on Tuesday in Easter Week, being the 17. of April 1655.
Matthew 6.19, 20. 19. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where
moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal.

20. But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor
rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.


I Shall not trouble or detain you with any further preamble then what will
make for the argument of the Text. In this Chapter (which contains a part of
that excellent Sermon which our blessed Lord and Savior preached to his
Disciples and others in the Mount) two things are by him decryed and condemned.

1 Hypocrisy, Ostentation, and an affectation of vain glory, from the
beginning of the Chapter to the nineteenth Verse.

2 Covetousness, inordinate affections unto, and carking cares for, the things
of this life, from the nineteenth verse to the end of the Chapter.

1 The former, namely, all Hypocrisy and affectation of vain glory, is decryed
and condemned.

First, In giving of Alms, from the 1 to the 5 Verse. Secondly, In Prayer, from
the 5 to the 16 Verse. Thirdly, In Fasting, from the 16 to the 19 Verse.
2 The latter, namely Covetousness, is decryed and condemned by sundry
forcible disswasive arguments: All which, should I distinctly enumerate and
explain, 'twould eat up too much of the time allotted for this exercise;
therefore I wave the enumeration and explanation of them. Be pleased to observe
with me, that our blessed Savior, well knowing that every man desires and
endeavors to have some treasure or other, propounds a double Rule to be
carefully observed by all Christians in their treasuring,

1 The first is negative, showing what we should not make choice of for our
treasure, not worldly wealth, not any earthly thing whatsoever, in the 19
verse. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth.

2 The second is affirmative, showing what we may and ought to make choice of
for our treasure, in the 20 verse. But lay up for your selves treasures in
heaven.

1 The former of these rules or precepts (call it which you will) which (you
may see) is prohibitive or dehortatory, is 1 Propounded. 2 Pressed.


1 Consider it as propounded, so there are four terms considerable.

1 An Act, To lay up. 2 The Obj^^^, Treasures. 3 The Place, Upon earth. 4 The
End, For your selves.
2 Consider it as pressed by, or backed with an argument drawn from the
instability and uncertainty of earthly treasures, which are obnoxious or
subject unto a double danger.

1 Of vanity in themselves, the moth or rust may and will in time corrupt them.

2 Of violence from others, though moth and rust do not, yet robbery may undo
us.

Thieves may steal away our earthly treasures.

2 The latter of these rules or precepts, which (you may see) is injunctive or
hortatory, is likewise; 1 Propounded. 2 Pressed.


Consider it as propounded, and so there are four terms likewise considerable.

1 An Act, To lay up. 2 The Object, Treasures. 3 The place, In heaven. 4 The
end, For your selves.
2 Consider it as pressed by, or backed with, an argument drawn from the
stability and certainty of heavenly Treasures.

1 They are incorruptible in their own nature, neither moth nor rust can
corrupt them.

2 They are out of the reach of fraud and violence, Thieves cannot steal them
away from us: Lay up for your selves, etc.

In the handling of this Text, I shall endeavor to be serviceable to your
souls, By

1 An explication of the several terms. 2 The confirmation of the Propo^^^ions
deducible or emergent. 3 The application of them unto your and mine own soul.
I begin with the first, namely, the explication of the several terms: and
first,

1 Of the Act, Lay not up: the Greek word is very significant, (...) treasure
not up, it imports two things.

1 To gather together.

2 To hoard or heap up in store things gathered for tomorrow, for hereafter,
against the time to come; which is the literal notation of the word, a laying
up for tomorrow, for hereafter.

2 The object and place, I shall join them together, treasures upon earth, our
Savior herein aims not so much at the place, as at the kinds of treasures;
for heavenly treasures may and ought to be laid up by us whilst we are on this
side heaven, as is evident from the 20 verse, Lay up for your selves treasures
in heaven. It Is the laying up of earthly treasures that our Savior condemns.

But what are those earthly treasures which we may not treasure up, as our
chief treasure? (for that is chiefly intended.) Answ. There a^^ three sorts of
earthly things (as one well observes) which humane providence is wont to store
or treasure up.

1 Garments or Clothes, which were wont to be a great treasure in this Nation,
especially in this City, but the itch and vanity of changing fashions has much
impaired this treasure in our days.

2 Com and Fruits of the earth, thus we read, 2 Cron. 32.28. that Hezekiah had
storehouses (which were a kind of treasuries) for the increase of corn and
wine and oil.

3 Gold and Silver, Jewels, and the like; thus we read, 2 Chronicles. 32.27. that
Hezekiah had treasuries for silver and for gold, and for precious stones, and
for all manner of pleasant Jewels.

Now these three sorts of earthly treasures our Savior tells us are subject to
such great uncertainties as render them unfit and unworthy to be stored or
treasured up as our chief treasure, for

1 Garments or Clothes are subject to moths, Isa. 51.8. the moth shall eat them
up like a garment, which is a proverbial speech; and, James 5.2. the Apostle
tells us, they are more then subject to mothes. The moth actually eats them,
your garments are moth-eaten.

2 Corn and fruits of the earth are subject to rust, not that which Iron is
subject unto, but that which spoils corn and fruits of the earth, which is in
some Countries called smut, in other Countries rust; (...) transfertur ad
vestes. (...) vero ad cibos. Theoph.
for which notation of the word, as most proper and pertinent in this place,
some Critics do contend.

3 Gold and silver, Jewels, and the like, are subject to fraud and violence
from others: thus we read, that all Hezekiahs treasures were carried away as a
spoil to Babylon, which was threatened in the days of Hezekiah by the Prophet
Isaiah for his pride of heart and vainglory, in showing all his treasures to
the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon, 2 Kings 20.13. compared with the the
17th. verse, and accordingly accomplished in the days of Jehoiakim, 2 King.
24.13. He (that is, the King of Babylon) carried out thence all the treasures
of the House of the Lord, and the treasure of the Kings house, etc. You see
what is meant by treasures upon earth.

4 The end (which is the fourth term) For your selves, self is a poor center,
yet is it the center of most men's studies and actions. 'Twas the Apostle Paul's
complaint, Phil. 2.21. That all (that is, the greater part) seek their own. Its
an empty vine that brings forth fruit to it self, Hos. 10.1. Yet with many such
empty vines is the earth cumbred, though no man be born for himself, nor
enriched with terrene riches for himself, yet carnal men are all for
themselves, now they live to themselves and ere long they will also die to
themselves. This hoarding or treasuring up earthly treasures for our selves
without any regard had unto either the incumbent or imminent, the present or
future necessities of the Commonwealth, or the Church, or the Poor, our
blessed Lord here prohibits, Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth.

Thus you have the explication of the terms of the 19th. verse, from whence I
might raise several Corollaries or Doctrinal Conclusions, which naturally arise
out of this Scripture; but I shall mention but one unto you, under which some
others deducible shall in my subsequent Discourse be touched upon and hinted
at: the Observation is this;



To prevent mistake, I shall premise two things before I fall directly upon the
point.

1 That all treasuring up of earthly treasures is not in this place simply
condemned.

2 That the simple possession of earthly treasures is not here condemned, nor
is it unlawful or unwarrantable: I begin with the former (viz.)

1 That all treasuring up of earthly treasures is not in this place simply
condemned: for,

First, Industry and diligence in a lawful and warrantable vocation or calling
in order to a competent provision of terrene or earthly things for our selves,
is not condemned in Sacred Writ, but commended; the custody and culture of
Paradise was committed to Adam in innocence, Genesis 2.15. The Lord God took the
man and put him into the Garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it. Even then
Adam was to be a labourer, not a loiterer: It Is true, the taedium, the
irksomeness, and weariness which comes by laboring is the fruit of sin, but
the duty ^f labor was before sin, before the fall of man: Since the fall of
man it is Gods Ordinance, that in the sweat of our faces (our brows or brains)
we should eat bread, until we return to the ground, Genesis 3.19. which Sanction
or Ordinance the Gospel has not ^ullified or mollified into delicacy or
idleness, but inforceth sub poena, under a penalty, 2 Thessalonians 3.10. When we were
with you (says the Apostle) this we commanded you, that if any would not work
neither should he eat. Where, the Apostle does not say, If any man cannot; but,
If any man will not work, neither should he eat.

2 Industry and diligence in a lawful and warrantable Vocation or Calling, in
order to a competent provision of earthly things for our Children and
Relations, is not condemned in Sacred Writ, but commended, 2 Cor. 12.14.
Parents ought to lay up for their Children? And the same Holy Apostle has
branded him with a black coal, that provides not for his own; 1 Timothy 5.8. If
any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, he has
denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. It Is granted, an excessive
solicitude or carking thoughtfulness, what shall become of our selves when we
are old, or of our children when we are dead, is condemned: but a provident
Christian care for our selves and families, is agreeable to the principles both
of Humanity and Religion. Thus you see that all treasuring up of earthly
treasures is not here simply condemned,

2 The simple possession of earthly treasures is not here condemned, nor is it
unlawful or unwarrantable, which is demonstrable by three arguments.

1 They come out of Gods good treasury, and are good blessings in themselves,
Deuteronomy. 28.12. The Lord shall open unto thee his good Treasure, the he^^en to
give the rain unto thy Land in his season, and to bless all the work of thine
hand, and thou shall lend unto many Nations, and thou shall not borrow. Thus
the Lord tells Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 1.11, 12. That because he had not asked riches,
and wealth, and honor for himself, but wisdom and knowledge; therefore he
will give him riches, and wealth, and honor, as an overplus or advantage. I
will give thee riches and wealth, and honor, says the Lord.

2 They put a price into the hands of the possessors to glorify God and do
good unto others. O! what precious and ample opportunities have such men as do
abound with earthly treasures to abound also in good works, Eccles. 7.11.
Wisdom is good (says the Wiseman) with an Inheritance: why is not wisdom good
without an Inheritance? yes, but it is better with then without an Inheritance.
Wisdom is more conspicuous and more useful with then without an Inheritance. A
Diamond in a dirty rag is a Diamond, but in a gold ring it sparkles and is more
illustrious: So grace in a poor man is grace, and it is beautiful, but grace in
a rich man is more conspicuous, more useful.

In short, earthly treasures are not only an ornament unto wisdom, but also an
excellent instrument, where^^ the owner is enabled to do much good.

3 God has given earthly treasures unto those that were good, which he would
never have done if they were simply evil in themselves: thus we read that
Abraham was a very rich man, Genesis 13.2. Abraham was very rich (says the Text)
in cattle, in silver, and in gold, A very rich man and a very holy man too; and
we read that David's treasures were exceeding great, 1 Chronicles. 22.14. he left
Solomon for the building of the Temple an hundred thousand talents of Gold, and
a thousand thousand talents of silver, etc. So exceeding great were holy David's
treasures, that man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14. Thus we ^ead that Job
was the greatest man of all the men of the East, Job 1.3. the most famous for
wealth and honor: And as he was greater in worldly goods; so was he also
greater in grace and piety then any that lived in those Eastern parts; 8 verse,
There is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that
fears God and escheweth evil. Now surely the Lord would never have given
earthly treasures to those and others of his Worthies, had ^he possession of
them been unlawful, Divitiae ne malae putentur dantur bonis, ne ^agna vel
summae dantur and malis, says Augustine, lest we should think riches evil in
themselves, they are given to those that are good; and lest riches should be
thought the chiefest good, they are given to those that are evil. Thus you see
the possession or fruition of earthly treasures is not unwarrantable or
unlawful.

3 But now (and so I come to the point) the treasuring up of worldly wealth or
any earthly thing whatsoever; as our chief treasure is never commended in
Sacred Writ, but ever condemned. If you ask me what it is to treasure up
worldly wealth, or any earthly th^^ whatsoever, as our chief treasure? I
answer, it implies three things.

1 Inordinate affection unto any earthly thing as our chief treasure. 2
Excessive pursuit after any earthly thing as our chief treasure. 3 Vain
confidence and trust in any earthly thing as our chief treasure.
1 Inordinate affection unto earthly treasures, our hearts and affections
should not be wedded and wedged to the goods of this world. Earthly treasures
we may have in our hands; but cannot, in our hearts without sin: have them we
may, but love them as our chief treasure we may not, 1 John 2.15. Love not the
world, neither the things that are in the world. The Apostle does not say, Have
not the world, neither the things that are in the world, but love them not;
Take heed of passing over your hearts and affections to those things you have
in your hands.

2 Excessive pursuit after them; 1 Timothy 6.9. the Apostle speaks of some that
will be rich, (...), some men are resolved to be rich, per fas and nefas,
either by hook or crook; as they usually say; all is fish with them that comes
to their hook or net, they will have earthly treasures, though they hazard
their heaven-born souls for them; they will treasure up wealth, although they
treasure up wrath withal; if they cannot get earthly treasures in a fair, they
will (if it be possible) in a foul and unwarrantable way: thus Judas will betray
his Lord and Master rather then not be fingring the pieces of silver, Matthew.
26.15, 16. They (that is, the chief Priests) covenanted with him for thirty
pieces of silver, and from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.

3. Vain confidence and trust in them; Prove. 10.15. The rich man's wealth is his
strong City. The worldlings wedge is his confidence, his gold is his god: Jer.
48.7. we find the Moabites charged herewith, Thou have trusted in thy works
and in thy treasures: and, Jer. 49.4. we find the Ammonites, who were the
Moabites brethren, charged with the like vain confidence: Wherefore gloriest
thou in thy valleys, thy flowing valley, o backsliding daughter? that trusted
in her treasures, saying, who shall come unto me? Thus did that rich fool in
the Gospel, Luke 12.19. Soul (says he) thou have much goods laid up for many
years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. Thus you see what it is for a
man to ^^ke earthly treasures his chief treasure.

I come now to the reasons or grounds of the point, why Christians ought not to
treasure up earthly treasures, as their chief treasure.

Now the reasons or grounds may be taken,

1 From the nature and quality of earthly treasures.

2 From the nature of the sin of treasuring up earthly treasures, as our
chief treasure.

1 From the nature of earthly treasures, which be pleased to consid^r with me.

1. Generally.

2 More particularly.

1 In general inquire into the Parentage or Pedigree.

1 Of gold and silver, pearls, and precious stones, what are they but clods of
dust, white and yellow earth, the guts and garbage of the earth, thick clay; so
Habbakkuk 2.6. terms them; Woe to him that ladeth himself with thick clay: that
is, with earthly riches; the earth is the basest of the four Elements, yet is
it the womb of gold and silver, which silly muck worms so much admire and
adore, yea, those mountains, in the bowels of which is most gold and silver are
most barren and unfruitful.

2 Of costly clothes and garments, your Silks, and Sattins, and Velvets; what
are they, but the issue of worms: Man himself is but a worm, Job 25.6. How
much less man that is a worm, and the son of man which is a worm, says
Bildad. And when man is arrayed in Silks or Sartins, or Velvets, what is his
clothing but the issue or excrements of worms? Now are these things worthy to
be our chief treasure which have so vile a pedi^^^e, so base an original?

2 More parti^ularly be pleased to consider with me the nature and quality of
earthly treasures.

1 Negatively, what they are not.

2 Affirmatively, what they are.

1 Negatively, what they are not. Answ. They are,

1 Not distinguishing.

2 Not satisfying.

3 Not reforming.

Turcium Imperium quantum quantum est, mica tantum est quam pater-familias
projicit canibus. The whole Turkish Empire (says Luther) is but a crum that the
Master of the Family throws to a Dog.
First, not distinguishing: if the special love and favor of God were graven on
gold or silver, pearls, or precious stones, 'twould be not only lawful but
laudable and commendable in us to treasure and store them up. But, beloved,
they are not characteristical, evidential, or demonstrative, of the special
love and favor of (...) Nay, a man may be outwardly blessed, yet inwardly
cursed; Wicked men have had their belli^s filled with eatthly treasures, Psalm.
17.14. the Psalmist speaks of men of the world, which have their portion in
this life, whose belly (says he) thou fillest with thy hid treasure. Nimrod
(we read) was a mighty man in the earth; Genesis 10.8. A man great in outward
greatness, and as great in wickedness as in greatness. verse. 9. He was a
mighty hunter before the Lord. Ismael had a large portion of earthly treasures
out of Gods treasury, a numerous, a noble progeny of twelve Princes, but the
principal blessings are settled upon Isaac by solemn Covenant, Genesis 17.20, 21.
Esau was a profane wretch, yet the fatness of the earth and of the dew of
heaven from above was his portion and blessing: Genesis 27.39. Behold, thy
dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from
above: and after God had rejected Saul, yet he suffered him to prosper much; he
had many victories and great riches; 1 Samuel 13. you read, he was rejected, yet
Chap. 14, 15. you read, that after this he prospered. And (to name no more)
Judas had the bag in his hand, or at his girdle, but the Devil in his heart.

2 They are not satisfying, Ecclesiastes 5.10. He that loves silver shall not
be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase. The
Heathen poor man at the first would have of his God but a thousand sheep, but
when he had them, he desired more, saying, pauperis est numerare peous: It Is
the lot of a poor man to be able to number his cattle. Earthly treasures cannot
fill our souls no more then heavenly can fill our chests or bags: our souls are
more capacious then our chests or bags, then the greatest affluence, or
abundance of earthly treasures. O! my beloved, how many in this City have
enough to sink them, yet have they not enough to satisfy them.

In short, a covetous man's desires are like a burning fire, whereof earthly
treasures are the wood and fuel: which, although they may seem to abate the
fire for the present, yet will it burn more vehemently afterward.

3 They are not reforming, Psalm. 73.12. behold, these are the ungodly, who
prosper in the world, they increase in riches. Observe it, they prospered and
increased in riches, and yet they were wicked and ungodly; where do you read,
that large possessions of earthly treasures have had such an influence either
into the hearts or lives of the possessors, as to make them better? I need not
tell you how David, and Solomon, and others fell foully by their prosperous and
flourishing estate. In a word, they make the owners richer, but very seldom
better: Thus you see what earthly treasures are not.

2 Affirmatively, be pleased to consider what they are. Answ. They are, 1
Deceiving. 2 Defiling. 3 Perishing. 4 Plaguing.


1 They are deceiving; they promise much, but perform nothing of what they
promise: men come to the Worlds felicities as unto a Lottery (as one wittily)
with heads full of hopes, but return with hearts full of blanks. As Ixion
embraced a cloud for Juno: So do worldlings shadows for substances. Balaam (we
read) loved the wages of unrighteousness; 2 Pet. 2.15. And he posted after it,
but what did he get by it but a sword in his bowels. Numb. 31.8. Copartner he
was with those in suffering, whose Counselor for wages of unrighteousness he
had been in sinning. What did Achan get by the Babylonish garment, and the two
hundred shekels of silver, and the wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight which
he hid in the earth, Joshua 7.21. What (I say) did he get by these treasures,
but the stones about his ears; v. 25. All Israel stoned him with stones. Thus
the sacrilegious wretch lost his treasure and his life also. And what did
Gehazie get by his li^ for a talent of silver and two changes of garments ( 2
Kings 5.22) but a Leprosy sticking to him and unto his seed for ever, as you
may read at the 27. verse. And what got Judas by his thirty pieces of silver
but the halter about his nec^ no sooner was his conscience awakened, but the
thirty pieces proved too hot for his fingers, Matthew. 27.5. He cast down the
pieces of silver, and went and hanged himself. This is one curse that is come
upon the creature since the fall of man, it is deceiving, it raises men's
expectations, but answers them not.

2 They are defiling, this is another curse that is come upon the creature, it
does not only raise men's expectations, but it draws out and feeds their
corruptions. So subject are these metals which worldlings dote upon to defile
us, that God made a law to have them purified 'ere he would have them used,
Numb. 31.22, 23. Tertullian is of opinion, that Judas carried himself honestly,
usque ad loculorum officium, until he was made his masters purse-bearer: some
of the Popes have been so ingenious, as to acknowledge, that their honors and
earthly treasures have changed their manners for the worse. Pope Adrian the
sixth, said, that nothing befell him more unhappy in all his life, then that he
had been head of the Church, and Monarch of the Christian Commonwealth. And
another Pope, Pius Quintus by name, says, When I first entered into Orders I
had some good hopes of my salvation; when I became Cardinal I doubted of it;
but since I came to be Pope, I do even almost despair. If poverty and want
has slain it is thousand, surely plenty and abundance of earthly treasure has
slain its ten thousand. Shall I instance in some of those lusts which are drawn
out and fed by earthly treasures? I Will name but four; 1 The lust of Pride. 2
The lust of Gluttony and Drunkenness. 3 The lust of Uncleanness. 4 The lust
of Malice and Revenge.


1 The lust of Pride; O! how is it fed by earthly treasures; Poverty does even
starve pride in many, but an affluence and abundance of earthly treasures feeds
it to the full: We have an English Proverb; As rises our good, so rises our
blood; and it is too often verified, August. de Temp.
Magnus est dives, qui non ideo se magnum putat, quia dives est, says
Augustine; He is a great (indeed a rare rich man) that counts not himself
greater for his riches. Vermis divitiarum est superbia, says the same Ancient,
Pride breeds in wealth, as the worm does in the nut or apple; hence it is, that
Paul straightly charge Timothy to charge rich men that they be not
high-minded, 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world that they be
not high-minded.

2 The lust of Gluttony and Drunkenesse, we read of a rich man that fared
deliciously every day. Luke 16.19. It is storied of one Apicius that his
kitchen expenses amounted unto more then two millions of gold per annum; and
that at length, finding by his account that he had eaten up so much of his
estate, as that there remained not enough to maintain his wonted luxury; He
drank down a glass of poison: And as for drunkenness that is regius morbus
(as one calls it) a costly sin; what shall I say? a full purse for a time
maintains fat dishes and full cups, but at length such fat dishes and full cups
will make an empty purse.

3 The lust of Uncleanness; O! how is it fed with earthly treasures, men that
have great estates have fuel for that lust: when the prodigal son had gotten
his portion into his own hands, then was he a fit companion for harlots,
doubtless many secret whoredoms are maintained, many unlawful issues kept and
shifted off in this City by men that abound with earthly treasures.

4 The lust of Malice and Revenge; great and rich men are oftentimes great
oppressors and grinders of the faces of the poor. It Is not immaterial to be
observed, that the dreadful woes denounced in Scripture against this sin of
oppression are levelled against great and rich men: as, Isa. 10.1, 2. Woe unto
them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousnesse which they
have prescribed, to turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the
right of the poor of my people, that Widows may be their prey, and that they
may rob the fatherless. Now who were they that enacted such injurious and
cruel decrees but great and rich men? their wicked Rulers and Judges whose will
(indeed lust) was their law; to this purpose is that in the prophecy of the
Prophet Amos, Chap. 4. v. 1, 2. Hear this word ye Kine of Bashan which oppress
the poor, and crush the needy, etc. the charge is against the Rulers and
Governors: so, James 2.6. Do not rich men oppress you (says the Apostle) and
draw you before the judgement-seats? Rich men are many times great oppressors,
they have power as well as will, whereas the poor have not power to their will.
Thus you see they are defiling.

3 They are perishing; by this Argument our blessed Lord and Savior in my Text
de-cries the treasuring up of earthly treasures, as our chief treasure; moth
and rust may and will corrupt them, or thieves may rob us of them: Indeed
earthly treasures are like treasures of snow that melt betwixt our fingers, the
world it self is compared to the Moon, Rev 12.1. There appeared a great wonder
in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun, that is, the Church clothed with
Christ, having the Moon under her feet, that is, the World, according to the
stream of the best Expositors, who make the Moon here an Emblem of the World,
and not unfitly. The Moon you know is subject to many changes, it is sometimes
an horned, sometimes an half, and sometimes a full Moon; so the world is a
stage of vicissitudes, constans in levitate sua, constant only in its
inconstancy. The fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. (...), the
word signifies a mere Mathematical Figure without substance, so some; or such
a fashion as is in a Comedy or Stage Play, where all things are but for a while
to please the eye, so others; the fashion of this world passes away: To this
purpose is that of the Apostle, 1 John 2.17. The world passes away: and as for
the enjoyments of this world, they are compared to a flock of birds; Prove.
23.5. Riches make themselves wings, and fly away like an Eagle. They have great
Eagles wings to fly from us (says one of the Fathers) but to follow after us,
ne passerinas quidem alas, not so much as little Sparrows wings. Many once as
rich as any here have found it impossible to pinion the wings of their riches.

4 They are plaguing; if unjustly acquired, or unduly detained; so Diodate
expounds that Text, James 5.3. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last
days. That is, whereas you thought to lay up treasures for time to come, you
shall in effect find, that you have laid up Gods Wrath. O! how many in
treasuring up wealth do treasure up the wrath and vengeance of God also. How
dearly earned does Judas count his thirty pieces now? and thus you have the
first ground or reason why we should not treasure up earthly treasures as our
chief treasure.

The second is taken from the nature of the sin of treasuring up earthly
treasures, as our chief treasure, it is such a sin as the Apostle would not
have to be named amongst Christians without extreme detestation, Ephesians. 5.3.
Fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness, let it not be once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints. This sin is called Idolatry, Coloss. 3.5.
Mortify your members which are upon the earth: fornication, uncleanness, and
covetousness, which is Idolatry. And the soul that is guilty of this sin is
expressly called an Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. This ye know, that no whoremonger nor
unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in
the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Holy David says of the Heathen, Psalm.
135.15. The Idols of the Heathen are silver and gold: and we may say of many
(too too many) professed Christians, silver and gold are their Idols. But why
is he that makes earthly treasures his chief treasure an Idolater? I answer,
Because

1 They have his heart; now that which the heart and affections run out unto as
the summum bonum, 'its chief good, that is unto that soul instead of God.

2 They have his trust: what Jobs soul abhorred to do, that he does, Job 31.24.
If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, thou art my
confidence, implying that he did not make gold his hope; not did he say to the
fine gold, thou art my cofidence. Job trusted in God alone; and made not an
Idol of his riches, by trusting in them. But this that soul does, that makes
earthly treasures his chief treasure. He trusts in uncertain riches, contrary
to that charge, 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they
trust not in uncertain riches.

3 They have his service: Now that which one worshippeth and serves is his
God. Our blessed Savior says peremptorily, that no servant can serve two
masters, Luke 16.13. As God and the Devil, and God and the flesh: so God and
the world are two contrary masters: hence our Savior says expressly in the
same verse, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. It Is notable, he does not say, ye
cannot have God and Mammon, but ye cannot serve God and Mammon; he that is Gods
Servant cannot be his golds servant also. If we be not masters of our earthly
treasures, we cannot be the true heaven-born Servants of God. What Seneca said
of affections, and we say of fire and water, it is true of earthly treasures,
They are good servants but bad masters. Now (beloved) what sin is more odious
then Idolatry: Can you name a more God-provoking and soul-destroying sin then
Idolatry. The soul of God abhors it, and it is worthy your observation, the sin
of Idolatry and this of Covetousness (under hand) which is called Idolatry)
are both stigmatized with the infamy of whoredom and adultery against God.
Isa. 57.8. Thou have discovered thy self to another then me, thou have enlarged
thy bed, and made a covenant with them, thou lovedst their bed when thou saw
it: So Ezekiel. 26.25. Thou have opened thy feet to every one that passed by, and
multiplied thy whoredoms: that is, thou have committed Idolatry with all the
false gods of the Heathen round about. And that inordinate love of the world is
a spiritual adultery, you may see, James 4.4. Ye adulterers and adulteresses
know ye not the friendship of the world is enmity with God: whosoever therefore
will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God. In a word, that soul that
lays out that love and zeal and confidence, or trust, which is due to God upon
his earthly treasures, is a spiritual Idolater and an Adulterer. O! what a
God-provoking and soul-destroying sin must this be? Thus you have the point
confirmed. I see I must be very short in the improvement of it by way of Use
and Application.

Let me exhort you in the fear of the Lord not to make worldly wealth, or any
earthly thing whatsoever your chief treasure. O! do not cast your eyes and set
your hearts upon that which is not, Prove. 23.5. For shame (my beloved) be not
like the dog in the fable, catching at the shadow, and so lose substance and
all: Be not like the cock upon the dunghill, esteeming the barley corn of earthly
treasures before heavenly treasure.

It may be you will say, we hope we do not, but (beloved) I am afraid that many of
you do. Are you willing to come to the touchstone, and to be weighed in the
balance of the Sanctuary?

I shall present you with four characters or discoveries only of a persons
making earthly treasures his chief treasure; and so proceed to the 20 verse.
The first is,

1 A low ground-ebbe of affections, desires, delights, thoughts and endeavors,
after heavenly treasures. This argues that something on this side heaven is
your chief treasure. Do you observe that rule laid down by our Savior, Matthew.
6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness. Good Lord! how
few of the many here before the Lord do observe that rule? This was profane
Esau his sin; give him a morsel of meat or a mess of pottage, and as for the
Birthright take it who will, Heb. 12.16. and this was the Gergesenes sin, they
had rather Satan should reside and play Rex in their own souls then in their
swine; and therefore upon the loss of their swine they beseech our Savior to
depart out of their Coasts, Matthew. 8. ult.

2 Hard-heartednesse and close-fistednesse toward the needy or necessitous:
Did not thy earthly treasures lie nearer thy heart then they should, thy heart
would be more merciful, and thy hand more bountiful, and open unto a due relief
of such as want necessaries, when as thou thy self have both delightfuls and
superfluities. When our blessed Lord bad that man sell what he had and give to
the poor (but the man went away sorrowful) does it not argue and infer, that
his earthly treasures had too much interest in his heart and affections?

3 Want of contentment, which indeed lies not in the things a man enjoyes, but
in the mind that values them. Natura paucis contenta, libido nullis, Nature is
content with a little, and grace is content with less, but lust is insatiable,
content with nothing: it is certain, earthly treasures in themselves yield no
sound contentment and satisfaction to the owner. Haman was a man that sucked at
the fair and full breasts of the world, he was one of the worlds darlings (as
they usually say) and yet was he not content therewith, Ester 5.13. All this
avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings
gate. There is ever something or other that gives an unsavory verdure unto the
worlds sweetest morsels, and make their sweets but bitter-sweets; but
godliness with contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. Now can you truly say,
you are content with what you have, and you can heartily bless God for it?

4 Over-grieving the loss of any creature-comfort: the less interest the
things of this world have in a man's heart and affections, the less grief will
there be at that man's parting with any thing in the world. But when there is
a-great deal of grief at parting, this argues such a creature-comfort lay too
near the heart, whilst enjoyed, Hosea 7.14. They houled upon their beds for
corn and wine. The Lord help you to judge righteous judgment, of the state and
genius, disposition, or temper of your own souls, whether you be, or be not,
such as do make earthly treasures your chief treasure.

I have done with the 19, and proceed to the 20 verse. But lay up for your
selves treasures in heaven.

This Rule or Precept (call it what you will) you see is affirmative, showing
what treasure we ought to treasure up for our selves, as our chief treasure,
videlicet, treasures in heaven. This Rule is, 1 Propounded. 2 Pressed.


Consider it as propounded, and so there are four terms considerable (as you
heard before) 1 An Act, Lay up, or Treasure up. 2 The Object, Treasures. 3 The
Place, In heaven. 4 The End, For your selves.


Some variety there is amongst Interpreters about the interpretation of the
object, what this treasure is, which Christians may and ought to treasure up
for themselves.

I shall not detain you with a prolix examination and confutation of the
Exposition of the Church of Rome, who make the overplus of Christ's merits and
of the merits of Saints and Martyrs to be the true treasure of the Church,
which is (say they) in the Popes custody. This delusion has kept the Popes
treasury full of earthly treasures, and his Kitchen warm.

Nor must I detain you with a prolix confutation of the Jesuit Maldonat his
inference from our Saviors command; namely, that the creature has freedom of
will and power to treasure up for himself treasures in heaven. And why? But
because Christ commands us so to do. Nemo praeter Haereticos, tam est insanus
ut Deum nobis praecipere dicat, quae facere non possumus. None but Heretics
(says he) will be so mad, as to say that God commands us to do what we are
not able to do. But (beloved) commands argue not power and free will in man to
do what is commanded; they infer duty, but not ability, that it is our duty to
do so and so, but not that we are able of our selves to do so and so, nor does
(...) impotency, or disability to perform take away Gods authority to command.
May not a Creditor justly require a just debt from a Bankrupt? In short, we are
able and too too apt of our selves to treasure up unto our selves wrath against
the day of wrath, but not to treasure up for our selves treasures in heaven.
Yet because we are instruments by his grace in the use of means to treasure up
this treasure; therefore are we commanded to treasure up for our selves
treasures in heaven, as if the work were wholly ours, though God himself be the
principal efficient cause, we but the instruments.

Well, but you will say, what is meant here by treasures in heaven? Answ.

1 Some by treasures in this place do understand alms, comparing this Text
with that, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this world, that
they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store f^^ themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

2 Others by treasures here understand Jesus Christ.

3 And others, life eternal, purchased for us by Jesus Christ.

Learned and holy Mr. Perkins (now happy in heaven) by treasures in heaven in
this place understands Jesus Christ, who is the true treasure, in whom all
treasures are hid, Coll. 2.3. in whom (that is in Christ) are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. This treasure is a Christians true riches,
so called, Coll. 1.27. to whom God would make known what is the riches of the
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you: which what?
Answ. Which riches is Christ in you the hope of glory, Christ is the only ttue
treasure, the only true riches of every true Christian.

Now according to this interpretation of the words, the Observation which I
will handle, shall be this:



If you ask me the reasons or grounds of the point, why Christians should make
Christ their chief treasure. I answer; 1 In general. 2 More particularly.


1 In general, because Christ is the chiefly desirable treasure, Haggai 2.7. he
is styled the desire of all Nations; I will shake all Nations, and the desire
of all Nations shall come. Some dispute there is, what is meant by the desire
of all Nations: Some would have us understand by the de^^^^ of all Nations, Vt
venient desiderati omnium gentium, Jun.
the people whom God should cull and call out of every Nation, as his desired
ones. Others would have us understand by the desire of all Nations, the
desirable things, the choice treasure of the Nations, which were to be tendered
unto Christ at his coming in the flesh. Thus we read of an oblation of gold,
and frankincense, and myrrh, which was made by the wise men unto Christ,
Matthew. 2.11. When they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him
gifts, gold, and frankincense, and myrrh: thus we read Acts 4.34, 35. that the
Primitive Converts sold their possessions, and brought the prices of the things
that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet. But others (indeed the
most) understand this Text of the Messiah, the Lord Jesus Christ, desideratus
omnium gentium, so Hierome, the person that is desired of all Nations, and who
was that but Jesus Christ? this interpretation is favored by the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, who quoteth this Text of the Prophet, as you may see,
Heb. 12.26. well then, Christ is the desire of all Nations. It Is notable, the
word is abstract, not concrete, he is styled, not the person desired, but the
desire, which implies two things: That he is; 1 Totus desiderabilis, altogether
desirable. 2 Totum desiderabile, all that can be desired.


1 The Lord Jesus Christ is altogether desirable, his person is desirable, his
offices are desirable, his service is desirable, his yoke easy, Matthew.
11.30. easy in regard of (to name no other regards) the yoke of sin and Satan:
Vita vitiosa gravior, a vicious life is more laborious and burdensome then a
virtuous. A man cannot serve a better Master then Christ, nor a worse then Sin
or Satan; this is the first, he is altogether desirable.

2 The Lord Jesus Christ he is totum desiderabile, all that can be desired,
which is not predicable of any or all the treasures of this world, Prove, 3.15.
All the things thou can desire are not to be compared unto this treasure:
when Paul had reckoned up all his privileges and prerogatives, and laid them
in one scale, and this treasure in the other, this treasure over-weighed his
all besides, as you may read, Phil. 3.8. I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ. What
is it that you account deservedly attractive of your love?

1 Is it beauty? Alas! what are the brightest beauties of nature compared unto
that beauty which is in Jesus Christ? Surely they are but a dim shadow of his
beauty, Psalm. 45.2. He is fairer then the children of men: when the Church had
limmed out his beauty and amiablenesse from top to toe, she is forced to break
off with a general Elogy, Cant. 5.16. He is altogether lovely; all the beauty
of God the Father is put forth in Christ, who is the resplendency of the
Fathers glory. The light of the Sun in the air, what is it but the accidental
reflection of the Suns beams? And what is Jesus Christ, this precious treasure,
but the substantial reflection of the Fathers light, beauty, and glory? Oh! how
are the eyes of Angels taken up with beholding the beauty, the amiablenesse and
loveliness of this treasure.

2 Is it gain or profit which you account deservedly attractive of your love?
why, the merchandise of this treasure is better then the merchandise of silver,
and the gain thereof then fine gold, it is more precious then rubies, Prove.
3.14, 15. A man may gain much of the world, and yet lose his soul; yea, a man
may lose his soul in gaining the world, Matthew. 16.26. Thus Demas when once he
embraced the world, then farewell Paul, and farewell soul too, 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas
has forsaken me, having loved this present world. But he that gains this
treasure cannot possibly lose his soul, the very name of this treasure sounds
salvation, Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins. In a word, that soul that gets a propriety to, an
interest in this treasure, gains more then a Naboths Vineyard, and that without
an Ahabs Curse, a better reward then Naamans without a Gehezies leprosy. If
ever you will prove your selves wise merchants, besure to make choice of this
treasure for your chief treasure.

3 Is it honor, which you account deservedly attractive of your love? Alas!
worldly honor and dignity, how airie and slippery is it? Haman (we read) was
in a little time both highly favored at Court, and exalted also on the
Gallows. And Nebuchadnezzar (we find) glorying in his Babel (as it were) to
day, and cast out of his Kingdom to morrow; deservedly may worldly honor be
chronicled for a lie; Psalm. 62.9. Men os high degree are a lie: but now all
that have title to this treasure are Kings and Priests unto God, Revel. 1.6.
Indeed on earth they are but warring Kings, but in heaven they shall be
triumphing Kings, crowned Kings, Revel. 4.4. heirs they are of the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, a Kingdom which cannot be
moved. Thus you see in general, that Jesus Christ is the chiefly desirable
treasure.

2 More particularly, be pleased to consider with me that Jesus Christ is, 1 A
soul-beautifying treasure. 2 A soul satisfying treasure. 3 A durable
everlasting treasure.


1 This treasure is a soul-beautifying treasure, the soul of man by nature is
of all other things in the world, one of the vilest, most polluted and
loathsome thing in the sight of God, but this treasure does singularly
beautify the soul that has it, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair, my Love, (says
Christ to his Church) there is no spot in thee: to this purpose is that, Cant.
6.10. Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as
the Sun? The Church of Christ by virtue of her title unto and possession of
this treasure is clear as the Sun, in regard of justification, and fair as the
Moon, in regard of sanctjfication. Look as when Jacob wore Esaus garment, he
was as Esau to his father Isaac, and in that relation obtained the blessing; so
when a poor sinner is clothed with the white robe of the righteousness of
this true treasure, God the Father looks upon him, as if he had fulfilled all
righteousness.

2 This Treasure is a soul-satisfying treasure, he that has an interest in
this treasure, may lay this conclusion firmly in his own spirit, That the same
God that has given unto him this treasure, cannot but with him give him all
things also. Take it in two particulars.

1 That soul that has this treasure, has in the same Charter all things: thus
the Apostle argues the Churches title to all things from this very ground, 1
Cor. 3.21 22, 23. All things (says he) are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come,
all are yours; though not in possession yet in free heritage. And why all
yours? because Christ is yours, ye are Christ's, and Christ's is Gods; Habet
omnia qui habet habentem omnia (says Austine) He has all things that has the
God of all things.

2 That soul that has this treasure has all that he has by a Covenant-right,
and not by simple donation only; he has all by the free-holding of grace; his
bread not by common providence only, but by Covenant, Isa. 33.16. Bread shall
be given him, his waters shall be sure; his sleep not by common providence
only, but by promise, Prove. 3.24. When thou lie down thou shall not be
afraid, yea, thou shall lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet. What shall I
say? the very gleanings of this treasure are more filling and satisfying then
all the vintage and harvest of earthly treasures. Thus you see he is a
soul-sasisfying treasure.

3 This treasure is a durable, a lasting, an everlasting treasure. Earthly
treasures perish in the use: yea, beloved, if you have not a title to this
treasure, you will have your portion in this world, which is dreadful to
consider; although God should now fill your bellies with hid treasures. It is
storied of Gregory, that when he was advanced to high preferment, he professed,
that no Scripture was ever so terrible in his ears, as that, Luke 6.24. Woe
unto you that are rich, for you have received your consolation; this Scripture
sounded in his ears, as Jerome said, that Scripture did in his, surgite mortui,
and venite ad judicium, arise ye dead, and come to judgment. But (beloved)
this treasure, which a Christian should make his choice treasure, will stand
him instead for ever. This is the treasure (...) the heavens that fails not;
Luke 12.33. Where no thief approaches, neither moth corrupts. This treasure
will be ever sweet and precious, yea, then best, when time shall be no more:
this is the true treasure, and (indeed) the only treasure, which makes all
the possessours of it solidly and eternally happy. Thus ye have the reasons,
why Christians ought to make Christ their chief treasure. Give me leave now to
improve it by way of Use and Application. By way of

1 Trial or Examination,

1 By your distinct and deep apprehensions of your personal want, and of the
real worth of this treasure.

2 By your high appretiations of this treasure, above all earthly treasures
soever.

By the Bias and tendencie of your affections toward this treasure.

4 By the laboriousnesse of your endeavors to get this treasure.

1 By your distinct and deep apprehensions of your personal want, and of the
real worth of this treasure. By your distinct apprehensions, (I say)

1 Of your personal want of this treasure; has the Lord thoroughly convinced
you, that without a title to this treasure, you are undone for ever? And does
this make you cry out with Rachel, in another case, Give me children (says
she) or else I die; so does thy soul unfeignedly and feelingly say, Lord, give
me Christ, the true treasure, or else I shall die, and be damned eternally. Oh!
how many here before the Lord never yet saw their need and want of this
treasure, who yet pretend that Christ is their treasure?

2 Of the real worth and excellency of this treasure has the Lord convinced
thee, that this treasure does not only make a man richer, but it makes a man
better? earthly treasures do make a man richer, but they seldom or never make
a man better; nay, they many times make a man worse, but this treasure, (the
Lord has let thee see) will make thee better, it will enlighten thy mind, it
will purify thy heart, it will purge thy conscience, 'twill every way
beautify thy precious foul, what say your souls to this.

2 By your high appretiations of this treasure above all earthly treasures
whatsoever: clear apprehensions of the surpassing worth and transcendent
excellency of this treasure will beget high appretiations of it; we see it in
Paul, Phil 3.8. I count all things (says he) but dung, ((...), dogs meat) that
I may win Christ, and get home to him. 'T was a brave speech of Luther, Melch.
R. D. in vita Luth.
when great gifts were proffered him, if he would warp, and tune his fiddle to
the Popes Base, valde protestatus sum me nolle sic satiari. I deeply protested
(says he) that God should not put me off with such poor things: resolved he
was, not to be satisfied with any thing on this side treasures in heaven.
Earthly treasures were but gay nothings in his eye, compared with this choice
treasure. It is reported, that he should profess, that he was never so much as
tempted by Satan to this sin of dry drunkenness, covetousness. Indeed the
Pope attempted to win him unto his faction by money, but the answer which his
Agents returned, was, Germana haec bestia non curat aurum, that the German
beast cared not for gold. And as he was famous for his contempt of the world,
so was he likewise for his prizing of Christ and the Gospel. Malim praesente
Christo esse in inferno, quam absente eo in coelo. I had rather (says he) be
in hell with Christ then in heaven without him; what say your consciences to
this? have ye high appretiations of this treasure above all earthly treasures.

3 By the Byas and tendency of your affections toward this treasure, high
appretiations of this treasure will beget strong affections unto it, and after
it, Cant. 3.6. The Church is compared to pillars of smoke, ascending, though
she be black as smoke, in regard of infirmities, yet has she a principle
within her, that carries her upwards. And how the Byas of the affections of
Gods people in the Prophet Isaiahs time was set, you may read, Isa. 26.8, 9.
The desire of our souls is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee. With my
soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within me will I
seek thee early. Their desires were always breathi^g out and flaming up
toward this treasure. Now can you say in the witness of your consciences,
that your affections (the pulses of your souls) do thus work and beat toward
Christ? does your hearts say with David Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but
thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee?

4 By the laboriousnesse of your endeavors to get this treasure; look, as
clear apprehensions will beget high appretiations, and high appretiations will
beget strong affections, so strong affections will beget strong endeavors. No
sooner were the bowels of the Church thoroughly affected, and deeply moved for
her beloved, but she bestirred her self to find him, whom her soul loved,
Cant. 5.5, 6, etc. Although she meets not with any encouragements, but many and
great discouragements, yet will she not be beaten off from seeking of him every
where. Thus in that Text even now quoted, Isa. 26.9. we read not only that the
affections of Gods people were carried toward him; but also that their
enquiries and endeavors were after him; With my soul have I desired thee in
the night, and what follows? with my spirit within me will I seek thee early.
Beloved, some velleities, imperfect wishings and wouldings you may have for
this treasure, and yet live and die treasurelesse, Christlesse. Now, what say
your souls to this? are you willing to be at any pains, at any cost, so you may
gain this treasure? And so much by way of Trial or Examination.

2 By way of Exhortation let me exhort you in the fear of the Lord to make
Christ your chief treasure: If you have this treasure, you are not poor, for
you are heirs of the Kingdom, which God has promised unto them that love him,
James 2.5. If you have not a title to this treasure, you are not rich, the
Laodiceans were a rich people, yet are they said to be poor, Revel. 3.17. thou
art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: though they were
rich in worldly treasures, yet were they poor Godward and Heavenward, because
they wanted this heavenly treasure, Jesus Christ. Oh! therefore let me beseech
you to improve your all this way, namely, to get this treasure, you will say,
what must we do? Answ.

1 You must read and hear the Word of God, which is compared unto a treasure,
Matthew. 13.44. the Word of God opens unto us the inestimable value of this
heavenly treasure. It Is the means that God has ordained to bring us unto
Christ, the true treasure, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. Take heed that you undervalue not the truths of Christ, because
brought unto you in an earthen vessel: Remember what the Apostle says, 2 Cor.
4.7. we have this treasure in earthen vessels. O! let not the vileness, the
weakness, or meannesse of the vessel prejudice you against the preciousnesse
and choicenesse of the treasure that is in it.

2 You must believe the Word which you read and hear, you must mix it with
faith, or your reading and hearing will not profit you, Heb. 4.2. Audientes
corporis sensu, non audiunt cordis assensu, Aug.
The Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that
heard it.

3 You must treasure up divine truths in your memory, which although it be one
of the britlest parts, yet is it one of the richest cabinets and treasuries in
the soul of man, and therefore too good to keep lumber and rubbish in, It Is a
treasury for the richest and most precious Jewels, to this use did Mary put her
memory, Luke 2.19. Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.
O! that Christians would put theirs unto the like use.

4 You must believe in Jesus Christ with all your heart, you must receive this
treasure upon his own terms.

5 You must frequent the Lords Table, where this treasure is freely offered by
God the Father unto every believing communicant.

6 You must pray in faith, and with an holy fervency for this treasure.

But these means have been (I presume) frequently inculcated upon you; and
therefore I wave any further discourse of them.

Two things I must commend unto you from the Lord, as ever you would have Jesus
Christ to be your chief treasure: namely, 1 That you would forsake all your
sins. 2 That you would forego some part of your earthly treasures.


1 That you would forsake all your sins. Thus did that wise merchant in the
Gospel, when he had found the true treasure, the precious pearl, he went and
sold all that he had, and bought it, now what had he or we to sell, nothing
that is properly our own, but our sins; all things that we have are Gods
already, unless it be our sins, and are your sins worth the keeping? do you
think you cannot live comfortably, and die blessedly without such or such a
lust? why should you think so? what think you of the Angels and glorified souls
in heaven, they live without sin, and are they not blessed? yea, are they not
therefore blessed, because without sin? Consider with me I beseech you.

1 Sins unreasonablenesse. 2 Sins undesireablenesse in it self.
1 The unreasonablenesse of Sin, there is all the reason in the world that we
should serve God, but no reason that we should sin against God: Sin is folly
and darkness, and it tends unto and ends in utter darkness; when we persuade
you to part with sin, we persuade you to part with that, which (if not parted
with) will incur and bind that direful and dreadful sentence upon your souls
and bodies unto all eternity, Matthew. 7.23. Depart from me ye that work
iniquity. We petswade you to part with that which will be the bane, the poison,
the ruin of your precious souls.

2 The undesireablenesse of sin in its self; alas! you see the bait, but you
see not the hook that is under it, the venomous, poisonous sting of sin, is but
honied over; you feel the pleasures of sin, but believe not the pains after and
for sin, because you feel them not; were not the horror of sin disguised, your
souls would cry out in sober sadness, Oh I have no pleasure in such an
heart-iniquity or way of wickedness? now I see the fruit of sin is shame, the
wages of sin is eternal death, separation of soul and body from God for ever.
Therefore let me again beseech you, as you would have Christ for your treasure,
forsake your sins.

1 Universally fell all that you have for this treasure, be willing to part
with all your sins, deal not by your sins as Ananias did by his goods, who
retained a part to or for himself; but (you know) how heavy the hand of God was
upon him for his dissembling. O! beloved, be not indulgent to any lust, think
it not enough to loath some one sin, although you love and live in another; if
you will keep sin in part, you shall lose this precious, this glorious treasure
(and so your souls) in whole, and forsake your sins.

2 Perpetually, think it not enough to lay aside your sins for a time, as you
do your clothes at night when you go to bed, and in the morning put them on
again. As the Israelites lusted after the fleshpots of Egypt. But shake off (I
beseech you) all your sins, as Paul did the viper, never to resume them again;
take heed of returning with the dog to his vomit, and the sow to her wallowing
in the mire. This is the first thing I would commend unto you, forsake all your
sins: And be willing

2 To forego some part of your earthly treasures for Christ, yea, the whole, if
Christ call for it, but I shall bespeak a part only at this time, lay not up
earthly treasures for your selves, but lay them out in doing good to the poor
members of Jesus Christ; this Injunction our blessed Savior laid upon that
rich man that came unto him and moved a very needful question, Matthew. 19.16.
Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life: to which
Christ returns this answer, verse 21. Go and sell that thou have and give to
the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven. How happy should you and I
be, if I could persuade you that are rich men to be rich in good works: You
that abound in earthly treasures to make the bowels of the needy your treasury,
manus pauperum gazaphylacium Christi, says one of the Ancients, the poor man's
hand is Christ's treasury; O that it might be yours. I hope you will not say, we
have little enough for our selves and families, should you say, we have too
little for our lusts I should rather believe you; indeed lust is unsatiable;
but you cannot truly say, you have little enough for your selves; how many are
there that have scarce covering for their nakedness, when as you (many of you)
have clothing for your comeliness and stateliness; how many are there that
have scarce food for their hunger, when as you have plenty and variety of
delicious dishes for your delight and daintiness: many of you cannot say, you
are not rich men, except you be of the judgment of Marcus Crassus, whom
Plutarch speaks of, who accounted no man rich except he could at his own
charges maintain an Army. Profane Esau could say, I have enough my brother, I
hope you will not prove your selves to be worse then Esau: if you be resolved
to make it your business to satisfy your lusts, then I must tell you that you
go about an endless business; but I know to whom I speak, I hope not to men
rich in worldly goods only, but to some that are rich in faith, and heirs of
the Kingdom which God has promised to them that love him. To you I speak, and
yet not unto you only, but unto all here before the Lord, who have enough to
supply your wants and over: be merciful, be bountiful, be open-hearted, and
open-handed, improve your earthly treasures, as helps to further you in the
attainment of the true heavenly treasure: This counsel I crave leave to back
with six quickening considerations.

1 What has God and Christ accounted too dear for Matthew. 26.15. They
covenanted with him for 30 pieces of silver, which price the Prophet Zachariah
calls a goodly price, Zach. 11.13. but it is in scorn and disdain; the price
at which he was prized and sold was sordid, but were we bought with such a
price? O! no, the Apostle Paul tells us, that we are bought with a price, 1
Cor. 6.20. And the Apostle Peter tells us with what price, namely, not with
silver and gold, or such corruptible things, but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. the
price of our souls was so high as that the whole Creation was not able to pay
it, we were base and vile in our selves, yet would not our redeemer buy us with
a vile, a base price, nay not with vast treasures of the gold of Ophir, or the
precious Onyx, but with his own precious blood; Now shall we count any thing
too dear for Christ and his poor members, who counted not his own heart blood
too dear for us?

napkin, but trade with and lay out for his service.

3 What do I press you to part with, but what the Prove. 11.24. There is that
scatters, and yet increases; and there is that withholds more then is
meet, but it tends to poverty: this is a Paradox, a mystery to the world,
there be some that get by giving, and there be others that lose by keeping, and
not giving; so Isai^h 32.8. the liberal man devises liberal things, yea (will
a worldling say) so may he part with all he has, nay (says the Spirit of God)
by liberal things shall he stand. Well (beloved) this argument which the
Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 9.8. uses to induce men to lay out their earthly
treasures for the good of others, I leave with you. God (says he) is able to
make all grace abound toward you, that ye always, having all sufficiency in
all things may abound to every good work.

4 What are men content to lay out for their lusts? Luke 15.13. that he wasted
his substance with riotous living, yea, he spent all, verse. 14. and as prodigal
are many in our days, when the Devil or their lusts call for pounds; when
pride, or a dainty tooth, or a drunken appetite, or the fire of a filthy lust
calls, how profuse and prodigal are many men? Now shall hell overbid heaven?
Shall wicked men empty their bags and pockets to fill their souls with
wickedness, and shall not we empty ours for treasure in heaven? so much we
find promised, Matthew. 19.21. Sell that that thou have, and give to the poor,
and thou shall have treasure in heaven. Shall men lay out more for their filthy
soul-damning lusts, then we do for the soul-saving treasure?

Tim. 6.7. Nay, if your earthly treasures have been unjustlie gotten, or
undulie withheld, death will strain out all the sweet, and leave only the
sour, and guilt upon your souls. I say, if unduly withheld, believe it, you
may lose and damn your precious souls, by pinching and saving, as well as by
extorting from others; the wicked which we read of, Matthew. 25.41, 42, etc. are
sentenced unto everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, not for
robbing, but for withholding bread from the hungry, not for fleecing or
uncloathing, but for not clothing the backs of the poor members of Jesus
Christ. Now whether it be not Christian prudence to lay up in store for your
selves, a good foundation against the time to come, that you may lay hold on
eternal life, by doing good, by being rich in good works, ready to distribute,
and willing to communicate, Judge ye: In short, the world passes away, and not
the world only, but the lusts thereof also, 1 John 2.17. when you come to
leave the world, your earthly treasures will not relish with you, but your
souls will say, I have no pleasure in them.

Matthew. 25.35, 36. Our blessed Savior tells the faithful of all their acts of
charity, I was an hungered, and you gave me meat, I was thirsty, and you gave me
drink, naked and you clothed me, I was sick, and you visited me: at the 37
verse, the righteous answer him, as if they had forgotten that they had done
any such acts. Lord (say they) when saw we thee an hungered, or thirsty: but
though they should, yet the Lord will not forget their works of mercy; God will
be sure to remember them for good who have done good with their goods, Revel.
14.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, they rest from their
labors, and their works do follow them; not their works in kind, but the
fruits of their works of mercy and charity, etc. shall follow them. It is
storied of one of the Dukes of Savoy, that being asked by certain Ambassadors,
that came to his Court, what hounds he had, for they desired to see them, the
next day he showed them a company of poor people feeding at his Table, and
told them, these are the hounds with which I hunt after heaven. In a word, it
is counted an honor to live like a Prince; but sure I am, when you come to
die, it will be more comfortable to your own souls, and more honorable among
those that truly honor God, and are honorable in his eyes: to have the
testimony, that you have given like Princes, then that you have lived like
Princes. I have but one thing more to do, namely, to present unto you, some,
shall I say? indeed many crying objects of mercy and compassion; and so I
shall conclude.

Here (according to custom) a true Repore was read of the great number of poor
Children, and other poor people maintained in the several Hospitals by the
pious care of the Lord Major, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London,
viz.

Children now remaining under the Care and Charge of Christ's Hospital (with
them lately admitted) which are kept in the house, and diverse places in London,
and Suburbs thereof, and at Nurse in the Country, amounting in the whole to
the number of 948.

Remaining under cure, at this present, at the Charge of S. Bartholomews
Hospital 361.

Remaining under cure, at present, upon the Charge of St. Thomas Hospital 249.

Maintained in Arts and Occupations, and other useful and necessary works and
labors, at the charge of the Hospital of Bridewel, Apprentices, and other
persons 130.

Maintained in the Hospital of Bethlehem, with Physic, Diet, and other relief,
51 distracted persons constantly at least, besides the charge of Servants to
look to them, they being most unruly, and not able to help themselves; and the
Rents and Revenues of the said Hospital being very small, not amounting to two
third parts of the yearly charge.

THere was also read the Report of the Governors of the Corporation for
employing and relieving the Poor of this City of London, and Liberties thereof.

The said Corporation do at the present maintain and educate about 100 poor
Children in Learning, and Arts, whose Parents are either dead, or not able to
maintain them, aiming (according as ability by the good providence of God shall
be administered) at the entertaining of some hundreds more; Moreover, there are
many hundred of poor people and families employed by the said Corporation, in
the Manufactures of Spinning Hemp, Flax, and Tow, and Weaving of it into Cloth.

Thus you see (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, honored, and beloved) how
many Channels there are for your beneficence and liberality to run down in, how
many objects of mercy and compassion there are in these Hospitals, these
houses of Mercy; and it is well known to your selves in whose hands the
government of these Hospitals is entrusted. (I hope) I may say without
flattery, men fearing God, and hating covetousnes; such as have yearning bowels
to refresh the bowels of the Saints, the household of faith and their seed, such
as will not abuse and lavish out your charity either profuse or confuse,
without measure or order. Now my humble and earnest request unto you is, that
before you sleep you would resolve between God and your own souls to lay out
some discreet proportion of your earthly treasures for the relief and
maintenance of those crying objects of charity, even now presented unto you; (I
say) before you sleep. I hope many of you are resolved to do something, but
give me leave to ask ye when? why not now Sirs? Consider I beseech you six
things.

1 You may not be long lived, you may be taken from your earthly treasures,
even in the twinkling of an eye, and then 'twill be too late to put your
purposes and resolutions in execution: And is it not pity that good executions
should not succeed good resolutions? We read in the Gospel, according to Saint
Luke, Chap. 12. verse. 17, 18. of a certain rich man, who wanted room to lay up
his treasure in; but remember what was said unto him, verse. 20. Fool, this
night thy soul shall be required of thee, then whose shall those things be
which thou have provided; and in the same Gospel, Luke the 16. we read of
another rich man, who in his lifetime had his good things, wherewith he might
have done a great deal of good, but he neglected the opportunities of life, and
therefore is now tormented in hell.

2 Suppose you should be long-lived, you may then survive, outlive your
earthly treasures. Though you would stay with them, yet they may not stay with
you: though your end be not at hand, yet theirs may: this was Jobs case; In the
morning he was the richest man in all the East, in the evening one of the
poorest, stripped of all his earthly riches. Now had his conscience exhibited
a bill of Endictment against him to this effect. The time was Job, when thou
had worldly goods, but thou did no good with rhy goods: Oh! how would such
a charge have cut him to the heart? but his conscience spoke other language
unto him, viz. whilst thou had earthly treasures thou wast a father to the
fatherless, feet to the lame, and eyes to the blind. Thou did not eat thy
morsels alone, thou did not see any perish for want of clothing, or any
poor without covering, but they were warmed with the fleece of thy sheep. And
this was no small comfort unto him, nor will it be unto you, if God should turn
his hand upon you (as he did upon Job) and strip you of your earthly treasures.

3 Delays will argue infidelity, why will ye not lay out some part of your
earthly treasures in your lifetime? Is it not because you are afraid your
selves may want before ye die? This was Ananias his sin and ruin, why did he
keep back a part of the price which he had received for lands that he had sold,
but because he distrusted the Providence of God, and feared, lest he himself
should want also? has not the Lord himself undertaken the re-paiment of what
you give unto the poor? Prove. 19.17. He that has pity upon the poor lends
unto the Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay him again. Can you
have a better debtor, a better pai-master? Dare you repose trust and confidence
in your uncertain riches, and not in the living God? Has not he said, that by
devising liberal things the liberal man shall stand? Ah, check and cry shame
upon your unbelief.

4 By protracting, delaying your purposes you may lose them; in sinful motions
delaie oftentimes proves beneficial; the execution of them is thereby
prevented; but in good motions delaie proves dangerous and prejudicial: It is
good striking whilst the Iron is hot, our hearts are fickle and unconstant, Oh
how many a good resolution vanishes like the morning dew for want of speedy
execution. Something you are resolved to do, but happily not till you are old
and stricken in years. (Alas Sirs) covetousness is one of the proper lusts of
old age, as voluptuousness is of youth: old men are commonly the most
covetous, when all other sins wax old; every soul of us has cause to fear,
that this sin will wax young in us. Is it safe then to delaie works of charity
till old age?

5 Although you should not lose your purposes, yet by a sinful neglect of
opportunities and advantages for the doing of good in your lifetime, you will
incur that known censure, Such a man's will at his death was good, but his deeds
while he lived stark naught; it is well that he is gone, for now his goods do
some good; had he lived longer they would have done none; he was a mere
hoarder, not a dispencer. Athanasius calls alms willed by dying men (...),
dead sacrifices; mistake me not, I do not condemn Funeral-beneficence simply,
but I must needs commend and prefer Vital before it. I would not have your
charity and compassion die with you. It is not praise-worthie, (shall I speak
plainly?) It is a shame that any rich Citizen should die without some
Testamentarie benevolence unto these Hospitals. But yet I am an humble suitor
unto you, that you would not put off all until death, but make your own hands
your executors, and your own eyes your overseers, as to some part of your
earthly treasures. For,

6 The present Revenues and certain In-comes of these Hospitals come short of
what is dispended for the relief of such as are admitted into them. And
therefore now you that are great men and good men, may be like good trees
bringing forth good fruit in due season, you may do a good work in a good time,
you know the old rule, Bis dat qui aito dat. I would not have you think that
you shall be crowned in heaven for the merit or worth of your beneficence and
liberality on earth, whether Vital or Funeral: when you have done all, you must
say with Bernard, Meritum meum miseratio Domini, my merit is the Lords mereie,
I am an an unprofitable servant, yet if the Lord give you open hearts and open
hands to relieve the needy, he will crown his own gifts and graces in you
(though not your merits) with glory.

Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

