THE PETITION OF THE JEWS For the Repealing of the Act of Parliament for their
banishment out of ENGLAND.

Presented to his Excellency and the general Council of Officers on Friday
Jan. 5. 1648.

With their favorable acceptance thereof.

Also a Petition of diverse Commanmanders, prisoners in the Kings Bench, for the
releasing of all prisoners for Debt, according to the Custom of other
Countries.

London, Printed for George Roberts, 1649.

To the Right Honorable, THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, (His Excellency) ENGLANES
GENERAL, AND The Honorable Council of War, Conveaned for Gods Glory,
Izraells Freedom, Peace, and Safety, The humble Petition of Johanna
Cartenright, Widow, and Ebenezer Cartwright her Son, freeborn of England, and
now Inhabitants of the City of Amsterdam.
Humbly Shows,
THat your Petitioners being conversant in that City, with and amongst some of
Izraells race, called Jews, and growing sensible of their heavy outcries and
clamours against the intolerable cruelty of this our English Nation, exercised
against them by that (and other) inhumane exceeding great Massacre of them, in
the Reign of RICHARD the second, King of this Land, and their banishment ever
since, with the penalty of death to be inflicted upon any of their return into
this Land, that by discourse with them, and serious perusal of the Prophets,
both they and we find, that the time of hercall draws nigh; whereby they
together with us, shall come to know the Emanuell, the Lord of life, light, and
glory; even as we are now known of him, And that this Nation of ENGLAND, with
the Inhabitants of the Nether-lands, shall be the first and readiest to
transport IZRAELLS Sons and Daughters in their Ships to the Land promised to
their Forefathers, ABRAHAM, ISAAC, and JACOB, for an everlasting Inheritance.

For the glorious manifestation whereof, and pyous means thereunto, your
Petitioners humbly pray that the inhumane cruel Statute of banishment made
against them, may be repealed, and they under the Christian banner of charity,
and brotherly love, may again be received and permitted to trade and dwell
amongst you in this Land, as now they do in the Nether-lands.

By which act of mercy, your Petitioners are assured of the wrath of God, will
be much appeased toward you, for their innocent blood shed, and they thereby
daily enlightened in the saving knowledge of him, for whom they look daily and
expect as their King of eternal glory, and both their and our Lord God of
salvation (Christ Jesus.) For the glorious accomplishing whereof, your
Petitioners do, and shall ever address themselves to the true Peace, and pray;
etc.

This Petition was presented to the general Council of the Officers of the
Army, under the Command of his Excelleney, Thomas Lord Fairfax, at White Hall
on Ian. 5. And favorably received with a promise to take it into speedy
consideration, when the present more public affairs are dispatched.

To his Excellency, Thomas Lord Fairfax, and his General Council of Officers.
The most humble Petition of diverse Commanders, Prisoners in the Kings Bench,
whose names are hereunto subscribed in the behalf of themselves, and all other
their enslaved Brethren, imprisoned for Debt.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners with all seriousness revolving the admirable mercy of
God, vouchsafed to this Nation in preserving and carrying on your Excellency
and Pyous Army through the many dangers and difficulties (and according to the
desires of your Petitioners and all good men) in Crowning you with Victory, and
putting this long wished for opportunity into your hands, of procuring a speedy
administration of Justice for the impartial punishment of all offenders, to
the relief and comfort of the oppressed; your Petitioners are hereby imbouldned
and by your Proposalls and late Declarations encouraged to make their humble
addresses to your Excellency, and the General Council of the Army.

That your Petitioners with all humbleness and earnestness beseech your
Excellency, who is the pattern and Patron of Soldiers, first to consider their
sad condition (being imprisoned contrary to the Law of God, the fundamental
Laws of this Kingdone, and the practice of all States) and peruse their
Petition hereunto annexed, containing their grievances and desires, and as
soon as your weighty affairs will permit to take such order (either by
presenting the same, or otherwise for your Petioners just relief and liberty
without prison Fees, as to your Excellency and the General Counsels grave
wisdom shall seem expedient, whereby they may be enabled to attend your
Excellencies Command in the Army or else where.

And further your Petitioners hmubly pray, that you would please with all
convenience, mature some course for the releasing of all Prisoners for debt,
espetially the well affected, and in the mean times according to your practice
of other Countries, cause their Creditors to maintain them according to their
qualities, that noe more perish through want, as very many have done already,
whose innocent blood cries for vengance to the Almighty, and doubtless is not
the least cause of our present colamities, and of Gods judgments upon us.

And as in duty bound, your Petitioners shall pray etc.
FINIS.

