Helps for Discovery of the Truth In Point of TOLERATION: BEING The judgment
of that eminent Scholar Tho. Cartwright, sometimes Divinity-Professor in the
University of Cambridge in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of happy memory, and
then a famous Nonconformist, for which through the tyranny of the Bishops he
suffered Exile. Wherein the Power and Duty of the Magistrate in relation to
matters of Religion is discussed; as also whether the Judicial Laws given by
Moses to the Jews are abrogate by the coming of Christ. More particularly in
relation to some sins, viz. Blasphemy, Adultery, etc. Occasionally handled in
a Controversy between the said public Professor T. C. and Doctor Whitgift.
Here also by the way is laid down his judgment in the case of Divorce, and
that the party innocent may marry again.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Banks, at the sign of the Seal in Westminster
Hall. 1648.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
FOr understanding this piece of Mr. Cartwrights, thou art to consider, that it
is an extract out of a book of his written for a reply to the then Bishop of
Canterbury Dr. Whitgift. And finding that he unfolds many truths for the
settling of men's judgments in these times, as concerning the force of the
Judicial Laws of Moses given to the Jews, concerning the punishment of
blasphemy, adultery, etc. it was judged likely to prove useful to the Church
of Christ if it were made more public, the old Book being near worn out of
print.

The extent and continuance of the Law Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, with
their several uses, not being well considered, has been the cause that many
errors of late times have been pleaded for. Something of the Law was abrogated
by the coming of Christ: this being hinted and taken hold of by the ignorant
and unstable, they understand it of the abrogation of all, both Ceremonial,
Judicial and Moral, and so open a gap to licentiousness. Thus by confounding
what should be distinguished, many absurdities have their rise. There is
something Moral among the Iudicialls, which will stand against all opposition.
There is somewhat in the Moral which is abrogate to the believer, as the curse,
the condemning power, the irritating nature, etc. Qui been distinguit, been
docet. I leave the clearing of some of these things to this ensuing extract:
The Lord grant us discerning spirits, together with hearts to walk in the light
of his truth, when we discern it.

Helps for discovery of the Truth, in point of Toleration.
MY former Assertion was, That we have a word of God for our direction in all
things which we have to do. My reason illustrating this truth was this, That
otherwise our estate should be worse then the state of the Jews, who had
direction (as is on all hands confessed) out of the Law, even for the least
things; And whereat it is the virtue of a good Law, to leave as little
undetermined, and without the compass of the Law, as can be, my adversary D.
W. imagining that we have no word for diverse things, wherein the Jews had
particular direction, supposes a greater perfection ^n the Law given to the
Jews, then in that which is left to us.

That this is a principal virtue of the Law, may be seen and evidenced thus;
First, because conscience that is well ^^nstructed and touched with the fear
of God, will seek direction from the light of Gods word, even in the smallest
actions. Secondly, common reason will urge it, the Masters whereof give this
Rule, (...), etc. Arist. ad Theod. viz. It greatly behooves those Laws which
are well made, as much as can be to determine of all things, and to leave as
few things as may be to the discretion of the Judge.

I added, That the new Testament is a noble addition to the old, that it makes
the old more manifest, and brings greater light; which expression (though D.
W. wrangleth withal) is no other then Mr. Calvin uses on 2 Timothy 3. where he
calls the Gospel an addition to the Law: Let us therefore now consider, whether
in the matter of the Judicial Law, that which I have set down be strange and
dangerous, as Dr. W. surmiseth.

I do not affirm, that the Magistrate is simply bound to the Judicial Law of
Moses; but that he is bound to the Equity, which I also call the substance and
marrow of them, in regard of which equity, I affirm that,
There are certain Laws among the judicialls, which cannot be changed.

Hereof I gave example in the Laws which command, that a stubborn Idolater,
Blasphemer, Murderer, Incestuous person, and such like should be put to death.

For the first point, That the equity of the judicialls does remain, and
therefore ought to be a rule to direct all Laws by: Calv. Instit. l. 4 c. 20.
Sect. 15.
To let pass the authority of Mr Calvin, Mr Beza, and other writers of our
time, who have written with any judgment of this matter, Beza de comburendis
Haereticis.
(who do in plain words affirm, that there is a perpetual equity in them, and
that our Laws, though they differ in form, yet ought to retain the reason or
ground of them) I say to let that pass, I assert, That all these Laws, Moral,
Ceremonial, and Judicial, being the Laws of God, and by his revealed will
established, must so far forth remain, as it appears not by his will that
they are revoked.

To boult out therefore this truth, seeing the altering or revoking of any Law
must be by our Saviors coming only, Let us inquire what those Laws are which
he put an end unto.

This thing may be considered in that division which S. Paul uses, Ephesians. 2.
where he says that our Savior Christ came to make peace, first between God
and men, and then between men and men; that is to say between the Jews and
Gentiles. 1. The Ceremonial Law therefore being a Law of enmity (which as a
wall held out the Gentiles from joining themselves unto the Jews) was
necessary, among other causes, in this respect to be taken away. Secondly, the
curse of the Law, for the breach of any of the Laws of God, either pertaining
to the Jews in times past, or unto us now (being that which makes the wall
between the Lord and us) was, for our reconciliation with his Majesty,
necessarily to be removed: whereupon it follows, First, That the Moral Law
(as that which hinders not our reconciliation with God, nor our good
agreement with men) is in as full strength as ever it was before the coming of
our Savior Christ: For the curse of the Law besides that, it is in regard of
the Elect, rather fulfilled and executed in the person of our Savior Christ,
then abrogated. 2. Besides that also, it has a necessary use as yet toward
the Elect, not only to drive them to the faith which is in Christ Jesus, but
also to keep under the remnants of rebellion, even of them which have already
believed. And 3. Besides that, the force thereof is daily, and shall be for
ever executed upon the wicked. 4. Besides all this, seeing this curse was
annexed not only to the breach of the Moral Law, but also of the Ceremonial
and Judicial, there is no just cause, why the Moral Law should be said to be
abrogated.

Secondly it follows hereupon, That those Judicial Laws of Moses, which are
merely Politck, and without all mixture of Ceremonies, must remain, as those
which hinder not the Atonement of Jews and Gentiles with God, or of one of
them with another. Besides this, It being manifest, that our Savior Christ
came not to dissolve any good Government of Commonwealth, he can least of all
be thought to come to destroy that which himself had established.

Of this Point Dr. W. has two contrary sentences, one of Musculus, pa. 97.
which says that the Judicial Law is abrogate, the other of Beza, which is,
That the Judicial Law being given to the Jews, is not yet abrogate, so that
if they had any estate of Commonwealth in the Land of Canaan, they should be
constrained to use that form of Government, which was given to them by Moses.

Now albeit those Laws given unto the Jews for that Land, do not bind the
Gentiles in other Lands, for so much as the diversity of the dispositions of the
people, and state of that Country, gave occasion of some Laws there, which
would not have been in other places, yet forasmuch as there is in those Laws a
constant and everlasting Equity whereupon they were grounded, 2. And the same
perfecter and further from error then the forge of man's reason (which is even
in this behalf shrewdly wounded,) is able to devise; It follows, that even
in making Politic Laws for the Commonwealth, Christian Magistrates ought to
propound unto themselves those Laws, and in light of their Equity by a just
proportion of circumstances, of person, place, etc. to frame them.

Now to prove this truth, That the equity of the Judicial Law remains, (not
as a counsel which men may follow if
they list, and leave at their pleasure, but) as a Law whereto they be bound, 1.
Argument.
I shall prove by an Argument taken from that of the Apostle in 1 Cor 9. where
after he had alleged diverse similitudes, fetched from the common use of men, to
prove that a Minister of the Gospel ought to be maintained upon the Churches
charge; Page 98.
least it might be objected that these were but humane reasons, he cites one
of the Judicial Laws, as the eternal Law of God, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. Thou shall not
muzzell the mouth etc. Where it is manifest, that he doubts not to bind the
Conscience of the Corinths unto the equity of that Law which was Judicial, and
so urges it ver. 10.

Likewise of the finding of the Priests in the service of the Altar, commanded
in the Law, he concludes, That those which preach the Gospel should live of
it. And this maintenance of the Priest, albeit in the manner of the provision
it was merely Ceremonial, yet as it was a reward of their service, due by men
(as the punishments also, if they had failed in their duties,) was mere
Judicial. Whereupon it follows, that in those Judicialls, to all the
circumstances whereof we are not bound, we are yet bound to the Equity of them.

It remains to show, that there are certain Judicial Laws which cannot be
changed, as that a Blasphemer, contemptuous and stubborn Idolater, etc. ought
to be put to death. They which would have this left at liberty, have nothing to
allege to color their looseness, but the coming of Christ and his passion:
but they do not see how this their arguing faultreth diverse ways. For,

1. It is a childish error to think, that our Savior Christ came to exempt men
from corporal death, which the Law casts upon evil doers, when as he came
not to deliver from death, which is the parting of the body from the soul, but
from that which is the separation both of body and soul from the gracious
presence of the Lord. And if it were so, that our Savior Christ had born in
his Body this civil punishment of public offenders, it must thereupon follow,
not that it is in the liberty of the Magistrate to put them to death, but that
he must, will he, nill he, if they repent, keep them alive. For if our Savior
has answered that justice of God in his Law, whereby he has commanded that
such malefactors should be put to death, Page 99.
it should be great injustice to require that again in the life of the offender.

2. Again, this opinion is injurious to the death of Christ; for if he were
for this cause made manifest in the slesh, that he might destroy sin, which is
the work of the Devil, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. this imagination of a liberty left to the
Magistrate, whether he will put them to death or not, does make Christ build
again that kingdom of sin which he has destroyed: For, when both in common
reason, and by the manifest word of God, the Lord gives this blessing unto the
punishment of such grievous offenders by death, Deuteronomy. 19.
that others (not only which see, but also) which hear of them, have the
bridle of fear put upon them, whereby they are withheld from the like
crimes, it must needs follow, that whosoever makes our Savior Christ author
of this looseness, in not punishing such offenders, makes him forthwith to
loose the bridle whereby others are stayed from throwing themselves down the
hill of wickedness which was before committed: And what is, if this be not, to
make our Savior Christ a troubler of commonwealths?

Moreover, if our Savior Christ by his coming loosed these civil punishments,
and purchased this grace of his Father for blasphemers, etc. that if they could
find favor in the eyes of the Magistrate, they might escape the hands of
death, 2 Argument, to prove the Judicial Law still in force.
which the Law of God adjudgeth them unto: How comes it to pass, that the
Apostles, to whom the Lord committed the publishing of all that pardon which he
obtained for us, did never make mention of the slaking of these punishments? If
our Savior Christ had obtained this liberty, it was worthy the preaching; and
therefore unless D. W. can show something out of the writings of the Apostles,
Ioe.
to warrant this Sanctuary, which he would so feign build to the support of
blasphemers, murderers, etc. it follows, that the Apostles, by his saying,
have not answered the trust committed unto them; But if all godly minds do
abhor these absurdities, there is no cause why they should like of this
corruption of the Doctor, whereupon all these depend. Nay in that the Apostle
puts a sword in the hand of the Magistrate, and in the use of it makes him
a Minister and servant of the vengeance and justice of the Lord against sin:
Romans 13.
He strikes through this opinion, which imagines that our Savior Christ came
to hang the sword of the Lords justice upon the pleasure and will of man. For
the Magistrate being the Lords Officer, as the Sheriff is the Magistrates: It
is no more in his choice to withold the Sword which the Lord has put in his
hand to draw, then in the power of the Sheriff, to stay the execution of that
judgment, which the Magistrate himself has lawfully commanded,

Now seeing there is a sword in the Magistrates hand, by the doctrine of the
Apostles, and that also which the Magistrate must of duty draw; I would gladly
know where that necessity of drawing this sword can be found, if it be not in
these crimes of Blasphemy, etc. which I have set down?

And if he say that Paul, by the sword understands all manner of civil
punishments, as well by the purse, as by other bodily chastisements which spare
the life; I grant it, but by an usual manner of speech which is figurative,
and notes the whole by the part, he rather chose to utter those punishments by
the Sword, then either by the whip or purse: whereby he did not only not
exclude this necessity of punishing malefactors with death, but laid rather a
straiter bond upon the Magistrate to execute those which commit things worthy
of death.

Hitherto generally of putting those to death, which commit things against the
Laws remaining still in force, as they were in times past established by the
blood of the Transgressors: Now I will come to the particular crimes set down,
and first for the crime of Adultery.

It is to be considered that the crime of Adultery is a breach of the holy and
ancient, both institution and solemn Covenant of the Lord, then that it is an
injury done unto the innocent party in the most precious possession that can
be, page 101.
in things pertaining to this present life, joined with dishonor cast not only
upon the person, but upon all his Children, and in a manner on all those that
belong unto him. Thirdly that this fire does not only wast the family where it
is, but makes a breach into the Commonwealth, whilst the right of
inheritance, either of Lands or Offices is oftentimes thus translated from the
true Inheritors, while the children which are so begotten, having often times
less care and cost bestowed on them in their education, become hurtful
Members of the Commonwalth; whereby all may clearly see the perpetual equity
of the Law of God in the revengement of this sin by death.

And when the Lord adds this for a reason of putting the Adulterer to death,
Lev. 19.
that the evil may be taken out of Israel, unto the heap of discommodities
before rehearsed for fault of executing this Judgment of death, he threatens
the whole Commonwealth with mischief to fall upon it; and the equity of this
punishment by death has so lightsome colors upon it, that it has upholden it
self against the ignorance and injustice of all which have not willingly put
out that sparkle which stands in the discretion of honesty; For even before
this candle light of the Law of God was set up, Job. 31. 11.
not only the godly (as Job) which were in some part reformed of the general
blindness, but even those that were not of the Church of God, as Abimelech the
King of Gerar, and the very Canaanite (as long as there was any step of equity
among them) did see that the filth of this sin was such, Genesis 26. 11.
as ought to be washed away with the blood of the offenders. For whereas Isaac
feared the assault, both of his life and of the chastity of Rebecka, Genesis 38.
24.
the King ordained that whosoever either laid violent hands on him, or had to
do with his wife, should die; and in that Judah called for Thamar to be led
forth to death in the Land of Canaan, where himself was but a private man, for
that she being made sure unto an husband, played the Harlot: he gave to
understand, that the Canaanites, who had even then filled a good part of that
measure of sin unto the brinke, whereof they came afterward did notwithstanding
pursue Adulterers unto death.

And when the Lord did afterward give testimony to this punishment by the
express words of his Law, it is manifest, that the Law which God has written
in the table of the hearts of all men, pronounces the sentence of death
against Adulterers: So that unless men will like Giants fight against the
light of nature, or say, that our Savior Christ came to abolish that which in
all times and with all Nations (not altogether spoiled of the discretion of
honesty and dishonesty) was observed, it follows, that the punishment of
Adultery by death, and consequently much more the punishment of incestuous
meetings by death, stands in as full force now as ever it did before the
coming of our Savior Christ.

The exceptions against this Doctrine are of no value, for if this be the truth
of God there can be no prerogative against it, unless he can show some higher
Court then heaven, and some chief Justice above the Lord.

It is not denied, but the punishments by death whereby men have established
Laws which themselves have for their better commodity devised, may be either
mitigated or taken away by those to whom it appertained; neither is the
Magistrate by any thing which I have set down bound to mitigate the punishment
of Thieves. For, their punishment may grow by the circumstance of place, as in
Scithia where all things lying open to the spoil, had need to be locked up by
the straighter punishment, and sometimes by the disposition of the people
lighter handed then others, as if one had to do with the Lacedaemonians, or some
Nation in whom that sin had taken deeper root. And I will not deny, but even
these crimes of Murder and Adultery may vary by diverse circumstances, and
therefore the Magistrate may according to the quantity of the fault appoint the
manner of death sharper or milder. But that there is any place, time, or other
circumstance, which can lessen these crimes that they should not be worthy of
death, upon the reasons before alleged, I utterly deny.

An objection answered.
It may be objected, that the Law of our Savior Christ touching divorcement for
Adultery, Mat. 5. 32. had been to no purpose, if the Adulterer ought of
necessity to be put to death.

1. Answer.
First, he that urges this may be justly charged with a mistake in bringing in
our Savior Christ there as a maker of Laws under the Gospel, whereas he made
none in those places, but expounded the Law of God, which he had made from the
beginning; the other refusalls made by the Jews of their wives, were never any
Laws but Permissions only: and therefore in their abolishment there was no Law
of God abrogated.

Secondly, 2. Answer.
it was necessary to use that exposition, notwithstanding that the punishment
of the Law by death remained; Joh. 18. 31.
for besides that the Jews being under the Government of the Romans had those
civil punishments by death suspended upon the pleasure of their Officers, who
were often corrupted: our Savior Christ foreseeing all things did foresee
what looseness would follow in this behalf, and therefore as the office of a
good Teacher required, he instructed the conscience, and taught that albeit the
Magistrate fail in the execution of the Law, yet that the former yoke being
broken, men were at their liberty to enter into a new contract of Marriage with
other; whereby he met with the corrupt opinion of those which dream that the
knot of Marriage is not cut asunder by Adultery during the life of the parties
married.

Now for the opinion of Musculus before quoted, at pa. 3. although his manner
of speech (in saying that all Moses is abrogated) be hard, yet it will appear
that D. W. has wrested this learned man's words from his meaning, and that he
is but a snatcher at syllables; for the meaning of that learned man Musculus
was, that these Laws are abrogate, as given by Moss, and do notwithstanding
remain as they contain a perpetual equity; and that this is his meaning may
be proved by comparing him with himself, for in the same title of Laws he
writes thus, There are (says he) that think that Christ did abrogate the
punishment prescribed by the Law against Adulterers, when he says, Neither do
I condemn thee, go and sin no more; these be gay fellows, they think not
of this, that our Savior Christ came into the world, not to judge or punish,
but to save sinners: and yet in the mean season not to take away the
punishments of the Law, given of God his Father by Moses; whereupon he said not
simply, thon thoughtest not to be condemned, etc. and so shows, that if she
had been condemned according to the sentence of the Law, that the Lord would
not have spoke against it. This our Saviors refusal to condemn this woman
taken in Adultery, does no more cease the punishment due to Adultery, Joh. 8.
then his refusing to judge in the division of an inheritance when he was
requested, does countenance Anabaptisticall community, or does prove, that
Inheritances should not be divided, in both these he refuses to meddle, as
impertinent to that spiritual work he intended] Calvin in his Comment on John,
calls it Popish divinity, that the sentence of our Savior Christ, Jo. 8.
should bring any favor to Adulterers, page 107.
as touching the civil punishment.

As for Mr. Beza, it is known that he proves that Heretics ought by the Law
of God to be put to death, See also Bezae confessio Christianae fidei, ca. 5.
de Ecclesia sect. 44.
whereby it appears that he believes those Judicialls which give sentence of
death against the crimes here set down to be still in as full force as ever
they were. Unto which I could add Peter Martyr, who has a long dispute of the
necessary observation of this Law against Adulterers, and as I have showed
there is none of these crimes but even the Law of nature will teach us, that
they ought to receive the reward af death. Dr. VV.


The Dr. proceeds, and seeks to make one difference between the Law and Gospel,
to ly in relation to the severity of the Law and lenity of the Gospel, in
respect of temporal punishment.

The Answer. T. C.
I say that in this very point, a great part of the error of the Manichees
does consist, for they were led to condemn the Justice of God under the old
Testament, because of the outward punishments which were exercised partly by
the hand of God by judgments from Heaven, and partly by the Ministry of men
at the commandment of the Law; therefore the favor of Manichism is still hot
as ever it was.

But since I am entered into the mention of this, the Truth is, that even in
these outward punishments, the dispensaton of God under the Law, is diverse from
that under the Gospel; For under the Paedagogy of the Law, as he crowned the
obedience of it for the most part with greater abundance of outward blessings,
then he does the obedience of his Saints under the Gospel: so did he with more
terrible, more often, and more manifest judgments, revenge the breach of it in
that time, then he does now. And herein indeed is the difference which the Dr.
is groping after but cannot hit on it; But that this should bring any diversity
in the set and ordinary punishments prescribed by the Law, I for my part cannot
understand. The contrary rather I can gather; for even as although the Lord
does not now by outward blessings give so plentiful testimony to the obedience
of the Gospel, as then of the Law: yet the Magistrate ought to be as diligent
to procure the good of the Church as ever he was in the time of the Law: Even
so although the Lord by bodily punishments does not so severely revenge as he
did then, yet the Magistrate may not remit any thing therefore of that severity
which he was wont to use. Nay more, even as the Magistrate ought so much the
more carefully to procure the outward welfare of the Church now, as the Lord
withdraws his hand that way, more now then he did then, even so ought he to
keep by so much an harder hand over the punishment of sin now, then he did
then, as the Lord more rarely thundereth by his judgments from Heaven, now,
then he did in time of the Law.

And sruely, if ever there had been any time wherein the Magistrates sword
might have rested and rusted in the sheath, the time of the Law of all had been
most fittest: when the Lord did so visibly sit in judgment, and himself in
proper person hold the Assize.

The causes of this diversity between the Law and Gospel may be seen in those
learned men mentioned, which handle the Point.

It is enough for me, so to help the Dr. out, with what he traveled with,
that I have showed, that what is by me here laid down is nothing hindered, but
greatly helped by this difference which he brings between the Law, and the
Gospel.

Ob.
Next, the Dr. finds fault with my interpretation of that place of Zachary,
concerning putting to death him that prophesied falsely, zach. 12.
his reason is, Because (forsooth) by that means the Parents should have power
of death upon their Children; Reas.
therefore (says the Dr.) there must be some other sense sought out, then that
which the words do purport.

The answer of T. C.
Whereunto I answer, That Moses showing what ought to be done against those
false Teachers which go about secretly to withdraw from the true worship of
God, says, Deu. 13. 6, 9. that though it be his Brother, his Son, his
Daughter, or his Wife, he shall not spare but kill them: tell me now I pray
you, does not Moses mean there truly, and as his words sound, that the false
Teacher shall die? If you cannot deny it, then you see that your reason which
you here assign is nothing worth, for there also it is commanded to the Father
to kill his Son.

But if you list to learn, Page 112.
you may perceive that by these words understood simply, there is no power
given to one private man to kill another, nor for the parent (as a private man)
to kill his children: but this manner of speech is grounded upon the Law of
God, Deuteronomy. 17. 7. whereby it was provided, that the witness which had accused
should throw the first stone against the convicted person; forasmuch therefore,
as both Moses and Zachary after Moses, will have the Father accuser of his own
Child, if the knowledge of his inticement to Idolatry remain with him alone,
therefore also they ascribe the killing of the guilty person unto them, as a
thing belonging to the duty of the Accuser.

Oh! but your words seem to give suspicion of a difference between the Jews
and us, what is that? why that Christian Parents should rather put their
children to death, then to be with-drawne by them: so that the Jews have an
absolute Commandment to put them to death, but the Christians have it under
condition, if they cannot otherwise keep still the true Worship of God.

But where and in what shop is this difference quoined? For how shall they be
sure they shall not be with-drawne by him, unless they procure him to be put
to death?

And although they were out of the peril of being withdrawn, how are others
provided for, whom he may corrupt? And if it were possible that poison which he
has, could not hurt any other, where is the revenge of Gods glory which has
been dishonored by such false teaching? and in the maintenance whereof the
zeal of Gods children as well under the Gospel as under the Law does consist?

I conclude therefore that place of Zachary (against your fond distinction)
that the same severity of punishment which was used against false Prophets
then, ought to be used now under the Gospel against false Teachers, comparing
one person and circumstance with another. As he which has fallen from God, and
gone about to draw others away, to be handled according to the Law prescribed
in that 13. of Deuteronomy. If this be extreme, I am content to be so counted with the
holy Ghost. And though in some cases of Idolatry, upon repentance life is
given, yet in this case and some other expressed in the Law, as of open and
horrible blasphemy of the Name of God; I deny that upon repentance there ought
to follow any pardon of death, which the Judicial Law does require.

Besides, Page 108.
It is an Anabaptisticall tenent to avoid all punishment of sin whatsoever, to
maintain that, For whatever offense a man commit, if he show tokens of
repentance, he may be delivered from bodily punishment: For what Murderer,
what Traitor, etc. which though he be never so unrepentant and obstinate in his
sin, hearing that upon repentance there is a way to escape death, will not
enforce himself to show all tokens of repentance?

Let this truth therefore be further enforced by this Argument. Arg.
Forasmuch as I have showed out of the new Testament that he who kills a man,
and takes away his corporal life ought to die, it follows much more, that
he which takes away the life of the soul should die: and if it be meet to
maintain the life of man by the punishment of death, Page 117.
how should the honor of God, which is more precious then all men's lives, be
with smaller punishment established?

Therefore to close up this question, I will add this; That the Magistrates
which punish Murderers and Thiefes, and Treasons, with other transgressors of
the second Table severely, and are loose in punishing the breaches of the first
Table, begin at the wrong end, and do all one with those, who to dry up many
rivers continually fed by one fountain, begin at the channells where it
divides and parts it self into many arms: which as it is an endless
labor, so is this also which they go about; Arg.
for whereas S. Paul teaches Romans 1. that God for revenge of the dishonor of
his Name, gives men over to wicked minds, to the committing all kind of
silthinesse, and of all kind of sins against the second Table, be they never so
horrible; and so makes the breach of the first Table the cause of the breach
of the second: It cannot be (let the Magistrate lay as good watch as he can,
and aggravate punishments as much as he can,) I say it cannot be but where
either the first table is broken, or the breach not duly revenged, but swarms
of Treasons, Thefts, Murders, Adulteries, Perjuries and such like, must needs
break out in those Governments.

And therefore as the short and easy way to dry up the Channells and Rivers is
to stop up the head and fountain of all, so the only remedy of purging the
Commonwealth of these mischiefs, is to bend the force of sharp and severe
punishments especially against Idolaters, Blasphemers, Contemners of true
Religion, and of the Service of God.

And therefore I conclude, page 118.
that those which would have the severity of the Law against Idolaters, etc.
abated, do at unawares not only thereby utter the small price which they set
either of Gods glory, or of the salvation of their Brethren, but withal
declare themselves enemies to Commonwealths, and of all both civil and godly
honesty of life.

FINIS.

