AN USEFUL TRACTATE TO Further Christians of these dangerous and backsliding
times, in the Practice of the most needful Duty of PRAYER.

Wherein are discovered the nature, necessity and success of FERVENT PRAYER:
Many Objections answered, several Practical Cases of Conscience resolved; and
all briefly applied from this Text, viz.

James 5.16. The effectual fervent-prayer of a righteous man avails much.
Being the substance of several Sermons Preached in the Town of Columpton in
Devon.

By William Crompton M. A. Minister of that part of Christ's Church there.

John 16.23. And in that day ye shall ask me nothing: Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, he will give it you.

Coloss. 4.2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving.

London, Printed by J. H. for Philemon Stephens, at the Gilded Lion in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

ALthough there be many excellent Treatises already printed concerning Prayer,
yet this ensuing Discourse has a peculiar excellency in it, for which it
deserves to be bought, and diligently perused. And let me assure the Reader,
that he will neither repent of his money, nor his pains; and that it will be his
happiness to be transformed into the doctrine herein delivered.

Febr. 15. 1658. Imprimatur, EDM. CALAMY.

I Have perused this Treatise of Prayer, from the beginning to the end; and I
conceive it will be good service to God and his Church in the making of it
public; not so much because of the delight it will yield to those that read
it, as because I hope the holy directions which are herein given, will be of
much avail to teach men to pray so, that their prayers may be the Lords
delight, Pro. 15.18.

ARTH. JACKSON, Pastor of the Church of Faiths under Paul's.
Januar. 19. 1658.
TO THE WORSHIPFUL ROBERT COCKRAM Esquire, his honored Patron; with the rest
of my constant Auditors in the Town and Parish of Columpton, The dew of Heaven
be your portion, as the beauty and fatness of the earth is your habitation:
grace, mercy and peace be upon the heads and hearts of you all, that love
Christ Jesus in sincerity.
BEsides my readiness to gratify the desire of some among you, and
willingness to give some signal of my unfeigned love to you all, I have been
easily induced to publish the following Treatise, by these following
considerations, viz.

1. That I might the better confirm these things wherein you have been
instructed Luke 1.4.
: and not seem to labor altogether in vain, by bestowing so much time on that
which was to vanish in the hearing: a sad lot which waits on the best things
committed to leaking ears, as water poured into a vessel full of chinks.

2. That I might benefit those absent, yea if it may be, the people that are
yet unborn, Psalm. 102.18.

3. That I might leave a memorial with you, whenever it shall please the Lord
of the Vineyard, whose I am, to call me off from you, and so supply my absence,
though by death, speaking to you, when I cannot see you, yea living with you,
when dead and laid in the dust Sic Mathaeus cum praedicasset Hebraeis and ad
gentes ire pararet, utile judicavit si iis quos corpore deserebat, aliquid
memoriale doctri^ae suae relinqueret. Ut Bell lib. 4. de verb. Dei non scrip. c.
4. notavit ex Eusebio.
.

4. Because the matter thereof is weighty, and the design of no small
consequence: it is to guide you in your going to God, how to converse with him,
to manage well your performances; in which if you are defective, the whole will
be unprofitable. Religion is curious clock work, if but one wheel fail, so w^ll
all the rest: and as one string in a Lute dissonant and unharmonious to the
rest corrupts the whole Music. There is in every duty absolutely required
righteousness quoad substantiam operis, and no less quoad modum: the matter
and the manner are of equal concernment; the fly in the Apothecaries ointment,
and miscarriage in the Christians performance, render both unsavory. If you
are resolved to the duty (as I hope you are, and more, Practitioners in it,)
see here what it is will adorn your sacrifice; why it must be so accommodated,
and how it may be discerned: besides other things which occur for your
information therein.

There are, its true, other more excellent Discourses of this nature extant,
some of the same metal bearing a better stamp: but this I commend to you
soonest, because your own, it is honey that was gathered for your use, milk
drawn from your own breast, and therefore most proper for you; it is a sheaf
gathered out of your own field: a dish taken from your own table, if it be not
so well filled as might be expected, so circumstantiated as the subject does
deserve, you cannot despise it, except you blame your selves who chose the Cook.

Accept it then with the same love it is offered: read it with the same
diligence you heard it. If any among you may be informed, convinced, confirmed,
resolved, comforted, quickened, by any thing here presented, I shall account a
sufficient recompense, and rejoice that I have not run in vain.

And now, my Beloved, since I have opportunity, suffer me in the eye of the
world to exhort you. The publishing of these things was chiefly intended for
you, let it be your care, to be the principal Proficients by it; here is a
talent committed to your careful improvement, lay it not in a napkin, hide it
not in the earth. Now be doing; move (Planet-like) uniformly; Covet grace
rather then gifts, as to pray more fervently, though less notionally; yet
strive to come behind in no spiritual gift. Be men of excellent spirits: and
express sincerity by your fervent endeavors after communion with God and
fellowship with Christ. Like the Eagle, soar aloft, but out of love to Heaven.
Trade for grace, your trading on earth is slack, unprofitable. Let your
conversation be now, where you would have it to be shortly, when you shall be
here no more; be not slack in closet-services; do not you as others that
restrain prayer before God, but continue in prayer and watch in the same with
thanksgiving; O pray continually, and that not out of form, but feeling. Serve
God faithfully; keep close to Christ your Captain: Stand in your order, (O it is
a straggling age!) fly not from your colors! quit your selves like men, and men
of valor, soldiers in the spiritual war for Christ and his truth; manifest
your actual membership of the Militant Church, be mindeful of the yet suffering
body of Christ; join your mutual forces for her help: fervent prayer will do
it; be not weary nor wanting. But my-thinks I hear you reply, and say with
Samuel, God forbid that we should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray.

I will therefore dismiss you with prayer to God for you, in the words of old
Eli, Go in peace, and the Lord of Israel grant you your Petitions, which you
have, or shall so ask of him for your selves or others! To his Grace I leave
you, and remain

Your most affectionate Pastor, Devoted to the service of your faith. W.
Crompton.

Mr FORD'S PREFACE TOUCHING The ensuing Treatise, and the Subject thereof.
I Need not commend the Subject of this Discourse to any that confesses there
is a God. He that has but so much Divinity, as to acknowledge a Deity, must
needs grant Prayer to be a necessary duty. For the usefulness I appeal to all
that have found the benefit of it by experience: And they are such as count of
no enjoyment, but what is the fruit, and return of prayers. It may be truly
said of Prayer; It is not more our duty, then our privilege. It Is (as one
says) piae mentis cum Deo colloquium, The converse, and commerce that a
gracious soul on earth has with God in Heaven. A privilege indeed as great as
we are here capable of, that we may come to God as children to a father, and
speak to him, as a man speaks to his friend.

Now he that has but so much leisure, and patience as will give him leave to
peruse this short Discourse, will find many encouragements to press the
performance of this duty, and many helps to direct him in it. Its aim and scope
is nothing else but to teach us to pray. It meddles with no controversy, only
resoves a Case or two in order to practice; the design of it being only to
learn us how to reason the case, and plead our cause with God. In one word; It
shows nothing but the practice of Religion in one great and necessary part of
it. And if those who pretend most to godliness would fall closer to their work
in the practice, and think more of expressing the life, and power of it in
effectual-fervent-prayer, and the duties of personal relations, and particular
callings, I am sure they should find more sound peace and comfort, then now
they do in many frivolous controversies, and perverse disputings. For foolish
questions do but puff men up in pride, and self-conceitednesse: whereas
effectual-fervent-prayer, and practical godliness edify, and establish in
grace, render men approved to God, and amiable in the sight of all that have to
do with them. It Is very remarkable what the reverend Author observes in this
ensuing Treatise; That whilst we are quarrelling and striving one with another,
we can never wrestle, and strive with God, as we ought to do, in Prayer. And
then what marvel is it if iniquity do abound, and the love of many wax cold as
it does? But I shall Preface no more, Let it suffice, to say of this Treatise,
that it is short and sweet. Has in it plenty with much variety, and all
couched into a narrow compass, so as the Reader is in no danger of being
cloyed, as some guests are wont to be at a great Feast, where the sight of so
much as is served in, takes off their stomachs that they can eat little. Here
is enough, and no more of what is singularly useful for all that have but a
mind, and good will to pray. And in testimony hereof, I subscribe my self an
hearty well-willer to the publication of this Treatise, and the Readers due
improvement of it.

Tho. Ford.
Exceter December. 16. 1658.
Mr. SAUNDER'S PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
IT was the respect I had to the Reverend Author, and the content I took in
the perusal of this Tract (being therewith entrusted by him before it was
committed to the Press) rather then expectation to add reputation to it by
prefixing my name, that drew this Epistle from me. But if the matter treated of
meet with the better entertainment from any, by this means I shall count a
little time and pains well spent. As for the subject, it is such as needs not
(...) Letters of commendation, 2 Cor. 3.^
or any Panegyric to usher it in to an honest heart. Yet in our giddy-headed
times, it is its lot, with all other the sacred institutions of Christ, to have
its legitimatenesse made matter of dispute, yea, zealously impugned. We read of
Heretics, very ancient, called Euchitae, that held men must be ever praying,
Aug. de Haer l 1. De quibus etiam. Epiphan.
but who ever heard before men should never pray? Yes, (for there is no new
thing under the Sun) (...). Clem. Alex. strom. lib. 7.
Clemens Alexandrinus mentions an old Heresy, (...). That men should not pray
at all. God gives blessings unaskt, Prayer therefore is (...), superfluous. Our
unhappy times have given a resurrection to this monstrous conceit. I take thee,
Reader, to be a Christian; and if thou be so indeed, thou know, thou can
no more be without Prayer, then thou can be without thy food. It Is not so
much thy duty as thy privilege. Would thou please God? I know thou would.
The Prayer of the righteous is his delight, Prove. 15.8. It Is like honey drops,
Cant. 4.11. Sweet to his taste. Incense to his nostrils, Psalm 141.2. Dionis.
Carth. in Matthew.
Carthusian observes, that, of all other Christian services, Prayer only is
compared to incense. In it we strive with God; but he likes such striving. Haec
vis Deo grata est, says Tert. This force is grateful to God. Would thou
glorify God, and pay him the homage thou owe him? This is Census
subjectionis nostrae, our suit fine, or homage in which God has the glory of
all his Attributes returned him: Solater on Psa. 116. page 194.
his All Sufficiency, Omnipotency, Omniscience, Love, Mercy, Dominion, Truth.
Is Heaven shut against thee? This is Clavis Coeli, as Austin, The key of
Heaven: Not of the aerial only; it opens that, as Elias prayed for rain and it
came: yea, and an Heathen Emperor, M. Aurelius relates how that in the German
Expedition, Tert. ed s^^p. c. 4. and in apolog cap. 5. Justia. M^^. Apol. 2.
Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 5.
the Christian soldiers by their prayers made the clouds to yield down water
to his Host, ready to die for thirst. But it is Clavis Paradisi, the key of
Paradise too; by this key may thou get into Gods presence, and have what thou will of him. It Is Res omnipotentissima, Luthers devout Hyperbole, a kind of
omnipotent thing, which makes God himself to say, Sine me, Let me alone, Exodus
32.10. It does (with reverence be it spoken) strangely charm the Majesty of
Heaven. The word which is rendered Prayer, (...) ^^cantatio, I^cantam mum D^us
ips^ q^i nullis c^^^^ se v^^bus superar^ potest. P^^icani p^^^bus (...)
Hi^^^on. Epist.
Isa. 26.16. signifies a charm. Fear thou the Devils assaults? It Is
Flagellum Satanae (as Austin) a whip for Satan, and a bulwark for thee, that
is, (says Chrysostom.) (...). Not to be broken, not to be shaken. (...), as the same
Father, a strong weapon. It Is both off^nsive and defensive. Desire thou
sweetest communion with thy blessed Savior here on earth? This is Osculum
pacis, as an Ancient styles it, The kiss of peace, with which the soul kisseth
the lips of her beloved. It Is Sabbathum animae, as another calls it, the souls
sabbath. Would thou visit Canaan before hand, and get to Heaven once before
thou come to settle there? Prayer is scala Coeli, a Ladder for thee. It Is
Ascensus intellectus ad Deum. The ascent of the mind to God, Damascen's
definition. To be short, it is a Catholicon, good for every thing, and nothing
good without it. All things are sanctified by it, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Weems Christ.
Synag. S^ct. 3. Parag^. 5
All things upheld by it. The Jews have a saying, sine stationibus non
subsisteret mundus. The world would not endure without Standing. Gnammuda,
standing, is one of the seven names they give to Prayer; without this, the
world would not stand. This rich treasure, Reader, is here put into thine hand,
with direction how to use it. Here is not Novum, any thing new, but perhaps
Nove, good old truths in a new and delightful dress. (...). The Reverend
Author has, in this little piece, well mixed utile dulci, thou can not
m^sse desired content in reading it; nor can I choose but heartily commend it
to thy serious perusal. Read, and practice: but remember, write over thy closet
door what the Jews use to write about the doors of their Synagogues. (...) i.
e. They express it by this Abbr^viature (...) which is the first letter of
each word. Bux. o^s. de Abbr. Heb.
A Prayer without affection is like a body without a soul. Maintain inward
warmth of devotion in thine heart; he that does not, Loquitur, non precatur (as
says Salvian) he talks, he does not pray: if thou do, Genesis 32.28.
Thou shall be caled Israel, because, as a Prince, thou shall have power with
God, and with men, and thou shall prevail. That thou may is the hearty
desire of him, who is

Desirous of the prosperity of thy precious and immortal soul RICH. SAUNDERS.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
THe Introduction and opening of the Text. page 1 Two Doctrines from it, viz.
First, That when we have to do with God in prayer, it is our duty to make use
of fervency. Secondly, that righteous men's prayers are powerful and effectual.
5 The first point opened and proved. 6 Prayer described to be a fervent
expression of holy desires to God only, by Jesus Christ. 7 This description of
Prayer explained in the several branches of it, viz. 1. It is a fervent
expression] Wherein is enquired, First, What this fervency is? Answered in
three particulars. Secondly, When are men said to be fervent in prayer? p. 10.
Answered in seven things. Thirdly, Why men must be thus zealous? p. 19. Made
good by eight reasons following. 1. Not because God like man stands in need of
it. 2. Because the Lord loves an importunate suitor. 3. Because he that asks
any thing coldly, asks a denial. 4. The matter about which you are employed,
is weighty. 5. There are many and prodigious sins crying. 6. By this means we
declare at what rate we value Gods mercies. 7. Fervent-prayer is most
effectual. 8. There are other reasons why the Lord will have it so. First, So
much the more to astonish the Devil. Secondly, To give good example to the
Church. Thirdly, To bring the hear^ into a better temper. p. 26 The Doctrine
farther cleared by Scripture-Presidents. p. 27. Fourthly, How may a man keep
his heart i^ this height of heavenly fervor and tha^ constantly, for sometimes
it is so? Answered. 28 Use 1. To condemn the Roman society: and too many formal
Protestants. 33 A formal Christian described in five particulars. 1. He is
destitute of spiritual life and heat. 2. He says or repeats prayers often, but
without zeal. 3. He is taken up with self-seeking and variety of distracting
cares. 4. He is oppressed with corruption, and carried away with a violent
stream of wordly cares. 5. He is not in charity with his neighbor. Use 2. To
excite men to the duty of fervent prayer. p. 35 Directions for that purpose, in
three things. To which are annexed three serious motives. 38 One weighty
Objection answered, viz. These fervent expressions are not always successeful,
a time may come when a Moses and a Samuel may not be heard. 42 The second
branch of the description of Prayer, viz. Of holy desires] how to be
understood. They must be holy for Person, Principle, Matter and End. 43 First,
The Person must be holy: Farther explained by enquiring first, What an holy
heart is? Secondly, Why prayer must come from an holy heart? 46 Secondly, The
Principle must be holy. Under which head is discovered, First, Why Prayer must
come from a spiritual principle? Secondly, How Prayer coming from the Spirit
may be discerned? 49, 51 Thirdly, Desires must be holy for the Matter of them,
and that 1. In the ground. 2. In the matter, instanced in several particulars.
p. 53 Fourthly, Desires must be holy for the end. Where is discovered, 1. When
a man's end is holy? 2. Why it must be so? To which reasons are given, both
Philosophical and Theological. 56, 57 Use 1. For correction of those that pray,
but in a cold manner. ib. Marks of such indisposednesse to prayer. 60, 61 Use
2. For instruction in two things 1. All prayer will not serve the turn. 2.
Learn the art of praying. 62 The third branch of the d^scription of Prayer --
Unto God] 65 Prayer must be directed to God only. Reasons of it. 66 -- Only by
Jesus Christ.] ^8 Where is enquired, First, What it is to offer up prayers by
Christ? Secondly, Why it must be so? Use 1. Shows the misery of graceless
persons in that they cannot pr^y. See it discovered in two things. Use 2. To
show the duty of all to amend their praying. 74 To wh^^^ are annexed Objections
to be answered, viz. First, What need this ado? less pains may serve the turn;
God knows our wants, and he will do what seems good in his sight. 75
Secondly, Some say they cannot pray, or at least not according to this
description of Prayer. 76 Thirdly, Many that have used thus to pray, have
proved counterfeits? Ergo, etc. 81 Fourthly, Many we see have blessings of all
sorts, who yet never did, nor could pray thus for them? 82 Fifthly, Should we
practice this duty every day, as is pressed, it would waste and spend our
spirits, hinder us in our callings, and expose us to the derision of others? 84
Cases of Conscience to be resolved, viz. First, What should a man do that
cannot utter his mind? he wants fit words for such a presence. 89 Secondly,
What should he do that finds his heart unfit and altogether indisposed for
prayer, especially with such holy fervency. 92 Thirdly, I am distracted with
vain thoughts, and terrified with strange fears, especially when alone and in
the dark: what shall I do? 98 Fourthly, I find not any success in my prayer,
but am rather crossed in them, therefore I fear it is in vain to pray. 96
Fifthly, What should a man settle his mind upon while he is framing and
directing his prayer? 100 Sixthly, But when I do, m^thinks my own unworthiness
does so much the more present it self, and make me ready through fear to sink.
101 Conditions required that pra^er may be accepted. 103 First, The Person must
be ri^htly qualified; and that standing in a threefold relation, viz. 1. To
God. ibid. 2. To Men. 104 3. To it self. 104, 105
Five properties of persons thus qualified. 105 Quest. It seems by this that
wicked, unrighteous persons may no^ pray; or if so, their prayers will ^e to
little or no purpose, ineffectual. 108 Secondly, All the graces mu^t be set on
work, viz. Faith; where is enquired, how may a man know when he prays in
faith? 110 Repentance, which gives occasion to consider, How true penitency in
gracious souls may be discerned from feigned sorrow in graceless persons? 114,
115 Humility. Q. How this grace may be discerned? 117 Motives to fervent prayer
drawn 1. From the Lord. 120, 121 2. From Men. 125 3. From prayer it self. 130
Object. Answered with respect to such persons as were effectual in prayer. 132
Second Doctrine, 134 Proved by Scripture. ibid. Explained by enquiring, First,
Wherein they are so prevailing? 135 Secondly, Why they are so prevalent? 139
Use 1. To let us see what to expect from the prayers of too many among us,
unrighteous, unholy. 142 Use 2. To show us what to do that we may be powerful
and effectual in prayer, viz. First, get the qualification in the Text. 143
Secondly, Pray in a time while he may be found. p. 144
When these two are joined, prayer never failed. 1. When they are joined in
Persons. 2. When they are joined in a Nation. 145
Obj. When will that be? 146 A. 1. It has been often promised. 2. This is the
way whereby ^ll those that belong to God may be brought in. ibid.
Causes discovered, why prayers have been so ineffectual. 147 Directions how to
prevail more. 151
A TREATISE OF PRAYER.
JAMES 5.16. -- The effectual ferven^ Prayer of a righteous man, avails much.


THE Springhead of this Scripture does arise at the 13th verse of the Chapter,
and the streams run down to the 18th. The general scope of the whole, is to
give direction in a matter of no small concernment, viz. how the Flock of
Christ should demean themselves in every condition Divine providence might cut
out for them in the present evil world. According to our Apostle, whose pen was
held and ruled by the Spirit of truth, the state of the Church, and as here
described, is twofold, Prosperity and Adversity, happiness and misery, frowns
and smiles; like the Sun which sometimes appears bright and glorious, but
sometimes is hid under dusky clouds; now in health, then in an Hectic: weeping
and joy; a summers day and a winters night, as she gives her own motto, Psalm.
102.10. Thou have life me up and cast me down: an uncertain c^ndition, and such
as wants peculiar direction, especially if it be considered how easy it is to
miscarry in both.

He that runs may read the purpose of the Apostle, to ballast the people of God
in this unequal condition, to help them walk steadily both in their up-hill and
down-hill way; Is any afflicted? then, let him pray: Is any merry? then, let
him sing Psalms. Needful it is for Christians to be doing in each condition.

My Text is a branch of the first direction, and is laid down as a Motive and
Encouragement to the duty, drawn from the excellent success of it, which he
proves by induction of particular examples in the following verse^.

The words in themselves are a good man's encouragement and testimonial,
subscribed by God himself, which does certify, what he is, and what he must
be, viz. Fervent in prayer.

They are easy in the sense of them, clear and plain; it will be time and
labor spent impertinently, to give account what Interpreters say of them, how
they differ or agree; this were almost to strike fire and light up a candle at
noonday, to seek for that which is neither hid nor lost. As for part^, to
prevent confusion, and to clear our entrance, I shall divide the handling of
them into three generals; In them we have to consider,

First, The (...), or duty commended and directed unto, viz. P^ayer. A
necessary and useful duty, which neither the decree of God in regard of its
immutability, nor the promise of God in regard of its infallibility, Ezekiel. 36.
v. 37.
nor the effectual intercession of Christ our Lord, who taught his Disciples to
pray, can dispense with us for not doing it. The Gospel commands it.

Secondly, The (...), or quallification mentioned, which is twofold, viz.
First, Of the duty; it must be fervent, such as sets the whole man on work, and
such as notes the most lively activity that can be. (...), is ardens, 1.
fervent, as Piscator renders it; Efficax, i. effectual, as Beza. It is both,
effectual-fervent, as in the text. Secondly, Of the person, he must be
righteous, i. so made by the righteousness of Christ by faith: justified by
righteousness impured, called the righteousness of God; sanctified by
righteousness imparted, called ours, because inherent in us. They must be men
of penitent, renewed hearts, men of faith, evangelically righteous.

Thirdly, The (...), or effect, success and good issue of prayer so
quallified, and performed, It avails much; they are prayers that carry force
with them; thus quallified, they are a mighty engine to move heaven and earth,
a key to open the door of the treasury of God, to fetch mercies for our selves
and others; a Panecaea, a receipt for every disease, and a sovereign one too,
it brings present ease and future health. God never said to the seed of Jacob,
Seek ye my face in vain.

The parts thus set, we may ^asily read the meaning of the Spirit in them.
Supposing the first, I shall handle the two later, and labor to condescend to
the meanest capacity, and point out the full scope of the words in two useful
Observations.

First, That when we have to do with God in prayer, it is our duty to make use
of strength and fervency.

Secondly, That righteous m^ns prayers are powerful and effectual.

Both these observations (God willing) I shall labor to explain, laying them
as the foundation of my intended Discourse.

For the first, viz. That when we have to do with God in prayer, it is our duty
to use strength and fervency. I shall prove this Doctrine, first, by Scripture
presidents and precepts. We must put to our strength, as Abraham did in his
intercession for Sodom, Genesis 18. and as Jacob in wrestling with the Angel, Genesis
32. v. 26. who held with his hand, when his thigh was lamed. Moses in praying
for the people, craving leave for himself to enter Canaan, how earnest was he
with God? how does he work it out? The woman in the Gospel was full of this
heat, Matthew. 15.25. She will not be said nay, like another Gorgonia, she
threatens heaven, and is modestly impudent; and I think it was for that end
Christ held her off so long. We may see it enjoined in general, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength; what we do to or for God, it must be done cum toto valde,
with all our might. Pressed and practiced in particulars, Isa. 12.6. Cry out
and shout thou inhabitant of Zion! Exodus 14.15. Moses cried to the Lord. The
Ninevites cry mightily to God, Jonah 3.8. It notes the strength of affection.
Elijah cried earnestly to God, Jam. 5.17. Christ as Mediator sent up strong
cries to his Father, Heb. 5.7. He prayed as he preached: He preached, (...), as
one having authority, and he prayed likewise powerfully and effectually. Paul
advises the Saints, (...), to strive together in prayer to God, Romans 15.30. A
military word he uses, noting such fervency as is for life and death; as he
testifies of himself, that he prayed night and day. The Primi^^^^ Christians
at their services and d^votions, with one shoulder were so earnest, that they
seemed to besiege the Throne of grace, to raise a common force and strength to
invade and use violence with God in prayer; as it is related by Tertullian,
Apol. 39.

In the prosecution of this point, I intend this method, viz. to ^^ew what
prayer, and what fervent prayer i^, opening and applying the description
following:

Prayer is a fervent expressio^ of holy desires to God, only by Jesus Christ.

This is to pray fervently, Orationi instare, and fortiter incumbere Col. 4.2.
(...), Continue in prayer, which implies both intention of mind, and assiduity
in the exercise.

First, I say, it is a fervent expression] So much these ordinary terms used
in Scripture do import, as, calling out of the deep, pouring out of the soul,
and crying to heaven; expressed also in other Scriptures: 2 Chronicles. 32.20.
Hezekiah the King, and Isaiah the Prophet prayed and cried to heaven, Luke
18-1. Men ought always to pray, and v. 7. the elect cry day and night. I shall
labor as fully as I can, to unfold what I have read and observed touching this
fervor in prayer; and enquire.

fervencie is?

A. We may conceive the nature of it in these three following branches, viz.

First, It is the very h^at and height of all gracious affections, in a Zealous
moving o^ the soul to God in prayer, and for God after prayer; where there is
no Zeal for him, there is little to him: and again, where there is none to him
in our prayers, commonly there is none for him in our actions; he that is cold
in prayer, is not hot in any good cause, except where self is principle or end.
Though I do confess diversity of Degrees in Zeal to God, and for God, which
are diversely manifested, and sometimes eclipsed in Gods dearest servants, best
skilled, and most exercised in prayer.

Secondly, Fervency, is the influence, and efficacy of the regenerating Spirit
of Christ, helping his own needy members to pray, so as they may be he^^d, Romans
8.26. The spirit helps our infirmities, 1 Cor. 14.15. I will pray w^^^ the
Spirit: -- Though you be we k, yet the Spirit is willing and strong; And so
much only as comes in our prayers from the renewed part, finds accept^^ce
with God; If the motion be good, he will not accept it from an ill mouth, nor
own these prayers, which (...) not indicted by the Spirit of grace and
supplication.

Thirdly, It is a reverently-Zealous manifestation of both; the former, in
words suitable, for matter and manner, to a renewed mind, as may be most
beneficial to the hearers, if it be public; the heart is the fountain of this
heat and life, the tongue is but an instrument, and God looks chiefly to the
first; Moses and Hannah prayed fervently to God, and yet spoke little or
nothing: The latter is for man's sake.

Secondly, We enquire, when are fervent in p^^^er, and in dealing with God to
use their strength?



First, When they are moved by the Spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15. and 26.
compared: Ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father,
and, the Spirit helps our infirmities. Then a man prays with strength, when
the Spirit helps. The same word (...), i. e. Spirit, is attributed both to
the Spirit of man, and to the holy Ghost, or Spirit of God, because as that
gives motion and operation to the body, which of it self could never perform;
so does the Spirit of God to those that partake of it. Hence of Stephen and
others, when they performed any notable exploit of grace, it is said, they were
filled with the holy Ghost. The heart of man indeed is but as so much cold
earth, till the Spirit of adoption inflame it, and when this is gone, all the
strength is gone; as a wheel that is turned about with an hand, if the hand be
removed, the wheel stands still. The duty is we^k and empty till the Spirit
overshadow the soul, and then it is a living body. We know, of old, the
Symboles of the Spirit were fiery tongues, and where this fire is, it melts the
co^^ ice, its heavenly flame appears in ^uty. As Eliahs body was carried up
with a whirlwind, and a fiery Chariot to heaven, so are gracious souls moved by
the Spirit of God in prayer: for as its motions are regular, in regard of the
object, so they are vehement in regard of the manner.

Secondly, When men are inwardly heated with a sense and feeling of what they
pray for. Noah's Ark rose higher, as the waters grew higher; want will add
sticks to the fire and make the flame more fervent. Hence come groans
unutterable, earnest ejaculations, like darts shot up to heaven. David is an
exact pattern for this, Psalm. 42.1, 2, 3. As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O God! my soul thirsts for God,
for the living God, etc. As a child, as soon as it comes into the world, begins
with cries and tears, because of its indigency: so where there is any spiritual
life and heat, the first discoveries of it, are by sighs and groans. Beggars
cry earnestly from apprehension of want, as the blind man did, Luke 18.41. O
thou son of David have mercy on me! And as the Apostles did, Lord save or we
perish! When a man prays as Rachel whilst she spoke to Jacob, Give me children
or I die! or as Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.13. who spoke in her heart, then he is
fervent. For as many beams of the sun meeting in a glass do beget a burning,
so are the spirits and faculties conjoined and heated in prayer.

Thirdly, When tongue and tears are the index of a melting heart, then men may
be said to be fervent in prayer. Thus David discovers his work in prayer, Psalm.
55.2. Attend to me and hear me; I mourn in my complaints and make a noise: he
bent, as it were, all his nerves, and set up his note. So does Hannah, 1 Samuel
1.10. when she is said to be in bitterness of spirit, and prayed to the Lord
and wept sore. Mary Magdalen manifested her fervency, by those streams of tears
that ran through her supplications. I do not say, that the strength and work of
prayer does consist in extension of the voice, or vehemence of pronunciation:
Moses and Hannah prayed fervently, and yet spoke not a word;] neither do I
judge tears unseparable from effectual Prayer; But, this I say, that the voice
may be much helpful to increase devotion and to move compassion, and when tears
do accompany, they are good symptoms, as Calvin speaks, Lachrymae non sunt
vera poenitentia, at affectus and symbola poenitentiae. They have strength and
a voice ^s well as words, Psalm. 6.8. The Lord has heard the voice of my
weeping! (lachrymae, pondera vocis habent.) As music on the waters sounds
farther and more harmoniously then on dry land, so do prayers joined with
tears, cry louder in the ears of God, and make sweeter melody, then when they
be absent.

Fourthly, When a man borrows strength, and gets hands to join with him.
Woe to him that is alone; Society is useful both in preaching and in praying.
Therefore our Savior sent out his disciples by two and two; (vis unita
fortior:) as the gathering together of waters make the stream stronger, and the
voices of many together, the louder sound; So it is here, single prayer is like
the single hair of Sampson, but those of a Congregation like the whole bush.
Deus pluris facit preces in Ecclesia quam domi factas, non ob locum, sed ob
considerationem multitudinis fidelium, Deus communi consensu invocantium, as
Rivet notes. As those use to do who would fain speed in their Petitions to
great men, they get hands, others to join in pleading and speaking for them, so
it is here; yet understand this inclusively, you must pray your selves and for
your selves: Not as Pharaoh and Simon Magus, who put it wholly on others, Orate
pro nobis.

Fifthly, When men are frequent and constant in Prayer, so as to receive no
denial, discouragements and worldly impediments notwithstanding. Importunity
carries fervency in its bowels. Jacob would not let the Angel go till he
blessed him, and will stand to it though upon one leg. Hannah multiplied to
pray, 1 Samuel 1.12. Paul sought the Lord thrice, 2 Cor. 12.8. i. e. frequently,
fervently: He is advising men to pray continually; i. e. habitually, vitally.
Colos. 4.2. Semper orat, qui been semper agit.
Wait upon prayer, persevere with strength; (...): The word is attributed to
the hunting of Dogs, which will not cease following the game till they have got
it: And Romans 12.12. continuing, watching in prayer, it imports constancy with
vehemence. And this was the practice of that poor woman, Mat. 15.22. Have mercy
on me thou son of Daevid, etc. And after denials she rises higher, and locks
her self within the denial, and pleads Gods truth and justice, if mercy will
nor serve, let thy words be true, I am a Dog, and there is something for Dogs,
let me have a Dogs portion, crumbs, I crave no mo e. David and Daniel prayed
thrice a day, and otherwhiles seven times: Of sa^ous Bolton it is reported that
he constan^ly prayed six times a day, viz. twice by himself alone, twice with
his wife, and twice with his family. And of Theodosius that pious Emperor,
(Cujus regia non dissimilis crat monasterio) that his Court was like a Church
for piety and devotion; Of Constantine the great, that he conversed more with
God then with men. All men of might in Prayer. Constancy bespeaks fervency.

Sixthly, When in Prayers men do heat others by the beauty and liveliness of a
well-ordered working prayer. A living coal will inliven others, and one candle
lights others. Grace where it is, endeavors to kindle where it is not: as
where is life, there is also a seminary of propagation, and the more excellent
the life is, the more pregnant is it to propagate in its kind: like the
glow-iron on the Smiths Anvill, c^sting light and heat round about it. But
because this may be brought about by one who is not formally fervent,
effectively (as the Philosopher speaks of the sun) there are some cautions to
be added to this mark: In such a zealous petitioner, who heateth others with
the fervency of his Devotion, there is required, First, a sense of that misery
which the voice deciphereth, both in confession of sin and deprecation of
judgments. Secondly, A grounded hope of relief upon experience of some
promises. Thirdly, Sincerity in the Petitioner: the truth spoken must be in the
inward parts, that what is asked of God, be for God, for his service and glory;
as Hannah in her Samuel. There may be an inward coldness and yet an outward
heat, (the nature of the Amber-stone) as in hypocrites who know much of God,
bur do little for him; this may heat and benefit others, though not themselves.
Again, there may be an inward hea^, and for some time in some duties, yet no
audible expressions, as in Moses and Hannah, they cried to the Lord and yet
said nothing: their heat was as a flame kept in, increasing. This zeal in
prayer is most acceptable to God, as the prime object of his eye, and ear,
although no^ so beneficial to men; for unless the Petitioner burn with
zealous heat and express it, he shall never inflame the heart of the hearers
nor quicken their devotion: as Austin speaks, Enar. in Psalm.

Seventhly, When men join endeavors, and other things seasonable and useful
together with Prayer. As the wise mariner who has not only an eye to the
Star, but an hand to the Helm: and as the Plowmen of Sparta, who had one hand
held up to Ceres, whom they feigned the Goddess of corn, and the other on the
stilts of the plow: they joined plowing and praying. The good man not only
lifts up his heart to heaven, but puts his hand to the work, to compass what
he prays for. The Heathen could say, admota manu, invocanda est Minerva: and
they noted him for a foolish Carter, that when his Cart stuck fast, cried to
God, and moved his lips, but not his hands to help himself. Semper orare, est
semper operari, Aug. If thou call for knowledge (says Solomon) and criest
for understanding: there is Prayer to God; If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasure, there is man's endeavor in the use of
means. Many things are requisite to prayer, according to the nature of the
blessing: if Spiritual, then fasting and alms, as Cornelius practiced, Acts.
10. Repentance and Prayer, as the Ninevites did, Jon. 3.8. Hearing the Word and
use of the Sacraments, which are instituted means for accomplishing great and
saving ends. And so, if the blessing be temporal; Vain are desires not
produced to action. Aristotle writes of the Bathes in the Parthecusian
Islands, that they are fiery hot, but send forth no flames; that fervency
cannot be commended, which is smothered and pent up in the heart, gets no vent,
has no extrinsecall operation. Augustine relates it as a vanity of his youth,
that he prayed God against some sins whereunto he was strongly addicted, but
should have been full sorrowful if God should have heard him, because he was
loath to part with them; how much better was that prayer, Domine Deus fac me in
consequendis iis operam collocare, pro quibus obtinendis, soleo ad Te orare; i.
O Lord help me to bestow pains in getting those things, for obtaining of which,
I usually pray unto thee.

Confess sin you must and not slight, pray for pardon and power, with desire
and longing after them; not as Austin did with a secret reservation; or as
Spira and the hypocrite, who pray for grace, but saw no beauty in it why it
should be desired; saved without it they cannot be, that they only apprehend:
But rather say with David, My heart is prepared, O God, my heart is prepared;
and with Paul, I will pray with the Spirit and with understanding. This is to
work in prayer, to use strength and fervency. Now is the soul on the mount of
transfiguration, this is to pray in prayer, and the second Question answered.

Thirdly, Why must men be thus

I Answer, First, of Examination for discovery: nothing is hid from him: he is
omniscient: as he hears without ears, so he understands without words. And
yet it must be so for these reasons, viz. First, That you may acknowledge his
Propriety (even as children do their fathers, when they come for food) in the
good things you want, and receive them with more joy and thankfulness. God
will be owned, and have his Lordly-right acknowledged; If we take any thing
that is our neighbors without asking them leave, we shall be accounted
thieves, so, to take and possess the things of God, without asking his leave,
will be accounted felony of the highest nature. Secondly, That you may learn to
distinguish between gifts of promise, and of common providence: the first are
effects of special grace, requiring faith and prayer, (I will be sought unto by
the house of Israel:) the latter are fruits of common goodness, flowing from
that fountain according to his unchangeable purpose, for the supportance of
creatures, till they attain their pre-ordained ends; the first are peculiar to
the good only; the second common (as the sun) to good and bad. Thirdly, That by
this familiar intercourse between God and the soul, your graces may be both
exercised and increased; that hereby, I say, we may have communion with God,
and grow into acquaintance with him, whereby the stock of grace is much
augmented; as good company does increase it, so does converse with God much
more: set this duty aside, and man becomes a stranger to God, his graces decay,
and he becomes cold and loose. This is the first reason.

Secondly, Because the Lord loves an importunate suitor. Fervency, like rosin to
the strings of a musical instrument, makes the sound pleasant. Haec vis grata
Deo est, says Tertullian. It does, as it were, charm God: it is a weapon well
managed that overcomes the invincible: a cord that binds the Almighty, as Jerome
phraseth it. It is a strength he has promised to yield unto, Isa. 45.11.
Command ye me; as some gloss the place. As they write of Proteus, that when
any came to consult with, and to receive Oracles from him, he would first turn
himself into a thousand shapes and varieties of colors, but if they pressed
him with importunity, and held him close to it, he then would give them
satisfactory Oracles. God may indeed seem to slight the prayer of his people
(as we slight a confused noise) and wind himself from them, but when they grow
fervent, then he lets them to be their own carvers. It will bow down his ear,
and pull the hand out of his bosom; to speak with the Psalmist, Psalm. 145.18.
He is nigh to them that call upon him in truth. The Canaanitish woman is put
off three times, and her fervency is crowned with success. It is recorded to
the everlasting renown of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 31.37. that in every service of
God he acted with all his might, and he prospered.

Thirdly, Because he that asks any thing coldly, does but teach a denial.
Careless, heartlesse prayer, is one of the most unsavory parts of formallity,
dishonorable, unpleasing to God; as a body without a soul, as incense without
fire, say the Jews. Yea and to men unprofitable: as a Diamond that is not
right, and as a Picture not drawn to the life, are of no value. Formal cold
devotion, like Caesar's heartlesse sacrifice, will never find acceptance.
Painted fire as it has no heat, so it is of no use. We may as soon cleave a
rock with a wedge of wood, grasp the wind in our hand, as make carnal cold
affections to draw any thing from God. There is no great odds between the
omission of duty, and the careless performance of it, man is loser both ways.
The Bow that is slack bent, carries not the Arrow to the mark; formality and
coldness destroy the very virtue of prayer, as does Garlic the drawing virtue
of the loadstone, applied to it. Therefore we must be fervent. We must be
fervent seekers, before we can be happy enjoyers; God will have us Jacobs,
before we shall be Isreal's.

Fourthly, The matter about which you are employed is weighty, and of great
concernment; viz. to procure pardon and power over sin, supportance under
temptations; Giant-like corruptions, sons of Anack to prevail over: removal of
Judgments, renewed peace after much treachery and hostility. Now these are not
matters of an inferior alloy: they are things not to be obtained with a single
sigh; opposition from earth and hell is not to be conquered with a slight
breath. It is not a dull wish, a languishing velleity, an heartlesse endeavor
that will win the day. There must be passionate longings and breakings of
heart, with continual desires after God. Great stones (you know) are not to be
turned over without great strength: and great mercies are not to be obtained
without great strivings. The matters we pray for, require fired affections,
enlarged petitions; as the Heathen said, Imperia quolibet pretio constant lene:
a Kingdom cannot be bought too dear; Agrippina thought the Roman Empire a good
penyworth, paying her life for it, though for her Nero. We cannot lay out too
much strength, in obtaining objects of so great worth.

Fifthly, There are many and prodigious sins cry aloud to God, in your own
breasts, families, place and Country, ye^, Nation wherein you live; we are like
the land of Egypt, which though it bring forth multa salubria, yet withal it
brings forth plurima venena: in our Garden are many pleasant Flowers, but
withal more poisonful, unsavory weeds; if we look within or without, almost
all things are to be sound as the Physicians facies hypocratica of a dying man,
very ghastly, and tantum non deadly; the whole head is sick; sin cries aloud,
and, if you be not earnest indeed, will outcry your prayers.

Sixthly, By this means we declare at what rate we value Gods savor and
mercies. A fervent request does advance the person and thing petitioned for. It
is an argument we disesteem and undervalue the blessing, that we think may be
obtained by slender peti^^ns, as if the purchase we were about, would not quit
the cost, nor be worth the pains that is required for it. When Callidius the
Roman Orator pleaded a cause but faintly, and exp^essed little or no
affection, Tully told him, that sure he was not in earnest, otherwise the tide
of affection would have been up; in like manner, it is an argument we reckon
not much the blessing, when we are faint in our pursuits after it.

Seventhly, Fervent prayer is best and most effectual: like an arrow shot with
full strength, and a ship carried on with full sails. Powder and shot in the
Musket will do no execution, unless the Soldier gives fire well: Prayers
without fervency are but as powder and shot without fire, they will never go
off so as to reach Heaven or our wants. Of all elements that of fire is nearest
Heaven, and the more fire in any thing, the higher it ascends Heavenward; cold
and sluggish prayers have so much earth in them, that like the Grasshopper, if
they mount a little upward, they are presently down again, fall short of
Heaven. Of all warlike Engines, your Grenades and Fireworks are of most force;
and of all prayers, those that have most fervency, are most effectual.

Lastly, The Lord will have you to be fervent; First, To the end you may so
much the more anger and astonish the Devil, who is eaten up with envy to see
God so much honored; the inward heat and voice of the heart he cannot hear,
divine at it he may: but outward expressions he does note and observe.
Secondly, To give good example to the Church, who are much moved and stirred up
by prayer, especially if it be fervent; as in the body of an Army, concurrent
shoutings of Soldiers do as it were infuse mutually spirits into one another.
Thirdly, To bring the heart into a better temper, which is enlarged and made
more capable of spiritual blessings by this fervency. A zealous petitioner is
but preparing and enlarging his rooms to store up the return of his holy
adventures. Thus you may answer the question of the rich man, What shall I do,
because I have no room to bestow my fruit? A manifest sign they were never
gotten by prayer; it makes room before the blessing comes; he that is much in
fervent prayer, shall never be brought into such a straight of vexing cares.
And thus you have the third Quere dispatched, and it shall now suffice, only a
little to clear your judgments, and help you in practice by some presidents.

I refer you to Moses, Exodus 32.11, 12, 13. he does as it were put God to it,
to free himself: as if Moses his Devotion were stronger then Gods indignation.
To Joshuah c. 7. v. 6, 7, 8, 9. he rent his clothes, fell to the earth on his
face before the Ark of the Lord, etc. there is fervency in the very manner, and
so in the matter of his prayer; Alas, O Lord God, wherefore have thou at all
brought this great people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hands of the
Amorites? What shall I say when Israel turns their back before the enemy?
What will thou do unto thy great Name? To David in most of his Psalms. To Ezra
c. 9.56. O Lord God of Heaven, the great and terrible God, etc. Let thine ear
now be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou may hear the prayer of thy
servant which I pray before thee day and night. And to Daniel c. 9. v. 3, 4. He
set his face to seek the Lord by supplication and prayer, with fasting,
sackcloth and ashes, saying, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping
Covenant and Mercy, etc. we have sinned and committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, etc. as you may farther read. I come to a fourth Quere, viz.



First, By soundness and depth of spiritual union between Christ and the soul;
(who is the Fountain of spiritual life and heat, as the Sun is the Fountain of
all life and heat to sublunary things) as also, between you and the members of
Christ where you live: they pray most fervently, that love most entirely;
therefore S. P^ter advises men and their wives to live lovingly together, lest
their prayers should be hindered. How much enmity and strangeness do hinder
prayers, the common enemy of mankind knows well enough; he is busy in sowing
cares, and glad to see men divided, for, then they cannot use this spiritual
weapon against him, nor weild this instrument, one of the chiefest Engines to
batter down the gates of Hell. To make much of those that are godly, is a ready
way by allurement to make others good: let this band be strong, and your
prayers cannot be weak.

Secondly, By dependence on the strength of God, and not upon your own
abilities or graces; this is to fetch fire from Heaven, because no sacrifice
must be offered up with common fire. Our strength is weakness, and it is one
of Gods names, the Strength of Israel, 1 Samuel 15.19. When the wheel is set on
going, the soul set on work, how long will it hold to its motion? No longer
then turned by the same hand that first moved it. We shall soon work out the
strength received; and therefore to maintain the vigor of a fervent course,
there must be renewing strength from Heaven every day. This David knew, and
therefore when his heart was in good frame as ever he felt it, and his people
likewise by their free-will-offering declared so much in themselves; yet even
then he prays, that God would keep this for ever in the imagination of the
thoughts of the heart of his people, and establish their heart in them, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. He adored the mercy that made them willing, and then implores his
farther grace to strengthen them. Would a Christian pray? Where else will he
find materials for his prayer? Alas! he knows not how, or what to pray for as
he ought. God puts words into his mouth, and these would freeze there, and
never vent, did he not by the same influence of some heart-heating affections
prevail to thaw the tap. In a word, a Christian has not a spark of this fire
on his own hearth, except some that is strange fire, which will not serve the
turn, he must fetch it from Heaven continually.

Thirdly, By a continual supposal that the present opportunity may be the last;
how earnest would you pray, how fervent would you be, were you to dye
presently? provided this be in earnest, settled on a grounded knowledge of your
mortality, the uncertainty of the last hour: else this also will degenerate
into formality.

Fourthly, By weighing the causes moving unto and requiring this fervency; as,
fear of Gods displeasure, of the curse, of the sentence of death, and of Hell
following. Want of Gods image and love of Christ, and his grace; imminent
judgments hanging over our heads, ready to fall every moment, with some hope of
speeding in our requests, knowing who has said, Ye shall reap if you faint not.

Fifthly, By a true love unto that we pray for. Strong affections cause fervent
prayers. True love makes weak things strong: it is as an addition of fire to
the flame. It was love to God that made Moses so fervent: Mary Magdalen so
earnest. It has a constraining virtue: it made the dumb son to speak. Love if
true, will make a man do that is be^ond his power; as the Corinthians, when they
were poor in estate, yet were rich in liberality. Christ loving Lazarus well,
wept and groaned in spirit, when he prayed for him: and so did David for his
son. Where affection is wanting, there will be cold praying; we see it in
suitors among men.

Sixthly, By a proposal of some moving presidents; as of a poor man that comes
to your door for an alms; hear how he cries, with hands and eyes lift up, he
multiplieth and continues Petitions, For the Lords sake, for Christ's sake some
relief! Of one naked and almost starved, see and behold he will have no denial.
Or of a condemned prisoner at the bar, his knees are bowed to the ground, as if
his heart would touch the Judges feet, his hands elevated, his looks ruful, his
eyes full of distilling tears, his words earnest and constant, Mercy, O
Merciful Judge, save or I perish! Set these patterns before you, and make their
case your own. Be earnest, the matter is weighty, you must either speed there,
or no where, now or never.

I shall apply this in a few things. First, The Use may serve to condemn, as
the society of Rome, requiring and resting in the work done; whether mighty or
weak, hot or cold, they enquire not, so the number and tale be up: So, too many
among our selves, that content themselves with a cold and careless form of
praying, a bedulling strain, like the pace the Spaniard is said to ride. Let us
take a character of them: First, Such as are destitute of spiritual life and
heat, who have no grounded hope in any promise of speeding. How should they
pray lively that want life? When life goes out of the body it grows cold,
and so where the life of grace is not, all is cold, no vigor, no zeal, in the
discharge of duty. The dead do not praise thee, neither can they pray unto
thee, O Lord! Secondly, They are merely formal in Prayer, who say or repeat
Prayers often, but without any zeal, or serious bent of mind to the passages
thereof, as if they cared not whether they were heard or no. Negare docent, qui
frigide rogant. Such persons do far rather suggest a denial then move pity; it
was hinted before. Thirdly, All they who are wholly taken up with self-seeking
and variety of distracting employments, so that they spend most of their
strength about the perishing comforts of this life; such are the malicious,
envious, covetous and voluptuous men and women. Moses was fervent in Prayer,
hot in the cause of God, but in his own, the meekest man on earth: his heat was
not spent for himself, it was reserved for God. Therefore our Savior checks
his Disciples when they would pray down fire from Heaven upon the Samaritans,
telling them, they knew not what spirit they were of. In our own business and
wrongs our heat should be hid, and as it were wrapped up in the embers, but when
Gods honor is endangered, or obscured, then should our fire break forth, (nay,
it will, if we have any) as Cyril sometimes advised Theodosius. Fourthly, They
are cold in prayer, who are oppressed with corruption, or are carried away with
the violent streams of worldly cares for the present, (they are all choking
and quenching, as water abateth the heat of the fire;) or else lie under
desertion, or a divine restraint, as Jeremiah was often forbid, if not disabled
to pray in some cases, and for some people. Fifthly, They that are not in
charity with their neighbors. Love ^s the bond of perfection, and the heat of
the soul; no love, no heat; so much want of heat as is want of love. Forgive,
and it shall be forgiven; Confess your f^ults one to another, and pray one for
another, James 5.16. Be reconciled, then come and offer, Matthew. 5.24. God will
not appear to Abraham till Lot and he be agreed. Jacob being reconciled to hi^
brother, first, builds an Altar. Prayer offered up with uncharitable hands,
though otherwise most excellently accomplished, is but as sounding brass and a
tinkling Cymball.

Secondly, The Use serves, to advise, fervent in appearance only, take you
heed of Jehu's countenance, full of flushing heat, and Nabals heart as cold as
the stone. Bid defiance to Laodicean luke-warmnesse. Remember the sweet
perfumes under the Law, were burnt before they ascended. Hoc agite! Attend on
your selves, when you call upon God to attend you, lest frequency diminish
fervor, which should increase it: and custom take away the sense. When you
are to go with a Petition to Christ, to be presented to the Father, First, Let
the mind be withdrawn from all prevalency of lust, though from the presence it
cannot. Of worldly employments, say as Abraham to his servant with the asses,
Stay here, while we go yonder and worship. These Birds would rob Abraham of his
Sacrifice. Call in and concenter your thoughts as men do the Sunbeams into a
burning glass. Have your hearts at your right hand, with Solomon's wise man; or
else be sure of this, that which is upmost will be out ever and anon,
distracting, dragging downward, and cooling your prayers. Secondly, Be well
verst with that Divine Rhetoric in the holy Scriptures, to move attention, and
to procure compassion: Setting forth your own misery, and using arguments for
mercy, out of Gods own Word. God loves to be sued on his own bond. Thus did
Hester with the King, and so must we if we will speed in Heaven. Produce Gods
own words, and say, (as she did to Judah) Whose are these? It is acceptable to
God to be pressed with his promise; this David knew, and therefore cries, Unite
my heart to fear thy Name, Ps. 86.11. which is as if he had said, thou have
promised to give me one heart, behold, I find my heart divided, my thoughts
dissipated, and my self disabled for duty, (anima dispersa sit minor.) Unite it
I beseech thee. This is a ready way to have our prayers nigh to the Lord day
and night. Thirdly, Though your own Conscience should trouble and check you,
though Satan labor mightily to hinder you; yea, say the Lord seem to turn away
his face from you, as he did once to David, and to shut the door of mercy
against you, yet faint not, cry still, plead free grace, and look on Christ
against all replies; remember who says, You shall reap if you faint not.

And great cause you have to improve your strength this way: For, 1. The Lord
is greatly incensed against us, and others round about us; we may say as Moses
sometime did in a case not much different, Numb. 16. v. 46. Wrath is gone out
from the Lord, the plague is begun: it is a time now especially, to be strong
in Prayer, the only way to heal the Land, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Besides, a multitude
of sins are between God and you, and therefore great need of fervent praying;
the Lord will be entreated if you be earnest; what father seeing his indigent
child, though a Prodigal, on his knees, with hands lift up, with tears in his
eyes, can forbear to embrace him, and to grant him his request? If you who are
evil know how to give good things to such children, how much more will your
heavenly Father give the Spirit to them that ask? 2. You may hear and see the
poor Church of Christ, lying and languishing before you, withering in her
cadency like a May-flower. Jerusalem is become an heap of rubbish, our fair
hopes of her establishment almost blasted, her enemies potent, and we cannot
rationally conceive her ever able to wrestle through her difficulties; and if
the Church wither, the Commonwealth cannot grow; like Hippocrates his twins,
they smile and weep, live and die together: the children of both have cause to
pray, if either languish, yea, to pray fervently for both. Surely if we have
any bowels of compassion, we cannot hold our peace for the misery of Zion; the
Gangrene of Heresy has overspread her, more then the present sickness on the
Nation: the raging billows of profaneness is ready to overwhelm her; hell and
the bottomless pit are open: homebred vipers and foreign enemies, like the
children of Edom, cry out and gape for her destruction: she is in great
bitterness, and is it nothing to you that pass by? When one of Darius King of
Persia's Eunuchs saw Alexander the great set his feet on a low cable that had
been highly prized by his master, he wept; and being asked the reason by
Alexander, he answered, I mourn to see that thing my master so highly esteemed,
to be contemned, and made a footstool. What pious heart cannot bleed and weep
to hear and see in these degenerate times, the despisings of those things which
God so highly prizeth, (Jerusalem the perfection of beauty, and joy of the
whole earth) should not this make a dumb man to speak, to pray, to use strong
cries? Let every son of Zion consider this. 3. You have many, and those mighty
enemies; within you, original sin which never rests to draw you to evil in
act; without you, Satan and his Agents, either to tempt, terrify, or persecute
you; this should make your hearts boil up in devotion. But be sure to pray
aright: Some of old cried our (like a wind-instrument) loud enough on their
beds, but could not be heard, and were turned off, with the censure of howling
on their beds; like Balaam, who had words enough in his mouth, without any heat
in his heart. A man may pray for pardon, as Joseph's brethren did, and yet not
be sorry for what is past, nor resolve to amend for time to come. A man may
pray for power over lust, as Austine confesses of himself, and yet fear as
unwilling to be heard. A man may pray for removal of judgments, and when on the
r^ck, roar out a confession, as Pharaoh, Ahab and Simon Magus did, (like the
mill-wheel driven by the force of waters) and yet not think of, much less be
sorry for the cause, and perhaps, repent of their repentance, thawing in the
Sun, and freezing in the shade. As the Historian relates of William Rufus, that
in a great sickness he vowed amendment, to reform his hard laws and taxes, to
give spiritual livings freely: but recovering, repented of his promise. And as
the captivated Jews fasted and prayed for seventy years, but, to get off their
chains, more then their sins, and so like melted me^tal, held no longer then
the fire lasted, Isa. 26.16. They poured out prayer when thy chastening was
upon them. A man may pray for grace, as Spira said he did, and yet have no love
to it for its excellency and beauty. All this men do, and yet not pray
fervently to God. Pauci quaerunt Deum propter se, sed propter aliud. He only
that is mighty in Scripture, that is mighty in the Spirit, that is mighty by
Christ to do all things, can thus pray; O God, create in me a clean heart, and
renew a right spirit within me.

Object. These fervent expressions are not always successful; a time may come,
when a Moses and a Samuel may not be heard.

A. 1. Fervent expressions, though they be one and chief, yet not the only
means, somewhat else must be done, viz. submission in Petitioners, and
reformation in those for whom it is petitioned. 2. These fervent expressions
are always, First, According to the divine purpose, though not always to your
intents and ends. Secondly, For your selves and own good, though not always
for others; your prayers shall return into your own bosom. Thirdly, it may be
your Petition is heard and granted, but the time of manifestation is not yet
come; be constant and wait a while, you shall reap. Zacharies prayers for a
child were granted long before it was discovered to him. Fourthly, Else you
may be out in the thing desired; either for the matter, it may not be good in
it self, or not for you; or not for the measure, not so much as is desired; or
for the time, it may not be good now: and then no wonder if you be not heard;
which is the second branch in my description of Prayer, viz. Fervent
expressions.

Secondly, Of holy desires.] These are the feet on which the soul runs, the
wings on which it mounts toward the object desired.

Holy they must be for Person, Principle, Matter and End.

First, The Person must be holy. Under the Law the Swan which was white in
feathers, was yet reputed unclean and unmeet for sacrifice, because the skin
under them was black. Religious workings stand in Gods account, according to
the qualification of the workman, either for acceptance or rejection.

These fervent expressions must come from an holy heart: they are not the
child of wit and fantasy, but the rapture of an elevated spirit, the
heavenly dew of a good heart, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart,
the Lord will not hear my prayer.

To explain this branch, we may enquire fitly,

First, What this holy Heart is?

I Answer, 1. broken contrite heart, a self-condemning, self-crucifying, sin
mortifying-heart. Prayer comes for mercy, and must bring a vessel to hold it,
and that is a broken heart; a paradox in nature but not in grace. Deus non
infundit oleum miserecordiae nisi in vas contritum; the sacrifices of God are a
broken spirit. An heart that by passing under the hammer of the Law, and
through the melting fire of the Gospel, is divided from the band of sin, which
is a fruit of that sweet Spirit of grace promised, Zach. 12.10, 11, 12. The
Spirit of grace and supplication; and whereby they shall look on him whom they
have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, etc. It hides nothing, like a
broken vessel, lets all run out; opens and spreads all its vileness before the
Lord: As water, mire, stones, heterogeneals, which were inseparably congealed
in a hard bound frost, yet they all lie loose when there comes a kindly thaw;
so in the heart that was once congealed in the mire and dregs of sin, etc. and
with penitential brokennesse is kindly thawed and dissolved, the sins that
before stuck fast in the soul, now lie loose, the spirit longs to be rid of
them all, and so becomes more capacious. Broken language, if from a broken
heart is acceptable. 2. It is an humble flexible heart, waiting for, and ready
to receive divine impressions, like softened wax; and as melted mettle, will run
into any mould; an holy heart will be ready to bend and bow as God will have
it: Acts 9.6. What will thou have me to do? As if he should say, Lord, do but
thou command me and I am ready to obey: Lord, give me ability to do what thou
command, and then command me what thou please; as Austin once of himself.
A carnal heart waits for, and embraces the commands of sin; and an holy heart
waits for, and is ready to receive the commands of Christ; to stoop to that
service which bears Gods superscription on it. 3. It is a chaste, clean heart,
wholly dedicated to God, that loves no evil in motion or action; Create in me
a clean heart, Psalm. 51.10. Holiness is a cleansing thing 2 Cor. 7.1. As a
good wife is toward her husband, such is the holy heart to Christ; espoused it
is to him: The carnal heart has many lovers, but the holy heart has one whom
it loves, even Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2.4. It is an heavenly heart. Words, deeds,
behavior, not only in sacred but in civil affairs, are heavenly, Phil. 3.20.
Our conversation is in Heaven: (i. e.) Habitually. Corpore ambulamus in terra,
cord habitamus in co^lo, says Augustine. The body is on earth, but our heart
in Heaven; as the pearl that grows in the Sea, but shines as the sky. O the
preciousnesse of an holy heart. A person thus rightly qualified for prayer, is
more honorable, more excellent then his neighbor.



First, Because a carnal heart destitute of renewing grace and spiritual life,
cannot rise to close with such a spiritual duty. A natural man receives not
the things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. Light and darkness may as soon come
together and agree. An holy heart may make a carnal prayer, but a carnal heart
can never make an holy prayer, so as to ascend high enough. Nothing can work
beyond the activity of its own principle. A bullet flies no farther then the
force of the powder carries it: and where prayers come from nature only, they
go no farther then nature can carry them. Secondly, Reigning sin in the heart,
out-cryeth your prayers: especially the sins of pride and anger, Jam. 4.6. God
resists the proud, 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men every where pray, lifting up
holy hands without wrath. If your sins be hearty, your prayers cannot be
hearty. If the sin of one man may hinder the prayers and endeavors of many;
how much more will many sins hinder the prayers of one. Reigning sin is like
many great Ordnance charged and planted on high mountains, they make a great
noise; like thunder which confounds and swallows up lower and smaller cries.
Sin unto prayer is as Garlic to the Loadstone, renders it flat and dead.
Thirdly, The person must be accepted before the prayer, and none are accepted
but such as are sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ. Therefore prayers must
come from an holy heart. John 15.5. He that abides in me brings forth much
fruit. Genesis 4.4. The Lord had respect to Abel, and then to his offering. Prayer
from a wicked heart, is like a jewel put into a dead man's mouth, loses all its
virtue The Naturalist says, a precious jewel put into a dead man's mouth,
loses its worth and virtue; so does prayer in the mouth of a man spiritually
dead.
. The prayer of the wicked is abominable, Prove. 21.27. But if the tree be good,
the fruit will be good. You must be in Christ before you can do or obtain any
good this way. Through him we have access with confidence unto the Father,
Ephesians. 2.18. Fourthly, Because the Lord is holy and cannot endure sin,
especially in Petitioners. God hates sin naturally where ever it is: (like as
we hate poison, whether it be in a Toad or Princes Cabinet.) Yea, he hates it
more then the Devil. Can a Prince endure a Petitioner that shall bring his
greatest enemy with him in his hand, even into his presence? Or can any
Petitioner think so to prevail. No: As in a wound the plaster prevails not
whilst the iron remains within, so neither can prayer while sin rankleth. God
will not hear a good motion from a bad mouth. He will hide his eyes while your
hands are full of blood. You love my professed enemies more then me, will God
say, your bosom sins above your requests. Therefore go and be reconciled, put
away your sins, and then come and offer. Thus much for the first branch, the
Person must be holy. Again,

Secondly, The Principle must be holy. Your desires must be the issues of
grace, dictated by the Spirit of Christ; we know not how or what to ask without
his assistance, Romans 8.15, 26.

Here also may be profitably enquired two things.

First, Why our prayer must come

The Reasons will appear to be such as these; 1. Father of Spirits, who is
delighted with spiritual service, and accepts nothing in this kind from men,
but what comes from a spiritual principle. It is therefore we hear the Apostle
enjoining prayer in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. and praying in the Holy Ghost,
Jude v. 20. This is the wind must set you^ mill on work: and the poise that
should cause your clock to strike. 2. It is to distinguish prayers, First,
Because many prayers are but natural desires, or hypocritical expressions of
counterfeit devotion. The Ravens call upon God, and some we read of, did howl
on their beds, and were importunate for corn, wine and oil, but from a natural
principle, which as the Grasshopper, hope not much above the earth, and as a
vapor exhaled by the Sun does soon fall down again; when self does seek and is
sought for, as the people did Christ for the loaves, and Judas for the purse.
And this not only in carnal persons, I mean such as for the present are
destitute of actual grace, and the spirit of holiness: but even in the
regenerate. Moses his prayer was very earnest to enter C^naan, and yet it was
but a natural desire. Secondly, Because men living under the means of grace,
may go far by their own spirits; as, to read, repeat Sermons, and frame prayers
very exactly, as if they were full of spiritual life and heat. We know great
wants may and do produce earnest entreaties; terrors of God, and frights of
Conscience may make men fervent: they may desire pardon, and removal of
judgments, merited, inflicted, or threatened; nay, they may pray for grace when
they never heartily desire it, because they look upon it as a means of safety,
(as a Bridge to help them to Heaven) not because they love and desire sanctity,
and so all this while may be destitute of a gracious principle.

Therefore Secondly, We may farther Spirit may be discerned?

The Answer may be thus, 1. liberty, light and heat following the presence of
that Spirit. (See Luke 2.25. 2 Cor. 3.17.) Light to discern what to ask,
Liberty and heat to order and send up your Petitions. It removes impediments,
freeth from the invisible chains of the Kingdom of darkness, enlarges the
heart, and helps to pray with fervency, such sighs and groans as cannot be
uttered. 2. By an hearty, free and full submission of our selves and requests
to the God of prayer^, for the matter and measure. Not my will, but thy will be
done. As Hester submitted to the good pleasure of the King in her requests. And
as the mother of Christ does not over earnestly in words press him to do that
she desired, but only lays open the case, they have no wine, referring all to
his discretion. It is reported of Socrates, that he ^aught his Scholars to ask
no more of God but this, that he would do them good: but how, and how much,
they would leave that to him, as best understanding what is best and fittest
for us. It comes not from the holy Spirit, to drive men upon indenting with
God. 3. By a patient expectation in the use of all other means, till the Lord
be pleased to manifest his answer in so^e gracious return. This disposition
flows from faith. He that believes shall not make haste, Isa. 28.16. As the
husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the earth, and waits patiently,
by a natural faith he sees the h^rve^t in the seed, and so bears up himself by
that faith in expectation of an harvest. So much more does a spiritual faith
enable souls to do much more; waiting is nothing else but faith stretched out
into patience. 4. By spiritual cheerfulness after prayer, with care to improve
and apply all you get by prayer to some spiritual ends, 1 Samuel 1.18. Hannah
prayed for a son, and went away and was no more sad, and after, dedicated her
Samuel to the service of God. Thus the principle must be holy.

Thirdly, Desires must be holy for the matter of them. [ Whosoever shall ask
any thing according to his will believing, 1 John 5.14.] And that 1. In the
ground: You must have a promise for what you ask, in particular, or at least in
general, distinctly apprehended, and rightly applied; no way repugnant to the
Analogy of faith, nor to any passage of Divine Providence; otherwise we can
have no hope to be heard; For, no faculty can or ought to extend it self beyond
its adequate and proper object: it is limited by peculiar rules. He that
prays without a promise, denies his own request. To make our fancy the
highest rule is a presumptuous folly: and to ask according to our own lusts, is
an implicit blasphemy. 2. Prayer must be holy in the matter, this must also
bear the stamp of God. Whenever, your Censers are fired, the coal must be taken
from the Altar, nor from the Kitchen. The matter must be spiritual, or
spiritually desired. For instance: First, You may and must pray for the
apprehension of Gods love, promised Hos. 14.4. I will love them freely.
Secondly, For pardon of sin, promised Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth
out thy tra^sgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins.
Thirdly, For sanctification of nature, promised Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy
God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord
thy God with all thine heart. Ezekiel. 36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean water
upon you, and you shall be clean. Fourthly, For the removal of judgments,
spiritual or corporal, promised Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will deliver thee, etc. At least for the sanctification of them,
and supportation under them.

Q. May not we pray for temporal blessings?

A. Yes; As some men pray for spiritual things in a carnal way: So others may
pray for carnal blessings in a spiritual manner. Provided 1. It be done in
order, and that they have their due place. Spiritual things must be first and
principal, these secondary and subordinate. Matthew. 6.33. First seek the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, etc. 2. Upon condition that you
submit to God, both the things themselves, and the measure and time. John
12.27, 28. Save me from this hour -- Father glorify thy name! It is enough to
a gracious heart, if God will glorify his own name; carnal hearts are
impetuous and impatient of a check, delay, or denial: Rachel must have children
or die. 3. With caution, that you desire and use them to the Lord. Whatever you
desire for this life, make it serviceable toward the other; desire not mercies
for, nor abuse them to excess, revenge, luxury. Lust is an earnest craver, but
when it rece^veth any comfort, it consumes it in ease and pleasure. This must
be observed, else you may ask and receive not, because you ask amiss, Jam.
4.3. Your requests may not terminate in self. That was but a brutish request
which we find related, Exodus 17.2. Give us water that we may drink: A beast can
aim at self-preservation. This branch of Prayer must have an ordination to God.
Therefore,

Thirdly and Lastly, Desir^s must be holy for the end. As may well be collected
from the beginning and end of the Lords Prayer; the beginning is, Hallowed be
thy Name: the end is, For thine is the Kingdom, Power and Glory, for ever! As
the superior Orb carries all the inferior about with i^s own motion: So must
this great and noble end wheel about all our desires, and, though lowest
actions.

Enquire we may for the clearing of this last branch after two things. First,
When is a man's end holy? Secondly, Why our ends must be holy?



himself, nor any other creature is the last end of a man's prayer: For either
of them make it eccentrick, irregular. The motion must needs be lame, when a
man shall make God a mere servant to himself, and move wholly on a private
center of his own: and is visibly for God, but underhand for himself. The
Pharisees were glorious in prayer, but what they did was (...), to be admired
by others. The Spring was not Gods grace, and the end was not Gods glory.
Glorious actions without holy and pure ends, are like sweet herbs on a noisome
dunghi^l. 2. When God is the end (ultimus, though not proximus) last, though
not the very next or immediate end of our desires: As in Jacobs, and Hannahs
prayer, 1 Samuel 1.11. When men aim at his glory, the enl^rging of Christ's
Kingdom, and resolve what they get in prayer to spend for God, and the good of
his Relations, with the sanctification and salvation of their souls: then the
end is holy. The want of this, was that did so discolor the (otherwise)
excellent works of the Heathen, which are almost incredible, they looked not to
God in their great services and brave exploits. So that their actions were good
Bullion (as one speaks) but carried not a good stamp upon them, and therefore
would not pass with God. So that it is well maintained by our Divines, yea,
some of the Schoolmen, that their works were not morally good, because though
the proxime end might be good, yet they knew not the ultimate end which was
Gods glory.

Secondly, Why must our ends be holy?

Diverse Reasons may be rendered. Philosophical, and some Theological. Of the
first, I will mention these three, viz. 1. Because every operative intellect
does begin with the end; that is first in intention, and that which does both
move the agent and denominate the action. Which appears to be truth from two
reasons. First, Because the end supplieth the room and place of the form, in
all those agents and acts whose essential perfection consists in operation.
Secondly, Because the last end does perfect both the actor and the action;
justly therefore does it begin with the end, and take denomination from the
end. 2. The end must be holy, because the last end especially does give beauty
and amability to all the means conducing thereunto: and because the appetite is
terminated and quieted in the last end. Needs must his desires be holy whose
end is holy. 3. Because the end and the means leading thereunto, are
proportioned and disposed together; Posito sine ponuntur and disponuntur media
omnia, etc. if a man's end be not holy, the means leading thereunto cannot be
holy.

The second sort of Reasons are Theological, I shall give these two; viz.
First, Because the Lord looks mainly to the end, and specially no^es wherefore
we pray. He regards not so much the Arithmetic of Prayers, how numerous they
are: nor the Rhetoric of them, how neat they are: nor their Geometry, how long
they are; not so much their Music, how melodious, nor their Logic, how
methodical; but their Divinity, how heart-sprung they are, how they tend to his
glory, how much holiness is twisted about them.

Secondly, The end if it be holy, will strengthen the Petitioner to pe^severe
in the use of all good means. When a man with a free Conscience can say, Lord,
thou know my ends, they are not merely self, nor biassed with carnal
interests, but holy and spiritual, according to the best of my knowledge and
power, (as did Hezekiah, I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight) is a good ground to rest
faith upon, for a gracious ^nswer in due time.

This may be useful to us all, by way First, For correction: there be many
among us that pray, at least that read or say prayers, (like the Parrot at
Rome, that could repeat the whole Creed.) but very few that send up fervent
expressions of holy desires. Some know no^ what it is to pray, they cannot
distinguish between oro and credo. Others think not of it, that they are going
into Heaven, into the Presence Chamber, before the Throne of a great and
glorious God, when they do pray. And too many there are who rest on the work
done, numbering rather then weighing their prayers. So it comes to pass, that
most are indisposed for this holy exercise, in all or some of these following
cases; 1. If your hearts be impure; which may be discerned by your thoughts,
now good, and then bad, and both disregarded; by your words, the very
offspring of the heart, Matthew. 12.34. false, corrupt impertinent; by your
companions chosen for intimacy, and that you most delight in; and by your life,
if that be impure, through the reign of any one sin: You regard iniquity in
your heart, and the Lord will not hear. But observe, there is a twofold
impurity, one in the dominion, another from the inhesion of sin, understand the
first here. 2. If you have and bring nothing but natural desires, (sufficient
knowledge, a good memory, a quick invention, and easy elocution) so that your
praying is nothing but a mat^er of wit and parts, rather for ostentation then
devotion; which may be thus discerned, First, If your heads are better then
your hearts, you have more abilities then will, to do good and glorify God.
Secondly, By such prayers the head may be bettered but not the heart. It is a
clear case, the more any man prays spiritually, the more is Gods image
renewed in his heart and soul, the heart is more benefited then the head.
Thirdly, If the matter o^ manner of your prayers be carnal; as, if you should
crave blessings of the le^^ hand only, for corn, wine and oil, meat that
perishes, the bona scabelli, and not throni, as Austine speaks; o^ should
ask these things in the first plac^: the matter and manner is then carnal.
Fourthly, if your ends be evil which move you to pray; and may be known from
these three companions, F^rst, Hypocrisy, when men neither o^it the duty
wholly, nor go through with it, in an hearty and cheerful performance.
Secondly, Vainglory, praying to be heard and praised, Matthew. 6.5. A thing
hateful among Heathens. T^lly taxed Gracchus for this, that he referred all his
actions, not to the rule o^ virtue, but to the favor of the people, that he
might have their esteem and applause. And as Pliny tells, the Nightingale
sings far longer and sweeter, when men are by, then at other times. Thirdly,
Self-love, which keeps men at home to look only or chiefly to their own good.
If thus you pray, see what follows; Your outward gross sins are daily
increased, by this addition of spiritual sins. An unprepared, irreverent
Petitioner takes Gods Name in vain. Besides, your pains and labor upon the
matter are lost, the Lord will not heat such prayers; the grunting of Hogs in
the stye, says Hierom, is as pleasing to God, because he expects no more then
he has given or offered.

every kind of praying will not serve the turn. Every sound is not Music. The
followers of Baa^ called on his name from morning even until noon, but there
was no voice, nor any thing that answered, 1 Kings 26.28. Yea, and they cried
aloud, and cut themselves aft^r their manner, etc. and no voice, nor any to
answer, etc. Papists say over abundance of composures which they call prayers,
in so much as they need beads to help them keep number, yet Saint James his
Praye^ is to be desired among them. So too many among our selves, who rest on
the Idol opus operatum, or, work wrought. If they be frequent in some common
forms, they think themselves boon-Christians, though they do nothing less then
pray. Take heed of this, God is in Heaven and thou on earth, Eccles. 5.2. ^et
your expressions be heated with reve^ent fervency. 2. Learn the Art of Praying.
He is a good Christian that can pray well, not contenting himself with the form
without the power. My Brethren! It is not the labor of the lips, but the
travel of the heart. Common beggary is the easiest and poorest trade, but this
beggary is the richest and the hardest. Then to the work, redeem the time. It
is observed of the Camel, that having long traveled through sandy desart^
without water, impletur cum bibendi est occasio, and in praeteritum and in
futurum: (i. e.) drinks for the time past, and for the time to come; so do you:
for past neglects, act with more diligence; now, do for what is past and to
come. And for your direction herein, know, that he that would pray well, must
have, first, Ability, consisting in knowledge of his own wants, and Gods
treasury in his word and promises. Blind devotion cannot please God. I will
pray with understanding. In assent, not only to the verity, but also to the
equity and congruity between the desire and the offer. In a fiducial resting on
the fidelity of the promiser, with reference to his own case. All which is
ordinarily got, by hearing of the Word, and former experience of Gods
goodness. An humble hearer, is always a zealous Petitioner. Secondly, He must
have flexibility, or a bending of the mind to or with the duty. He must not be
content to be down on his knees, if his heart be not up: to have his hand in
the work, if his soul be not also in it. It was the saying of holy Bradford,
that he would never leave a duty, till he had brought his heart into the frame
of the duty. He would not leave confession of sin, till his heart was broken
for sin. He would not leave Petitioning for grace, till his heart was quickened
in desire. A property of a good, honest, soft and humble heart, which is a
jewel, an ornament of great price in the sight of God. Thirdly, He must have
dignity or worth, both for composition and presentation. The Spirit of Prayer
to compose it, and the personal merit of Christ to present it. Pray always
with all supplication in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. 3. Be instructed: when you
are about to pray, call these things to mind: Prayer is a fervent expression of
holy desires: holy for person, principle, matter and end. And so I come to the
last part of the description, that these holy desires with spiritual fervency,
must be presented

Unto the only true God by Jesus Christ.] To God only, Prayers must be
directed, not to creatures, Angel or Saint. In every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God, Phil.
4.6. This will be cleared with a little labor. For, first, he only can hear
and relieve you, Psalm. 65.11. O thou that hear prayers, to thee shall all
flesh come. Isa. 63.16. Doub^lesse thou art our Father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou art our Father, O Lord, our
Redeemer. Look as nature teaches our children to come to their parents for
every thing, and to give thanks to them; so grace teaches the children of God,
to cry Abba, Father, to resort to him in every condition (as they did to Joseph
in Egypt) and to praise him for every blessing. As it is one of the Royalties
of the King to be petitioned unto as a common parent for grace in sundry cases,
so is this a divine Royalty of God, that all flesh should come to him in their
several necessities, abasing themselves in confessing their indignity, exalting
him with whom is all fullness of good things, and uncontrolable power to effect
for us, whatever is good according to his own pleasure. Secondly, For this you
have a command, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble. Acts 8.22.
Pray God if perhaps, etc. Yea, and a promise, Whatsoever ye ask the Father in
my Name, he will give it you. And God complains of such who forsake the
fountain of living waters, and dig to themselves pits that can hold no water.
Thirdly, We have presidents for it. The Church directs her prayer to God, Lam.
5.1. And herein she is like to John Baptist, a shining and a burning light. She
shines as knowing the rich storehouse where, in her exigence to fetch relief,
and she goes to none below God. She burns, the fire of her zeal is kindled in
her breast, and therefore goes not with cold, lukewarm affections. In that
Prayer our blessed Savior taught his disciples, we are taught the same; Look
over the form, observe the phrases, and see whether you can imagine, that
prayer should ever be directed to any other. Read through all the Records of
the world, and show if you can, where any Saint of God made supp^ica ion unto
any but to God only! You cannot; no, not to the Virgin the Mother of Christ,
nor to any other Saint or Angel. And in all the presidents recorded in the
sacred Scriptures, not only in the Old Testament, (while the Fathers are fondly
supposed to be in Limbo, as Bellarmine gives the reason why we do not then read
of any praying to Saints.) but in the New, after our Saviors ascension. And if
there be neither command, promise nor president in the Old or New Testament for
invocation of Saints, is it not a wonder, it has been so much pressed and
practiced. To the contrary we have, viz. Matthew. 4.10. Colos. 2.18. Rev.
19.10.22.9. Alas all other persons are rather praying to God, then to be prayed
to, as God. God is the author of every perfect gift, and to seek it from any
other is flat idolatry; and to give the praise thereof to any but God, is
sacrilege.

Further we add, By and through Jesus Christ.] We cannot mount to Heaven on our
own wings: nor reach God by our own strength: as soon may we scale Heaven with
ladders. And besides, how terrible and horrible is it to think of God, much
more to come to him, without Christ. The holiness and justice of God were
before Christ as two flaming swords to keep off souls from coming to him: but
by Christ, they both look on the soul with a lovely and aimable countenance.
And, whatever you ask the Father in Christ's name, believing, ye shall receive.

For the farther benefit of Practitioners in this holy Art, here will be
enquired, 1. What it is to offer up Prayers by Christ? 2. Why they must be so
offered up?

First, What is it to offer up Prayers by Christ?

composed by the Spirit of Christ. I name this the oftener, lest you should
trust to your own spirits, and content your selves with mere natural desires.
And further to move you, both to prize and to procure and cherish the spirit of
prayer. 2. It is to direct Prayers to Christ, ascending by his glorious
humanity toward the Deity, that so the gift may be sanctified by the Altar. It
is Christ's office to pray the Father for his Saints, and it is their privilege
to call upon him so to do, and direct their holy desires to him, Joh. 14.16.
Thirdly, It is to have Prayers presented by Christ to the Father, and taken as
immediately from him, who is heard in all his suits. John 11.42. I know that
thou hear me always. This ^s to offer up Prayers by Christ.

Secondly, Why must Prayers be offered

I Answer: 1. Covenant is made with him; all the promises are in him yea! Yea,
indeed, all the promises are made to him first, and by him to us. Heb. 9.15. He
is called the Mediator of the Covenant. No intercourse now between God and man,
but by and through him. The keys of the house of David are laid on his
shoulders. He is the only door, and through him we have boldness of access to
the Father: and confidence to enter into the Holiest, by the blood of Jesus, by
a new and living way, Heb. 10.20. 2. He is both the Priest and Altar for his
Church. No other Priests or Altars now properly but Christ: Since Priest, Altar
and Sacrifice met in one, in him. No more Priests, Altars or Sacrifices but
Metaphorical. As then, all Sacrifices were to be brought to the Priest, and
offered on the Altar appointed, so it must be now. We have an Altar upon which
all our spiritual Sacrifices must be offered, even the Lord Jesus, Heb. 13.10.
If we go and offer without him, the Altar, and in our own name, the sacrifice
will be loathed. It is not because we perform a duty in the most excellent
manner, that it is accepted, but because Christ our High Priest presents both
us and our performances to the Father. So that if a man should offer as many
Sacrifices as were at the dedication of Solomon's Temple, and all without
blemish, and that all the qualifications did meet in the person that did offer:
yet all these are accursed, if offered in their own name. As the least things
that were offered, even an Epha, or a Gomer, a pair of Turtle Doves, or a mite,
were accepted from the hand of the High Priest, when rivers of oil should be
refused, if presented otherways. We must do therefore in this case, as the
Country of Tire and Sidon, having need of Herod's favor, made suit to Blastus
his Chamberlain, that was gracious with him. And as Themistocles being to make
a great request to King Philip of Macedon, took with him young Alexander,
Philips beloved son. We can then hope to speed with God, when by faith we take
Christ Jesus with us to be our Intercessour, to present and offer our prayers
to God. Thirdly, Because the best prayers of the Saints here, as they proceed
from men, are tainted and unsavory; yea, to go farther: the most gracious
actions which they are enabled to do by Gods Spirit, are coming through them so
imperfect, (as pure water running through a foul pipe, gets some soil upon
it: and excellent generous wine will taste of the cask, if it be not sweet.) so
vitiated, as they become very unfit for the Lords holy and pure presence. And
therefore we read of the smoke of the incense coming with the prayers of the
Saints. They must be dipped in his blood, perfumed with his odours, otherwise
they will stink worse in Gods nostrils, then ever did the Onions and Garlic of
Egypt. It was the fault of King Uzziah to burn incense upon the Altar without a
Priest: he was resisted by eighty valiant Priests of the Lord, and struck with
Leprosy, to make you fear to do the like, by offering up prayers to God
without Christ. The work cannot be accepted, where the person is not: and the
person is accepted in and for Christ's sake.

Now stand still, look back, lay all together, and conclude two things, by way
of Application.

First, The misery of graceless persons (though endowed with many natural
abilities) in that they cannot pray, in best health and prosperity, much less
in sickness and danger. They have no ability, skill nor will to pray with any
power and life. The Painter can give external lineaments and outward
representations, but he cannot give that which is the actus primus, life to
them; the hypocrite may give outward colors and shades, but he wants this
Principle. As the Satyr in Plutarch, who strove to make a dead man stand
upright, but could not, said, Deest aliquid intus: there wants a principle
within to enable him to stand. So may we say, the carnal man that prays, wants
a principle within to put forth spiritual prayer. He is that like a ship that
is wind-bound. No stirring without the Spirits gales. There is great difference
between praying and reading or saying over a prayer; these have no fervent
expressions, their heat goes another way; no holy desires can come from such
impure, proud, profane spirits; either they go to the creature as the end, or
by the creature as the mean, and what success can be expected? That Is a true
rule: Bonum est ex integris causis, malum e quolibet defectu: Good, like
harmonious Music, if one string jar, the h^rmony is marred; and like beauty
which is completed of the Symmetry of parts, if one part be deformed, the
beauty is vitiated; thus it is in any good action, let it be never so admirable
for the matter of it, if there be any failing or crack in the principle, manner
or end, the man loses the comfort and the reward of the duty. You ask and have
not, because you ask amiss. Let such consider two things: First, That all
their hope, such as it is, themselves confessing, is upon their prayers, good
meaning and good deeds; now, without grace and Christ's Spirit, you can do none
of these; (he that wants the Spirit of Grace, must needs be destitute of the
Spirit of Supplication.) You hope to be saved by your good prayers, and cannot
pray: by your good deeds, and can do none: without faith it is impossible to
please God. In what condition are you then? Secondly, None can stead you but
God; not friend, not wit, not wealth, were you set as the Caliph of Babylon
once was in the midst of a golden treasure, and yet starved: in the midst of
all these and cannot pray, in what a miserable case are you? The dead pra^se
not God, they that are in the pit call not upon him: and without prayer no good
thing can be had.

Secondly, Let all learn their duty, to amend your praying; else, you may howl
upon your beds, and call loud upon him, and not be heard. It is not speaking or
babbling, but praying that has the promise. Psalm. 50.16. Matthew. 7. See wherein
you have been faulty, apprehend and acknowledge it; for time to come, number
not, measure not the length of your prayers, weigh them in Christ's balance,
viz. by the heat and holiness of your desires, by the merit of Christ, and by
the reverent fervency of expression.

And thus from the description of fervent-working prayer, I proceed to
Objections, Cases, Conditions and Motives; so to close this Doctrine.

It may be objected, first, What need of this ado? Will not less pains serve
the turn? God knows our wants already, he will do what seems good in his
sight. His Decrees are immutable, and cannot be altered by all our e^rnestnesse
and endeavors.

Thus indeed argued Maximus Tyrius an Heathen. Libertines in our days. But to
the Answer. Prayer is not for Gods information, but the creatures submission,
we pray for his leave; yea, when he will do any thing, he stirs up those
that are his to desire that which otherwise he would have done, to the intent
that for honors sake, he might attribute the same unto their prayers. Besides,
Gods Decrees do not exclude the duty of the creature, and the work of second
causes, Jer. 29.11, 12. I know the thoughts of peace I have toward you, yet ye
shall call upon me, and I will hear you. This, Moses and Elias knew, and the
former, turned Gods predictions, and the latter, his promises into prayers.
Finally, We pray not in any case to the intent that God should be changed,
which thing should be attempted in vain: for he is immutable; but rather, that
we our selves should be changed, for so much as in praying we are made capable
of the divine benefits. By virtue of Gods Ordination, a spiritual holy prayer
casts the soul into a better disposition, so that now he is made capable of
spiritual blessings, which before it was not. So that we draw not God nearer to
us by our arguments, but we draw nearer unto him.



spiritually dead. The blind man may justly say, he cannot see, the deaf man,
that he cannot hear, the same man, that he cannot go: but nemo vivens potest
dicere, non possum orare. No living man can say, cannot pray. The blind, the
lame, the deaf, if they have any grace, any jo^ of spiritual life, may pray:
the dead only praise thee not, O Lord! Neither can any man pray acceptably
without the Spirit. 2. It is true, you cannot pray of your selves, by natural
abilities, or any innate principle. Pray that you may pray, for you know not
what you should pray for, as you ought, but the Spirit helps your
infirmities. As a poor hungry man craves an alms, or a condemned prisoner a
pardon, so, humbly and earnestly seek of God, the assistance of his blessed
Spirit, the Spirit of Prayer, eying what is written for your comfort, Luke
11.13. If you being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children: how
much more shall your heavenly Father give the Spirit to them that ask. 3. S^ir
up those gifts and abilities connatural and acquired, whatever they be, though
never so few or weak, and do what you can with them. If you can but look up and
sigh out your wants, and with silent motions of the heart (where words and
other skill is wanting) send up your complaints to Heaven. The Ravens call upon
the Lord, he hears and feeds them: you are better in Gods esteem then Ravens.
4. By timely and stirring endeavors, remove the impediments of Prayer. As are
ignorance, pride, distraction, through variety of evil motions, or earthly
employments, difuse and the like; These clip the wings of the soul, and are to
it as lead to the net, bear it down; they are the rust of the soul and do
mightily streighten and render it useless. Many complain of power, when will
is wanting. They say they cannot do this or that, when through spiritual sloth
they never tried. 5. Hear and join sometimes as conveniently you may, with such
as can pray fervently. Those that have any sparks of heavenly fire in their
breasts, may be a means to inflame others, as a dead coal catches fire being
cast among living coals: and green wood takes fire when it is laid with the
dry; at least to give a good president and great encouragement to the duty. I
heartily wish you knew the benefit of good company. The communion of Saints is
the perfection of beauty and joy of the whole earth; No better help to Prayer
then the society of those who can and do pray with frequent fervency.
Especially be careful to note your enemies which go about, yea, often hinder
you from this duty. And they are such as these viz. First, Your sleighting of
the duty, that it is an easy thing to pray. And so it is indeed, as most go
about it, not distinguishing between reading and saying over a prayer, and
prayer indeed. Commonly, men, yea, good men and women put not their strength to
it, but hastily run over it as a task; insomuch that frequency does allay
fervency, and custom does turn prayer into a fruitless formality, indeed, vain
babbling. Secondly, Living in some secret sin, especially, pride, (God resists
the proud,) and enmity with your neighbors. This is one of the worst signs in
the world, especially to be out with the people of God. Yet such broils Satan
labors to foment, and chiefly for this end, to hinder prayers, or to slack
the fervency of them, if he can, between man and wife, Minister and people; the
Devil well knows, guilt to be a tongue-tying thing; Great sins to be great
gags. David on this account prays, Psalm. 51.14, 15. Deliver me from bloods, O
Lord, then my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness: Open my mouth!
Guilt had put a padlock on David's mouth, and he could not speak to God, whom he
had so much offended. Sin approved, makes the Lord deaf, and the sinner dumb.
Thirdly, Variety of worldly business and multiplicity of oppressing cares;
these are the birds that would rob Abraham of his Sacrifice, and swarms of
Egypt, which annoy the best; coming necessarily, they prove a cumber, but when
men voluntatarily thrust themselves upon, and delight to be in them, as a fish
in water, they choke the seed, and thrust duty out of doors, Matthew. 13.22. Luke
21.34. Oh how quickly will these thorns overtop the corn! Fourthly, Satan and
wicked company, which unloose a man, and disrelish spiritual employments,
laboring to cast a beclouding mist upon the blessed beauty of holiness, and
to vail the spiritualnesse of this exercise from the eye of the mind. Either
they indispose men wholly and keep them off from it, as forgetful or fearful to
come into Gods presence; or else, to keep them contented with a mere form; so
that men may go to Hell praying in that manner, Isa. 1.15. Hosea 7.14.

3. But many that have used thus to Ergo, etc.

Will you therefore dislike it, coin be counterfeit, will you therefore keep no
silver in your purse? I think you will not so easily be persuaded: Some abuse
good callings, will you therefore cast off all? How can tha^ be reason in
Religion, which ^is a kind of madness in civil matters? If an abuse of some
should merit an abolishment of all good things of that nature, what would have
become of us by this time? But to answer more punctually. First, All those have
not proved counterfeits, that have been thus fervent in prayer. God forbid,
that you should so think. Moses, Joshuah, David, Hannah, Daniel, Paul, with
many hundreds of blessed souls, have held out in a growing fervency, and proved
best at last. Secondly, In those that have falen, the fault was not in their
fervent praying, o^ any other part of Religion, but their false hearts, blame
unsoundnesse only, and give zeal, her due praise. Thirdly, Let their example
make you afraid, of any, especially, self-deceiving-hypocrisie. Keep truth in
the inward parts. Labor mainly for sincerity. Let the greatest heat be inward,
in the intention of the spirit this way. Fourthly, Regard not so much what the
common sort say, as what God and your need requires. If others deride it, the
Scriptures commend it. Remember Joshuah; let all others do and be what they
please, go you and pray fervently, with all your strength. It is sad to see,
how careless, indevout, cold and irreverent the generality of people are
amongst us! if by their public we may judge of their private devotion. Mend
this, and the rest of your spiritual maladies will be easily cured.

fervency in prayer.

nature of them, they are always blessings, either of common Providence, or of
special favor and promise. The former are and may be enjoyed without any
prayer, and therefore without fervency, coming from God as a Creator, to
support his creature in being, till the pr^ordained end be obtained. The
latter, which are blessings indeed, sweet, full and lasting, must be sued out
with strong cries, and fervency of devotion. I will yet for this be enquired of
by the house of Israel, to do it for them, Ezekiel. 36.37. Many rich favors
promised in the former verses, but they must be fetched by Prayer. 2. For the
end of them, some are bestowed on men for their everlasting good, as are saving
graces, and a sanctified use of common favors; effects of Prayer in adult
persons. Other blessings are bestowed not so much for themselves as for the
good of others; Such are functional abilities, for the good of humane
societies: as Saul called to be King had another heart given him, without
prayer for it. 3. For the use and continuance; that shows whether they be the
persons of devout Prayer or no. Men may have blessings with a curse, Hosea
13.11. I gave them a King in mine anger, etc. as he once gave them quails to
choke them. Like Achans wedge, Gehezies silver, Je^oboams Crown, (all were
gifts of God, but yet giftlesse.) Ahabs Vineyard taken from Naboth, because
convenient for him. Some things are lawful, but not convenient; this was
convenient, but not lawful: it had been better for him and his, had he suffered
some inconveniences to have enjoyed things lawful. Possession without right,
and prosperity without prayer frequent and fervent, is the bane and ruin of
all.



fasting, watching, and much kneeling; [ James surnamed the just, Christ's
kinsman, had his knees made as hard as Camels knees, with much praying; as
Eusebius relates. Father Latimer during his imprisonment, was so constant and
frequent in prayer, that he was much impaired in his bodily strength, as is
related by Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments.] But I never read or heard, nor
conceive it possible, that ever any man was hurt by fervency in prayer. This
heat, I speak of, consumes no radical moisture, an heavenly dew goes with it
as a cordial, to cool, refresh and make glad men in prayer. 2. I demand, Can
your time and strength be spent in a bette^ emploiment? No man spends so much
as he gains in prayer. You are mistaken, and slander this sweet communion with
God, while you lay such blame, upon secret or private-devotion in
family duties. Does not the satisfying of your lusts spend you? Do not evil
company and riot consume you? Does not your neglect and backwardness in sowing
(Charity is so called by the Apostle, 2. Cor. 9.6.) beggar you? it is not
prayer. 3. How can you after deliberation account it an hinderance of you or
yours in their work? First, It is a matter of greatest weight and concernment,
for comfort, credit and profit; and to matters of greatest importance we
account all other things but lets, but not them as lets to any thing of a
subordinate nature. If the King or some special Favorite should come to your
Place, and publish a will to admit any to his presence, that you might confer
with him an hour or two, about your wrongs and wants: would you so plead, Alas,
we have not the leisure, it would hinder us in our callings? I trow not: but
rather put off all occasions, attend this: So judge in the Case now in
question. Secondly, It does much further you in all your worldly affairs. You
know, the baiting of the horse does not hinder the journey, nor the whetting of
the sithe, the work, but further them. The blessing of the Lord makes rich,
and fervent prayer is the souls messenger sent up to fetch it down, on
servants, cattle, grounds, and the whole day and night. Therefore is prayer
called by one of the Fathers, the lock of the night, and the key of the day: to
shut up from harm, and to let in the Sun, even the Sun of righteousness in his
glorious beams and ravishing influence, into every sad, dark and drooping soul.
4. Grant all you say; Suppose it some hinderance; will you be at no charge to
wait upon God, and to prefer your Petitions to him? You can hardly expect so
easy and such cheap audience in any earthly Princes Court, to have your
Petitions presented and answered without fees, or moving gratuities. And, will
you part with nothing for God, not so much as hazard a pretended loss? David
was of another mind, when called to build an Altar, 2 Samuel 24. He would not
offer that to God which cost him nothing. It is true God is not won thus, our
good extends not to him; yet he would have us willing to part with all for the
purchase of the pearl: to account all things but dung in respect of communion
with him, and the fruition of Christ; he can give you a rich dew upon your
labors much more then this, and infinitely recompense your supposed
hinderance. A whet is no let, you say: and for all the haste of work and
business, you will have time to eat your meat, three or four times a day, that
you may do your work both better and speedier; O fools and unwise! to judge
prayer a loss, a hinderance, while it refreshes the soul of poor Pilgrims,
sets edge on all our spiritual implements, and calls in the Lord to be and
help you in your business! Many thousands now in Heaven are blessing God for
the benefit of Prayer. No time can be spent better. But I am sensible of a
Digression; my aim is to assure you, (my Beloved in the Lord, for whose sake
this is written) that Prayer is the best way to thrive. To such as rested on
the Lords day according to the command, did not the Lord give a double portion
of Manna the day before? And to such as paid their Tithes for the maintenance
of the Sanctuary, did not the Lord promise to open the windows of Heaven,
Malac. 3.10? Abraham had this promise of abundance performed to him; So had
Constantine the first Christian Emperor, the Churches great Benefactor, so
many temporal blessings, as never any man durst to wish. Aug. de Civit. Dei.
Lastly, Where you mention fear of Derision, it is of all other the least
discouragement. If others laugh, do you mourn; if they scoff, do you counsel;
if they curse, do you bless and pray. The best things do hear ill from the
worst men. They know not what they do. Let Dogs bark, or mad men shoot arrows
to the Lights of Heaven, they with their radiant light and motion do still
serve their Creator. So say you, If this be to be vile, I will be more vile
then thus. Choose you, whether you will pray or no, as for me, I will pray
fervently to God, who only is able to save us from sin and Hell.

From Objections, we proceed to some Cases of Conscience.

First, What should a man do that

1. Let such a one know, fervent desire of the heart is to God an acceptable
prayer: and broken language coming from a broken heart, avails more then
affectation of well-couched words, without affection of prayer. I say, the
business of prayer is more dispatched by sighs, then speeches, by inward
groans, more then outward garnishes. As the Lord hears without ears, so he
understands without words. Sighs and breathing^ to God are articulate. There
is great dispute among the Schoolmen, about the speech of Angels: but this they
agree in, that one Angel speaks thus to another, when any one has a conceit
in his mind of any thing, with a will that another should understand it, and
that God should also, that is enough for the expression of it; So it is with
the spirit of man, in speaking to God, for the spirit of man agrees with
Angels. Though it is our duty to strive to pray in fit words, and to be
enriched in all utterance and knowledge, Hosea 14.1. 1 Cor. 1.5. Therefore 2.
Let him for a time use the help of godly men's prayers, composed to his hand, by
the same Spirit, and purposely intended for such, as want knowledge, memory or
utterance, till the Lord further enable the willing mind to make its requests
known in a reverent and sober manner, as savouring more of grace then art.
Young beginners may find great help in the matter, fit words, good method,
from such a form, and which being applied to particular occasions, do not a
little quicken, revive and enlarge the heart. If you should say, Is it lawful
so to pray? I shall answer by asking this question; Where is there any law
against it? And where there is no law, there is no transgression. I can find
no command against it. This we find in Scripture, that Prayer is an Ordinance
of God; but whether to be conceived only in the heart, or uttered by words,
whether in our own, or in others words, by pronunciation or reading that is not
appointed. Why then may not a godly man, and in some cases especially, (as when
the soul cannot put forth its operations) do as Christ did, pray often in the
same words to God; and that, though composed by another? Neither is there any
thing hinders, but that a man thus doing, may pray by the Spirit; the work of
the Spirit being rather 1. To teach us what graces to pray for. 2. To raise
fervent and devout desires after the things we pray for, (groans that cannot be
expressed) then to give in words, which a man may want, and yet not want the
Spirit of Prayer. Nor that I deny that the Spirit of God does at all help, as
to words and expressions: for he does it mediately by stirring up the
affections; which being raised, are some advantage to expression. However we
find that through slownesse of fantasy, bashfulnesse, unreadinesse of
speech, men that have good affections, may yet need foreign helps, as to words.
3. Let such a one read, or hear to get by heart, such passages of Scripture as
being orderly joined, will make an excellent Prayer. It is best praying in the
Lords own words. The Scripture is a Magazine of matter. Many complain they have
a great dearth of expressions, when the cause is in themselves, they do not
study the Word of God, the most genuine offspring of expressions.

unfit and altogether indisposed for Prayer, especially such Prayer, with holy
fervency.

corruption, which must be mortified, or from omission of some duty, which must
be bewailed and redeemed; or, from a temptation which must be resisted; or
else, from a desertion, in which case there must be a waiting and earnest
seeking for the Lords return. 2. In this danger and damp of the soul, know,
there is most need of praying to bring the heart into temper, and to free it
from those pressing weights, which do so clog and keep it down. The only way to
fit a soul for this duty, is to fall presently upon it, and the very doing of
the duty does fit to the duty: As one expresses it; for as all actions of the
same kind increase the habit; so prayer will make ready for prayer. By setting
a man's self on the work, he shall gather disposednesse, though unfit before: as
joints benumbed, get life being used. 3. Know, such is your condition here
below: like a watch, though it be brought in order, yet ere long it will be out
again: like the house that is swept, and the childs face that is washed,
gathers dust, and is fouled again. Yet let not this discourage you, but rather
excite you to resolution and diligence in keeping the soul Heavenward: and
like the Palm Tree, which by how much the more weight is laid upon it, gathers
the more strength, the more to encounter Assailants. Especially take heed of
living in any beloved sin, and thinking to pacify Conscience, and satisfy
offended Justice, by a task of daily prayer; a wile of Satan ^eigning among
Papists, who hearing the Mass, and confessing their sins once a year audibly,
think they may live as they list, and spend the day as they ple^se, as if they
had taken a new license to commit iniquity; a practice too too common amongst
ourselves, resting on a cold performance of some duties, without truth of
grace, or any thought of a necessity of universal obedience.



1. Consider whence they come; from without, within, as corruptions prevailing
through negligence, or mere weakness; judge and shame thy self for such
distractions, strive to do better, so shall they never be imputed. To be wholly
freed from them is a privilege proper to the state of perfection: as some
diseases cannot, will not be cured near home, but men must repair to the Bath,
or to the City for help; this infirmity is not to be quite healed, till we come
to Heaven. 2. Admit not such vain and hurtful thoughts while you are in your
civil emploiments, at least play not with them as children use to do with motes
in the air; for there begins your bane: You admit them at other times, and they
will be admitted at prayer. If once the mind is let loose, to rove idly, it
will hardly be brought in to attend upon God wholly in the duty of Prayer, or
otherwise: as the trifling fellow that wanders up and down, will not easily be
tied to work. The best way to keep the heart from gadding, is to keep it as
much as may be in ^une, and rightly disposed before; as when a man is to use
his horse he will have him under bridle. 3. Though you be set with terrors and
fears, yet fly not upon such imaginations, but resist, and the enemy will
yield: leave not the place where you are, but buckle so much the closer to the
duty in hand. When Christ sweat drops of blood, he prayed most fervently.
Remember Satan is chained, he has no enforcing power, (Distrustful fear gives
advantage:) and that you are in Gods presence, who has power over the Devil.
4. Know, that these defects and displeasing thoughts, do disturb and discomfort
the praying soul, but cannot evacuate your prayers. This is the privilege of a
true Christian, his spotty and defiled prayers (as other services) are washed
in the Foun^^in opened for sin and uncleanness: he corrects, interlines, and
paraphrases them, puts them into the method and language, and expected
constitution of the Court of Heaven, that what goes from us with sincerity is
immediately taken and entered on the File, and become standing Records of that
Office.



matter, manner, or end, no marvail; in the matter, as Moses in his desire to
enter into the promised Land; the matter of prayer being temporal, we have no
absolute promise to obtain; Spiritual mercies indeed are bona absoluta, and
bona bonum habentem facientia, ever good to him that has them, and therefore
we have an absolute promise to speed in our requests for them; he will never
deny good things to them that ask, Luke 11.13. But outward blessings, are only
bona respectiva, good in reference to a certain end, and our expectations may
fail with reference to them. In the manner; as the Church in the Cant. 5.3. She
would and she would not. There is it may be a kind of wambling willingness
and velleitie, but it boils not up to a full height of resolution for God, and
utmost endeavors after the thing desired. Now, affection without endeavor, is
like Rachel, beautiful, but barren. Or, Lastly, Your prayers may miss in the
end, either of intention or of duration. They draw not near him with true
heart, that is contented either to wait for, or to want the thing desired,
being heartily willing that God should be glorified, though themselves be not
answered. They that ask aright may have any thing, Mat. 5.6. 2. Prayers may be
successeful and yet not found or felt. The grant may be past, and you not know
it, for it is made to Christ first, who by the worth of his Intercession merits
a return of Prayers, to himself, and after to his Saints; besides, somewhat
equivolent, or better for you, then that which you requested, may be given, and
you not discern it, for the vehement intention of your eyes upon your own will;
or, the very thing may be granted, though not for the time, manner, means and
measure, by you, to your selves propounded and from God expected. 3. I grant,
the Lord may justly and mercifully for your good, either deny or cross you:
And that for these Reasons, First, Because of the indisposition of your heart
to receive such a blessing, or so much. Paul prayed thrice, and had this answer
in the end, My Grace is sufficient for thee, to uphold and give thee victory,
better then thy desired freedom. Time may come when you will kneel down and
adore the wisdom and seasonablenesse of such crosses. Possidonius in the life
of Saint Augustine gives a memorable example: the good Father being to visit
and instruct the people of a certain place, and having a guide to direct him,
did notwithstanding miss the way, and ignorantly fell into a by-path, by which
means he escaped the bloody hands of some cruel Donatists, who lay in wait for
him, to take away his life. I have read another passage of a godly man, that as
he was going to take shipping for France, he brake his leg, and it pleased
Providence so to order it, that the ship whe^ein he should have gone was that
time cast away, and not a man saved; thus may God lead you besides your
expectations and intentions, to preserve you from some danger, which otherwise
lies in wait for you. The sick patient is never better served, then when he is
denied, and God denies our will sometime, that we may have our will. Secondly,
It may be to quicken your zeal, which delay and denial does inflame. Our zeal
if it be true is like lime, which grows hotter by how much more water is cast
upon it. Before you were moderate in your desire and requests: and God likes
not that temper: therefore he delays. Let the infant fast, it will know the
dug the better, and seek it the faster. Stop the Lure and the Flawk will mend
her pitch, and fly the higher; and if God deny or delay faithful prayers, it is
to increase them, to exercise his gifts, your graces, that so you may search
and try your ways more thoroughly, be more ready to open your ears to the
cries of the poor, and for ever after more love and prize the favor of God. 4.
However, pray still, cast not away your anchor, pray for blessings absolutely
promised, although you could never be assured of having your particular
request; granted; wait upon God, and eye the promises; hold out faith and
patience; rest assured, holy desires can never finally be lost; the longer he
holds souls in u^pence, it argues God will give more abundantly. Great
engines move slowly, small things are quickly wheeled about. Great ships that
go long Voyages, before they come home are usually richly laden; an Oak is long
growing, but proves a great tree and long-lived, whereas a Gourd which grows up
in a night, in another is smitten with a worm and dies; a blessing that is
long a coming, is ordinarily a great one when it does come. God intends not
your hinderance, no, no; go on, bre^th after him, make up a good and great
treasure against another day. In the communion of Saints (O blessed Society!)
there is a stock of Prayers continually going on and growing. He is a rich man
indeed, that is rich in Prayer.



active intellect too much liberty, to p^ie into things not yet reve^led; or to
present and apprehend them in another notion then reve^^ed. Sorutator
Majestatis opprimetur a gloria. Your eyes will be dazeled by looking on this
Sun. To frame the Divine Nature in any imaginary likeness is bold Idolatry:
it is to seek that, which in that vast Oce^n of infinite Being cannot be found,
but in man's imagination, presenting wh^t is not, and so making an Idol. 2.
Begin with, and ascend by the now glorious Humanity of Christ, toward the
Deity, let that serve you instead of Jacobs Ladder. 3. Be well acquainted with,
and especially mindeful of the Divine Attributes, wherein the Lord has
described himself to Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets. Majesty, power, bounty
and love do shine in the Attributes of God, and we may make use of them
especially that are fittest to raise the heart in desire and faith, or to
strike it with awe and reverence, as occasion requires. ^. When you have done
that you can, by reading and meditating: conceive an excellency of glory, not
to be fadom'd by humane reason; and so quiet the mind till you be qualified
for the beatifical Vision.

But when I do so, my-thinks my own unworthiness does so much the more present
it self, and makes me ready to sink through fear?

True it is, Opposita juxta se p^sita magis elucescunt: Contraries do
illustrate one another; the glorious day discovers the blackness of the night:
the sweetest Music renders jarring sounds more unacceptable: and the nearer
we draw near into Gods presence, the better we see him in the Word, so much
more does our vileness appear, Job 42.5, 6. But be ye well assured, 1. That
this does not increase your unworthiness (no more then the light of the Sun
increases deformity,) but only unvail it so much the more; the Looking-glass
does not augment the spots in the face, but discovers them to the eye, to the
intent, they may be loathed and washed off, so it is here. 2. The more unworthy
you are in your own eyes, by that reflection: the more worthy are you in the
account of God, who judges not as man judges. 3. Your worthiness for which
you are accepted by God, is not in your selves, but in Christ, the
Righteousness of the Saints. Keep your eye upon him, who is a cloud, a skreen,
or shelter for poor guilty man, against those pure and piercing beams; So that
God sees not iniquity in Jacob. 4. Know and consider, that Prayer is not only
a duty, but a means to procure worthiness and acceptance. Ask of me and I will
give, etc. Ask and ye shall receive. Ask that your joy may be full. Therefore
as they might boldly come unto the inner Court of the King of Persia, to whom
he held forth the golden Scepter: So may we confidently speak to God; his
commands, and sweet promises, his bountiful invitations, and aimable titles,
with the effectual Intercession of Christ, must be opposed to the sense of our
unworthiness.

And so from Cases we proceed to Conditions required, that your prayers may be
acceptable, viz. The Person must be rightly qualified, and all the graces must
be set on work, as about a matter of greatest importance.

First, The Person must be rightly qualified: and that as standing in a
threefold relation: 1. To God. 2. To men. 3. To himself.

1. To God, he must acknowledge God, and be acknowledged of God, by virtue of
the Covenant, and of the Mediator, intitling Petitioners to the promises, Heb.
11.6. He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is the
rewarder of those that diligently seek him; this you must be well settled in,
that he is such in himself, and such toward you as he stands described in his
Word; and be acknowledged of God: or else the answer will be, I have no
pleasure in you, says the Lord of Hosts, neither will I accept an offering at
your hands, Malac. 1.10. I care not for your persons, I respect not your
performances.

2. To men, whether friends or enemies, to be in love and charity, Matthew. 5.23,
24. Matthew. 6.14, 15. Gods bounty to us requires our obedience to him, he will
not give, except we forgive: if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you. Though our love to men be not a cause of our
acceptance with God, yet it is a necessary antecedent; yea, forasmuch as he
has made us this promise here, our forgiving others seems to have the nature
of an intervenient cause, a cause sine qua non, of his forgiving us. How can we
look our Father in the face, or ask him a blessing, when we are conscious that
he knows, hatred or heart-burning between us and our brethren.

3. Toward himself; he must be an hater of sin (if I regard iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer) so as to pursue it with a serious
intent and hearty desire to have it taken and killed; he must be a lover of
Gods image where ever it truly appears; it was the expression of a good man, I
dare not but love him, in whom I see any thing of Christ. If thou love not thy
brother whom thou have seen, how can thou l ve God, whom thou have not seen?
As Dalilah said to Sampson, so it may be said to most men, how can ye say, ye
love God or good men, seeing your heart is not with them. Now that you may not
be mistaken, take along with you some properties of men and women thus
qualified, viz.

First, They will be ready to part with any thing for Christ, Matthew. 13.46. to
sell all and purchase this pearl. Phil. 3.8. I count all things but dung, etc.
Now I know that thou love me, says the Lord to Abraham, seeing thou art
content to part with thy only son at my word! Christ has taken up their souls
unto the top of Pisgah, and discovered to them the Land of Canaan, and has
given them such more then ordinary tastes of the world to come, that the whole
lower world, though veiled with the most glorious and glistring temptations, is
all scorned as too low a bribe to draw off the soul from Christ. Theodosius
will value his Christianity above his Empire. Luther would rather be
Christianus rusticus, quam Ethnicus Alexander, (i. e.) a Christian clown then
an Heathen Emperor. Secondly, They are not long angry, but easily entreated in
the matters of God, or in their transactions with men, ready to any good
office: Like the waters at the foot of Sion, that run softly: 1 Cor. 13.4.
Charity suffers long and is kind; Charity envieth not, it does not behave it
self unseemly. James 3.17. The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good works. A
good garment for a Christian, without which he is naked before God. Thirdly,
They are open-ear'd and handed toward any in misery. They resent the misery of
others, their hearts do yearn over the Brethrens calamities. As Pharaohs
daughter, when she saw the child in the Ark of Bull-rushes, (a very sad
Cradle!) and that the babe wept, the Text says, She had compassion on him,
Exodus 2.6. And so in the good Samaritan, when he passed by the poor man who had
fallen among thieves, and saw him stripped of all, wounde^; this good man had
an eye and an hand toward him: So it is in this case. F^urthly, They are
wondrous cheerful, in see^ing heavy conditions: especially in afflictions for
the truth's sake, rejoicing in the hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.2. Which
hope holds them above fears; so that they are not moved with love or fear, (as
the Romans wrote on their Targets) though at first they may be daunted, yet at
length they look up and gather strength. Hannah was much troubled for want of a
child, she went to God by fervent prayer, an^ was no more sad. With thi^ David
was wont to cheer himself in the depth of troubles, the Lord has heard my
prayer! Fifthly, They can deny themselves whom God cannot deny, in their
fervent suits, being divorced from their own will by an over-powering work of
the Spirit in Legal convictions; they le^^ not to their own understandings.
Thus must the person be qualified for Prayer.

Object. Then it seems a wicked, unrighteous person may not pray? Or if he may,
his prayer will be to little or no purpose, ineffectual?

A. Prayer is considerable two ways, 1. In a large sense, as a commanded duty
and part of Gods worship, in its ordinary use, whereby we give God the glory of
his Omnisciency, Mercy, Power, and Wisdom. 2. In a more strict sense, for the
putting up of a formal request or petition to God, which may consist in an
exercise of the soul, and of the graces in it, whether common or saving. And
the Answer to the Objection I shall lay thus before you. First, Prayer
considered as a duty must be performed by unrighteous men: and a great sin it
is to neglect it; it is the worst thing can be said of any man, that he
restrains prayer before God; in Job 15.4. it is joined with casting away the
fear of God, i. e. with professed Atheism and profaneness. Man's defects as
he now stands, can give no excuse to a wilful neglect: his impotency cannot
prejudice Gods authority, or diminish his own duty. Prayer is a thing good in
it self, and not evil propter fieri, because it is done, but by accident, vitio
personae, by reason of some defects cleaving unto it; In which sense only it
is, that the Scriptures cry down the prayers of wicked men, as an abomintion,
as Pro. 15.8. and 28.9. Cartwright on the Text gives that same gloss.
not that it is so as to the substance of the duty, but because, whatever it be
they pray for, they resolve to go on in their wicked practices, as the latter
Scripture expresses in the beginning of it, He that turns his ear from
hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be abomination. And besides, though
prayer, not made in faith, cannot please God, as the prayers of holy ^en do;
yet being good for the substance of it, giving glory to God of sundry
Attributes of his, it may probably avail for procurement of a temporal
blessing: as the Pharisees prayers had the reward of men's praises. Ahabs
humiliation, and the Ninevites repentance procured a delay of punishment.
Secondly, Prayer considered as a formal request in the exercise of the soul,
and of some common graces in it, especially argumentative prayer, may perhaps
avail through the help of Gods Spirit, bringing the soul into a better temper
and frame, and so making it capable of spiritual and outward b^essings.
Profane Esau could go to his father for a childs portion, and so could the
Prodigal, and had it.

I come to the second qualification of acceptable effectual prayer, viz. all
the Graces must be set on work: faith, repentance, humility, the very lungs
whence prayer is bre^thed.

First, Faith, (for where it lives, it will breath in devotion) in the Divine
History, touching what is there revealed, to be true, because he has said it.
Faith, in Gods Providence, concerning his wise and stable government of the
world: that he can and will provide for bodies and souls, out of the rich
Magazine of infinite tre^sures laid up in Christ. If an Elijah want, the Ravens
will come at Gods command, and bring him mea^ morning and evening: Faith, in
Gods promises, (which are the air and elements wherein faith breaths) touching
free justification, sanctification and acceptance of you unto life and glory
for Christ's sake. If any want wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives liberally
unto all men, but let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering, James 1.5, 6. And
again, the Apostle wills men to pray -- without doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8. (the
more doubting the less faith.) For he that comes unto God must believe, etc.
as before. He that wants this ingredient, does no more then deny his own
requests, and shuts up the door of Heaven.

Q. How may a man know when he prays in faith?

A. 1. By an hearty resistance, with some comfortable power and gaining
strength, against fears, doubts and distractions that do oppose. This is the
victory that overcomes the world, even your faith, it overcomes a world of
enemies, 1 John 5.4. It is a victorious grace, and it acts by purifying the
heart, and mortifying lusts. And though a man may be foiled now and then in a
skirmish, when very hotly charged, and overborn by violence, yet these foils
tend to hi^ further establishment, and like the tree, stands the firmer for
shaking. This ^s a fruit of praying in faith. 2. By st^adinesse of the heart,
at least in desire and endeavor, upon the right object God in Christ. Moses
his hand being underpropt and stayed by Aaron and Hur (as by the Spirit and
faith) were steady unto the going down of the Sun, Exodus 17.12. Christ
continued all night in prayer to God, Luke 6.12. But take heed of the error of
the Heathen, Matthew. 6.7. that thought to be heard for their much speaking; and
of the hypocrisy of the Scribes, Matthew. 23.14. who made long prayers for the
praise of men. Carry an equal mind in the duty; they are not gifts, but graces
that God looks for in prayer, 3. By that calmnesse of mind after, trusting God
with the success, and resolving patiently to wait. When Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.18.
had made her supplication to God for a child, it is said, She went her way and
did eat, and her countenance was no more sad. Which alteration happened through
an inward comfort of Gods Spirit, which sealed in her heart, that her prayers
were heard. This is an effect of the witnessing of the Spirit together with
ours, Romans 8.16. A refreshing of the heart after duty, with a secret content,
with an hidden approbation. If our hearts condemn us not, then we have
confidence toward God, 1 John 3.21. 4. By due care in the use of appointed
means, not to cleave to any particular means, with a sinful resolution to have
mercy that way, or not at all. This is to limit a most free agent, to
circumscribe Gods will, and to streighten our selves in a narrow path, Psalm.
78.41. 5. By constancy, even when the Lord seems to frown, and turn away his
face. A notable instance you have in the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15.22. she
cried earnestly after Christ, Have mercy on me, O Lord, etc. One Copy has it,
and cried behind him, which implies that Christ had turned his back on her,
seeing her now coming toward him; well, the Disciples intercede, he tells
them, He was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. She comes
again, but receives a rough answer, It is not meet to take childrens bread and
cast it to dogs; out of all we may conclude, great faith to act that poor
woman. View her temptations in that doubtful case (it is Mr. Boltons
Observation in his Treatise Of the Nature and Roialties of says.) First, There
was tentatio taciturnitatis, the trial of silence, she prays, and not a word
comes. Secondly, Tentatio particularitatis, first nothing, and then worse then
nothing, I am not sent, but, etc. as if he had said, thou do not belong to
the election of grace: thou art not in Covenant; I came only to my own, not to
thee, therefore I will not help thee. Thirdly, Tentatio indignitatis; the trial
of indignity, It is not meet, etc. And yet see the strength of her faith,
Truth, Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs: if she may not have a childs, yet
a dogs portion, if not childrens morsels, yet childrens crumbs, but such as
fall from the table, such as they have no need of. She was that well resolved
Christian, whose part is (as Luther sometime said) to believe things invisible,
to hope for things deferred, and to love God when he seems most angry with, and
opposite to him. With this measure of faith Christ is overcome: Oh, woman,
great is thy faith! Such force there is in faithful-fervent prayer.

A Second Grace to be set on work in prayer is Repentance. Wash ye make ye
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do
evil, learn to do well, etc. then come and let us reason together, says the
Lord, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. I will wash mine hands in innocence, and so will I
compass thine Altar, O Lord, was David's practice. Typified in Aarons washing
of his feet, before he went into Sacrifice: and continued as a borrowed rite
among the Turks, to wash and put off their shoes before they enter on their
idol-worship. A plain doctrine that Saint James teaches, chapter 4. v. 8. Draw
nigh to God, etc. cleanse your hands ye sinners, etc. And the reason is,
because in prayer, you crave pardon of sin and removal of judgments, with the
favor of Gods blessed presence, which cannot be without repentance. Conscience
of sin unrepented of will clip and dull the wings of prayer, set a damp on the
petitioner, separate between him and God; but the blood of Christ will cleanse,
cheer and elevate the soul, as the waters did No^hs Ark, far above all danger.
Repentance is a Rainbow, which if God see shining in our hearts, when we come
before him, he will not drown the soul.

Q. How may true penitency in gracious hearts, be discerned from seigned sorrow
in graceless persons, tha^ sin, and after say they repent, yet sin again?

A. 1. A truly gracious soul, though it sin, yet it makes no league o^ peace
with sin, but keeps the war on foo^ still. As Hannibal took an Oath to his
father to maintain perpetual hostility with Rome: So have gracious souls
covenanted with ^od, to wage a perpetual war with sin; though it sometime
receives a foil and loss, yet thereby it is more enraged against the
adversary. Carnal counterfeit persons once foiled, seldom come on again: but
the true penitent rises and fights most valiantly, doubles his guard after
unwariness, strengthens the battle after a blow, laying on more strongly,
after sin has been too hard; as we see in Peter and Paul, and many other
Scripture-examples. 2. True grace gets advantage by the stirring and sometimes
prevailing power of sin, which mere nature cannot do: it always loses, the
heart is made worse, sin loved, holiness loathed some degrees more, and
security surpriseth the soul. When as in gracious hearts, every thing falls
out otherwise; the heart is made better, sin more loathed, holiness prized
some degrees more, and the soul strengthened; like the Giant Anteus, who in his
wrestling with Hercules, is seigned to get strength by every fall to the ground.

The Third Grace required to be acted in prayer is humility: which may serve as
the pins of Jacobs Ladder, whereby the soul climbeth up to He^ven. He that
would leap highest must stoop lowest. God exalts the humble, whilst he
resists the proud and sends them empty away. As men use to lay up the richest
wine in the lowest Ce^lars, so does God the choicest mercies in humble and
lowly hearts. Christ when he was upon the earth did most for those that were
humble, and so continues to do. The truly humble soul is Gods second Heaven, I
will dwell with the cont^^^e spirit. The Valleys shall laugh with satnesse,
when the Hills are barren. And this Grace may be discerned thus;

First, By a grateful disposition for former favors. Of old, a pe^ce-offering
was appointed to be joine^ with the trespasse-offering: to teach the Church
ever to join praise with prayer. But the proud heart has never enough, is ever
unthankful. Secondly, By a mean and low conceit of your selves, and your own
unworthiness before God. Like that of Abraham, Genesis 18.27. that am but dust
and ashes: or of David, ^o foolish was I, as a beast before thee: and Agur,
Prove. 30.2. I am more brutish then any man; or as that Martyr, who cried out,
Gehenna sum Domine, etc. Lord, thou art Heaven, but I am as bad as Hell.
Tantillitas nostra, said Ignatius of himself and his Colleagues; the humble man
like Paul, does not elevate, but aggravate his sins against himself, vails all
the topsails and sits down in the dust, Job 42.6. Mine eye sees thee,
therefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes; when he had a glorious
apparition of God, he vanished into nothing in his own thoughts. The stars
vanish when the Sun appears: and our poor Candle vanishes into a
disappearance, when the glory of God arises in the thoughts of the humble.
Thirdly, By this, when heavenly Objects appear in our eye great and beautiful
more and more. As in David, Psalm. 4.6. who preferred Gods favor to all things;
and in Paul, Phil. 3.8. who counted all things but dung, in comparison of the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ. He undervalues a whole sky full of
stars, to one Sun of Righteousness. And as holy Lambert, None but Christ, none
but Christ. To them that believe he is precious, they can see those beauties
and excellencie^ in him, that are not discovered to others. To unbelievers,
heavenly objects are as orient pearls in an heap of sand, and a Mine of gold
covered over with rubbish and earth. Fourthly, By meekness and readiness to
yield in all your own causes, but resolutenesse in the cause o^ God, in behalf
of his truth. Moses, one of the meekest men on earth, yet who more hot and
zealous in the service of God? The three children, Dan. 3.16. are well resolved
in the like case, and will not suffer truth to fall for them. Luther regards
not himself nor the rich presents, but is eaten up with the zeal of Gods house.
Fifthly, By a patient waiting upon God, till the time appointed, He that
believes will not make have: to step aside through indirect means to obtain
what is prayed for or promised, not sorcery, charms, witchcraft to find things
lost, to obtain health or grow rich; who art thou that fear God and obeyest
the voice of his servants, and yet walk in darkness, wait upon God and stay
thy self on the Lord. We re^d of Zachary, that he prayed for a child
heretofore, while there was any ordinary ground of hope, but after (as it is
probable) left off that suit, but not waiting, what God would do for him, and
he had his request at last. Prayers are often granted, long before manifested.
Thus must grace be exercised in acceptable prayer: it is the Palaestra, the
Arena, the Artillary-yard of all our graces in which they must show their
activity. And thus much may suffice for the discovery of the Conditions
required in prayer.

In the last place we come to the Motives, not to the reading, or repeating,
saying over of prayers only, not to a cold, careless performance of this duty
at all; but to fervent praying: this is praying with power, whereof that
passage is fitly verified, and rightly to be understood, Acts 9.11. Behold he
prays. Saul struck to the ground remained three days without sight, and did
neither eat nor drink: but, behold he prays, (i. e.) with all his might, as
one that takes no denial. To pray fervently, is the point in hand, first
undertaken, and hitherto prosecured. And to this there are seve^all Motives:
and they may be taken, first, From the Lord, to whom we must pray. Secondly,
From men. Thirdly, from prayer it self.

First, From the Lord; and then you may take into consideration, such Motives
as these: 1. He commands that you should pray to him as you love him, (i. e.)
strongly, vehemently, and constantly. My son, give me thy hea^. It is a special
part of Divine worship, and if you make conscience of any duty, you will of
this especially, Hos. 14.2.2. He delights in earnest and zealous prayers and
petitioners, (God is not a man, who may be tired with uncessant suits, and
frequent visits, ( Prove. 25.17.) as was the unjust Judge, and the Disciples
with the poor woman's cries, repeating the same request over and over) Such were
Moses and David, highly commended of God, for their skill and art in praying;
one, the meekest man on earth, the other, a man after Gods own heart; and he
can deny them nothing; provided they refer the time, and measure to him. As
men take delight in the deep-mou^h'd hound, and the shrill sound of the
Trumpet, and the loud report of the Piec^; so does God take delight in the
fervent reports of his people. 3. He is ready to return answer to such fervent
prayers; hi^ ears are open to the cries of his people. The Aediles among the
Romans, had ever the door standing open to all that had occasion, for requests
or complaints: Even so are the doors of Gods mercy open unto fervent
suppliants. He is that friend spoken of in Luke 11. Ready to hear when any
friend does knock. God is not like that Idol Baal, 1 Kings 18.27. Of whom
Elijah said to his Priests (when with much clamor they cried unto him, but had
no answet) Cry aloud, for he is a God, either talking, or pursuing, or in a
journey, or peradventure he sleeps; Or like the Heathen Jupiter, who when the
Grecians and Trojans were by the ears, was gone to visit his old friends,
Oceanus and Tethis: The Lord is always nigh at hand to all that call upon him
fervently. It was never known that God said to any suitor as Philip of Macedon,
(...), i. e. I have no leisure; or go away, and come to morrow, if it were
convenient and seasonable for him to grant the request at present. He is as
ready to bestow mercy, as a mothers breast is to give milk, he waits but for
drawing. It was the commendation of Theodosius his clemency and sweet
disposition, that it was to him as if he received a benefit, if he might have
opportunity to forgive an injury; and such is the excellent freeness of Divine
bowels, that the Lord waits to ^e gracious, and mercy pleases him! 4. He
has made many sweet and precious promises to such as pray to him with
supplication and thanksgiving, Psalm. 50.^5. Call upon me, and I will hear. God
will hear: But upon what terms? upon condition that you call, seek and knock,
Mat. 7.7, 8. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. Yea, Whatsoever ye ask
the Father in my Name believing, he will do it for you. There is a promise for
whatsoever you have need to pray for. Who then is so dull, that will not be
quickened by those allurements? so stubborn, as not to be won? so timorous, as
not to be encouraged by them? who will not ask, when his request is so
graciously accepted, so easily granted? 5. Christ has taught you how to pray,
Mat. 6.9. He puts words as it were to your mouths, and tells you what to ask.
He died and rose again, to make way for your persons and prayers into Gods
presence, calling you to come unto him with your petitions, and he will present
them to the Father. 6. The Divine Attributes should move you, whether absolute
or relative: Absolute, as his Omnisciency, Omnipotency, Mercy, Truth and
Faithfulness, his bounty and Glory, all magni^ied by petitioners, and
excercised by granting requests. Relative, so he is called an husband, a
Father, a gracious Lord; as it was said of Augustus, that he that dared to
approach his presence, seemed not to know his greatness, and he that durst
not, seemed not to know his goodness. All of God should encourage the household
of Faith to come unto him, in all zealous humility and devout reverence. 7. The
honor to be admitted his presence, and to have conference with him. Men
account it a great honor to stand before a great Prince of the earth (who is
but a man in a greater letter) and to conve^se with him. The Queen of Sheba
pronounced them happy men, happy servants, which could stand continually before
Solomon, and to hear his wisdom, 1 Kings. 10.8. The Persian Kings made it a
part of their great condescension, to manife^t themselves unto their Subjects:
But what honor is this, to stand in the pre^ence chamber of the King of Kings,
that Glorious Lord of all the earth, to converse and have fellowship with him?
Consider it is a favor given only to a few, even such as the Lord shall call,
and they are but few, compared with the numbers that sit in darkness, and call
not upon the Name of the Lord. This should move you to pray often, and ever in
earnest; he is easy to be entreated and upbraideth not, the oftener we come,
the more welcome, and the more we acquaint our selves wi^h him, the more good
comes to us, Jo^ 22.21. Our often addresses and requests ^o men, may soon
receive a repulse, but cannot weary infiniteness.

The Second sort of Motives may be taken from men, and so 1. From a
consideration of your selves. 2. Of others. 1. Consider your selves. First,
What danger and loss grows upon omission of prayer, as 1. Your outward estate
lies open to the curse of God, to be spoiled by all, or any of the Creatures.
It is the presence of God that must preserve our outward estates, and make up a
peace with us and the Creatures. Rebellis enim facta est quia homo numini,
creatura homini. The creatures rebel against man, because he rebelled against
God: Now as Noble men's servants will draw in defense of their Lord, and as
Soldiers fight for their General, so it is here, God is the Lord of Hosts, and
they continue to this day according to his Ordinance, for they are all servants
ready pressed to seize a sinner, and to do execution on him and his, as a Traitor
and Rebel to highest Majesty. Now it is Gods presence that can only abolish
this enmity; And how shall we confine God amongst us without fervent praying?
Prayer is like the Golden chain with which the Tyrians (when Alexander
beleagur'd them) bound fast their tutelar God Apollo, that he might not leave
their City. Secondly, Your inward parts and faculties run all out of order,
like a wide wilderness whereon comes neither Sun or dew; or as a Clock that no
man looks unto, will soon be out of order, and at a stand, and as a sore wound
which is not dressed, or plied with fresh salves, will corrupt and fester; so
it is with men that neglect or omit prayer. Thirdly, It is one of the worst
signs can be, that men are and continue strangers to God, that they depend on
themselves, and like the swine, who eat the ^corns, but never look up to the
tree that bare them. What damage likewise comes upon a cold careless
performance of it? for so you mispend precious time, lay your selves open to
the enmity of the world, who take you to be zealous men indeed, and under that
notion hate and trouble you, and all this without any recompense from God,
because you are not such indeed. And so often you pray, or rather repeat a
prayer, in this cold formal manner, you take Gods Name in vain.

Secondly, Consider the benefit comes to the soul, and society of Christians,
by fervent prayer, which can hardly be imagined or uttered. For 1. I^ is ever a
blessed means to mitigate or remove judgments, what spiritual burdens the soul
lies under, by reason of sin remaining within, or enemies without. It was
David's Catholicon in all his troubles and trials: When you have none to
complain to, or ease you, think what an happiness it is to have such a bosom
open. 2. A means it is richly to supply all your wants. Prayer, like the
Heavens, has influence on all things below it; as appears from the Prophetic
Prayer of Solomon, 1 Kings 8. And the practice of David in the book of Psalms,
and of Agur, Prove. 30.8. It brings and keeps the heart in good temper, and
fills it with Spiritual joy and sweetness, John 16.24. Ask and your joy shall
be full: No sorrow can stand before the God of consolation. David's heart was
more often out of tune than his harp, he prays, and then cries, Return to thy
rest O my soul. In many of the Psalms, the beginnings are sull of trouble, but
by that time he has prayed a while, the ends are full of joy and assurance,
Psalm. 6.22. and 51. It fastneth on us as with Spiritual buckles, all our
Spiritual armor, and sets God on work for us. It is a lock for the night, and
a key for the day, to open Gods treasury, and let in the beams of the Sun of
righteousness upon us.

Thirdly, Consider what need you have to pray to God fervently. If you
knowingly weighed, what a great work you have to do, in a short time, and in
what danger you are, upon the brink of Eternity, and Satan goes about seeking
to devour you, say then, have you not cause in respect of your selves to work
in prayer?

2. Motives may be taken from consideration of others, whether ^nemies or
friends. Enemies you have many, to your persons, profession and practice in
close following the Captain of your salvation Jesus Christ. Psalm. 3.1. Many
there are that rise up against me. 2 Chronicles. 20.12. O our God, will thou not
judge them, we have no might against this great company that comes against us,
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. Your friends are sick
in body, or troubled in mind, with fears, doubts, desertions, and suggestions,
carnal or Satanical; as Paul was, 2 Cor. 12.9. Persecuted and imprisoned as
Peter was, Acts 12.5. or lying under heavy rods, one way or other; perhaps
employed about weighty matters by sea or land, tending especially to unthrone
Satan, to root out Antichrist, and to enlarge the Kingdom of Christ: Such
moving objects you have enough at home, and you may hear of more abroad! The
great dangers we are sensibly in, by reason of sin and enemies, should move and
awaken us to improve all our interest in Christ, to save us, or else we perish,
and so be made the woful'st spectacle that was ever yet beheld. A fruitful
land makes he barren for the sins of the people that dwell therein. May not we
tremble to think what will befall us? To close this, Can you see God
dishonored, Satan advantaged, to domineer, a flourishing Church endangered, a
dear Country like a mother bleeding to death, a brother, nay, many brethren
oppressed, distressed, and yet be silent? Can you hear of what is preached on
house-tops, without sighing? Can you look on the doleful face of things with
dry eyes? O hard-hearted! Christ has some great work in hand: a great and
effectual door is opened, and there are many adversaries; and will you not so
much as pray to God for help? They are cursed with a bitter curse which come
not in to help the Lord against the mighty.

A third and last sort of Motives are taken from Prayer it self; such kind of
praying, First, It distinguishes between the gracious and the graceless soul;
it declares the sacrifice to be more excellent. Cain offered a sacrifice as
well as Abel, but says put the difference. As faith puts a difference, between
the works of Heathens and the works of Christians, though not for the matter,
yet for the manner; so do faithful fervent prayers, between the sound and the
rotten Christian. It puts a difference betwixt the Abba-fathers of a child, and
the Ave-Maries of a superstitious Papist; betwixt the devotion of a Saint, and
the devotion of a sinner; the cry: of a Saint, and the howlings of an
hypocrite; these make a great and long noise, the other only send up strong
cries, as well, and more in private then in public. Secondly, It is ever
effectual, and has been most successful. Vitus The^dorus spe^king of the
prayers Luther made in reference to a Diet at Ausburg, wherein matters were
like to go against the Protestants, wrote thus, Non dubito quin illius preces,
magnum momentum ad desparatam hanc causam comitiorum sint allaturae; he doubted
not but Luthers prayers would go near to turn the stream. No man ever thus
sought help of God in vain. Witness Abraham, Moses, Joshuah, Elijah, a man
subject to like passions with us; Hannah, Daniel, with thousands more, who were
sent away as Ruth from Boaz, with their bosom full of blessings; as
Mephibosheth from David, with a royal revenue; as Achsah, Calebs daughter from
her father, with upper and nether springs: or as Moses from the mount, with
their faces shining. A Christian cannot want supplies, so long as he can pray
for them; as they were wont to say of the Pope, he could never want money, so
long as he could hold a pen in his hand to write for it. When the man can find
a fervent-praying heart, God will find a pitying heart and a supplying hand.
The Ark and the Mercy-seat, were never, nor ever shall be separated.

Obj. But such as you instance for success of prayer, were all extraordinary,
eminent men, good and holy, while I am mean, poor, vile, and cannot hope to
prevail as they?

Ans. 1. I would know, who they are that have most need of mercy, and are so
pressed to use strength and fervency with God, as penitent sinners, throughout
the whole book of God. Paenitens loco justi, apud Deum; a penitent sinner is
just in Gods account. As Manasses, the Publican, Mary Magdalen, the thief on
the Cross, sinners in grain, yet humbled and accepted. As for Abraham, and
Moses, and the like, they were holy men indeed, as there are many in the world
now, though not so eminent, yet as acceptable to God, and as powerful in
praying as they were. 2. I say, that the success and effectualnesse of p^ayer,
is not so much from the faith and fervency of the Petitioner, as from the mercy
of God, and merit of Christ: Cry and pray fervently unto God, and rest on the
promises.

Obj. But I am straightened and want time to pray morning and evening, as you
direct?

Ans. 1. Have you time for other business, to eat, drink, sleep, labor, and
take your pleasure, and none to pray? Have you time to game and drink, to buy
and sell, and none to pray? This is the part of a worldling, of the man of this
life. 2. Wisely improve your time, and beware of contracting upon your selves
that burden of oppressing varieties, which keep men down, and employ them in
such an excess of matters in the earth, as with that Duke of Alva, they have
no time to mind or look up to heaven. 3. Redeem at one time, what is inevitably
lost at another; You may be assured in the word of truth and experience, there
is no hinderance of work nor loss of time in continuing this exercise. Gods
blessing does more then recompen^e such expenses. A whet is no let.

I come now to the second Doctrine, viz.

That righteous men are very prevalent in prayer.

While men's hands are full of blood, the Lord will not he^r, Isa. 1.15. If I
regard iniquity in my heart, etc. Psalm. 66.18. Impenitent persons, such I mean
as are so in act or disposition, either they pray not at all: they that have
done evil hate the light, lest their deeds should be reproved, Joh. 3.20. The
guilt of sin redounding and resting on them, does discourage such from prayer,
and makes them willing to grow strangers to God; as a trespasser of his
neighbor uses to say, I have done so or so against you, and am ashamed to
look you in the face: Or else, they pray in a cold f^int manner, for form,
rather then out of love; and such prayers ascend not. Now for the penitent
righteous persons, they are fervent in prayer, wrestling, with Jacob, striving
with Paul, and swe^ting with Christ. As the tribes, Acts 26.27. are said to
serve God (...), which signifies a stretching forth themselves with all their
might. And their prayers are worth something: Witness the prayers of Moses,
Joshuah, Elijah, Davi^, Daniel, Paul, no such extraordinary presidents but that
a true penitent, skilled in prayer, and closing with the promises, may prevail
as much with God now, a^ they did then. Coldness and infidelity are the main
causes of so much fruitless praying: and want of skill to observe returns,
when they are fruitful, does occasion unthankfulness, and uncheerfulnesse in
good men.

For a further illustration of this Doctrine, it will do well to enqu^re,
First, Wherein are the prayers of the righteous so prevalent? Secondly, Why*

First, Wherein are they so effectual? A. The answer may be thus. They are
effectual both to remove judgments and procure mercies. The work of prayer in
the former will discover the later. It is effectual to remove judgments, and
consequently to bring mercies. Amos 7.1. to the 7. It removed the judgments of
the grasshoppers and the fire: as Jonah prayed and removed a double death that
had seized on him. It is the best Lever at a dead lift. It loosed the iron
chains, and opened the iron gates; unlocked the windows of heaven. Est clavis
instar qua Dei penetralia aperiuntur. Jamblicus. Instead of a key wherewith
Gods Cabinet is opened. The Prophet Amos knew this full well, and therefore
sets to work in good earnest: as when a Cart is in a quagmire, if the horses
feel it coming, they will pull the harder, till they have it out: so he. Prayer
overcomes enemies; Achitophel withers before the prayer of David. The huge Army
of a thousand thousand Ethiopians, ran away like cowards before the prayer of
Asa. Luther having prayed earnestly to God in his chamber for the Churches
success, came down saying, We have overcome, we have overcome! And so
accordingly it proved. Marcus Aurelius being in the field with his Army, and in
a great straight for water, commanded his Christian band to pray unto their God
in that distress; they presently fall down where they stood, and behold a
plentiful shower followed immediately, with thunder and lightning upon the
enemy; called by him therefore from that time, Legio fulminatrix, the lightning
Legion. Constantine would have his Effigies made kneeling, (whenas other
Emperors had theirs standing, triumphing) to show that he got all his
Victories by prayer. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 12. reports of him, that he never took
any war in hand, but first presented his earnest prayers to God; Statis
temporibus quotidie solus cum solo D^o loquebatur. Fox in Martyr. relates that
the victory against Cedwell and Penda in the time of the Saxons, was ascribed
to the prayers of Oswald; and the like of Allured against the Danes. What was
said of the wicked, Psalm. 57.5. Their tongue is a sharp sword, swords are in
their lips, may be truly said of the tongues and lips of Gods people in prayer,
they are as two-edged swords in their hands, to execute vengeance. Of all
weapons, there is ^one like to this.

Again, prayer is effectual to heal the sick, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people which
are called by my Name, shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, etc.
then I will hear from Heaven, forgive their sins, and heal the land. Genesis
^0.17. We find that Abraham prayed, and the Lord healed Abimelech. Jam. 5.15.
The prayer of Faith shall heal the sick, and if they have committed sins, they
shall be forgiven them. And so shall be healed on both sides. Anointing will
not do it, prayer will not do it, but the prayer of faith shall. The story of
Luther is well known, how by his pr^yers he recovered Theodorus Vitus of a
consumption, after the Physicians had given him up for dead. Such strong
breathings, like strong winds, whilst they are up keep great showers from
falling, and can blow away the blackest cloud; yea, blow the most smarting
wounds whole. Such sweet lips are ever dropping balm into the wounds of a
people. You see the prayers of the righteous are effectual to procure
blessings, for the well-being of the common body. It is this that raises storms
to drive away enemies, and prosperous gales to bring mercy and relief. It was
the prayer of England that scatte^ed the Spanish Armado like a mist. I have
read of Theodosius, who being once dangerously beset with enemies, turned
himself to God by prayers, fasting, and tears, the Lord was entreated to raise
a tempest in the face of the enemy, to their discomfiture, and to turn Arbiti^,
one of their C^ptains to his side, as Socrates relates it. Herein are the
prayers of the righteous effectual.

Secondly, Why are their prayers so effectual?

Ans. First, Because all righteous persons are in house and Covenant with God;
and therefore powe^fully-effectuall: They are near to him, dearer than Heaven
and Earth. Now a domestic Attendant can ever prevail more with the Lord, than
a retainer only. Their prayers go up as pillars of Incense, and come before the
Lord, as the sound of many waters. Sozomen reports of Apollonius, that he never
asked any thing of God, but obtained it. Hic homo potuit apud Deum quod voluit,
re^orded of Luther, he could have what he would of God. What Zedekiah sai^ to
his Courtiers hypocri^ically, God says to his servants seriously, The King c^^
deny you nothing. The Courtier that is a f^vourite, gets more of his Prince
many times with one request, than an hu^bandman or tradesman can attain unto by
twenty years labor. So does the righteous man obt^in at the hands of Go^,
having the Royalty of his e^r. Hen^^ that transcendent rapture of Luther, in a
certain prayer of his, fiat voluntas mea Domine! Lord let my will be done! And
hence that request of Bernard to his friend, whom he had advised for strict and
holy walking, and cum talis fueris, memento mei. i. e. When thou art such a
one, remember me in thy prayers. All Gods family-servants are Isreal's,
prevailers with him. Secondly, They have the Spirit of prayer, whereby they are
enabled to cry powerfully, Abba, Father. As the Spirit wrought powerfully in
those men, who were (...), moved by the holy Ghost to speak the Word of God to
men, so it works powerfully in all righteous men speaking to God. The Spirit
does both disponere and excitare, give the habit and the act also, brings the
fuel of good desires into the soul, and there sets it a burning; so that in a
sense they are the prayers of Christ indicted by the Spirit, put up in his Name,
and presented by ^his mediation. And it cannot otherwise be, but that they
should find the way back again, and reach that bosom whence they came. These
waters will rise as high as the fountain, especially being conveyed by such a
Conduit-pipe. If the holy Spirit be the Inditer, the Son the Advocate, and the
Father the Register of the Saints prayers, whatever weaknesses there be, if not
wilful, they cannot nonsuit them in that Court. He cannot dislike the petition
which himself has framed: Prayer is the counterpane and reflection of his own
good pleasure, and he can no more resist it, than his own will. Thirdly, They
have disposed and enlarged hearts, though not always alike. Utinam eodem
ardore orare possim! says Luther. The more they pray, the better it is with
them in that regard: The Lord does enlarge their hearts, that they may pray,
and then by prayer, that enlargement is increased, that they may be fitted to
receive more blessings. Prayer does not merit mercy, but sits us for mercy:
empties the heart of self, and takes in the more of God. Fourthly, There is
nothing that can totally and finally hinder them: whilst Christ, Heavens
Favorite and Master of requests is their friend, and husband: whilst the
blessed Spirit is their assistant, and no sin beloved. Distracted and weakened
they may be, but wholly disappointed and kept off they cannot be.

The Use follows. And it may serve,

First, To let us see what to expect from the prayers of too many among us^
those birds without wings, and messengers without feet, good for nothing at
all. Divide us into four sorts, viz. Profane, Civil, Formal and penitent: We
find the first sort pray not at all; the second, repeat a prayer; the third
sort make a prayer; but the last sort only pray in Faith and power. The prayers
of unrighteous persons are little worth; confundunt opera sermonem; their works
confute their words, s^ith Hierom. And as Tacitus speaks of some words of
Tiberius, Preclara verba, etc. They are good words, but not suitable to him; and
the reason he gives, is, because, ad haec caetera non convenient; his other
words and actions are not of the same stamp. This we may read in many
Scriptures, Isa. 1.15. When you make many prayers, I will not he^r, your hands
are full of blood Jer. 7.9.16. Will ye steal, murder, etc. and come before me?
Jer. 14.10, 11, 12. See the place.

Secondly, What you must do that you may be powerful and effectual in prayer,
viz. 1. Get this qualification, be righteous men: You must lay aside all your
sins, not for a time only, as it is said of the snake, that she lays aside her
poison whilst she drinks. Or as the Persians, who kill all their venomous
creatures one day in the year, and after that, suffer them to swarm as before,
nor blot out the old score, to begin a new one; as it is said of Lewis the
eleventh of France, that when he had done evil, he would kiss his crucifix,
and then God and he were good friends, as he thought, and so might go to his
old work again; but for ever, in desire and endeavor. Is not this the fast
that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, and to undo heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free? that ye break every yoke. Is it not
to deal thy bread to the hungry? etc. Isa. 58.7.55.7. Let the wicked forsake
his way, etc. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, etc. Then thou
shall call and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I
am. Your stubbornness and pride must submit, or else never hope to speed; all
your time and strength is spent in vain. When you spread forth your hands to
me, I will not hear, I will hide mine eyes from you (while) your hands are full
of blood. Sin is a devil in the air to hinder the ascending of prayer; a thick
cloud to stop the Sunshine of mercy. That which was noted of Co^sar, may be
here applied; when one that was up in Arms against him, yet at the same time
sent him a Crown; Coesar sends back the Crown with this message, Let him return
to his obedience, and then the Crown may be accepted. Certainly whatever means
we use to obtain favor, and prevail with God, remaining in our sins, had we
Crowns to dedicate to his honor, all would be in vain; Then turn from sin. 2.
You must pray in a time, while he will be found, Isa. 55.6. and call upon him
while he is near. In giving you peace and liberty in the Ordinances, while the
Spirit strives lovingly, and the Angel moves the water. God calls, waits, Grace
is dispensed, the door is open; whilst the day continues, a time may come, when
he may not be found; a black night may come, and hide his gracious presence,
the Sun and the Stars may be turned into blood. Lose not opportunity; be
gathering Manna, whilst it falls; call upon him: Say, his own beauty, mercy,
goodness moved you.

Where these are joined, there is a promise of good success: they never yet
failed; this better deserves then any, an affix of probatum est saepissime. 1.
When they are joined in Persons, so that the petitioner be penitent, and the
penitent a petitioner; such as see their s^ns convictingly and distinctly, such
as bewail, and fly to the fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness, may
run and re^d comfort, Isa. 1.18. Matthew. 21.22. Jo^n 15.7. A penitents prayer
does presuppose a promise, though not always in particular, yet always in
general, which is sufficient. 2. When they are general in a Nation, when those
that sit in the throne, as stars in the superior Orb, le^d the way, and give
light and influence, in the power of godliness, splendor of grace, and
gracious performances: to deny themselves in all hurtful vanities, and pr^y
fervently, as did Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.3, etc. When there is a
Court-reformation, and a Country-reformation; when young and old, in City,
Church, and State, reform and cry fervently to God; when all join in acting as
well as in speaking of repentance; when men see and leave their whoring,
swearing, excessive drinking, their covetousness, idleness, gaming and
conformity to this world; when women leave their pride and vain-talking, etc.
when both bring forth fruit meet for repentance, and walk in that humility and
soundness, as is most comely for the Gospel, then expect good success from
prayer, and religious drawing nigh to God.

Ob^. But when will this be? It is a thing has been long expected, spoken of,
exhorted to by all sorts, both Magistrates and others, but yet to be acted?

I Answer: First, So much is this time A solemn day of humiliation, 1657.
solemnly professed, and this day invited unto; viz. to repent and turn from
our evil waie^; and they must be gross hypocrites, which afterward do not join
them, seeing they have represented the persons and acted the parts of humble
penitents, and professed Reformists. Secondly, Thi^ is the way; whereby those
that belong to God among us, may be brought in. Children of many prayers cannot
perish. Prayer and f^sting, can cast out Devils, and work mighty cures. However
it fall out to others, it cannot but be successful to your selve^. You that
labor to join them, shall not miss a return. You shall have he^lth in s^ckne^,
plenty in penury, pe^ce in war; and who knows, how far you may be accepted
for others?

Say then, What is the cause why your prayers with reference to your selves and
the Nation, to this present season, are no more successeful? Is it not because
First, These things are not joined, in persons, nor general in our Nation, as
with grief we see and hear? It is true, we have had, and still have much
praying, but we have little doing; much speaking to God, little or no reforming
among men; no wonder that so many prayers are made and not heard, whilst men's
hands are full of blood; howl and cry, and yet rebel against God: pray, and
yet grow worse and worse; thus this excellent engine of a Nation is marred, and
proves to a people, like the Ark to the Philistims, provoke God to anger, and
does the people more hurt. Praying without reforming, is but howling, Hos.
7.14. They have not cried unto me with their whole heart, when they ^owled on
their beds, they assembled themselves for co^n, wine and oil, and they rebel
against me, i. e. They consume it on their lust, and sight against God with his
own weapons; or, they assembled themselves, and made no small show of devotion,
but when the duty was over, they go to their old courses again. See Isa.
1.15.58.4, 5. Jer. 7.9, 10.14.11, 12. Wh^t Saint Hierom speaks of luxurious
Clerks in his time, that the grunting of hogs in the slye, was more pleasing to
God, then their singing of prayers in the Church; may warrantably be applied
here. To the wicked God says, What have thou to do to take my Covenant into
thy mouth, Psalm. 50.16. Such devotion is but beautiful abomination. Secondly,
Is it not because such as do join them for, and to the good of the Land, are
some way o^ other disco^ntenanced and troubled in most places? and can we think
to prevail with God? what dissembling is this, to speak him fair to his face,
both privately and publicly, and strike him in his fr ends after, with words,
deeds, and neglect of them? If thou will take from the midst of thee, the yoke,
the putting forth of the finger, (i. e. any way of disgracing, contemning,
despi^ng the people of God) and speaking vanity, (great sins in most places)
then call and cry, and I will answer, says the Lord. Jobs friends dealt
unkindly with him, but to him they must be reconciled, before they can be
accepted. Justin Martyr and Tertullian in their Apologies for Christians, tell
the Emperors plainly, what was the cause of those plagues and judgments
inflicted, because Gods people, the poor Christians were persecuted. They may
be heard for you awhile, but you cannot be heard for your selves, nor all of us
for the whole, so long as the best are proscribed, and by men's tongues (who
think they have a Law for it) so bitterly pursued. Thirdly, Is it not because
of the cry of division and backsliding among us, from God and one anot^er. 1.
From God and the purity of his wo^ship and service, truths and commands! what
incongruity is it to cry unto God, and run from him. No wonder if he say, Go
now to your idols, etc. Is not this the ground of his dividing from our
prayers? As smoke drives away the Be from his Hive, so does this sin drive God
from his habitation. 2. From one another. We are broken in minutula frustula,
(as Austin of the Donatists in Africa) little, little pieces; little love and
unity to be found; so ne cry out for them, but they mean by it their own wills.
And how many cast oil instead of water upon the ^lames of contention? Few study
to be quiet, and of an healing spirit; some are for God and further
reformation, that Christ's government may be advanced, and established in his
own house, and seen among his people; others are for Ba^l and Romish
Superstition, a Samaritan Religion, to introduce and burnish the filthy rags of
the scarlet whore, though under better pretenses. Some few are for truly good
men; others and the most in number, are for wicked temp^rizing for^alists,
whose best piety is policy, and faith fantas e; and too many halt as neuters,
till they see which is, that they may side with the stronge^t. Now a divided
multi ude, either pray not at all, or not for one thing, and one another; how
can Christians sight and prevail, when they are in so many divided troops? If
they do pray, the^ are slight, weak, and interrupted; some cry one thing, and
some another, for the assembly was confused ( Act. 19.32.) and the greater part
knew not wherefore they were come together; as it was once in the Apostles
time, is often in ours. This is the mors in olla, like to the Colliquintida
that spoiled all the pottage; these turbulent waves overthrow the vessel of
prayer, and we see no return of our adventures. Fourthly, Is it not from our
unthankfulness for mercies received, and shameful barrenness in improving
them? Because mercies have been fuel to feed our corruptions? Spiritual showers
have made the weeds of sin to grow the faster. Such dunghilly hearts are in
mortals, that many times, the more God shines on us with his mercies, the more
they putrify; the better he is to us, have we not been the worse to him? the
more he loved us, has he not the less been loved by us? As the Ocean takes in
all the fresh rivers, but is not a jot the fresher for it, so are we insensible
of what we have received; and think we not this an intolerable provocation?
Unthankfulness is an hellish stop to future mercies. A man that is about to
pour oil into a glass, if he see it cracked, he stays his hand and says, I
will pour no more oil into this glass. The unthankful heart is the broken
glass, not fit to receive any more blessings. Unthankfulness was the sin for
which God gave over the Heathens to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.21, 27. It is
related of the Romans that they made a law, that if a master did free a servant
from bondage, and afterward that servant prove unthankful; the master had power
to re-inslave him. The great God has bestowed many mercies upon the Nation, he
has delivered us from Babylon, Egypt, and those that had evil will to us:
innumerable are the mercies heaped upon England; now if we prove unthankful, we
may not expect otherwise to be dealt with, then to want an answer to our best
prayers, yea, be re-inslaved, and brought under former hazards. Unthankfulness
is a sin that makes the times perilous, 2 Timothy 3.1.

Q. What may be done that we may prevail more?

A. To what has been already said, I shall add here two things more, viz.
Constancy and Regularity. 1. Constancy, till you have gone through the work; be
not slight and careless, nor weary in seeking God, as sluggards in wo^k, or
cowards in war. Prayer must be re-doubled, and reinforced like those arrows of
deliverance, 2 Kin. 13.19. As the woman of Canaan when denied, and shows her
self a woman of a well-kni^ resolution. And Jacob, who holds with his hand,
when his thigh is lamed; thus the Israelites overc^me Go^, Judge. 20.18.23, 26.
They go up and ask who shall go up to Benjamin first, (a very careless and
formal behavior, their multitude made them presume to ask rather Gods
direction for the thing, then his lewe and presence;) then they came again,
they wept and asked him leave (which was somewhat more submissive, and yet not
enough.) Lastly, all the people came unto the house of God, there they sat and
wept before the Lord, and fasted that day until evening, and offered
burnt-offering, etc. thus they went through the work and prevailed. As Dali^ah
overcame Sampson, so may we overcome God; where neither love, nor reason, nor
desert will gain, constancy will. 2. Regularity, under which I comprise, First,
Order; that reformation go before your petition; first, amend, and then pray.
Reformation is the wing of the soul to fly heavenward; one leg to help the
soul to walk and run to Christ. As a man cannot run with one leg, nor a bird
fly with one wing, no more can we get to Heaven by prayer without reformation.
This being done, nothing remains to hinder, or question your entrance at the
door of mercy. If you regard iniquity in your heart, the Lord will not hear.
They do well that reform though it be after; they do better that reform and pray
together; but they do best, that lay aside their filthy garments, before they
come into Gods presence. David's resolution is an excellent copy for us in this
case to write after, Ps. 26.6. I will wash mine hands in innocence, and so will
I compass thine Altar, O Lord! Secondly, Rule; what you do, must be like good
builders, who first lay a good foundation, and afterward ascend by line and
directions from the master builder; For help herein, is the intent of the whole
discourse.

Gloria Deo, mihi condonatio!

