Foelix scelus, Querela piorum, ET Auscultatio Divina; OR, Prospering
profaneness provoking Holy conference, and Gods Attention, in which you have
The Happy estate of the wicked, The Holy exercise of the godly, The Hazard and
event of both.


Plainly propounded in sundry sermons preached at Botolphs Algate London: and
after contracted in two sermons preached in Peter's Church in West-Chester, July
17. 1659.

Now published to the counsel and confirmation of the godly; and check of the
false surmises and reports of the wicked.

By ZACHARY CROFTON.

Job. 1^.5. He that is ready to slip with his feet, is as a Lamp despised in
the thought of him that is at ease.

ver. 6. The Tabernacles of the robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are
secure, into whose hand God brings abundantly.

Psalm. 44.17. All this is come upon us: yet have we not forgotten thee; neither
have we dealt falsely in thy covenant.

Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now
will I arise says the Lord, to set him in safety from him who puffs at him.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the three Crowns a^ the lower end of
Cheapside, 1660.

To the Right worshipful the Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses of the ancient
Corporation of Newcastle Underline in Staffordshire.
Right worshipful and well beloved,
AMongst my many friends, I have at this time made bold to prefixe your names
to this small tract: you have been my people, and I doubt not, but will be my
patrons; you have already appeared my purgators from the reproaches, which
heretical rage has raised against me: yet that is not the end of this
Dedication, the truth is Gods, and I doubt not his defense of it, and its
Author, but to express my hearty affections toward you, I think I may say you
know I love you: I hope to rejoice in many souls among you as seals of my
Ministry: I cannot but let the world know, my Ministry afforded me most comfort
among you; The Lord forgive the sin of such as divided between me and you, as
my love is to you, my care is for you. A people you are obnoxious to
temptation, and conversant in holy conference; and so sit for these
instructions: you are subject to the same providence with other men, and no
less apt to be swayed by them against divine precepts: your schismatic
neighbors studying to seduce you, will (without doubt) ply you with the
arguments of providence: and the lukewarmness to, and slighty recession from
holy Ordinances of many among you; the Skepticisme of others who change their
tune with the time and company, the separation already made by some, and the
Errastianisme of others, making the Church no other then the Commonwealth in a
religious dress, decked by the looking glass of the civil Magistrates mind:
The attendance of the allegiance of some of you on whomsoever by a providence,
though never so profanely can step into a chair of State; but especially the
late discords which have fallen out between you and your Ministers, and the
rather (for that as I have heard) your Town hall has (though but for a time,
and that it may be by connivance too) become a Chapel of contradiction to
your Church, wherein the Lords day was spent in a different worship, to what
you profess; cannot but make me fear, that you too much incline to dance after
providence, beyond what God allows, and Scriptures does direct: I must
confess if providence must be our rule, universal toleration, nay, rather
protection and propagation of schi^me, error, and heresy, must be our duty,
but I would desire that you may know the providence of God may dispose our
condition, but not direct our conversation. I would beg you, to approve your
selves obedient to Scripture precepts whilst observant of successful
providence; as sensible that one divine direction will afford more comfort in
evil times then all providentiall dispensations: notwithstanding therefore,
your eyes see to the trouble of your souls, men of Atheism, and irreligion,
perfidie and perjurie, schism and sacrilege, subverting all civil
Magistracy, supplanting Gospel order, blaspheming Gods truth, and ordinances;
making schisms in, and from Christ his Church; and setting up themselves by
sinful projects, and violent intrusion into Church and State, yet prosper in
this profaneness, tempting God by stout words and religiously espousing him by
fasting and prayers unto their horrid impieties, and yet are delivered be you
careful you do not admire providence into illogicall and irreligious
conclusions: I would not darken any the dispensations of God to our Land, but
wish that in our revolutions all men may read that God rules in the kingdoms
of men, he pulls down and sets up by bis own sovereignty: but my work and
endeavor is to direct men to the righ^ husbanding of providence, that
successful sin may not be lifted up, with the cry of sanctity, nor oppressed
loyalty, justice, and piety, be dejected, despised, and disowned: We live in
changing days, and therein great is the cry of providence the godly are
censured for not dancing after providence into Jeroboams changes in Church and
State: whilst palpable and positive profaneness is pleaded for as piety and
generation-work of God: I pray you consider sad are the changes which are only
defended by after providence: alteration may be of divine appointment, yet
disowned by God, when effected by men's sinful accomplishments, they have set
up Kings but not by me, says God, in a case against which Israel must not
fight, for this thing is from the Lord, 1 King. 12.21. Hos. 8.4. It will never
content a gracious heart to attain an end of Gods appointment, unless by means
of Gods approvement: anointed David, provoked by persecution, durst not cut his
way to the throne, his heart smote him for cutting the lap of Saul's garment,
when providence put his head into his power. Jeroboam for catching a Kingdom by
a providence bears this brand, Jeroboam who made Israel to sin; better it is
to wait on, and walk with God in affliction, then be the subjects of such
providence, to wander with David in a wilderness til God clear the throne;
then with Jeroboam by perfidie, sedition, and rebellion to rend away a Kingdom,
and possess it themselves, though this condition be of divine appointment.

But (beloved Sirs) that I may not too long parley with you at the threshold,
shall I be bold in the name of the Lord to propound unto you some few duties to
be done by you in such days of providence? shall I beg that in these evil
times you will observe these four directions?

1. Propound the word, not providence of God as the reason of your faith and
rule of conversation. This, not that, is appointed to this end: Jesus Christ by
one providence might have made to himself many proselites, yet would not allow
it, but ever referred his hearers to Scriptures: the new lights of our age
blaze much with providence but look you to the Law and the Testimony if any
speak not according to this rule, there is no truth in him: Oh let not
Christian faith be founded on Turkish reason.

2. Persevere in truth and piety, Heresies must come, that they who are sound
may be made manifest; Schism must succeed, that the fixed in Christ may be
found sincere: these must not only come on the the stage; but stand and
succeed; it may be unto persecution of the Orthodox and sound; as did
Arrianisme in the Grecian Empire, and Anabaptisme in Germany, they are no other
then trials of faith and patience: be it your care to cleave to truth, when
disowned and disregarded: and continue in the Church, though disordered and
discouraged: let not the boisterous blasts of providence remove you from your
stedfastness in the faith, or union of the Church Catholic. I know the design
of some schismatic neighbors, by courting, nay some of them by creeping
into your town is to paganize you, (as they have done other places) and set up
their own schismatic assemblies; and I fear your over affectionate
observation of the providential rising of some from you, has been as a snare
of separation from the Churh unto more then natural relations: but however
Church gatherers have gathered the power and treasure of these Nations to
themselves: forsake not you the assembling of your selves together, as the
manner of some is, and stand out against the sinful assembling of Church
gatherers: The glittering glory of particular Churches of selfe-constitution
(that way of Corah) and self consecration (that way of Jeroboam) will prove,
nay I may say does prove an ignis fatuus, leading into the fools paradise of
high expectations, but leaving men in the wilderness of confusion. They that
feared God in Israel followed the despised and driven out Priests to Jerusalem;
let it be your prayer and care not to follow the flocks of Christ his pretended
companions, I pray you recall to mind what instructions I gave you many years
since from that Text Cant. 1.7. and whilst you have power prevent
Congregational foxes from spoiling your vines, though you cannot keep them out
of close corners, you may from places of concourse, and command them out of
your common Hall, and public places of assembly, give them no countenance
whose only errand is confusion: you are now a Church of Christ become not the
gilded Synagogue of Satan. Will not reason tell you selfe-constitution is a
sedition in the Commonwealth and schism in the Church? Is authority
essential to a civil, and not to a religious Corporation? What superstructure
can be built on a sinful schismatical foundation? judge ye: though it
flourish fly from it, it cannot but fall: I say be you stable in truth,
steady in the union of the Church, constant to Gods covenant, and continuing in
prayer, though God carry discouragingly toward his people: for God laughs the
Devil to scorn, when Job serves him for naught: and the Saints constancy in
holiness does witness that there is a reward to the righteous, when the
prospering providence of the profane do suggest, it is in vain to serve God.

3. Prize and preserve among you a sound and zealous Ministry, such you have
enjoyed, such you may (by your own advantages which you above other Towns)
enjoy, Pastors to feed witb knowledge and understanding, are Gods promises and
his peoples privilege, bread and water of affliction to be embraced before
their removeall: let not the general contempt providence pours on M^nistry,
deaden your affection to your Ministers; but know them as over you in the Lord:
I am not a little grieved for your late differences with godly Ministers; I
wish you would seriously surveigh your souls, see wether some spirit of pride,
passion, prejudice, or vain glory, do not act and occasion them: take heed you
jar not with Ministers, until you wreak your quarrel on Ministry; I wish some
of you have not already proclaimed open war: I will not acquit your Ministers
from their infirmities; but desire you take heed to your selves; in this day of
discouraging providence to Gods Ministers; true piety should prize and prefer
them: so evil are the times that dis-satisfaction in a profane Minister can
scarcely pass without the censure of dis-respect to Ministry; much less when
fomented and continued against a man who is a faithful, painful, and diligent
(and in the general course of his life, let malice say its worst) a godly
Minister: my beloved, let the office and person be distinguished, and the
dignity of the one will darken and cloud the infirmity of the other; and the
authority of the one will awe duty denied to the weakness of the other. Receive
Ministers as they are indeed the messengers of the Lord of Hosts, and
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, and then despise them even in their distress if
you can:

4. Pursue your conference and manage it with all prudence, avoid the evils
incident to it, pursue the directions herein propounded: you have heretofore
been acquainted with them but have need to be put in remembrance: take heed of
spiritual pride in conference, least it prove an Audley conference that may
plunge you into the precipice of Anabaptisme, and other heresies: my heart
bleeds over those men with whom you know I have sometime past had sweet
communion though they will not now hear me, be warned by their example.

Be careful of, and constant in these and other duties directed in the word,
what ever men say or cross providence seem to suggest: Let Ecebolius whirl
about with every wind of providence in the Empire, until he proclaim the
shame of his own unconstancy; be you pillars of truth, and Cedars of holiness,
standing in stormy days, as indeed rooted and built up in Christ, and resolved
into divine revelation as your rule, however disposed by providence as to your
present outward condition: whereunto that you may be strengthened, read these
notes as helpful, and offered from the hearty affections, and with the hearty
prayer for Gods blessing,

of your Quondam Pastor, yet zealously affectionate for the good of your souls
ZAC. CROFTON.
from my Study in Botolphs Algate Lon. Nov. 3. 1659.
To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Did many months since, begin this discourse unto my own Congregation,
intending chiefly to instruct them in the too much neglected and abused duty of
Godly conference but finding the words so connexed that I could not
eonveniently come at my intended doctrine until I had spoken to the condition
which did constrain the godly, their speaking one to another. I divided the
Text into three general heads to be discussed, and so intended them for
particular instruction never to be made more public: but God who over-ruleth
men's purposes has otherwise disposed: In June last I being called to preach
at the morning exercise in Magdalen Milk-street Church took some of these
notes as next hand, and did very briefly discuss the prospero^s providence
which do attend the profane. Such approbation it met with from many godly
hearers, that I was pursued with great importunity to publish the same, yet I
resisted and resolved they should never see the light: in July following my
D^mestick affairs did c^ll me down unto the since unhappy County of Chester, in
the City whereof I was (by many friendly obligations and entreaties) eng^ged to
preach one whole Lords day, and did discourse this same subject as most fresh
in memory, because the very same on my thoughts in my ordinary course at home:
what advantage any that are in that City godly and zealous for religion, have
hence reaped they best know, what occasion they have to improve these
instructions, we must shut our eyes if we will not see; shortly after my thus
preaching did break out the late unhappy insurrection and did something retard
my return home: I being absenct in such a juncture of time was by malice (to
which I have been no little exposed) reported as eng^ged in the design, and
highly noysed to have preached before the body late in Arms in Westchester
City. And this report was carried with that height of impudence that it gained
credit among friends and foes: affrighted my poor family with proud threats:
and exposed me to troublsome attendance on the late Committee for the Militia,
and Council of State: before the last of whom a member of themselves offered
to produce a Leivetenant who heard me preach and would on oath depose it was
so and so circumstanced, as envy did desire: but when I demanded his appearance
and testimony, and could not obtain it, I was brought under a promise of
printing the sermons I did preach at Westchester: And thus the providence of
God has constrained them from me: I hope for good.

It is very probable the matter and season may expose the preaching, and
publishing these notes unto the censure of the Committee for discretion: which
if it do, let me be rather blamed for indiscreet discovery of Gods mind; then
unfaithful silence, and dissembling divine truth, darkning precepts by
providence; the sin of too many Prophets in our age and Nation: yet true
prudence speaks words pertinent to present providence, wise men must oppose
Gods word to men's wickedness: and give counsel squared to condition; nor
should danger divert or dismay them. Isaiah will cry aloud to tell Judah of her
sin, though for it he fall under the saw: And Jeremiah will declare Gods mind
though it cast him into the dungeon: Michaiah must needs h^ve played the fool,
if he had followed providence to the flattery of Ahab, as did all the other
Prophets. However evil times of hatred against him who rebukes in the Gate,
and abhorrency of him that speaks uprightly, may make the prudent (not bound
by office) to keep silence: It must not do so to Gods Ministers, whose office
is to witness for God and piety when prospering profaneness proclaims God to
be as the wicked, and that it is in vain to serve God: It is a man's prudence to
do with vigor the duty of his place against all opposition, shall the
providence of God be made the apology of sin, and so the stumbling block of
the Saints, and the Ministers of God not make known the method and order of
them? and the pleasure of the Lord that men cleave to his covenant though they
be killed all the day long, and walk with him in worst times; that so the
wicked may be convinced, and the weak be strengthened: the times of Gods
silence are the times of his Ministers speaking, when judgment is reprieved,
the malefactor must be reproved: I could heartily wish guilt on men's
consciences did not groundlesly charge indiscretion on Gods Ministers and
impertinency on Gods Word: had not our eyes seen treason, rebellion, regicide,
perfidie, perjury, pride, hypocrisy, and violence, break out into sad and
sinful revolutions, to the utter subversion of foundations: violation of Laws,
invasion of interests, destruction of liberties, trampling on truth,
divastation of the Church, blasphemy of God, Christ, and his Ordinances;
contempt of Gospell-Ministry, letting loose the Devil by a boundless
toleration, and unparalleld wickedness and unspeakable confusion in Church and
State: and that against all declarations, protestations, imprecations, solemn
vows and Covenants, oaths, appeals, to God and men, even of all kind of civil
or religious bonds: and had not our ears heard these boastings of properity and
succe sfull providence; as undeniable demonstration of Gods good liking and
approbation, nay of Gods very appointment and designation of these horrid
impieties as the good old cause of his sons kingdom, and the proper work of his
Saints; conducing much to his glory; blasphemously pleading providence against
precepts provoking themselves to pursue and persist in their own lusts
directly: contrary to Gods Law and proudly censuring the poor, holy, humble,
upright men of God as ignorant, in sensible of Gods hand, proud, obstinate,
Resisting providence, peevish, and profane, disowning the very hand and
disposing such prosperity to the profane, and only because they subscribe not
to, and go not along with their sinful though successful enterprises, and
consent not to pluck the fifth command out of the decalogue, to fling Gods word
behind they back; and dance after providence into Jeroboam like changes in
Church and State: I say courteous reader, had not our eyes seen and our ears
heard this sad abuse of providence; and men's conscience grown tickle and tender
by reason of guilt, a discou se of providence might have passed without the
least charge of violence, discontent, peevishness, or indiscretion; but proper
plasters must be applied though the wounded patient brand the Surgeon with
Rashness, and cruelty, in provoking pain by searching and suitable
applications: Chrisostom ceased not Reprove drunkenness for all the frettings
of a drunken people, until they ceased to be drunk nor was Jehoiadah the
Priest diverted from his just enterprice and duty by Athalia the usurper her
onterie of Treason, Treason.

Yet give me leave to tell thee that providence did suite the time to the Text,
I did not suite the Text to the time, I had begun and made some progress in
this discourse before the late return of the republck, and its success against
the disowners of it; so that my choice is not so much to be blamed; as Gods
wisdom in directing my thoughts to be acknowledged.

Reader, what ever fault may be charged on me, I shall submissely bear knowing
I am a man and have managed the discourse like a man of much weakness; yet,
the matter I will aver, is the mind of God meet for the Saints meditation
and in our day most needful to be studied: Thou have them in a plain dress,
as they were preached and are most proper for thy capacity, and had the
Author enjoyed his mind thou had had them much sooner: thou now have them,
read with diligence and due consideration: and that thou may profit by them,
shall be the constant prayer of.

ZAC. CROF.

Foelix Scelus Querela Piorum. Prospering Profaneness. provoking holy
conference and Gods attention First preached at Botolphs Algate, Land. and
after in Peter's Church West-Chester on July 17. 1659.
Mal. 3.15, 16, 17. And now we call the proud happy: yea, they that work
wickedness are set up, yea, they that tempt God are even delivered.

Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened and heard it, and a book of Remembrance was written before him, for
them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.

They shall be mine (says the Lord of hosts) in the day that I make up my
jewels: and I will spare them as a man spares his only Son that serves him


THis Prophet was the last inspired by the Lord, to make known his mind to the
Jews before the coming of the Messiah: he is therefore the most clear in
pointing out the appearance of the Lord, and animating the expectation of his
people.

In this Chapter the Prophet does declare two things. First,

The manner of the coming of the Messiah, which is in

Majesty, his way prepared by his messenger, ver. 1.

Much severity Refining his people, ver. 2, 3, 4. Requiting the wicked, ver. 5.


Secondly, the reason of so severe an approach which is partly in God, he
changes not: Chiefly from men they are presumptuously sinful and must be
curbed and convicted; Now we call the proud happy; and they that work
wickedness are set up; and they that tempt God are even delivered: Sin
abounded unto the sad and serious thoughts of the Godly, Then they that feared
the Lord spoke often one to another, etc. Therefore it was high time for the
Messiah to appear that then might discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God and him that serves him not.

Whence by the way, we might observe.

Sins prevalency and presumption; Observe.
is the season of Gods appearance to manifest his justice and holiness.

When sin is at the highest and most daringly profane; Saints despised and
dispondent, deeming that God has forsaken the earth, and will not regard the
sons of men, or requite the wickedness of the wicked but leave them at liberty
to blaspheme his name, and to reproach his people, then the Lord is nearest
hand, his holiness and justice most likely to appear; Thus it was in the old
world, in Sodoms ruin, and Jerusalems captivity, and thus it must be, to

1. Redeem Gods name and nature from the blasphemies and reproaches of the
wicked, Psalm. 10.13.50.21
who cry out, God does not see, neither will he regard God is such an one as
our selves, and therefore we prosper: when impiety impeacheth Gods purity, it
is time for justice to plead its cause.

2. Rescue Gods Saints and people from the taunts, scoffs and insultings of the
wicked: who deem, they in vain serve God; and are not profitted by walking
mounrfully all the day long; and to no purpose they trust in God and cleave to
godliness, which either cannot, or will not save them: God must be seen in his
holiness and power, when Religion is said to be vanity, and the pious
proclaimed fools.

But on this I must not insist only let it be the stay of our spirits, whilst
we see iniquity abound, profaneness prosper, fin soaring high, and are
sadned in our spirits at its prevalency and presumption consider we Gods
justice and holiness is under the press of men's profaneness, and must e're
long break out against them: Sins increase is the season of Christ his
appearance: now we call the proud happy, then they that feared the Lord spoke
often to one another, was the frame and state of affairs at his first, and so
will be at his second coming.

But I pass to the text, which I shall consider in it self rather then in its
connection and coherence, and so it offers three things to our consideration.

1. The estate of the wicked. 2. The exercise of the godly. 3. Event of both.
I shall speak to them a part, and distinctly, and first of the first.

The estate of the wicked, and that is asserted in the Prophets observation, by
an entire proposition we call the proud happy, they that work wickedness are
set up, etc. In which we have two things observable as the parts of this
proposition.

1. The subjects or persons spoken of, and they are described by a threefold
denomination, Proud, Workers of wickedniss. Such as tempt God.


2 The predicate and thing spoken of them, and that is their prosperous estate
and condition, and that is described in its gradations they are Happy, Set up,
Delivered,


This proposition (thus divided without any further comment or explication)
does lay before every observant eye and intelligent ear, the great prosperity
of the worst of men: that I may therefore hasten after time, I shall briefly
propound and prosecute to your instruction this plain point of doctrine.

Most prosperous provideneies do frequently attend the prophanest wretches.

In the discussion of this doctrine. I shall speak by way of explication,
demonstration, and application.

By way of explication we shall enquire

1. Whom we define and denominate prophanest wretches.

2. What are the prospering providence which do so frequently attend them.

First, The state of the wicked.
I shall show you whom we deem and denominate the prophanest wretches, who
enjoy these prospering providence: and they are such as at the first view,
will appear very unlikely of such enjoyments, as indeed unworthy to live on the
least of Gods goodness: I shall not wander far to find them out, only explain
their nature by those Characters which discover them in the text, and they are
Workers of Wickenesse, Proud workers of wickedness. Proud workers of
wickedness who tempt God.


1 Note of profaneness.
First, they are declared to be workers of wickedness, this is their name in
the text, and the same is given in Job 4.8. and in Psalm. 5.5. and Isa. 31.2.
and in other places and indeed it is their proper name the very notation of
their nature: for wickedness is their work, sin their service, ungodliness
their only trade, traffic, and negotiation; sin is called the works of the
flesh, for the flesh of profane men can follow no other work: it is their
whole endeavor, aim, and study, to be sinning themselves and set it forward by
other hands: what ever professions and pretenses they make, still sin is their
business: all their hypocrisies, circumventious, fallacies, fair speeches, is
but to drive this trade of sin, like them in Psalm. 58.1, 2. Speak
Righteousness, but work wickedness in their hearts, which is the Devils forge
and workhouse; sin is the seed and harvest (this they sow and reap) of profane
men: sin is an accidental chance act to a gracious soul, but it is the scope,
substance, and business of profane men: The best Ordinance is to them but the
humoring of sin, they hear, but their heart is after their coveteousness, Ezec.
33.31.
they pray, and it turns to iniquity, they fast, Isa. 58.2.3 Prove. 21.4
but it is for strife and debate to smite with the fist of wickedness. The very
plowing of the wicked is sin, their whole design is to dig descents into Hell,
they are true drudges to the Devil, they plow iniquity, and sow wickedness,
Job. 4. v. 8. arrant, serunt, occant, scelera, they drudge night and day,
turning up all the corruption in their hearts, and conveniences in the world,
for the effecting of their devices: all their expenses and endeavors is to
this end: Thus Alexander the great promised a Crown of an hundred and eight
poud weight to the men that drunk themselves dead; and thus Charles the ninth
of France gave Albertus Tudius (an Hucksters son) six hundred thousand Crowns
to teach him to swear with a grace, and make him an exact Artist in his
impiety: In a word, they are sinners in action, not only in intention, They
devise iniquity on their beds, and act it when the day is light because it is
in the power of their hand, Mica. 2.1. Suggestion are smoothered in the godly,
and profaneness in them seldom passes into purpose: but this seed soon
springs in profane soil, and having conceived it brings forth not only
purposes but practices also, Jam. 1. 15. they are sinners of duration, not
transiency, they continue in their course of profaneness, the practice of sin
is the prison of the pious, if they fall they recover by repentance; Isa. 56.12.
but in the palace of the profane they cry out, to morrow shall be as this
day, and much more abundant: they abide in their wicked course against friendly
counsels, misteriall reproofs, checks of conscience, and corrections of Gods
severe hand, they will not be warned, nay, if God hedge up their way, they leap
hedges, and rush into sin, as the horse into the battle, Ier. 8 6.
and will not be restrained: they carry guilt without any remorse, and run on
in profaneness without any return: they are workers of wickedness, who never
cease till they complete the estate of darkness designed by their master the
Devil: they are sinners of diligence and delight, not sloth or reluctance they
play at acts of piety and are therein careless and superficial; but work
wickedness with all their skill and will, laying out study and strength on sin,
as sold to work it; so far are they from slipping any opportunity that they
rise early and seek occasions of sin, and make provision for the flesh, they
compass sea and land, contrive conveniences, and stir up corruptions, admit no
check or curb of conscience, but as spurred, go on from evil to evil, and wax
worse and worse: so that this is the first note of such who may prosper in the
world, they are workers of wickedness to whom you must confess all wrath and
woe does belong, Romans 2.8.9.
and therefore it may seem strange that they should, who yet do, prosper, and
yet they are not only workers of wickedness. But

2. Note of profaneness Mich. 7.3.
Secondly, Proud workers of wickedness, not only do these men do wickedness
with both hands earnestly, Exodus. 18.11.21.11. but they also deal arrogantly
boiling and swelling with spite and spleen against God and his people, pursuing
their own ends confidently, and daring: Proud, haughty, and scornful is their
name, Prove. 21.24. they swell in their own sense unto the forgetting God and
themselves: and the scorn and contempt of others, they are insolent toward
men, and impudent toward God; in the pride of their heart they disdain the
poor, and oppress them, Psalm. 10.2. their hearts swell with such apprehensions
of their estate and enjoyments that their eyes do sparkle with pride; they are
of haughty and scornful looks, their hands can act nothing but appression,
vengeance, and destruction to the Mordecai and his people who deny to adore
their Hamam like pride their tongues can speak nothing but braggs, boastings,
and arrogance; their very jesture is a Comment on their pride: they are so
lifted up, they think none is, or can be like them, their enjoyments are in
their eyes unparalleled, unchangeable excellencies, and therefore they require
all prostration of others to their pride: their haughtiness can abide no
obstruction, but their wrath swells to the ruin and removal of them who
dis-respect their dignity, and disobey their unjust demands: they taunt at the
godly in their adversity, and insult over their calamity with an Ha, Ha, so we
would have it: where is now your God, Psalm. 35.21.137.3 Mat 27.43.
sing us your Hebrew songs: he trusted in God, let him save him if he will have
him: they sit in security and say they shall not be moved: their purposes they
pursue with the height of resolution, because with in the power of their hands,
We will pursue, we will overtake, we will destroy; are their proud terms
toward Gods Israel, Exo, 15.9.
so that they can admit no parity among men, nor parley between reason and their
own proud thoughts: nor are they more insolent toward men then impudent
toward God, appropriating to themselves their own power, might, acquirement,
what they hold by divine indulgence, Our high hand, Deu. 32.27. Dan. 4.30.
and not the Lord has done all this. Is not this great Babell which I have
built for the house of my kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honor
of my majesty? is their proud boasting language witnessing that they forget God
that rules in the Kingdom of men: and hence they arrogate to themselves the
honor, and adoration, (as did the Roman Emperors) which only belongs unto
God, their Image must be worshipped on pain of a fiery furnace, and prayers
must be presented to no God save themselves on pain of a Lions den: and in the
haughtiness of their spirit they blspheme Gods holy name denying his power with
Sennacherib; who is the God that can deliver out of my hand, Isa. 37. and
determine the execution of their own purposes in despite of God, as did Pope
Julius in eating his porke-flesh; as if omnipotency should not hinder them;
nay, such is their pride that they break all bonds, and presume to intermeddle
with holy things without their sphere. Corah's conceit of the peoples
holiness, carries not only to the contempt of Moses and Aaron, but unto a
proud preposterous unwarrantable approach to God. Vzziah is no sooner made
mighty by the Lord, but his heart is lifted up and he breaks all order, and
thinks scorn to be limited in any act he takes a Censer and goes into the
Temple to offer incense, 2 Chronicles. 26.18.
nor will he be by the Priest of God warned to desist his sin: in a word, he is
so proud that he forgets God by whom he subsists, and strives against God who
can soon break him in pieces; and blasphemeth the Lord, who is jealous of his
name: and although God hate the workers of iniquity, and resist proud doers,
yet these are the men that meet with prospering providence for a time.

3. These men are yet more wicked, 3. note of profaneness.
for they are proud workers of wickedness and proceed to tempt God. They sin
with such daring presumption, and speak such desperate blasphemous expressions
as if designed to prove whether there be a God, or he be a God of holiness,
justice and power, as he is deser bed. Like profane Israel, they fret and
fume, grudge and grumble under their crossed expectation, and cry, Is God in
the midst of us. Exodus 17.7. Can God spread a Table in the wilderness, and
prepare bread and flesh for his people. As Psalm. 78.18, 19, 20. They dispute
all divine threats, and debate Gods very nature, arraigning all the attributes
of God at the bar of their proud fancy; to be judged by their corrupt sense,
and blaspheming reason; and so daringly resist divine direction, like Israel
rush out of a dogged diffidence into a desperate resolution of going to fight
against Amaleck, though warned by Moses to sit still in their places, and not
to go out to War, for that God is not in the midst of them. Numb. 14, 41, 42,
43, 44, 45. And presumptuously answer the Prophets of God with We will not
hearken unto the voice of the Trumpet. As for what thou have spoken in the name
of the Lord we will not do it but we will do what seems good in our own eyes.
Jer. 6.17.44.16, 17. That by their daring presumptions they put Gods truth and
justice so upon the test that he can no longer forbear, but because of their
abominations bring a curse on the Land. v. 22. nay such is their hor-impudence,
that they do not only debate, but also blasphemously determine against the
threatenings of justice, crying out, the destroying scourge shall not come nigh
unto us; we have made a Covenant with Hell and death, and have made lies our
refuge, and hid our selves under falsehood. Isa. 28.15. Therefore they deride
the messengers of God and mock his Prophets with an how went the Spirit of the
Lord from me to thee. 1 Kings 22.24. Watchman, what of the night? Isa. 21.11.
Where is the promise of his coming? do not all things continue as they were. 2
Pet. 3 Nay such is their impiety as to impeach Gods very holiness^, and from
his patience, positively conclude him to be profane, and the pandor of all
impiety: they steal, murder, commit adultery, and swear falsely, and come and
stand before God in the house where his name is called, and say we are
delivered to do all these abominations; Jer. 7.9.
They purpose and practice against plain precept most positive and unparalled
profaneness, and cry providence, providence leads us to it, because God abides
silent, they say, he is altogether such an one as themselves Psalm. 50.21. They
conceive a mischievous device and come and enquire of the Lord: They contrive
by false accusations and horrid perjurie to shed innocent blood, and
Jesabel-like, they proclaim a Fast. S serious acts of piety are the prologues
of their profaneness, in Nomine Dei in ^ipit omne malum, they no sooner begin
to fast and pray, but sober men see and know their profane purposes are near
unto execution: nor does the wisdom and power of God pass their proud
temptation, for they attempt acts of cruelty, and cry, who is the God that
shall deliver out of our hands, crucify Christ and his people and
blasphemously insult, he trusted in the Lord let him save him if he will have
him trample on the righteous and triumph over them with a Where is now your
God, he persecutes the poor, he boasts of his hearts desire, he blesses the
Covetous whom God abhors, through the pride of his countenance he will not
seek after God; God is not in all his thoughts: his ways are always grievous;
thy judgments are far above out of his fight, as for all his enemies, he
puffs at them, his mouth is full of cursing and deceit, and under his tongue
is mischief and vanity, he croucheth and humbles himself, that the poor may
fall by his strong ones, yet he has said in heart I shall not be moved, s for
all his enemies he puffs at them, he has said in his heart, God has
forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see it; The wicked contemn God, he
has said in his heart Thou will not require it. Psalm. 10. So thus these proud
workers of wickedness speak stout words against God, and determine It is in
vain to serve the Almighty: they profanely strive with their maker, and put
his truth, holiness, power and justice to proof, and provoke to the
vindication of them: And are not these the prophanest wretches? Can we scrue
iniquity one jot higher? Can we choose but wonder the Heavens fall not on their
heads, and the Earth devoureth them not alive? yet these are the men whom
prospering providence do frequently attend, and so much for their persons.

The 2d thing to be considered is, what prospering providence do attend these
profane wretches, and in general, All those providence which pass in common
from the Creator to the Creature, profane men do and may possess: they have
not indeed any the specialties of Grace, holiness, and Covenant privileges
which stream in the blood of Christ unto Gods redeemed ones: these strangers
meddle not with these joys, but peace, plenty, health, honor, wealth, liberty,
all worldly ter^^ne sublimary mercy, expressions of Gods goodness are extended
to them, and that in such abundance that as the Psalmist notes, They have more
than heart (...) wish, They flo^rish like the green (...) tree, and know no
sorrow, our Prophet does very accurately describe the porsperitie of profane
men in the three steps thereof they are called Happy. Set up. Delivered.


1 step of profane prosperity.
1. The Proud are called happy, they are accounted the only blessed men on
earth, they are objects of other men's admiration and applause: they are
esteemed and envied as the only possessors of good: all men arise to give them
honor, and could wish their estate and enjoyments. Their condition comments on
Gods goodness and favor toward them: They swim so in the fullness of their
desire, that they become the objects of all men's flatteries: their happiness
shines with such splendor that their very attendants (like Solomon's young men)
are happy that they are so near; none can or dare speak contemptibly of them,
nay men are their felicity to the silencing of reproof toward their impiety,
nay the very justifying of their wickedness, and crying all is well done.
Alexander wants not an Anaxarchus to set Justice by Jupiter, Psalm. 49 18.
and conclude all must be deemed just that is done by so great a King, and that
first by himself, then by others, though it be the murder of his dearest
friend Clitus, nor is it to be thought strange that men arise call them
blessed, and conclude them the happiest men on earth for that.

2, They are set up, 2 step of profane prosperity.
exalted by the hand of God to the highest of outward enjoyments: They are set
up in natures throne, and blessed with a budding race and hopeful progeny.
They are planted and take root, and grow up in the earth, they send forth their
Children like sheep, and their sons dance before them, for their seed is
established in their sight with them and their generations before their eyes.
Job. 21.9 11. The posterity of the profane do frequently plead the cause and
justify the sinful carriage of their progenitors: their name is not only
preserved in posterity, but made to shine with splendour in the enjoyment of
riches and honor: their wealth and worship is no less conspicuous then
progeny. For their Kine calve, their Bull genders, the waters of a full cup
are wrung (...) unto them, they prosper and increase in riches, They enjoy full
barns, flourishing fields, fair structures, and fat Carkases, and all the good
things of this life; it is but ordinary for Dives to fare deliciously every
day, they are cl^^thed in purple and costly apparel; it is but common to see
the work of men seated in a chair of state, wearing the imperial Crown,
swaying the royal Scepter, and raging with the revengfull sword. Honor is so
incident to Haman, that he cannot think the least Ray of it can pass from him
to another. Favor follows the wicked with importunity, no dignity natural
or political passes the profane, but they possess it. They that work
wickedness are Set up. Nay this is not all, ^ut

3. 3d. stest of profane prosperity.
They that tempt are even delivered: They discerve and are devoted to
destruction, and yet are delivered: The hand of God is lifted up, and yet it
lights not on them, they tempt him and yet are not troubled, provoke him and
yet escape unpunished, They are not in trouble as other men, nor are they
plagued as other, there is no bands in their death, but they are lusty and
strong. Psalm. 73.4, 5. Their houses are peaceable without fear, and the Rod of
God is not upon them. Job. 21.9. The wicked are like the Tyrant Polycrates that
never met with cross all his life time nay the very clouds that hang over
their heads, do ordinarily disperse: sometimes unto the Godly observer, their
proud profaneness does so tempt God, that to their thinking, he can no longer
bear nay commotion and clouds does arise about them, and horror of spirit
cease on them, and all men deem their prosperity ready to expire, and yet
their fear vanishes and the expectation of the Godly fails them, they escape
Scot-free and are delivered from the dangers to which they seem obnoxious, also
snares are broken; they that fear God suffer, whilst these that tempt him are
eeven delivered. So it is plain, peace, plenty, health, liberty, honor,
victory, full enjoyments, successful achievements, immunity from deserved
and impending plagues and punishments, may attend the very worst of men, even
such who rage in sin, violate sacred vows, disobey divine command, trample on
truth and Gospel ordinances; insolently oppress the Godly and impudently
provoke divine justice For we call the proud happy, they that work wickedness
are set up, and they that tempt God are even delivered.

But to pass from explication, we proceed to demonstration, and that
prospering providence does so frequently attend the prophanest wretches is a
truth undeniably evedent to every serious and sober spirit acquainted with
sacred or profane story, or observant of the dispensation of common providence
in the world. Can we read Scripture and not regard its general and attest to
this plain truth, positively affirming that Some remove the Landmarks and
violently take away the flocks and feed thereon, They drive away the Ass of
the fatherless and take the widows ox for a pledge, they turn the needy out of
the way, and cause the naked to lodge without clothing; make men groan out of
the City, and soul of the wounded to cry, they rebel against the light, and yet
God lays not folly to them. Job. 24. Was not Jobs demonstration of profane
men's prosperity, the very defense of his integrity, against the erroneous
cavills and groundless censures of his three friends, and is it not therein
plainly asserted that the wicked live, become old, yea are mighty in power,
their seed is established before them. Their houses are safe from fear, and the
Rod of God is not upon them. And are not these positive assertions made evident
in plain instances and examples? is not cruel Pharaoh oppressing Israel the
highest Prince in the World? is not Jeroboam who rebelled against his master,
made Israel to sin, set up Calves at Dan and Bethel, and suffered the lowest
of the people to make themselves Priest, defended his usurped magistracy with
a usurped ministry; and put forth his hand against the Prophet of God, yet
established in his usurped Kingdom, and slept with his Fathers, leaving the
succession of his ill gotten Kingdom unto his son? and did not Manasseh that
raged most in murder and mischief reign longest of any of the Kings of Israel?
Yet many of them much better then himself. What shall we say of the high Honor
of Nebuchadnezzar, the Hammer of the nations under whom Babylon sat a Queen,
and said, she should never be moved: and did not Assyria the very Rod of Gods
anger make all her Princes Kings, and say in her heart, I will ascend Heaven, I
will exalt my Throne above the stars of God. Isa 14.13. Nay, as if these
instances were not sufficient; do not the Scriptures witness the success of
Bejamin once and again over Israel? destroying more by 14000 men then they
were themselves, whilst not only the fewest in number (being but 26000 against
four hundred thousand) but managing the basest quarrel the impudent defense of
the horrid impiety and murder of the men of Gibeah. Judge. 20. must we not shut
our Bibles if we will not see prosperity attend profaneness? does not the
word note the prospering providence of the propane to be the principle or
rather occasion of all their pride and blasphemy? is it not from hence that
pride compasses them as a chain, and violence covers them as a garment; that
they set their mouths against Heaven, and their tongues walk through the Earth.
Psalm. 73.6.9. Therefore they say unto God, depart from us, we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways; Nay because of Gods silence, they stick not to say that
he is such a one as themselves. It is the great stumbling block of the
righteous to see the prosperity of the profane: at this stone David feet had
almost slipped. Psalm. 73. And against this Jeremiah could not but complain, and
almost quarrel at Gods very justice. Jer. 12.1. Against this very temptation
God has prescribed, preserving and supporting cautions, counselling us not to
fret at the prosperity of the wicked. Psalm. 37. And declaring that it
determines not divine favor. Eccles. 9.1, 2. The prosperity of the profane is
not only visible within the pale of the Church and in the Word of God, but in
the World also, and demonstrated by all prohane History the Heathen Poets have
long since sung Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet, and Cato parvo.
Pompeius nullo; quis putat esse Deos.
Cato is contemned, Pompey to shame exposed.
Whilst base Licinus in Marble lies enclosed.


And have not their Orators left us that maxim on observation of wicked men's
prospering Foelix impietas virtus dicitur; Prosperity makes Vice be deemed
Virtue: Do not their Histories acquaint us with the happy gales which attended
the sacrilege of Dionysius, making him say the Gods loved sacrilege; and he
success of Coesar against Pompey, making him to question the very deity; and
the never crossed estate of the Tyrant Polycrates, who of purpose to fall under
a cross, cast his Ring into the Sea, and received it in the fish that was
served up at his table. Of the success of Anthony over famous Brutus,
constraining him to cry (...) virtue is of no value, let Fortune be adored by
my posterity. And Nero his high prosperity that made it treason in the famous
Senator Thraseus, not to flatter him. What shall we tell you of Seneca's
writings of providence occasioned by wicked men's prosperity? And Salvians
treatise of Gods government of the World in righteousness on the like
occasion: Or shall I mention to you Basils stumbling at the success and
prosperity of the blasphemous Arrians? Or of the flourishing estate of the
Turks those vowed enemies of Christianity? I might swell a volume with
instances of this nature, but must not our own observation witness it to us,
may not we in our age run and read the prospering providence of the most
profane; have not we seen men of error, ignorance, perjury perfidie and
hypocrisy, who supplant government, subvert foundation, dethrone Princes,
usurp authority, invade Nations, imbrew their hands in blood, trample on the
Church and lay it wast, blaspheme ordinances, expose Ministry to contempt,
violate all sacred obligations, falsify all solemn professions, advanc^ and
establish themselves by all acts of cruelty, couzenage dissimulation and
perjury, and pass to the grave in the height of honor. And can we otherwise
conclude, then that we call the proud happy, and they that work wickedness
are set up, and they that tempt God are even delivered. Whilst it is thus, we
have cause to be serious in Seneca's question, Cur been malis, why should
prospering providence attend the prophanest wretches: whence is their success,
how comes it to pass that they who thus provoke God, escape Scot-free? here then
I shall show you that prospering providence do on some weighty grounds and
reasons, attend the prophanest wretches, viz. the 1. Providence of God in its
common course and method does dispose. 2, Patience of God does require 3.
Punishment and probation of the Saints necessitate 4. Provoked Justice does
enforce prosperity to attend the prophaneest.


These Reasons let us particularly and seriously consider, and they will
convince us that there is good ground for profane men's prosperity, and first,
of the first.

Providence in it is Common the World created is preserved, ordered and disposed
by divine providence; he that made the World settleth it in a series and
regular course and method: though God do exercise a special care over his own
Children, his eyes running to, and fro, 2 Chronicles. 29.9.
that he may show himself strong for the good of the upright in heart; Yet he
sleights not the World, but orders all the affairs thereof, according to the
purpose of his own will, and that in a settled course, and prescribed method,
His eyes behold the evil, and the good. Prove. 15.3. Nothing falls out but at
his appointment: and in the course and order of his appointment; he disposes
all things to their end, with all causes, means, occasions, method or
obstructions thereunto belonging: No conservation, or condition befalls the
whole creation, but runs in the channel of common providence; fortune is a
foolery, and chance a mere cheat for nothing in the world is really (though to
our sense it be) accidental and fortuitous, but all things come to pass by
the Regular motion of providence, which frequently brings under the Godly, and
lifts up the profane, and there are in this Chariot of Providence four wheels
carrying forth, and regularly disposing the prosperity of the worst of men. viz.

1. Divine power and sovereignty. 2. Distribution of Gods goodness to his
Creatures. 3. Divine method and order. 4. And due Reservation of the wicked to
the day of vengeance. The first wheel of peovid.

The prosperity of the profane is disposed by the providence of God, unto the
demonstration of his power and soveraignity: God does whatsoever he will, and
who shall say unto him what do thou? the whole course of providence is a
comment on God his independencie and absolute dominion, and usually Runs
Counter to men's castings and contrivances, apprehensions and expectations, so
as that God may manifest, his thoughts are not man's thoughts. 1 Samuel 16.6, 7,
8, 9.10.
Samuels sight may soon suggest Eliab for his high stature, and lively aspect
to be the anointed of the Lord before him; but the Soveraignity of God will set
up David the most unlikely of the family of Jesse, and so witnesses that God
sees not as man sees: no outward enjoyments must depend on humane
acquirements, therefore all things come alike unto all men, There is one event
to the righteous and the wicked: to the Good, to the clean, and to the unclean;
to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not, as is the good, so is
the sinner, and he that swears as he that fears an oath. Eccles. 9.2.
Though the favor of the Lord be to the Righteous, and his good will to them
that fear him, yet sanctity is no peg to stop his wheel of providence: Grace
must not divert the demonstrations of his soveraignity: no man receives any
thing by desert and merit, in common (much less in special) good things, but
the very best are tenants at will, fed by the Commons of Gods determination. The
soveraignity of God will triumph over the seeming merit of sanctity, as well as
the probable procurements of nature: and therefore the Race is not to the
swift, nor the Battle to the strong; neither yet bread to the Wise, nor riches
to men of understanding. Eccl. 9.11. Benjamin with their 26000 once and again
overcame Isreal's 400000, and destroy 40000, to demonstrate that battle is not
to the strong. It is the wonder of the World to see fools flourish, the weak to
prevail, whilst the strong are foiled, and the wise in want; not considering
that the acquirements of art, and nature cannot alter the course of common
providence. Promotion comes not from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
South, but God sits as the Judge, he puts one down, and sets another
in the room. psalm. 75.6, 7. When the heathen do observe Agathocles the Son of a
Potter to become King of Scicile, Valentinian the Son of a Rope-maker, to
become Emperor of Rome, Justinus to arise from a Swineheard to be an
heardsman, to turn Soldier and at the length become Emperor; can they choose
but conclude Sic fata trahunt, thus the Gods will have it; and can Christians
observe Absolon advanced against his Father; Jeroboam against his Master;
Athaliah by blood, and cruelty, established seven years in the Kingdom: nay
Nebuchadnezzar prevailing over the whole world, and not conclude, God rules in
the Kingdoms of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. Vice is advanced,
least virtue should vie with divine justice, and vail the dominion of God: and
folly is enriched, that men may see God alone does all things. if Alexander to
magnify his majesty, advanced abdolominus, a poor Gardener to be King in
Sidon, what shall not God do? Prosspering providence attend the prophanest
wretches, to proclaim The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, Psalm.
24.
and he gives it to whomsoever he will: and parts or piety are not the grounds
of his dispensation; he gives good things o the worst of men, that men may know
his own will is the on^y guide of all his actions, he will not be prescribed by
the sons of men: and this is the first wheel of providence on which prosperity
does attend the profane.

2d wheel of provid.
The second wheel of this successessefull Chariot, is the distribution of Gods
goodness to all Creatures. God is good to all, and his mercy is over all his
works. Psalm. 145.9. The creation is a comment on Gods power and wisdom, but
in the preservation of the world shines Gods goodness: all creatures must
according to their capicity, partake of Gods goodness, and especially the sons
of men: they have not all like share, but at one time or other, they all do
share in the goodness of God; the very worst of men must witness even in
their eternal woes that God is good: therefore in him they live, and move, and
have their being. Acts 17, 28, 29. nay therefore his rain falls on the bad, as
well as good, and sun shines on the just and unjust: the wicked shall do no
work for God, but his goodness assigns them wages, if Ahab humble himself but
hypocritically, 1 King. 21.29.
yet the judgment threatened shall be delayed in his days; and if Nebuchadnezzar
do God service against Tyrus, he shall receive Egypt for his wages. Ezekiel. 29,
18, 19. If the goodness of God be extended unto birds and beasts, much more
to the basest of men: only we must note that the providence of God gives the
present sense of Gods goodness to the wicked, and the Godly have it only in
reversion; truly God is good to Israel, Psalm. 73.1.
but their present tune must be, Oh how great is thy goodness thou have laid up
in store for them that fear thee. Psalm. 31.19. So that the goodness of God on
the stage of this World is especially extended to the wicked, even to the worst
of men. T^^ good things of common providence is all the portion they must have,
and they have it in this life, therefore they are Gods hand and sword, in this
world, their bellies are filled with hid treasure, they are full of Children,
and leave their substance to their babes. Psalm. 17.14. They now live in
pleasure on the earth, and are wanton, and nourish their hearts as in a day of
slaughter they condemn and kill the just, and he does not resist them. Jam.
5.5, 6. It is in this life, Luke 26.25.
that Dives receives his good things, and Lazarus must be contented with evil
things here: for his comfort is in Abraham's bosom hereafter. And David's Dolor
is present, and by the pride of the now psosperou^, for that his satisfaction
must be when he shall arise in the likeness of God and see his face in
Righteousness; Psalm. 17.12 13, 14, 15.
such as will conceive Gods goodness, must at one time or other be extended to
all men in some measure, and consent that the course of providence carries it
to the wicked in this life, and reserveth it to the righteous, at the
resurrection, and can be but content to wait the motion of this wonderful
wheel will never wonder to see prosperity attend the profane.

The third wheel of providence on which the prosperity of the wicked does run,
The third wheel of provid.
is divine method and order, God is in all things a God of order, and works
regularly in the disposing of the affairs of the world and in the execution of
his justice: on this account the series of sin goes before the severe
judgments of a righteous God. Man's sin, and Gods silence do for a time consist,
and go hand in hand; for sin must be ripe before God reckon with he sinner, and
in order to this end, the Lord looks on the iniquity of the wicked, and is so
far from striking, that he suffers and disposes the course of his common
providence to their sinful desires: suffers them to prosper and possess all
occasions, advantages and opportunities to accomplish their wicked devises, and
execute their impiety: there is not the purpose in their heart, that shall want
the power of their hand to bring it to pass: Genesis 15.16
the Amorites must possess the land 400 years, that their iniquity may be
ripe, themselves, fit for the sickle of divine fury: such is the concurrence of
providence, in time of Gods silence with the corruption of men, that many would
think there were a combination unto profaneness; and therefore the wicked
blasphemously think God is such a one as themselves. Not only does Order
engage a succession of judgment unto the series of sin, sailing with the
pleasant of Gale prosperity, but also directs the publication of Gods Law in
promises and threats, to go before the execution of his displeasure. The Lord
warns before he wars, and alarms the wicked by his word before he abate their
pride by his sword, the days of divine debates, warnings, conviction and
threats, are days wherein wrath is bridled, and justice restrained, and so long
it is fair weather to the foulest sinner: on this account an hundred and twenty
years of peace and prosperity passed on the old world, whilst Noah the Preacher
of righteousness, warned them of the approaching refuge, and so long they did
eat and drink, marry, and give in marriage, live in all sensuallity, and
voluptuousness; and Jerusalem sat in peace, Jer. 44.
so long as God sent his messengers, rising early, and sending them. God is not
so preposterous as man, he permits the wicked to fill up the measure of their
sin, spit all, even the utmost of their spite, and show how vile they can be,
and so long suffers them to prosper; and then shows that he can curb and cut
them down; he sits still whilst his Heralds proclaim war su^mons submission,
solicit repentance, signify displeasure; and from this order God will not be
diverted. And hence it is, that his providence does attend the prophanest
wretch.

The fourth and last wheel of providence, which brings prosperity to the
profane, The fourth wheel of peovid.
is due reservation of them to the day of vengeance: God has appointed a day
in the which he will judge the World in righteousness, Act. 17.30.
by the man Christ Jesus, when he will render tribulation and anguish unto every
one that does wickedly; and unto this day the wrath of the Lord is referred,
the wicked are reserved, and the ungodly are not acquitted, though not yet
punished: Paternall correction and chastisement is a coursorie expresssion of
anger unto the awe of children, and so passes on the Godly every day, but
judicial punishment tending to the death and destruction of the malefactor, is
referred to the general S^ssions of Goal delivery: and till this time, men in
prison enjoy their liberty and sport, and all due provisions for support of
their being; Gods rod may frequently reach his children, but the Axe of his
displeasure is long e're it cut off the heinous Malefactor. God knows how to
deliver the Godly out of temptation, but to reserve the wicked unto the day of
judgment. 2 Pet. 2.9. In the course of his providence he gives them all things
necessary for the support of their being, and signifying of his goodness, that
with the more of majesty and justice, he may proceed to their punishment, and
make them everlasting monuments of his wrath: though the sinner do evil an
hundred times, yet God prolongeth his wrath, but at the long run it shall not go
well with the wicked, Eccl. 8.12, 13. God scorns to be at the trouble of
correction to men appointed to condemnation, and foul his fingers with the
daily chastisements of perverse rebellious castaways, he freely gives the
Prodigal the portion, he must have, whilst want, labor, lowering, and hardship
attends the heir and son of his favor, he spares, but does not acquit though
the heart of the wicked be full set in them to do evil, it is only because the
sentence is not speedily executed. Eccles. 8.11. The wicked flourish not in
favor, but forbearance, escape Scot-free, because the day of reckoning is not
yet come: Solomon makes the memento of a day of judgment the youngsters bridle;
and St. James makes it the check of Rich men's jollity; the young man may
rejoice, and walk in the ways of his own heart, but remember for all these
things God will bring thee to judgment is his cooling-Card. Eccles. 11.9. The
bitterness of wicked men's best things is that in this life they have good
things on earth, they live in pleasure, but their riches cry for judgment, and
they must be called to a reckoning; but until the day approach the trumpet
sound the Judge be sat, like secure prisoners they spend their days in sport
and security, as it was in the days of Noah, men were eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage, until the flood came; even so shall it be at
the coming of the Son of man: the course of providence must run till the last
day determine it. Common provision must be made for Malefactors, till the Goal
delivery destroy them. Man must not, and God will not judge before the time,
therefore men sin and suffer not, are profane and yet prosper.

We see then the first Reason carrying with it strength of conviction, and
declaring good ground for the prosperity of the profane men, the providence of
God in it is common course does dispose it: and so long as this Chariot of
Providence does run on these wheels, the demonstration of Gods power and
soveraignity, the distribution of Gods goodness to his creatures, divine method
and order, and the due reservation of the wicked to the day of judgment. We
must call the proud happy, and they that work wickedness will be set up, and
they that tempt God will be delivered.

The 2d ground and Reason of the prospering providence that attend the
prophanest wretches, is the patience of God which does require it. God is a God
of mercy, and his mercy is above all his works. Psalm. 145.9. God is slow to
anger, and ready to forgive The execution of his wrath is his strange work, in
which he seems no way dextrous, and is thereunto very slow: he forgiveth
iniquity, and forbeareth the sinner, unto the utmost of his pity and patience,
the whole course of his carriage toward the wicked is the comment upon, nay
the very current of his patience and long sufferance; though he be a God of
power and justice, that is able, in a moment to consume with the breath of his
nostrills, yet he is very slow in, and backward unto the destruction of the
wicked: of all his attributes God will advance his goodness and long sufferance
unto the acquittance of his power and severity when extended, and aggravation
of the wicked's torments, when damned; he therefore suffers with long
patience the vessels of wrath prepared unto destruction. Romans 9.22. Hence it
is that Israel commits horrid sins with an high hand, offering incense to the
Queen of Heaven and other gods, yet God suffers them to have plenty of
victuals, and to see no evil, but it is only in his patience, until he
provoked by their abominations could no longer forbear. Jer. 44.22. God
deferreth the destruction of the world, and day of judgment, until the
scoffers and mockers of the last times, tauntingly demand where is the promise
of his coming, and it is only because he is longsuffering, not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance: wicked men defy his
power, and dare his justice by their pride and blasphemies, yet he deferreth
his judgments, they sin with so high an hand, that sober men wonder that the
earth swalloweth them not up, and thunder bolts fly not about their ears, yet
they abide in peace, abound in their hearts desire, and are acquitted from
those common calamities which befall the Godly; and God either suffers them in
silence, or only sends his messengers, rising early, and sending them to
entreat that they would not do that great wickedness which his soul hates;
and all to show his patience, and constrain them under his wrath, to confess
such were their provocations that he could no longer forbear: The wrath of God
is to rage against the wicked and it is therefore restrained, that like
smothered fire it may flame more furiously and the impenitencie of the wicked
against, nay to the contempt of Gods goodness, patience and long sufferance is
the treasuring up of wrath against a day of wrath, and the Revelation of Jesus
Christ: when the Lord arises to judgment he will roar out of Sion, and make
the inhabitants of the earth to tremble: he is like a Lion loath to be rouzed,
and long before he be provoked; so that because God is, and will appear
exceeding patient, his Macrothumia long sufferance must be magnified, therefore
do prospering providence attend the prophanest wretches; and they who sin to
the highest pitch, are suffered to be happy to the utmost point of patience,
that not bare justice, but provoked justice may be the principle of vengeance,
and men may be convinced their destruction is of themselves, their sins were
so daring that the holiness of God could no longer forbear.

The third ground and reason of wicked men's success and profane men's
prosperity is. The punishment and probation of the Saints does necessitate it:
Gods gold must be tried, and children chastised, therefore the proud must be
called happy, and they that work wickedness be set up: the wicked prosper in
the world, and the current of providence is to their countenance and content,
they flourish in wealth, grow great in power, possess what ever the heart
desires accomplish whatever they purpose, but not out of any favor to them,
but frowns to the Godly, not for any grace that is in them, but the grief that
must seize on Gods Israel: the wicked are Gods hand by which he reaches his
children when running from him. The Rod of Gods anger by which he chastises
his hypocritical nation, his axe and saw whereby he hewes and squares his
knotty stubborn people to a submission to his own will: the furnace whereby he
purges away the dross and tin, and proves the faith and patience of his poor
ones, let the wicked think never so highly, and speak never so arrogantly
against God and his people, they are but instruments in his hand, to the
^ffliction of the Saints: Babylon must needs sit as a Queen in the height of
glory, because Zion must become desolate and forsaken such is the Antipathy of
Saints and sinners that the mercy of the one is the misery of the other, the
rising of the one is the fall of the other: of all rods in Gods hand the
prosperity of the wicked is the sharpest, most dreadful to Gods children: the
ungodly because of their arrogance and cruelty are Gods scorpions, David in his
choice well prays that God might deal with him immediately, not by the
success of his enemies; for the mercies of men are cruelty: Seven years famine,
or three days pestilence were far more easy afflictions then three months
flight before his enemies. Wicked men cannot execute God's anger on the godly,
without the expression of their own spite and wrath: God cannot be a little
angry, but the Heathen helps forward the affliction of Israel, Zach. 1.15. They
Assyria-like insult over Jerusalem, with an As I have done unto Samaria, so
will I do unto Jerusalem; I have found as a nest, the riches of the people, as
one gathers Eggs, so have I gathered all the earth, and there was none that
moved the wing, They speak proudly, and pvrpose cruelty, yet they forget that
God only sent them as a scourge against Jerusalem, and to strike them as with a
staff to correct, not destroy: like Pekah the son of Remaliah they cannot be
raised up to chastise their brethren, but they slay them with a rage which
reaches up to heaven, and purpose to keep the children of Judah and of
Jerusalem to be bondmen and bondwomen, 2 Chronicles. 28.9.10.
forgetting that they are brethren, though under the chastisement of the
Father, or that there are sins amongst them, even amongst themselves: Yet be
they never so cruel and churlish, God will do his own work by them, they must
succeed and prosper, they must purpose and prevail, and the very cries of Gods
Children will not change this providence; they are under God's correcting hand
and he will not spare for their roaring, in his own time he will abate their
pride, because the rod of the wicked must not lie always on the lot of the
Righteous, Psalm. 125.
and he will arraign the arrogance of the Assyrian, with a Shall the axe boast
it self against him that heweth therewith, or the saw magnify himself against
him that shakes it, as if the rod should shake it self against him that
lifts it up, or the staff should lift up it self, as if it were no wood;
but until God have purged away sin, he will chastise his sons, and the rod
which is intended for the fire must retain its sharpness, and in the trial of
faith and patience the furnace must retain its glowing heat and brightness: It
were well, if wicked men could say with Titus, Vespasian at the destruction of
Jerusalem, we have but lent God our hand for however they persecute the Godly
in lust, pride, and envy, they prevail over them in love, and pity, as the rod
on the back of a child, therefore they have no such reason to insult and
blaspheme: the godly do not resist them, because they dare not strive against
the Father: Lying still, not fretting, being quiet, waiting on God under the
prosperity of the wicked: Is the demeanor required of good men under the
prosperity of the wicked, the rod of God: let not the wicked blaspheme God when
their prospering proivdences succeed their profaneness, and seems to be the
result of their Ahab-like fasts, humiliations, and prayers, for let them know
they prevail not because God hears their prayers, but he wrappeth himself,
as in a cloud, and shuts out the prayers of his own people: If once the
faith of God's people be but found unto praise and honor, the light of the
wicked shall be put out, and when God shall cease to chastise his children,
then shall they no more be afraid of the Assyrian, who must be brought down and
confounded, and till then we must not wonder that the proud are called happy,
they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God are even
delivered.

The fourth and last reason and ground of the prospering providence that
attend the prophanest wretches, is provoked justice does enforce it: God's
anger does ordinarily enforce affliction, but he is most austere when he stays
his correcting hand. Cross providence do ordinarily attend Gods children when
all seems quiet and favorable to his slaves and enemies. Corrections are
pledges of adoption, and badges of sonship. One son God has without sin, not
one without sorrow; but indeed God corrects none but his own: he chastises
every son that he receives: and paternall affliction is but the result of his
affection so long as God does chastise corruptions; and correct our deviations
he demonstrates pity to us, and on purpose to do us good. Job makes it a favor
of great condescension to be admired, What is man that thou visitest him every
morning, and triest him every moment, Job. 7.17, 18. And correction is a
courtesy to be craved at Gods hand, Jer. 10.24 where God is at pain of
correction he purposes not a rejection: Casting out of Gods house and family
is dreadful and sad, when casting down under Gods hand is full of love and
pity, Isa. 21.4
faithfulness and truth: The Lord may smite Israel, and yet say fury is not in
me, but his wrath rages, and justice is much provoked when he cries out, why
should you be smitten any more, ^sa. 1.5. The son of most liberty and least
smart is usually the child of highest displeasure. Whom God most cockereth he
most corrects but if affliction be not felt, then are we bastards and not
sons: now affliction is either a note of no relation unto God, or of severe
rejection by God; if God cease to scourge a son, it is in severe anger to let
him take his swinge in wickedness to the loss of Fathers blessing and
inheritance: The saddest estate of Israel was when God professes he would
cease from his anger: and let Ephraim alone when joined to Idols; Gods rage can
only roar out this language, I will make my fury toward thee to rest, and my
jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet and be no more angry,
Ezekiel. 16.42. And I will not punish your daughters, when they commit whoredom,
nor your spouses when they commit adultery, Hos. 4.14. Origin quoting this
scripture cries out vis indignantis Dei, vocem terribilem audire, will you
hear the terrible voice of God, hear it here, I will not punish: The profane
like foolish children think their fathers quietness the token of his favor;
they are well pleased when profaneness passes uncontrouled, and impiety
uncorrected, when Gods silence seconds and gives way to their loud crying sins?
they cry mercy, mercy, but Bernard calls it Misericordiam omni indignatione
Crudeliorem, a cruel courtesy, a killing kindness to let the child play with
the candle till burned, and the knife till stabbed: Vatablus interprets those
words in Ezekiel. 3.20. I will lay a stumbling block before him: I will prosper
him and not by affliction restrain him, can we consider prosperity to be the
principle and spring of Atheism, irreligion, and profaneness; therefore pride
compasses them, they set their mouth against heaven, etc. Psalm. 73.6. and
conclude it a mercy to be prosperous; It is the miserable mercy of the Gentiles
whom God gave up unto a reprobate mind and vile affections to do those things
which were not convenient to be filled with all unrighteousness and fornication
wickedness etc. Romans 1.28, 29. An estate of so great displeasure that the
children of God rather choose affliction and cry with Luther, Feri, Domine
feri, strike Lord strike, and spare not: or with Jeremiah, Correct me O Lord;
however the wicked boast of Gods good pleasure, when they run into high
profaneness and justice regards not to restrain, then we cannot but read of
them, that they are Bastards and not sons, and so have no relation to God;
Chastisement is domestic discipline: or else they are designed to a wrathful
rejection, they have provoked him so far with their pride and stubbornness,
that he will no longer be troubled to correct them, or attempt to reduce
them; but let them take their swinge and run their Career of profaneness
unto their own ruin, let them swear and lie, commit adultry, deal falsely, do
what they will, they shall not for him be checked or crossed; for he in his
wrath has cast them off, and will have no more to do with them, till in
judgment he cry Go ye cursed into Hell fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: So not pity and good will, but provoked justice does enforce the
prosperity of profane men; God is most angry, when most silent, and strikes
least.

Thus then you have the question resolved, and see how it comes to pass, that
it goes so well with the wicked; and if we attend the course of Gods
providence; be affected with the working of Gods patience; assent unto the
Saints Chastisements and trials, and apprehend the highest expressions of
provoked fury: we see satisfying reasons and grounds why prospering
providence frequently attend the prophanest wretches, and shall cease to
wonder that the proud are called happy, they that work wickedness are set up,
and they that tempt God are even delivered.

Having thus explained and confirmed the doctrine, I shall now pass unto the
application of it, and although it might be largely useful; I shall contract
all into one general use of instruction, to teach us to demean and carry as
those that are convinced, that prospering providence do frequently attend the
prophanest wretches. Principles must be the ground of practice, and persuasions
must enforce obedience: do we then see that they call the proud happy, and they
that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God are even delivered:
Let it be our care to walk in the sense of this course of providence, and
carry suitably to so clear demonstration of profane men's prosperity, and
especially in learning, and daily exercising these three lessons or duties.

First, favor no cause or person, follow no course of life as approved of, and
acceptable to GOD, because seconded with prospering providence in this world.

2. Find not contentment in the prospering providence of this life.

3. Fret not at the prosperity of the wicked, even of the worst of men.

Of these in order, and first of the first.

1. If prospering providence do frequently attend the prophanest wretches,
then favor you no cause, follow no course as approved of, and and acceptable
to God, because seconded with prospering providence in this world. Make not
providence an argument of defense and justification to any cause, or yet a
ground of belief, and imbracement to any course of life; do not determine this
or that principle, profession or practice to be true because not troubled, and
good because successful. The providence of God are in our much age observed
and made mention of; I wish they be not more then admired, even profanely
advanced, to palliate profaneness, and impose impiety on others. How many that
act horrid impieties, unparalleld wickedness, subverting foundations,
supplanting laws, destroying liberties, usurping authority, despising
dominions, speaking evil of dignities, trampling on truth, contemning
ordinances, laying wast the Church, advancing errors, heresies schisms,
despising and despiting Gods Ministers, violating sacred vows and blaspheming
most solemn oaths and Covenants; and in their Enterprises meeting with
success: proceeding with prosperity; do with impudence cry, providence,
providence, as the plea of defense to their damned courses, and conclude their
horrid profaneness to be the Good Old Cause, even the Cause of God and Religion,
with all fervor imposing it on others, and charging ignorance, unbelief, and
obstinacy on all such as say not, all is well done, and do not strike hands
with them in their ungodliness: whilst they administer no light, nor urge any
argument, save success and prosperity: sure these men do forget that we call
the proud Happy, and they that work wickedness are set up: nor is there any
more of strength in their praying, fasting, and humilation, that religious
running into profaneness, and making piety the Prologue of their wicked
undertakings; whilst they that tempt God are even delivered.

Let me not be mistaken, I would not disown or in the least degrade the
providence of God; I know they are to be observed and dreaded by such as fear
God; there must be in all godly hearts a demeanor and frame of spirit, suitable
to divine providence; the success and prosperity of men in the world does
digitate and direct something of duty to Gods Children: but whilst providence
is to be observed it is not to be obeyed against any precept. Whilst it is to
be improved it must be our care it be not misimproved, and whilst we wait to
hear and see Gods mind in a providence, we must not make it to speak the
uncertain sound of our own fancies, and pointblank contrary to Gods will in his
word. I would that providenc^ be used, not abused, and duly argued, but not
made to conclude what the promises of success and prosperity will not
conclude: let me therefore (unto the guiding you unto the due observation and
Christian improvement of providence, success and prosperity) desire you to
keep this golden Rule in mind, and have it always at hand in changeable times
and under variety of providence, viz.

Gods providence does determine our condition, but not defend any cause, or
dictate any course of life. Providence is the explication of Gods mind.
Concerning our enjoyments, not our endeavors, and are to convince: this is the
estate we must enjoy or endure, not these are the principles we must believe,
and practice we must embrace; Gods providence is no Rule to know by, no Rule to
go by. It was never intended to be a line of decision in doubtful
controversies; or a Rule of direction in difficult cases; it is indeed a good
Dictator to our passions but no direction to our actions; the due and diligent
observer of providence sees what to fear, and what to desire, when to mourn,
and when to rejoice, and how to lie low and how to be lifted up under the hand
of God: but not what to believe in matters of faith, and act in matters of
Religion: I deny not the change of Gods people, under changing providence: but
must have this change understood to be a change not of principles but passion,
not piety and Religion, but particular acts of piety (that not in substance and
matter, but method and order:) Gods providence does sometimes call to weeping,
Isai. 22.12.
and mourning, and clothing in sackcloth; and sometimes to joy and gladness,
and feasting before the Lord; and he that answers not this Call of
Providence, with the change of his demeanor is profane and liable to divine
plagues: yet he that improves this providence to the casting off Religion,
Psalm. 44.17.
and forsaking the Covenant of God is blasphemous and irreligious, and
degenerated from the Saints of old, who could cleave to Gods Covenant under the
greatest of crosses, whilst then we fear before God, and observe his
providence, as disposing all affairs under the Sun: we must not favor any
cause because successful nor follow any course of life, because prosperous for
we must know,

1. Precept not providence is the Rule of direction unto the people of God
Their enquiry is, what does God speak, not what does God succeed, God has
published his word and prescribed it to be the Rule of life and manners, and
has bound his people to the determination thereof. Matters of faith and
Religion have ever been positive and prescribed by the word, and not left to
the uncertain determination of providence: the Gentiles may be left to the
guidance of the stars, and determinations of Heavens influence, but Gods Israel
have ^^ws, statutes, Ordinances, and commandments which they must observe, and
fare it as it will with their co^ditio^, they must not turn to the right hand or
the left hand, from Gods declared will. Deuteronomy. 5.32.1^.11.28.14.
No change of providence must carry them from positive commands; their very
King the subject of highest prosperity, must have the Law written and therein
read daily, and Rule the people not by the impulse or instigation of
providence, but those positive prescriptions: in doubtful cases Israel must
appeal to the Priest, and have the controversy decided by the Law, but we
never read of any appeal to providence directed or allowed: to the Law and to
the testimony, Deuteronomy. 17, 17.
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them. Isa. 8.20. In the most dark estate that that ever befell Israel, they are
directed to the word, not works of God to uphold their faith, and direct their
conversation. Remember the Law of Moses my servant wh ill I commanded him in
Horeb for a Israel, with the statutes and judgments, Mal. 4.4.
was the counsel of God to Israel until the coming of the Messiah; and he
leaves not Christian faith on the changable wheel of providence but committed it
to writing, that it might be a standard of doctrine, and Rule of life. These
things are written, that we may believe. Joh. 20.31. And peace is to be on as
many as walk according to the written Rule. Gal. 6.16. No gracious heart ever
yet durst decline the word of God to be directed by works of providence. Ahabs
majesty, his Prophets harmony, 1 King. 22.13, 14.
friends persuasion, and fear of adversity, have no influence on Micaiah to
turn him from the word of the Lord; he will speak what the Lord speaks.

Nay Balaam the false Prophet however swayed by the prospering providence put
into his hand, and pursuing the wages of unrighteousness, dares not ^ut
protest against the influence of providence a subjection to the word of God;
The word that God puts into my mouth, that will I speak, Numb. 22.38. The
Barbarians may bottom their persuasions of Paul, Act. 26.6.14.11, 12.
upon the success of the Viper; and the Lycaonians stir up their superstition
by the miraculous providence that attend the Apostles, 17.11.
but the noble Bereans regard neither the one nor the other; But search the
Scipture, and bottom their faith on the Word of God: he that weighs Religion
in the balance of providence, forsakes ^he balance of the Sanctuary; God
never intends by providence to just^e our precepts, and to make his word of
none effect. Let M^homet cudgel, Chr^^^ J^^us will convince his disciples, and
by his word witness his truth, when providence run never so cross: to
manage a cause with appeals to providence, is to manifest a want of, or a
weakness in the word of God: and put the controversy on that course that
gives no assurance of decision; having never been appointed to that end: to
embrace any course because it prospers, is to forsake the law of the Lord, as
rude and uncertain; and blasphemously to tempt God, by a course on which no
faith can be founded, for that no promise is made unto it: obedience to the
word is manifested, when works of providence do run counter and contrary
thereunto: the appeal of comfort to the soul, and honor to God and his truth
is, all this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely
in thy Covenant. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined
from thy way. Psalm. 44.17, 18. Let profane men practice their evil purposes
and prosper in their evil practices and plead providence providence; their
blasphemy may afflict us but their plea carries no persuasion, or force to
him that fears God, and obeys the voice of his servants: one; it is
written, is of more weight to a gracious soul, then hundreds of victories, and
a series of prosperity: for indeed to determine divine allowance, by good or
bad success of any cause, or approve, or disapprove any course of life by it is
external providence, that attend it, is to deny and determine in direct
contradiction not only to the experiences of the Church; but expressions and
maxims of Scripture, which are multiplied to our establishment against the
force of this very temptation: as, Blessed are the poor; theirs is the Kingdom
of God. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst, for they shall be fed: blessed
are they that weep for they shall laugh, and blessed are they that men shall
hate, separate from their company, and reproach, and cast out their name for
evil, for the Son of man's sake: such were the true Prophets: great is their
reward: but, on the contrary: Woe is unto the rich the full, and those of whom
all men speak well. Luke 6. For such were the false Prophets of old: and again
we must through many tribulations, enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Acts
14.22. And the poor of this World, Rich in faith, God has chosen: And the like
all which are of no use if the current of common providence must be the ground
of conviction, or guide of conversation, nay our Savior does so sarr
discountenance appeals to, and approbation of any cause by providence and
success, that he will not work miracles to convert souls or enforce faith.
When the Jewish Sectaries call for a sign, and resolve their conversion in some
pompous, outward, and glorious show, the Lord denies a sign, and refers to
the sign of Jonah, dictated in holy writ: nay, and cautioneth all men to take
heed of signs, wonders, and lying miracles, which are the arguments of
Antichrist, to outface the Scripture. Mat. 24.24. 2 These 1.9. John Huss (out
of Isiidore, Chrysostom, Gregory, and Augustine) has long since rendered the
Reason why miracles have ceased in the Church, and are only found in favor of
the false Prophet and Antichrist, [viz.] because the Church of Christ must be
persecuted, and seem abject, vile and forsaken: and must overcome by confessi^n
of the truth, by holiness, and shining in good works; by love and patience,
and not by power: but Antichrist must sway all; and have full power to
persecute; and Hypocrites who look after Temporals more then Eternalls must be
discovered, and the true Saints tried, and Carn^lists be justly punished with
that snare of specious signs, and convincing providence. So that if we will
not throw away our Bibles, disown Scripture, and make divine precep^s and
prescriptions of none effect: let us never dare to appeal to providence which
may fall on the side of the most profane; let us never say this course is
pleasi^g to God, because pleasing to the men that devise and pursue it: this
God al owes because he prospers; but this he disalloweth because thereto he
disappeareth these are Saints, their prayers succeed: but these are sinners,
Lam 3.44.
for God wrappeth himself as in a cloud, and shuts out their prayers: for
precept not providence is the Rule prescribed by the Lord, and by it we see The
proud are called Happy, etc.

to uncertainty of persuasion and unconstan^y in profession of Religion. Faith
ought to be fixed; and constancy in it, ^is the honor of any profession: 2 Timothy 1.13. 1 Cor. 15.58.
holding fast the form of sound words and being steadfast and unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord is the duty and due property of a true
believer but forsaking the right rule is the way to constant wandering;
declining the standard of truth does expose us to inevitable fluctuation and
deviation: The admirers of the Moon, and observers of the wheels motion, must
needs be subject unto Changes: variety of providence must needs engender
variety of persuasions by the orders thereof: such as see by no light or sail
by no compass but by success, must needs (like the waves of the Sea) be
tumbled and tossed to and fro. The returns of this wheel runs men on most
palpable, and shame, full contradictions: for if success be the line of
decision, the same cause is to day good, because prosperous, to morrow evil
because adverse, to day godliness is gain, and to morrow gain shall be
Godliness, sometime the Righteous are in honor, but anon, the Honorable are
the Righteous: how soon do such men change their Tune, who conclude providence
to be Gods voice. Was it not this that led men in all ages unto sinful,
shameful, unconstancy; 2 Samuel 7, 8, 19.19, 20,
the same Shimei that to day curses David because adverse, is the first that
to morrow comes down and meets him with blessing, 1 King. 18.40.
because returned with victory: They that in Ahab rage fall down before Baal in
Elijahs successful resolution, pull down Baall, and destroy his Priests.
Providence engages the same mouth to sing Hosannah to him that comes in the
name of the Lord; That to morrow cries Crucify him, Crucify him: such as
conform their Religion to outward providence, shape a coat for the Moon; and
like Baldwinus of whom Beza speaks, will have Religionem Ephemeram, an every
days Religion, ab his ad istos, abillis ad hos leviter iens aut transiens:
easily turning hither or thither as the Apostle Peter contending against, and
anon constraining again to the ceremonies of the Jews: like the Samaritans,
Gal. 2.14
brethren to Israel when favored, but strangers and foes, when frowned on by
Alexander: Like Eccebolius a Christian in time of Constantinus, an Infidel and
Pagan in the time of Julian the Apostate: and again, a Christian on his death,
changing his Religion with the Emperor, like the Melchites (a kind of mongrill
Christians) who would be of the Kings Religion: as those in 2 Kin. 17. Who
feared the Lord and served other gods, feared the Lord that plagued them, and
served other gods which pleased the King: so that luke warmness and fluctuation
of Spirit, and change, is the result of making outward present providence, the
reason of our assent and dissent to any cause or course: Providence is a brave
principle of Skepticisme, and a bar to Martyrdom: Our age is indeed an age of
providence to be admired, and Skepticisme to be abominated: They make indeed
few and very few, Martyrs, sometimes with hands lifted up to heaven, we vow and
Covenant to God, and presently cast off our Covenant as an old Almanac out of
date. One while we have zeal against Schisms and Heresies, and anon Toleration
Of all professions is the only note of sanctity: we cannot keep constant in
our very Civills only; while we see God will have us ruled by a single person,
and to him we basely bow, and again, by a republic, and for that we can engage
and vow, we easily swear and promise faithfulness to any faction, for we do
it on the principle of its present prosperity, and look not on our fidelity as
due, longer then it succeeds: if it but begin to tumble we may break promise,
and with violence throw it down: how sad have been the revolutions, our eyes
have seen: how shameful the changes of men among whom we live? is not
unconstancy a sin, a shame, and sad torment to humane spirits: Must men be like
children, tossed to and fro with every wind? Like waves of the Sea, always
rolling never resting? constancy, even in evil is more commendable then
tepidity and Lukewarmness. I would you were either hot or cold. Is Christ his
own desire of Lukewarm Laodicea. And if Baal be God follow him, Is Elijah his
advice to haling Israel, less hateful are they to God that serve him not at
all, then they that serve him with a rival, says Bishop Hall, the Prophet
rebukes Israel, not so much for their superstition, as unsettledness and
irreligion. How long will ye halt between two opinions? Peter's compliance with
the prospering providence of the circumcision was with stood to his face by the
Apostle Paul: to go upright in a wrong way, is a less eyesore to God, then to
halt betwixt right and wrong: shall not Ecebolius proclaim himself by his
providentiall changes unsavory salt? is not Christ failed, and Christian
Religion supplanted by unconstancy? Is Martyrdom a duty, or dignity? when to
be done and enjoyed? If providence must guide our course, nor is there more
shame and sin then sorrow in the minds uncertainty, and affections in
stability, its not only better in the end but very enjoyment, there cannot be
a greater misery then for a man to be a burden and terror to himself: They
(says Call.) who teach a doctrine of doubting exercent carnificina^ animarum.
Keep conscience on the Rack, and leave men to the torment of their own
distracted thoughts. He (says one) that cherishes his own doubts, Mant non
James 2.1.6.
does but hugg a distemper instead of a duty: so long then as following
providence leads us unto perplexing propbane inconstancy: let us to the Law and
testimony, and know rebellion is rebellion, though successful, and Skepticism
in Religion, the shame of Christianity though accounted the Saints moderation:
Lawful authority the object of loyallty and fidellity, even when oppressed and
ej^cted: Let us cleave to the Covenant of God against all changes of
providence, Communication, persw^sion or terrors whatsoever though it cost us
never so de^r: whilst this age affords few Martyrs; Let it be our Emulation to
be of the number of those few, however the wheel of providence does alter,
dispose, and change our condition; let us cleave to the Word, and be constant
in an holy conversation toward God and toward men;

fall into an impudent and blasphemous course of sin. Profaneness is the
natural product of marching after prospering providence, what impiety does not
issue from the prosperity of the profane? Leads it not unto all cruelty,
oppression, injustice, and tyranny among men? Jam. 2.6 5.5, 6. pride, security,
and sensuallity in themselves? Psalm 73.6. Nay, Atheism and irreligion, and
open contempt of God and Godliness: when we call the proud happy, and they that
work wickedness are set up, Mal. 3.17. Do not men say it is vain to serve God:
prospering providence do many times feed Atheism, as it is very blood who
would thimk there were a God? is the old observation of the oppressed just men,
among the heathen: for the wicked succeeding say there is no God, he does not
regard, or he is altogether blasphemous, Psalm. 10.11
and says God is such an one as our selves, Psa. 50.21.
and he abetteth our undertakings, and delivers us to work these
abominations: Jer. 7.7.
and so the wicked wax impudent in their impiety, because sentence against an
evil work is not speedily executed, therefore the heart of the sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil, Eccl. 8.11. So that whoever shall make
providence the Principle of his persuasion, and guide of his conversation must
make profaneness his course, and Atheism his Religion. What daring impieties
have been devised, pursued, and effected by such as cry up providence for
their guide? What open proclamation is made of divine providence, when men
devise mischief, and enter upon it with holy fasting, and return from it with
holy feasting? Oh the blasphemy of Jazabells fast! solemnly to implore divine
help and favor, on treason, rebellion, perfidie, perjury, and all
profaneness: Must not this needs speak that these men think that God is like
themselves: faith only can under prospering providence consult the Word and
conclude verily there is a God, and that an holy God, who rules the earth,
verily there is a reward unto the righteous.

We see then that making providence the ground of persuasion, and guide of our
action, is of very dangerous consequence, and of a very sinful influence,
whilst we forsake the Word, Gods standing rule, fall into an estate of
uncertainty, and unconstancy, and follow profaneness with impudence and
blasphemy, In which very respect Christians may, much more then heathen pray,
Careat successibus opto, qui ab eventu, etc.

Success be wanting unto him who makes,

Event the rule of what he undertaketh.

So long then as the most prospering providence may attend the prophanest
wretches; Let us learn this first lesson, favor no cause, nor follow any
course because it prospers, and so we proceed to the second instruction
propounded.

Find no content in a condition of Let not the blessings of this life puff you
up as blessed, or the want of them cast you down as cursed of God. place not
your bliss on sublunary enjoyments: The things of this life, peace, plenty,
health honor, wealth, and worship, I deny not to be blessings even as the
Apostle calls them precious fruits of the Earth: Jam. 5.7. Things they are that
must be received with thansgiving, but they must not take up our hearts as the
only objects of our affections, expectations, and endeavous, in the enjoyment
of which we should be satisfied and deem our selves happy, and in the want of
which we should be sadned, because cursed and undone, and to the obtainment of
which we should lay out our whole care and diligence. No there are blessings of
an higher nature, which we are to regard and pursue, if ever we will possess
true happiness: man's nature is indeed too much glued to the world, and if we
have but our wills in outward things, we look no higher; Like the Prodigal we
are content with a spending portion, which may satisfy our lust, we matter
not for the Patrimony and inheritance: And like the fool in the Gospel, sing a
Requiem to our soul, take thine ease, if we have but goods laid up for many
years, never considering what shall become of the immortal soul: there is no
one duty so often inculcated, and earnestly enforced in the Scripture, as to
sit loose in our affections to the things of this world. It is pressed by our
Savior and all his Apostles, and that with many pregnant arguments, and
patheticall persuasions; Mat. 6.20.33. 1 Jo. 2.15.
not to lay up treasures for our selves upon earth, not to love the world, or
the things of the world, but look after the Kingdom of heaven, and the
Righteousness thereof: And all this is enforced with the patterns and examples
of Abraham, and the Patriarchs. Moses and the Prophets who never pitched their
tents on Earth, but but looked for a city whose founder and maker is God: Heb.
11.
By all which we must needs know our selves as Christians bound to much
caution, that our hearts be not captivated with outward comforts, and conclude
not our happiness in the prospering providence of this life, that we never
say, Father give us the portion that to us belongs, if we well consider,
though God bless us with health, and an hopeful family, wealthfull treasures
and possessions; that with Dives we fare deliciously every day; with success
and victory in our atchievments, that we are delivered out of all straights,
and escape all dangers; Yet we must not be content and cry, we are blessed, we
have what we would: The soul must look further, and not be herein satisfied for
these considerations.

Common providence do conveigh There is not in these enjoyments any
expressions of special love and affection: They are good things, but only
general good is stamped on them: they are indeed Gods gift, but given in
common to creatures, not in special to his Children, they cannot conclude us
under divine favor and affection, but rather the contrary: The soul of man is
a spark of deity and will not be satisfied without God himself; in Gods
special love and peculiar favor, as a Father reconciled in Jesus Christ, in
the pardon of sin, sanctification of the soul, society with God and Christ,
consists true happiness; health, peace, wealth, honor, prosperity, success,
all outward things are common provisions of Gods family and food, of his
servants not the special fare of his Children: they may share but never be
satisfied in them; Gods rain does indeed fall on the just and unjust, and his
Sun does shine on the good and bad; sPa. 31.19.
but he has great good things laid up for them that fear him, and however the
men of the world do cry out after these common comforts, who will show us any
good? Gods dear David's do cry, Psa. 4.6, 7.
Lord lift up the light of thy countenance, it shall make me more joyful and
glad then when Corn and Wine and Oil increases. For his only prayer is, Oh
remember me with the favor thou bear to thy own people, and visit me with
thy salvation: That I may see the goodness of thy chosen, that I may rejoice
in the gladness of thy Nation; That I may glory with thy inheritance, Psalm
106.4, 5. Peculiar favor distinguishing love; special salvation is the only
delight and satisfaction of a gracious heart, however the heathen in their
ordinary dictates of blessedness would with Cicero make the enjoyment of
health, possession of honor, and immunity from want, the three choice things
to be wished to a friend, yet Christians must breath after Paul's wish; Grace,
mercy and peace, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Yet the wisest heathen in their
serious thoughts of true happiness, Quaeriteprimum bona animi. Cice.
could not but advise a care for more then the common blessings of nature:
(...). Aristot. Eth. lib. 8. cap. 71
Cicero commends the care of the soul as first and chief: and Aristotle's advise
is first and chiefly to take care of Divine things, hence it was that Scipio
went always to the capital, before the Senate, and on this account Numae
Pompilius would not be diverted from his devotion by the alarm of his enemies
approach, but answered at Egor em divinam facio, I am serving God. But how much
more should Christians prefer divine favor above all outward prosperity? it
is possible, nay it is common for the prophanest wretches to possess the most
common providence: they not only fall in common on the Righteous, and the
wicked, but most usually, woe is in this World to the Righteous; their
happiness and satisfactions are hereafter: the things of this life are in
Scripture, and not without ground, called, the portion of the wicked; that
share of Gods goodness they must ever possess; and the wages of
unrighteousness which are not only offered, but ordinarily are given by the
God of this world, as the recompense of the wicked: Christ himself observes
that the false Prophets were usually fed, rich, and well spoken of: but yet
liable to a woe, whilst the true Prophets were poor, hungry, and reproached;
Luke 6.23.26.
yet the heirs of the blessing; the sinner may do evil an hundred times, and
his days be prolonged; with a yet it shall not go well with the wicked. Eccles.
8.12, 13.
Dives may fare deliciously all his life long, and be damned when he dies;
James 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
the rich men may enjoy pleasures on earth, with a cause to howl and weep; they
are not in any peculiar relation to God not as Children, because fed with his
common good things, this is but prison provision, they are not Redeemed by
Christ, because released from present sorrows; sin is not pardoned because they
prosper, no, you have heard before, that these may be miserable mercies,
testimonies of the highest wrath. It is not for Christians to be content with
what is common to the elect and reprobate; no they must not rest till they see
themselves in favor and friendship with God, enjoying special love, let them
be but Children, and no matter if they be chastised every day, let the covenant
of grace conveigh their condition, and noe matter if it be correction; let
their comforts stream in the blood of Christ, though they bring the Cross with
them: let them be Gods Jewels, and no matter if the Proud be called Happy,
etc. A truly gracious heart: like a Pilgrim uses the world as not possessing
it, and quiets his souls in reversion, not present possession, with David
expects to be satisfied, when he arises in God likeness, and beholds Gods
face in Righteousness. Psalm. 17.15 Sins pardon, the Spirit of adoption, hopes
of Resurrection, are special favors, and afford content in all crosses,
conditions, and comforts, with which the wicked must not meddle.

Prospering providence in this scarcely consistent with true piety. Holiness
will hardly be maintained under outward happiness: I do not say they are not
at all consistent; grace and greatness may center in the same subject, and
stand together: for outward happiness is a blessing, though of the left hand,
and without it is specialty: yet not many wise, 1 Cor. 1.26
not many noble, not many rich, but ordinarily the weak and foolish things of
this world God has chosen; Christ has noted in it a difficulty unto natures
impossibility, A Camel may more easily pass through the eye of a needle, then a
rich man enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Ordinarily ^he rich in faith chosen
by God, are the poor of this World. The Apostle requires a great deal of
caution, and vigilance in the rich men of this world, prospering in their
outward condition; they must be charged often, and with authority, That they be
not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God; that
they do good, and be rich in good works, and ready to distribute. 1 Timothy 6.17,
18. And this not without great reason for they that desire to be rich, fall
into a temptation and a snare, and many foolish and hurtful lusts that drown
men in perdition. v. 9. You have heard before, that pride, oppression,
injustice, nay Atheism and irreligion are too often the product of prospering
providence. The wicked flourish in all enjoyments, and meet with no adversity;
Their Kine calve, Bull genders, their eyes stand out with fatness, there is no
bands in their death, therefore pride compasses their necks as a chain,
therefore they say unto God depart from us therefore they say God is altogether
such a one as themselves. How many Demas-like embrace the present world, and
forsake the faith; how many will to eternity lament their prosperity and
freedom from sorrow? like many a cockered child when brought to the Gallows,
curse parental indulgence, which reprooved but never restrained their
proprophanesse. Shall we ever be content with sins snares, the worlds fetters?
are we not taught to pray lead us not into temptation? must not every gracious
soul desire neither poverty nor riches, Prove. 30.8.
lest being full he deny God? Difficile est ut presentibus bonis quis fruatur
and futuris; ut hic ventrem illic mentem reficiat; ut de deliciis ad delicias
transeat: ut in coelo and in terra gloriosus appareat Be^u.
those men that can keep humble hearts under high enjoyments find an hard task;
Gregory the Great did always tremble when he read those words. Son remember in
thy life time thou receivedst thy good things, for said Bernard, It is
exceeding hard to enjoy good here, and hereafter to pass from pleasure to
pleasure, to be both glorious in earth and heaven: the very wicked tremble when
they observe the profane attemps to which they are pricked in their pospering
providence; Pope Adrian the sixth, said, nothing more unhappy in the world
ever befell him then having been the head of the Church and Monarch of the
Christian Commonwealth: and Pope Pius the fifth, said, When I first entered
into Orders, I had some hope of my salvatoin, when I became a Cardinal I
doubted, when Pope I despaired of it: Earth is no mean hinderance to Heaven, or
the world an enemy to holiness, how many men in their low estates, whilst
servants, have with Hazaell detested the thoughts of murder, treason,
rebellion, perfidie perjurie, cruelty, and mischief? with an Is thy servant a
dead Dog? which act, after, when advanced and set up in the World, they have
acted with an high hand: whilst outward blessings are not only common to the
wicked with the Godly, but sad occasions and temptations unto 3d. motive.
sin, let us never be contented with them* But again

Prospering providence are not continuing, there is no certainty in any
outward condition, humane enjoyments are as changeable as the moon, and turn
like the motions of the wheel. Adonibezecke, who but lately had threescore
Kings under his own Table, with their thumbs and great toes cut off, is shortly
himself the subject of the same, oppression and scorn: brave Belesarius the
Roman General is shortly brought to his dato obolu^u Belesario, to beg a
halfpenny. Proud Bainzet, that thunders against the whole world, soon is
brought to chatter in an Iron cage, as a captive. Riches take the wings of the
morning, and are gone: how many times do we see the wicked flourisly like a
green bay tree, but suddenly cut down and gone, both st^ck and branch: the
tr^asures of the earth are obnoxiou^ to rust and rape: they are things seen,
and so temporal, if we lived not in a changing age, wherein our eyes see not
strange and sudden Revolutions; I might amplify the transiency of the things of
the world, but we must all witness, man in his glittering glory, to be but
grass that is soon withered: Christians must always look for losses and stand
ready to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods: and therefore must it make
it them diligent to know in themselves that they have a better and more
enduring substance and whilst prospering providence are common temptations
unto sin, and of no continuance, let u^ never be contented with such a
condition. And that is the second instructiont. The third follows, and that
is,

Fret not at the prosperity of the wicked: let it be your care to look to look
to your passions, when most prospering providencs do attend the prophanest
wretches: the passions are the force of men's souls and will prove precipitate
if not bridled by reason and Religious understanding: there is nothing more
naturally pro o^i^g to humane passions, then the prosperity of the wick^d. When
we see it go well wi^h the worst o^ men we are not only envi^us at them but
^pt to be angry with God, and at enmity with Godliness. It is no great wonder
to hear Coesar when vanquished by Pompey, to conclude there was a a mist upon
the eye of providence, when David in a little distress could bruitishly
conclude, God has forgotten to be gracious, and will be merciful no more: and
shall we think it strange that the wicked cry out It is in vain to serve or to
keep his statutes and to walk mournfully before him, Psalm. 77.^.9.
when even the godly themselves are ready to resolve they have, in vain, washed
their hands in innocence, and cleansed their hearts: the success of the wicked
is and ever has been the stumbling stone of the Godly against this they have
spurned, Psalm. 73.
on it they have fallen, and bin by it fearfully wounded, David in a discontent
is ready to determine against piety, and Jeremiah cannot but plead with God,
and that in passion. Jer. 12.1, 2, 3, 4. And so also Habakkuck, but David
having recovered himself, strengthens his brethren; and to that end, has
penned that eminently useful 37 Psalm. to be studied by all who meet with the
stormy tempest of wicked men's welfare. Let me commend it to your reading and
study, and lay it as a bridle on your passions, and fret not, grieve envy and
care not when the proud are called Happy, etc. I say grieve not at the
greatness of the wicked, they must fall, their fall will be fearful; envy not
their enjoyments, they are but common favors; prison provision, and will cost
them dear, for the day is coming, yea at hand, when they must have their evil
things, and Dives must be tormented, they may now pass blessed without our
envy, for it is the whole of their blessedness if ever a day of death and
judgment come, they must go cursed for ever: and yet their present happiness
is fading and transient, the wheel is running round, and then they whom we now
see in estate and pomp, we see no mo^e: be not careful of the estate of the
godly, it shall go well with the Ri hteous, however it be at present, God is
good to them that are pure in spirit, their little is sweetened with Gods
blessing; the very prosperity of the wicked shall work for their good., Learn
to live by faith and patience contended with the disposals of God; not
suffering your passions to make you think or speak foolishly of God or
enviously of the wicked. Keep close to duty make it your care to maintain
sincerity, and calmely with a composed spirit wait we on God in the worst of
times, for if the proud are called happy, and they that work wickedness are set
up, etc. Yet there has no temptation befallen us, but what is common: So it
has been, so it will be, and so it must be.

Quaerela Piorum OR, Godly conference, the exercise o^ (...) godly, in the
^imes o^ prospering p^ophane^esse. The second part of the di^course, on ^^al.
3.15, 16, 17. First preached at Butolphs Algate, London, an^ afterward
co^tracted, and delivered in Peter's Church, West-Chester, one Lords day 17.
July, 1659. in afte^ noon.
Mal. 3.16, 17, 18. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another.
I Have heretofore presented this Text to your consideration, and divided it
into three general poin^s.

The estate of the wicked. Now we call the proud happy. ver. 15.

The exercise of the godly: Then they that feared the Lord spoke often etc.
ver. 6.

The event of both, The Lord harkened. etc.

Have done with the First of these; and therein showed the estate of the
wicked, now we call the proud happy, etc. Whereby you understand that most
prsopering providence do frequently attend the prophanest wretchet.

The next thing to be considered, is the holy exercise of the godly in such
prosperous profane time. They are men of activity and must be employed; they
fit not still when all the World are stirring; nay they are Godly men fearing
the Lord; and following providence unto the duties thereby dictated, they must
carry like selves in these sinful successful times; and how is that? Is it
to sail with the wind? Row with the tide? Follow the the multitued to do
evil? and by the success of sin, prosperity of profaneness; to be swayed in
their judgment to threw off a course of godliness? renounce the truth? and
recede from religion? to resolve with the proud now called happy, that it in
vain to serve God and it is no profit to walk mourn fully before him all the
day long? Oh, no? this is not the carriage of the godly, they read no such
lesson in all God's providence; they dare not make any such inference from the
premises of prospering profaneness: they easily assent unto Jobs proposition,
Job. 12.6.
The Tabernacle of robbers do prosper, and they are in safety that provoke God,
whom God has enriched with his hand, Job. 15.4.
but yet they withstand the inference of Eliphaz, thou restrainest prayer
before God, and conclude with David, Ii is good for us to draw near to G^d:
Whilst they see men succeed in sin, Psalm 3.28
and therefore set their mouths against heaven, and speak stout words against
God, they as men sollicitous for their own establishment in piety under so
strong temptations, and studious of the support of others; that God and
godliness may not want witnesses in the worst of times, speak often one unto
another.

These words are rendered by Montanus, tunc vastati sunt timen^es dominum.
Then they that feared the Lord were wasted and destroyed, (Scil.) by the
impious Atheists who prevailed and invaded them; the proud who were called
happy, and bent their violence against them, and the word which is here used,
is indeed used to signify divastation and destruction: Thus in 2 Cron. 22.10.
Psalm. 2.5. But in this place it can in no wise be so understood, it being here
used by the holy Ghost, to express the exercise, not the estate of the godly
in such sinful prosperous times and therefore is by all other expositors, and
in all other versions expressed as in our English Translation, Then they that
feared the Lord spoke often one to another and the cohaerence of the Text must
needs ^eade us to this sense of the words.

The words might (should we insist on them) be divided into these three parts.

1. A religious act or exercise they spoke often one to another.

2. The subjects of this act or exercise, not every man, but some under
special qualification, they that feared the Lord.

3. The season of this act and exercise, and that not only when religion
prospered, and was pleaded for: but then when men could speak against God, and
the proud were called happy, etc

Each of these parts would afford as a very profitable observation or point of
Doctrine, as from the time and season when these that feared God did thus speak
one unto another: Then, when men spak stout words, against God: And scornfully
against godliness, and said it was vanity; when none fared so well as the
worst; when profaneness was the only passage to preferment, the most
graceless appeared greatest, then, when if men wou^d serve God they must serve
him for naught: we cannot but observe.

Obser.
Prospering profaneness is good men's provocation to piety.

Succesuful sin is the Saints season of zeal in acts of piety; they are best in
the worst times, most wary to walk with God when all men war against him; to
cleave to Christ. when all forsake him: to adhere to holiness, when nothing
but hardship attends it: to appear against profaneness, when all men appear
in it, and make advantage by it: to serve God when men cry generally it is
vain to serve God, and abstain from impiety, when only they who work
wickedness are set up: they are awed by a divine command, not acted by the
current of providence, or course of the world: however the proud are called
happy, and they that tempt God are even delivered: they dare not fallow the
multitde to do evil: But with Noah by faith build the Arc, however derided by
a prodhane world, and with Lot, do grieve for, and complain of the
abominations of Sodom, though the men abhor and seek to destroy him: 1 King.
32.13.
with Michaiah, they They will speak the mind of God, though 400. Prophets
speak the mind of the King: with Antipas, suffer martyrdom and the Church of
Pergamus hold fast the name of Christ, Rev. 2.13.
and deny not the faith, when Satan his seat is set among them: With
Athanasius will conclude, for the faith when the whole Empire is Arrian, and
with Luther, enforce reformation, when Pope, Bishops, Emperor, and Kings are
against him: Thus they approve the sincerity of grace, and uprightness of
their hearts, by standing in a storm, abiding the utmost influence of
temptation and serving God for naught, Jam. 1.5.
leaving all outward comforts for a naked Christ and his Cross: Animate their
weak brethren, Phil 1.14.
by their confidence for, and constancy in the waves of God, under so sharp
conflicts, and sad discouragements as they meet withal: Answer, the
expectation of God, who disposes them into trouble, for the trial of their
faith; and expect to have it found unto praise honor and glory in the day of
the Lord Jesus, 1 Pet. 1.7.
and therefore triumphantly observes their faith and patience: And abate the
insolency and contempt of the wicked, whose ways are rebuked by the good
conversation of the godly, their very keeping of the law is a contending
against the wicked; Phil. 2.16.
among whom they live as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation, holding forth the word of life.

How repugnant to the carriage of the good men is the Tepidity, Luke warmness,
nay Changeableness and Apostasy of those vespertine professors of Religion
that square their principles and piety according to the company, times and
places, where, and among whom they live. So long as Religion flowrisheth, they
are the forwardest in pleading for it but if profaneness prosper they shake
hands with piety. and do as the most do, that they may be least spoken of,
what ever becoms of their conscience they will make sure to sleep in a whole
skin: and if their age afford but few Martyrs, they make sure that they will be
none of the number: they are great adorers of providence unto the disobedience
of precepts and degeneration from all holy men, whose care is in times of
prospering profaneness to provoke themselves and others unto zeal and
seriousness in acts of piety: but of this I shall speak more hereafter,

Secondly.
From the subjects of this holy exercise they that feared the Lord we shoul
observe this point of doctrine.

The fear of God is the spur and preservation of piety in times of prospering
profaneness. Observe.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Psalm. 111 10.
by it men depart from iniquity; the want of the fear of God is the ground of
all impiety and ir. religion When Abraham travels he expects all acts of
violence and cruelty in Egypt and Gerar, because the fear of God is not in
this place: and the unjust Judge is described by this note he feared not God,
nay when men's throats become an open sepulcher, and with their tongues they use
deceit, the poison of Asps is under their lips: their mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness, their feet is swift to shed blood. It is because there is no
fear of God before their eyes, Roma. 3, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. But the
fear of God is the bridle of corruption: Joseph's nature is restrained with, an
hew shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God: the bar unto
temptation, the fear of him that can cast the soul and body into Hell, makes
us scorn the allurements of the world, and scoff at the rage of men, and
utmost suffering can overtake us in the way of piety: and the hand of
holiness, that we cannot cease to pray unto God though we be, with Daniell,
cast into the Lions Den: The fear of God, and only the fear of God is the spur
of piety, when we row against the stream of the world, and the preservatiue of
religion when we see a general apostasy seconded, with the height of
prosperity.

Let it be noted that this fear of God must be spiritual, not natural
ingenions and filliall, not slavish as of a vassal, it must be a fear of
reverence sensibly apprehending Gods holiness, power, justice majesty, and all
his attributes, and that great desparitie and disproportion which is between
God and us, which was in Abraham constraining him, to cry out I^hat am but dust
and ashes having taken upon me to speak unto the Lord: Genesis 18.27. And in
Isaiah, I am a man of polluted lips, and live among a people of polluted lips
and I have seen the Lord of host: Isa. 6.5. The carriage of Saints, must be as
becomes the Children of so great a God, and so glorious majesty. The fear of
sense awfully affecting the hear with the horror of Gods fearful judgments,
dreadfully discerning that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of a
living God, this led Josiah to the renting of his garments and humbling himself
before the Lord; and made the marked of God in Jerusalem, mourn for her
abominations Ezekiel. 9.4. Stupidity under Gods judgments threatened or inflicted
is folly. Jer. 5.2. security and senselessnesse of the symptoms of Gods anger,
is a note of stubbornness incotrigible; and fasteneth a guilt indelible, Isa.
22.16. Deuteronomy. 29.1^, 20, The fear of diligence attending all dangerous assaults
of sin, and animating unto most difficult duties of holiness, as the soldier
standing sentinel and lying perdue in a Land of peace, keeping an Army
undermilitary discipline in a conquered Land, working out their own salvation
with fear and trembling because it is God that works in them to will and to
do, of his own good pleasure.

No marvel if few be found pleading f^r God and cleaving to his covenant in
evil backsliding days for there are not many that fear the Lord: if we will be
of the number of the men that speak one to another in evil tims; will be spurred
to piety, and kept from iniquity; will steer our course by precepts, not by
providence cleave close to the covenant of God, when al men count it, and carry
toward it, as analmanack out of date: will we commend Gods truth, justice and
faithfulness, and manifest godliness with contentment to be gain when the
prosperity of profaneness, make most men say it is in vain to serve God and no
profit to walk mournfully before him all the day, the proud are only happy:
Let it be our care study and prayer to fill our minds with the fear of the Lord.

But on these circumstances I must not insist, intending to acquaint you of,
and effect you with the exercise it self which was especially performed by
these, God fearing men in these sin successful times and that is holy
language, heavenly discourse, godly conference the sweet breath of their sound
hearts, in an hypocritical age: the evidence of their hearts fullness of
piety, thus venting its abundance: the expression of their care by the words of
the wise to preserve knowledge? whilst the evil communication of the prosperous
profane did corrupt good manners, They that feared the Lord spak often one
unto anthere, whence we shall propound to your serious thoughts,

The success of profaneness must stir up the truly pious to speak often one to
another. Or thus

Prospering profaneness does provoke the godly to frequent c^nference.

Many are the exercises of piety enjoined by the Lord to be duly performed by
his people, some are personal and concern only a particular soul but others
are public, and to be used unto the conviction of the wicked and confirmation
of the godly against all temptations that assault them: and these are not only
the administrations of word and sacraments, in, and to the Church in general:
but also admonitions and expostulations of particular Saints, in more private
and particular societies expressing the thoughts of their hearts by the help of
the tongue and communicating their gifts and graces to each other by godly and
religions conference. Godly conference and christian confabulation is an
absolute duty, and apparent act of the Communion of Saints; Incumbent on all
the members of Jesus Christ, and brethren in the faith to be carefully
performed by all that pray for, and in their places propagate the perfection of
the whole body, by the supply of every particular Joint: This duty is not
indeed fixed unto time, place, and order as are some other acts of worship, and
duties of religion, but to be exercised as occasion calls for it; and
opportunity does enforce it: no condition, time or season is unsuitable for
holy conference when ever good men have occasion of commerce, and opportunity
of serious communication: yet some estates of the Church does more enforce it,
and an inquiry of opportunity to enjoy it, then others: when the tongues of
the wicked do walk proudly through the earth, the tongues of the godly must be
tuned for Heaven when the profane, glutted with their prospering prouidences
do speak pride and blasphemy, and that in talking stoutly against God and and
openly affirm it. It is in vain to serve God, it is no profit to walk
mournfully before him all the day, for that the proud are called happy., Then
above all times is it a time for them that fear the Lord, to speak often one
unto another, though our words must be always seasoned with grace, and our care
must ever be to admonish one another, yet more especially, when assaulted with
the temptation of prospering profaneness: then our ordinary language, and our
often discourse must be holy conference.

This has been the care and carriage of them that feared the Lord in all ages
of the world, you shall not find the old World filled with pride, security, and
sensuallity, but Noah the preacher of Righteousness will be speaking of, and
preparing for the approaching Flood: Nor shall you read of the Captivity of
Righteous Lot, but also of Abraham's consultation with his chatechised servants
for his rescue and conference with Melchizedeck: and Isreal's oppression cannot
increase by the pride of prosperous Egypt, Genesis 14.
but Moses and Aron will confer of the mind of God, concerning their
deliverance and their own duty toward it: Exodus 4.14.15, 16. Saul's pride and
blasphemies pass not without the serious conferences of Jonathan and David:
Sam. 18.19
Job is no sooner brought into distress, but his friends gather about him to
confer of the things of God, though they make false conclusions, yet they
discoursed right and ^eligious premises, Ahab succeeds not in his idolatry, but
we shall find the Prophet Elijah and Elisha, and he and Obadiah in godly
conference: nor can Jesus Christ be crucified and blasphemed at Jerusalem, Luke
24.13.
but his disciples will discourse as they walk to Emmans, of the things that
befell him: nor shall the Roman Emperors in their prosperity oppress the
Faith, and afflict the Roman Christians, but the Apostle Paul longs to see
them, to the end, he may imparte unto them some spiritual good, that they may
be established, we shall not read in sacred or Ecclesiastic story of the
success of profaneness which did not stir up the holy conference of the
godly: The fellowship of the Saints, is never so visible, as in the suffering
seasons of the Church, Arius prosperity unto persecution, made the Orthordox,
resort one to another with frequencie. Marian pride, in the success of Popery
made the Protestant reformers to confer with diligence, the things of truth and
of salvation: the late prelaticall cruelty was the spur of the Puritans
Conventicles (as in derision, their holy conferences were called) for in such
times as these, if ever; Communion of Saints is necessary, profitable, and
comfortable, for then they That fear the Lord speak often one to another.

By way of complaint of sin and sorrow, the wickedness of men and dark
providence of God, that the heart may, be affected with both, and they may as
becomes them, mourn for the abominations which abound, and the blasphemies
which are proudly, belched against God, his name, truth, Ordinances, and people
in this day of prospering profaneness: and duly pray the diversion of these
dark providence; which are so dishonorable to God and discouraging, to
Godliness: sin must not succeed in the World, or sorrow seize on the Saints
without their sensible observation, and sad, but serious expostulation with
God, and each with others [by way of confirmation] each of others spirit,
against the strong influence of so sore temptations: we have before noted, that
the prosperity of the wicked, is a very great stumbling stone to the godly? at
this David spurned, and had almost slipped unto the condemning the generation of
the just, Psalm 7.3.7.
and charging vanity on the course of piety. On this Peter, fell to the denial
of his Lord and Master, making him with more then ordinary earnestness,
enquire his affection to him, Peter love thou me? Peter love thou me? Peter
love thou me: It is strange if Ahabs insolency in his Idolatry, make not all
even the best of Israel to halt between two opinions, and most to fall into
flat and open Idolatry: when the multitude do evil, those few who will not
follow them have need to cleave close together: if ever the fe^ble knees must
be strengthened, it must be when they stumble at the prosperity of
profaneness: If ever the godly will be armed against impiety, it must be when
it ascends the there, and becomes the stirrup of authority, and sole principle
of preferment: and if they will ever speakne couragingly of waiting on God, and
walking with him in holiness it must be when most men discouragingly determine
God has forsaken the Earth, does not regard the righteous, It Is in vain to
serve him: when the success of profaneness, is the soul object of sense,
and the dark providence of God, the cloud of his truth, and check of
holiness, then must Godly conference awe conscience to duty and animate faith,
to dependence on a never failing God.

But not to stay long on the illustration of a duty, so positive and plain,
even obvious to the common capacity of every sober christian seriously studious
of Scripture, or observant of the society of the Saints, I shall briefly
propound the reason of the point, and so pass unto the application.

And the reasons why the prosperity of profaneness must provoke the godly to
holy conference are reducible to these three heads. It is Directed by, and
delighfull to the Lord. Declares the sincerity of sanctity, Deriveth much
profit, and advantage.


Of these in their order; and first of the first.

The First reason why prospering profaneness, should provoke holy conference
is because holy conference is directed by, and delightful to the Lord: the
desire of the righteous is to do the pleasure of the Lord, and his delight is
not more in them that fear him; then theirs is to make mention of his name. Now
holy conference is a duty by him directed, who does also dispose the time, and
condition that does specially reqvire the discharg there of: fraternal
correptio^ friendly confabulation is not only a duty directed in the light of
nature by the necessity of public good, and natural enjoyment and improvement
of humane society, but also by positive prescription of scripture: God
enjoining his people, both in the old and new Testament times, unto mutual
colloquie, and reciprocal conferrence of, and concerning his council, and
their own condition: we shall find amongst other soul establishing means
appointed to Israel, that one was frequent and familiar conference of divine
council, he must not only learn the law himself and Catechize his Family
therein, but also make it the matter of his or dinarie languag Thou shall talk
of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk in thy way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: Deuternomie, 9.7. Family and
friendly conference must be conversant about Gods Law, let our company be at
home or abroad, this must be our discourse, for exciting the soul to duty, and
encouragment of the heart in difficulty, and to the restraint of sin, it is
Gods own direction that we shall rebuke a brother, by all brotherly
argumentation discourse and conference with him concerning his impiety Levit.
19.17. He is by words to show him, what is right, and what is wrong, says
Ainsworth, nor was this religious reasoning, peculiar to the Jews, by whom it
was in an Ordinany and familar way practiced: but it belongs to the whole
household of faith, and is more fully enjoined by the Lord Jesus and his
Apostles in the New Testament: who makes private conference with his brother,
the praecursor of public complaint against a brother, Mat. 11.15, 16. and
positively enjoins us in days of temptation unto sin, to exhort one another
daily whilst it is called to day, Heb. 3.13. And consider one another to
provoke unto love and good works, Heb. 10.24. To admonish one another, Rom
15.14. To comfort one another, 1 These. 5.11. Jude 20. All which is done by
conference and friendly discourse: and declare but the several parts thereof,
sometimes by complaint against sin, warning the unruly; sometimes by counsel
unto duty exhorting and quickening the dull and discouraged: sometimes by
convincing arguments establishing in the faith such as are in danger of
Apostasy: and sometimes by consideration of mercy, power, justice, and the
like confirming the mind that waxes feeble in affliction: so that we must
throw away our Bibles, or wilfully shut our eyes if we see not holy conference
be a duty directed by the Lord, and especially to be discharged in evil times
when we are under temptations to sin, discouragements to holiness, and
despondency in affliction.

Nor is it only directed by, but also delightful to the Lord; it cannot but
be pleasing to him, because prescribed by him: and indeed God does signify
much delight in the discourses of the Godly: their complaints he calls for, Let
me hear thy voice, for it is pleasant, Cant. 2.14. Their communication is his
complacency: Our Father loves to see his children distribute his sweet meats
among their brethren: he gives neither gifts nor graces to any for their sole
private use, but the public edification of the body; every one must distribute
as he has received: if the Apostles be comforted it is that they may comfort
others, by the selfsame consolation with which they are comforted in
themselves, 2 Cor 1.5. and if the Romans be full of goodness and knowledge it
is, that they may admonish one another. God will not that any of his servants
hide their Talent, and conceal his counsel; they must indeed keep their
places, and administer the supply proper to such joints. Private conference is
distinct from public preaching: and the one as well as the other tends to the
perfecting of the body of Christ. Private conference in families and friendly
societies; and preaching to the Church and in public Ministry, and each of
these make sweet music in Gods ear, if not marred in the order: the hand
miscarrieth when it would become the eye, and the foot when it would be the
head. Private conference is to be contemned when it presses upon public
Ministry, and becomes provoking to God: (but of this I shall speak more in the
applicati^n) otherwise it is exceeding pleasing to God: so delightful that
David determines the talking of Gods righteousness, as the p^easant holding of
his songs of praise, Psa. 71.24. and cheering of his own drooping and
desponding spirits as the help against diffidence, he will talk of all Gods
doings, Psalm. 77.12. he accounts it to be the precious and pleasant fruit of
all his instruction and eminently to be esteemed by the Lord, he prays for that
oil that may make this Lamp ever burn, make me to understand the w^y of thy
precepts, so shall I talk of all thy wondrous works, Psalm. 119. 27. Gods esteem
of the holy language and heavenly discourse of his people in profane times is
emphatically expressed in the text, when they that feared the Lord spoke one
nnto another the Lord hearkened and heard; and a book of remembrance was
written for them and they shall be mine, etc. There are three expressions of
Gods acceptance of his godly conference.

1. He regards it, he hears and hearkeneth, he listeneth, and lays his ear
close as loath to loofe one syllable of this holy language.

2. He records it as fearing it should be forgotten, a book of remembrance is
written, and that not in the earth where it may be trampled out by profane
feet, but before himself; where it shall be co^served with care, and free from
the least corruption, as fit for his own contemplation.

3. Rewards it and puts more honor on them then ever Ahashuerosh did on
Mordecay when by the record of his good service his oblivion was allarum'd, for
his compassion does work toward them, he is peirced to the heart with this
holy language; his pity is provoked to spare them as a man spares his own son,
which serves him; Nay his complacency is in them, they shall be his is
propriety and his jewels in peculiarity, whose hearts cause such holy language
in so bad and evil times: (but of these I shall speak more fully hereafter) we
see then what delight God takes in holy conference, no tender parent can with
more delight listen to the tatlings of her babe; or lay up in her heart the
pretty prudent reasons urged by the child and set her heart on the child, with
more serious and compassionate affections then God does to his people in their
holy conference: nor is, it to be wondered at; for this discourse is the
expression of the thoughts of his holy name which they fear: and evidence of
those zealous affections they bear unto the honor of his name, and ways of
his holiness; and this leads me to the 2d. Reason of the point:

Prospering profaneness provokes sincerity of sanctity: God loves the truth in
the inward parts; hypocrisy is to God an abomination: all outward profession
of his name and attendance on his ordinances are of no value without, sincere
sanctity, and an upright heart, he is not a Jew who is one outwardly, nor is
that circumcision which is of the flesh; but he is a Jew who is one inwardly,
and whose circumcision is of the heart, whose praise is not of men but of God:
such as will be delight unto the Lord, must be upright in heart; the integrity
of the heart covers many infirmities, God winks at the weakness of his
sincere servants, whose hearts are right before him: men's care must be to
manifest that holy conference in evil times; as an evident declaration of
sincere grace, such as have superficial and temporary graces may be forward in
common and ordinary acts of holiness and religion; but are estranged to and
careless of the rare and extraordinary acts thereof. Common Christians, make
some care of public exercises of Religion; such as hearing, Reading, and the
like ordinances of the Church in common, but when acts of private and personal
concernment are to to be performed, they think them needless and superfluous;
all specialties in Religion are in their account singularities, and nicities
and the agents in them deemed busy bodies, and giddy spirits making themselves
over righteous, but the sincere make conscience of keeping all Gods commands
and performing every prescribed duty as well those which are private and
personal, as those which are public and common: and in this their speaking
one to another, there are these evidences of their sincere holiness.

1. It is an especial service to God, a speaking to him, and for him,
co^plaining of the dishonor done to him, and confirming each others in
adependence on him: holy conference in so sinful times, under so sad
discouragements does spring out of an heart.

1. Apprehensive of present affairs, observant of the dispensations of God
toward his people; security and senslesness under gods hand, is the object of
a woe. God threatens sensuality as a sin indelible. I^a 22.13. and
non-apprehe^sion of his peoples affliction with most heavy judgments, to live
at ease in Lion, and not to regard the affliction of Joseph is the work of an
hypocrite and an high transgression. Amos 6.4. But to apprehend Gods anger
provoked, and his hand lifted up, the Lord looks on that with delight, Josiah
shall dye in peace because his heart was tender when he heard the words of the
Lord against Jerusalem. 2 Cor. 34.27. And the mourners for all Jerusalems
abominations make such melody in Gods ears, that they shall be the marked of
the Lord in the day of Jerusalems desolation. Ezekiel. 9. It is a kind check
Godgives Samuel for mourning over Saul's rejection. 1 Samuel 16.1. It is an how
long? not why dust thou mourn for Saul? the matter was pleasing, the measure is
burdensome and to be blamed.

2. Affectionate and ardent for Gods honor. Their good thoughts did heat their
affections, and make them to boil over into holy conference, heat of heart
toward God must have vent of tongue for God thus when David mused, the fire
waxed hot, until he at length was constrained to break his resolved silence,
zeal for Gods honor, grief for sins success sets the Godly on conference each
to others; holy language is the Ruptures of the heated affections and provoked
passions of an holy heart. The Parents danger will make that child speak who
never spoke before; Stephen spoke with such fullness and fervency, as when the
co^motions of his soul stirred by the blasphemies of the Jews showed him to be
full of the holy Ghost. Acts 7.

3. Associated to the Saints. Communion of Saints is an Article of Creed, and
advantage of grace to every sincere soul: Schism cannot be a sign of sanctity,
it is a fruit of the flesh, never was any savingly nverted, but he presently
sought Communion with the Church; for extra Ecclesiam nulla salus, no salvation
without the pale of the Church. Saul is no sooner become a Paul, but he assayed
to join himself to the Church. Act. 9.26. No member of the Church must be idle
and dead or unprofitabl, bu^ must gives and receive nutriment toward the
increase of the whole body, every joint must supply it is proper part; which is,
and can only be done by holy conference. Good lives and languages are the
Churches veins in which the blood of Gods word does run unto it is strength and
growth: so that the men who manifest life in their union with the Church are
careful to maintain Communion, and they that confirm themselves by holy
conference in evil times, do evidence themselves in society with, and
serviceable to the Saints. Colloquy is an act of Communion conference is in
company.

4. Adhaerence unto God: professions are the souls obligations, purposes bind a
man at his own good will and pleasure, and are alterable; but promises,
professions and public discourses provoke other men's observation and
expectation of performance and accomplishment, and so abide not within our
power: conscience of a backsliding spirit does bring many of the Saints under
the bond of promises, professions, and good conference; from which they cannot
start without shame: but conference of God and Religion in times of prospering
prophanen^sse proclaim a resolution of adhaerency a care against apostasy by
such confirming soul-establishing Colloquies. They must needs resolve to follow
God and piety who are fervent in discourse for, and of them when they find no
favor in the World: an heart apprehensive of present affairs, affected with
Gods honor, associating with the Saints and adhaering to God in times of
discouragement is approved sincere in Gods sight: but holy conference is the
vent, issue and result of such an heart out of this abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks.

2. The service it self does not more plainly evidence the sincere sanctity of
the heart, then the principle from which it springs, and by which it is
enforced, and that is the fear of God and thinking upon his name; those spurs
and preservatives of piety: They that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another and they were the men that thought on Gods holy name. The fear of God
is the fountain of wisdom; that fills their lips with words of understanding:
serious thoughts of Gods holy name blasphemed stirs up their sensible
discourse: all acts of service and observance are not arguments of sincerity:
the dog is Restrained and a slave made serviceable by the cudgel, but fear of
a father and zeal for his honor, are only notes of ingenuity and candor,
because principles of obedience, and spurs of duty: hypocrites may cry to God
in distress, but will not pray always, they must fear God who seeing the
prosperity of the profane will not restrain prayer before him: men may be full
and forward for Gods Religion in fair weather; but they must be pricked with
his holy fear that can speak of him, and for him in a foul and stormy season:
holy conscience is burdensome to the flesh especially when contrary to the
course and countenance of the world, and must therefore be forced by the fear
of God, and thoughts of his holy name, when discouragements do abound it must
be an I dare not offend my father must open the mouth for God, when the times
dictate silence to the prudent, they must be pricked with an aw of God, that
speak one unto another: they that fear not God will soon tail in their
profession, and forsake the faith: it is only the fear of God can answer the
allurements and counter poize the affrightments that arise from prospering
profaneness, when men are stout against God they must fear him that are stout
and seek to strenghthen one another for God: to serve God, when men cry it is
in vain to serve him, must spring from the thoughts of his name, so do evidence
sincere serving God for naught

3. Sincere grace is not more evident in the service done, and principle of
holy conference then in its season, it is performed then when profaneness
prospers, the proud are called happy, etc. Many receive good seed of Gods word,
who are offended at tribulation; Mat. 15.21.
and fall back from their profession: they must be sound at heart who will
speak of and for God when all men speak against him, they m^st be Cordial that
seek to confirm themselves and others against the discouragements of prospering
profaneness.

So that if men will appear sincerely sanctified, they must speak one to
another; and be busied in holy conference in the times of sins success by
prospering providence But thirdly.

Holy conference does derive discourse is not more profitable to humane then to
Christian society, provided it be duly seasoned: that of things natural and
civil; this of things spiritual and Religious: as sincerity is the life of
Religion so is society the life of sincerity. The Philippians are observed,
with much profit, to holdfellowship in the Gospel from the first day of their
conversio^, Phil. 1.5.6. The lips of the Righteous says Solomon do feed many,
Prove 10.21. Holy conference is not more comfortable to our selves as the
evidence of a sincere heart, and support of a desponding spirit then profitable
unto others by the anticipating and expulsion of sin: it is no small fence
against corruption or help unto repentance: It is appointed of God as a curb to
our own hatred; and cure of our brothers sin, thou shall in no wise hate thy
brother, but shall Rebuke thy brother and not suffer sin upon him: Levit.
19.17. Wrath retained in silence works Revenge, as in Absalon toward Amnon;
but expressed in Rebuke, it eases the offended heart and helps the offender
to Repentance: and on this account, It is desired of David as a most sovereign
ointment Let the Righteous smite me, says he and it shall not hurt me, Nay it
shall be a kindness; Let him Reprove me it shall be an excellent oil, Psalm.
141.5. Christian conference is prescribed of God as an antidote to the venom
of custom in sin. Exhort one another daily whilst it is called to day, least
any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. Fraternall
correption is a skillful setting of a lapsed soul in joint, (...). Gal. 6.1.
Restoring the fallen brother with meekness; private conference is the first
corrasive of sin, and must precede public censure in the enforcement of a
sinners repentance Complaints against sinners are not allowable whilst private
conference meets with acceptance and Mat. 18.15.16.17.
success, nor does this benefit of holy conference appear more by the
prescription then by the probation of it; many experiments of its efficacy are
left in sacred and Ecclesiastique story. David was restrained from acting his
self Revenge conceived against Naboth, 30.31.35. Sam. 25.
by the prudent conference had with Abigail: whom and whose advice he blesses,
and the private discourse between him and Nathan did a waken his conscience
unto repentance for his murder and adultery in which he lay a long time: 2.
Snm. 12.
the woman of Samaria was convinced and converted by the holy and familiar
conference of our Lord Jesus. John 4.
The Iberians were converted by the holy conference of a Captive maid; Edesius
and Frumentius both private Christians by their good discourse brought the
Indians to the Christians faith: Justin Martyr tells us in his 2d. Apology that
he came to the Christian faith: by the constant patience of the Martyrs and the
holy conference of a certain grave old man, who met him in the walks of his
retirement; and Junius professes of himself; that he escaped the snares of
Atheism in which he was entangled by the plain and fervent discourse of an
ordinary Country man in Florence; and Latimer was recovered from Popery by the
private confernce of Bilsney. So serviceable is holy conference to conversion
of souls; that the very reward thereof is promised to it: if any man Err from
the faith, and one convert him, let him know that he which converteth the
sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide
a multitude of sin; is the encouragement of Christian conference urged by the
Apostle James, 5.19.20. The wise shall shine as the firmament, and they that
turn many to Righteousness as the stars for ever and ever: is the assurance
given by the Angel, Dan. 12.2. So that if in times of sore temptation, by the
success of sin, we are desirous to prevent impiety and Recover any that are
fallen under this prospering profaneness, we must be provoked to be frequent
and fervent in holy con^erence.

2. It is profitable to excite, and animate unto duty: holiness is
supernatural to man's heart, and above his reach, he must strain and stretch
till tired, that will work out his own salvation: Nay it is contranatarall to
corrupt man, the natural man is at an enmity with God; He that walks with God,
walks up hill, Roweth against tide; and saileth against wind and cannot but be
wearied and find many times their very spirits fail: but especially when
under the storms of prospering providence to profaneness and the
discouragements of successful sin; the stoutest heart will find work enough
to keep his station, and bear up against the weather; it is indeed a lively
faith that keeps the soul then fixed, and hopes from fainting, God, as sensible
of our flagging spirits, has left us Cordial counsels and promises, to
encourage us and earnest cautions to quicken our faith, Gal. 6.9. 1 These. 3.13:
Rev. 2.15.
as be not weary of well doing ye shall reap if ye faint not Having begun in the
spirit, do not end in the flesh; Hold fast that thou have let no man take thy
Crown and the like: Yet so dull are our hearts so drousie our spirits, that the
best of Christ's Disciples may rejoice in the compassion of their master which
makes him conclude when he finds them sleeping: The spirit indeed is willing
but the flesh is weak; even the stoutest David is ready to faint with waiting
long on the Lord, and to slack in holiness and say as the wicked it is in vain
to serve God, when he considers the proud are called happy, they who tempt
God are delivered: but holy conference is an help to our weak and sainting
spirits; society is serviceable in heavens way. They travel cheerfully in the
Communion of Saints who would be tired alone. Two are better then one, says
the preacher they help one the other, and they hearten one the other. Eccles.
4.10.11. If at any time we wax dull in duty, and begin to draw heavily in the
yoke of Christ; the words of the wise are as Goads and as nails to spur, and
quicken us: if we grow faint and feeble that our spirits do begin to be
drooping and despondent as ointment, and perfume Rejoice the heart. So does the
sweetness of a man's friend by hearty council Prove. 27.9. Cold hearts in hard
times are warmed and heated by holy conference, consider one another to provoke
unto love and good works; says the Apostle Heb. 10.20. The Greek word is
consider one another into a Taroxisme; a violent heat as the fit of an Ague or
burning of a Fever: to make each other earnest and vigorous in love and good
works; for the dullest spirit is sharpened by holy conference as an Edge-tool
is sharpened by a whetstone, as Iron sharpneth Iron, so a man sharpeneth the
countenance of his friend. Prove. 27.17. by colloquie, debates, conference,
familiar disputes, speaking one to another, says Mer^er and Lavater on the
text: the heathen do much mention the quickening efficacy of conference,
Euripides makes it the mother of all arts, and Cicero, the means of all
wisdom and council: the quickner of all diligence, heating benumbed members
with rubbing: and what force soever is in conference, is the profit of the
Saints, when the conference is Christianized in the matter and manner of it:
for thereby we are encouraged in difficulties, enlivened in deadness,
enlightened in darkness; as Gregory Nazianzen notes, Christians sharpen each
others spirits by their conference, as Boars sharpen their tushes by rubbing
them one against another.

3. Holy conference is prositable to establish in the faith and fear of God,
professed by us: faith is the first and foundation of grace of the soul, al our
sanctity, nay our very salvation is dependant on our faith: holding fast the
profession of our faith, is the great duty of a Christian; of all graces faith
is most esteemed by the Lord, it is found unto praise and honor and glory at
the day of judgment. 1 Pet. 1.7. And therefore our Savior prays that our
faith fail not. Luke. 22, 32. And faith is most envied by the Devil, all his
temptations are to overthrow our faith, this is the only errand of all the
allurements of prospering profaneness, and the threat^ that are sounded out
by successeful sin, if at any time, we make shipwreck of faith we loose
salvation: but holy conference is a means for confirmation, making known common
persuasion; and by a friendly debate, removing all scruples and doubts which
arise in the soul; the only errand of Paul's expedition to Rome was Conference,
and the only end of that conference, the confirmation of the Saints in the
faith of Christ: I long to see you to the end I may impart to you some
spiritual good that your faith may be established. Romans 1.11.12. The Lord
Jesus, whilst upon earth, and before his death, did not only familiarly
co^fer with, and explain to his Disciples the mysteries of salvation which he
preached to others in parables, unto the confirmation of their faith therein,
but also after his Resurrection he condescended to associate with the two
Disciples as they walked to Emmaus; Luke 24.
and familiarly to confer of his own sufferings and confirm them in the faith
of his Resurrection: Thus also he in a friendly manner did confer with the
two Mary's, and with the Eleven Disciples; when they sat at meat and with the
other Disciples when fishing. So excellent and advantageous is holy conference
for confirmation in the faith; that it is honored by the exercise of the
Author and Finisher of our faith: It is also enjoined unto all the Saints: for
the support each of other in days of seduction and apostasy from the faith.
Jude 20. Build up one another in your most holy faith: Saints have the
inspection of one another and must endeavor the establishments and edification
one of another, and there is no way within their capacity whereby they may
perform it, but holy conference.

We see then that if the godly have any care of divine direction and delight;
desire to declare the sincerity of their sanctity and dilight in the expulsion
of sin, excitation one of another to duty, and establishment each of other in
their most holy faith, they must in times of sins success, speak often one to
another, by prospering profaneness, be provoked to godly conference: but I
hasten unto the use and application of this doctrine, which will be

Reproof for the neglect of this duty, exhortation unto the discharge thereof.

The first use I shall make of this doctrine is, by way of Reproof seeing
prospering profaneness; should provoke holy conference. They are justly to be
blamed who professing to the fear of God, fall short in this duty and speak not
one to another of the things of God: conference is indeed common among men but
it is seldom good, Rarely holy; most men are unacquainted with the language of
Canaan, and unskilled in heavenly discourse: the most of men seem to have set
up David's resolution though on different principles, to keep a watch before
their lips; and to Refrain from good talk in the sight of the wicked: for
saints, when they meet, seem strange and unacquainted each with other;
opportunities of holy intercourse are little looked after, and when
accidentally offered, we meet each with other, as men of no Relation and little
affection, our language carries with it no life, counsel or comfort, or
bespeaketh us to be men devoted to the world, and drowned in the earth speaking
of nothing but worldly affairs: Though times are evil, sin is advanced, and sad
affliction on the godly, snares and temptations are on the best of men, and run
them one straits not well knowing what to do, every tongue is tipped with
blasphemy and discountenanceth piety; saying it is in vain to serve God, yet we
who profess special Relation to God and each to other in the Lord, keep at
distance each from other; and walk alone in such evil times, and when
occasionally we meet make little or no mention of the ways of God, Case and
Condition of the Church, or cause of Religion: complaints of evil and
confirmations in good are to us strange language and such as either we know
not how through our ignorance, or are afraid through our weakness to
administer each to other: we shall not deny but there is a time to speak and
there is a time to be silent and the multitude of words many times are the
notes of folly, therefore, he that has knowledge will spare his words, and
that a fool stopping his lips may be judged prudent. Prove. 17, 27. But must
caution in speaking, be the bar of holy conference? must we fly from the
fools babbling into profane men's silence of the things of God? can the tongue
choose but speak out of the abundance of the heart? will not holy affections
boil in our bosoms until they bubble out in heavenly discourses? must not the
lips of the wise seed many? and if ever be the time of speaking one to another;
must it not be when the wicked do speak against the godly and their holy
practices, when God is dishonored Religion degraded and danger of seduction
and apostasy from truth and piety very palpable, because the proud are called
happy, etc. But you will say this season of sins success and prospering
profaneness; is an evil time in which the Prophet says, the prudent shall
keep silence, Amos. 5.13. But does this evil of the times engage an absolute
silence? though the prudent are prohibited by the Rage and violence of the
wicked, who hate him that Rebukes in the gate and abhor him that speaks
uprightly, verse 10. Yet the Prophets of God must speak ^^y a loud, and not
spare to tell Judah of her sins: the fear of the Saw did not silence, Isaiahs
prophecy; nor the terrors of the dungeon tongue-tie Jeremiah; nor yet the
scourge, prison and proud commands, no more to speak in the name of Jesus, stop
the ministry of the gospel: but you are not in awe of office, and so bound to
speak against opposition, private Saints we grant may with much prudence be
silent, when like to be made an offender for a word: but yet not altogether
silent neither; though you speak not to the wicked, may you not speak one to
another? though not to the conviction of the proud and profane, may you not
confer to the confirmation each of of others? when should godly conference
more abound then when open checks will not be endured by the wicked? if any
thing do drive the people of God to joint complaints and mutual communication
of gifts and graces it must be the times that are thus evil: and therefore
Christian souls, you who shun the society each of other, and abide silent in
sinful times, abstaining from holy conference as strange or dangerous; let me
tell you there is sin upon you, and you are greatly to be blamed for the
neglect of anindispensible duty and failing in the exercise profitable to your
selves and honorable to your God: and your sin is capable of these sad
aggravations.

1 You degenerate from your pious progenitors. I have before mentioned many
examples of the pious who were frequent and fervent in holy conference
especially in evil times, as amongst others these in our Text, who did speak
often one to another: the Corinthians did abound in speech and wisdom one
toward another. 1 Cor. 1.5. And the Romans were filled with all knowledge
admonishing one another. Romans 15.14. And the Philipians continned in fellowship
from the first day of their conversion. The Virgin Mary could not contain the
good news brought her by the Angel, but up she went to the hill Country, to
confer of them with her cosen Elizabeth: has not Catechizing been the
object of Popish, and conference of prelaticall rage in our Nation, witness
the bulla Papalis, condemning Catechizing, and the late Prelates complaint of,
and contests against Conventicles: how did not the Protestants in Queen Mary's
days confirm one another unto Martyrdom. It is storied of Rawlius White a
poor fisher man in Cardiffe in Wales that he, not being able to read, did by
the reading of his little boy and conference with good men, (in the time of
King Edward the sixth) gain such knowledge that he became an instructor of
others, going to his neighbors and conferring with them, he did prepare
himself and them for the patient undergoing the bloody persecution in Queen
Mary's days. I need not multiply instances of this nature, you that have been
observant of the godly (wickedly and falsely called Puritans (well know the
common and commendable course of conference by them used such Communion of
Saints, eomplaining of sin and Gods sad judgments has been the event of evil
times in England as has caused this note to be left upon our Nation.

Angelica gens est optima stens pessima ridens. England is best all in black,
when prospering profaneness provokes holy conference, then does piety most
flourish: can you call your selves brethren to the Saints, and so basely
degenerate from their practice?

2. You demonstrate your selves dead members in Christ's body: and that because
your silence in such sinful sad times does bespeak you in sensible and
unprofitable: without any feeling of Gods dishonor and Religious danger or
zeal for the Lords glory and the safety of piety, I have before told you warm
affections must word it, and have vent by good expressions. It is impossible
for an holy heart to be tongue-tied. David's holy heart and heated passions will
burst the padlock of resolved silence; and constrain good conference:
especially if enforced with the desire of our brethrens profit for such as are
slack in holy conference are unprofitable, for the souls of men, are no way fed
but by the lips of the wise, or preserved from falling, but by the
understanding of the prudent: though every act of wo^ship in the Church is an
act of Communion with the Church, yet gifts and graces are only communicated to
the members thereof in Colloquie: Saints stand charged each with other, and the
joints must supply their places by mutual conferences administering nourishment
to the whole body: lively and profitable Christians do in evil times enquire
the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying one to another come and
let us join our selves unto the Lord in a perpetual Covenant. And in evil
times they say every one to his neighbor, and every one to his brother, what
has the Lord answered, and what has he spoken: they do stand charged with
the souls each of other, and are therefore bound to exhort, rebuke, admonish,
comfort, and edify one another. And if ever the life of grace must be
manifested by acts communication, it must be in evil times the hour of
temptation which comes on them: in a day of general defection and diligent
seduction, the Saints must edify one another in their most holy faith, and
save one another with fea^e, pulling them out of the fire: if you are will ng
to witness your selves stupid under Gods heavy judgments, senseless of Gods
glory and the welfare of Religion, and livelesse, useless members in the body,
you may with due shame stand at distance each from other, and smother thoughts
of God in your own breasts, for want of vent by holy conference, but consider
profession of the tongue is no less useful to salvation then the persuasion
of the heart: and withholding counsel from the weak in evil times is
wickedness.

3. You disgrace Religion and are condemned by the wicked of the World, whilst
you sinfully suggest that sanctity destroys society, and makes the ungodly
conclude Religion a solitary condition in which communion is not to be enjoyed:
whereas indeed holiness is a bond of union and ground of Communion, which
whilst it seperates us from the Tabernacles of the wicked seateth us in the
Temple of God; and does not more divide us from the society of the profane
then drive us into the Communion with the Saints the scope of sanctity is to
turn the stream and direct men's thoughts and expressions into an holy channel,
which not being thus employed makes Religion look like the Ruin of charity,
and that which bars all kind of counsel admonition or conference. The men of
this world are wiser in their generations then the children of the kingdom;
they are Reduced into no straits but they run together and counsel each other
to escape and evade them: they agitate no affairs in the world, but by good
counsel and ordinary conference, men that seduce from the truth are diligent
and dextrous in their discourses:: Chatechizing and conference the two great
preserva ive of truth and Religion have been exercised as eminent means of
seduction, whilst neglected by such as should be established by them: is it
not ashame that the enemies of God should beat us at our own weapon? Popery
Arianisme, Socincanisme, Anabaptism, and other heresies are propagated, hy
Catechizing and conference whilst these edifying exercises are omitted and
slighted by the professors of truth: in the affairs of this world we are common
in Counsels and mutual Colloquies, but mindlesse of the great concernments of
salvation.

Let it therefore be our shame that we are so slack unto acts of Communion; and
so careless of this eminent means of confirmation, and the rather for that the
success of sin should stir us up; unto the frequent discharge thereof: Lay
your hands on your hearts and blush who are professors of the same faith, and
worshippers of the same God: pretenders to the same covenant and privileges
and yet such strangers unto each other; and so much unacquainted that you speak
not unto the comfort and confirmation one of another: Repent your sinful
neglect of these sociable soul-edifying acts of conference; or renounce your
relation to the Saints, who have gone before you: of whose spirit you do not
partake: Nay renounce your relation to God and his people, of, and to whom you
speak so little that you seem insensible of their estate; and unprofitable to
their souls.

The 2. Use that I shall make of this doctrine, is of exhortation to stir up
the godly to be frequent in holy conference; to get together and speak often
one to another. This is the duty incumbent on you that fear the Lord, and
cannot but be discharged by you whose hearts are full of thoughts, of Gods holy
name if you are indeed in union, maintain the Communion of Saints, and whilst
you sit jointly under the same ministrations of grace; fail not in your places
and capacities to minister one to another. Consider Christian brethren,
Scripture as well as nature does teach us it is not good to be alone; we are
not born for our selves, we are members one of another; we must seek every man
the good of his neighbor, the things of others not our own things: solitude is
not more burdensome and dangerous to nature then to grace; nor more unsuitable
to man then to a Christian: much hurt have the godly received by solitariness;
when David exilde from Israel, did walk alone in the land of the Philistines, he
fell into diffidence and despondency and blasphemous conceits; that God had
forgotten to be gracious; he had in vain washed his hands and cleansed his
heart in innocence: and when Peter wandered alone in the high Priests hall, he
was overcome with the temptation to deny his master: Profit of holy conference
is ever great but most in evil times, by it we are established in holiness;
kept from falling, Restored when fallen; strengthened in the day of temptation?
quickened when dead and dull in duty. It is the very veins of the Church by
which every joint supplieth its place unto the edification, of the body there
is not more profit then privilege in holy conference: It is the Communion of
Saints and fellowship of the Gospel, the comunication of the gifts and graces
of Gods holy spirits: it gives counsel in doubts and straits, comfort in
despondencies and sorrows. It is the vent of grief eases our hearts of the
burden of sad apprehensions by friendly complaints: it is the expression of
zeal which would burn; he uphold of the heart, by the Common consent of good
men, and mutual counsel each of other; how is it then Christian souls that
you are so much unacquainted, and unaccustomed to holy conference? for shame
content not our selves to hear the word preached, but conserre of what you have
heard; live not in the Church but in your places communicate each to others as
lively members of the Church: are not the times evil in which we live? do not
the proud prosper? are not they who work wickedness set up? and see we not men
that tempt God delivered? are not truth blasphemed ordinances trampled on,
sincere sanctity slighted vilified and contemned? is not perfidy perjury
violation o^ solemn oaths, and covenants the way to preferment? do not men
court us by providence, into ways pinciples and practise^ direct contrary to
Scripture precepts? and have not they who fear the Lord need to speak often one
to another? the Colloquies of the ungodly and conferences of the seducers and
seduced from the faith do every where abound, and and shall the men who are
sound in the faith, zealous for true religion, cleaving to the covenant of God
with constancy; be estranged one to another? if ever you had need to strenghen
one another hands and hearts now is your time; there was not more need of
Saints frequent conferences in times of Popish persecution and prelaticall
restriction, then in these days of sinful liberty by shameful Toleration, of
all impostors: the less restraint is laid on you by the Church or state you
should be more watchful one of another, and careful to k^ep each other from
the use of your profanely allowed libert^, know you that it is a saying
beseeming a cursed Cain: am I my brothers keeper? have we not evils to
complain of? do not men speak st^ut words against God? is not all possitive
p^ety, under a pretense of holiness, denied? do not men say it is in vain to
serve God? if you have any sense of Gods honor, any zeal for true Religion;
any feeling of the fo^ce o^ temptation, any pity to your weak brethren, any
fai^hfulnesse to your own souls, any fear of God; be quickn^d to holy
conference, flock together, se^k opportunities of mutual Colloquie, and having
found them, see you speak often one to another.

This duty of holy conference especially in ev^ll times, is in it self so
evident and so excellent that none do, or indeed can deny it; I shall not
therefore stand to enforce it with motives, but refer you to the reasons of
the Doctrine before urged, which you will find to be quickening considerations
thereunto: I shall only present you with some directions unto the right
discharge and management of holy conference, for it, like other good duties,
does many times miscarry by the r^sh and unadvised management thereof, many, I
must confess, have been the mismischiefes which have redounded from the
private conferences of the Godly; especially in this City: in so much that
although the duty has been allowed and enforced with the public authority of
the ministry of this City; in their jus divinum ministerii. Cap 5. page 78, ^9,
90. Yet many par icu^ar Pa^tors, to some of their peculiar charge, have seen
cause, in a way prudentiall, to discountenance, and almost dis^^low the
conferences of p^iv^te Christians; especially with their fixed circumstances,
that so the inconveniences accidently thence arising might be avoided: I would
gladly divide between the duties and their discommodities, I dare not debar
Christian-liberty, though I would it may be wisely enjoyed nor interdict the
posi ive duty, but will endeavor to inst^uct you unto the due management and
exercise there^f, that the evil and inconveniences thereof may be prevented and
herein I sh^l pr^^e^^ yo^ with some cautions and some direction^.

1. Some Cautions of evil to be avoided in holy conferences which must be
carefully observed by ^u^h as will speak one unto another to edification not
destruction: and they are these. viz.

Separate not from the Church, slight not public assemblies whilst in zeal
you frequ^nt private conferences: it is a sin to be noted to our shame, that
conferences of private Christians have given occasion to schism and sinful
separation from public assemblies, justifying our late prelacy in their
violent resistance of the private conventions of Christians, as Conventicles
opposite and destructive to Church assemblies: we cannot on serious
observation, but see that the sinful Schism of Independency, and shameful
separation of the Congregationallists was founded in and nour^shed by the fixed
conferences of private Christians: and how many are there at this day who leave
the public assemblies, break from the Communion of the Church, disown public
Ordinances and despise them, and only creep into private houses and spend their
Sabbath in Colloqui^s if not quaking soliloquies) and mutual discours^s of the
things of God, and so not only withdraw from, but set themselves against the
Church and the public assemblies of Gods people: now although private
conference is a duty, yet the improvement of it to the neglect, much more the
contempt, of the Church and public assemblies is an horrid impiety.

This profane fruit is not the natural result of conference, but is enforced
from it, by the c^rruption of profane hearts clothed with the pretense of
piety, and drawing wicked conclusions from just premises, the loose heart
^hinks private exercises to be sufficient, and so makes them jostle with
public acts of Religion; and the proud heart not enduring the subjection of
disciples to be taught with authority in the name of Christ, thinks it is
better to abide in priv^te Conference; where he may play the part of a Teacher,
and proudly acts his supposed gifts and abilities for instruction; or man's
curious brain is so busily captious, that it cannot be confined at any time to
positive and convincing assertions of truth, but must be conversant in that
exercise in which he may capti^usly propound his criticisms and groundless
scrupulosities or skeptical objections against plainest principles: all which
being to much to be allowed in private conferences does make hearts, not awed
with divine p^escription of method and order of holiness, and not apprehensive
of the consistency of public and private duties, nay the priority and
preheminency, the public has of all private means of edification, to which
the private must give place and not affected with the conscience-binding
authority of public administrations of instruction, wherein God him self
speaks above the charitative admonitions of brethren, wherein though the
thing spoken be good and true yet it is but the advice of men, and wants the
authority of God to enforce it: too much to cry it up, and content themselves
with it, until the devil, taking at man's disposition, does tempt and prevail
unto a neglect of public ordinances, a separation from the Church, and sinful
withdrawing from the solemn assemblies and shameful contempt of the public
Ministry profanely pleading for, and blasphemously defending their impiety,
urging gods words against Gods worship and arguing, we must speak every man to
his neighbor and enquire every man of his brother, what has the Lord
answered? we must teach one another, saying, know ye the Lord and shall not
need any to teach us.

This forsaking the assemblies, and separating from the Church is an evil and
inconvenience so dishonorable to Religion, and dangerous to the soul, and yet
so incident unto the holy conferences of the people of God, that the holy Ghost
has taken notice of it, and bounded the command of private conference with
this very caution concerning public assemblies. Heb. 10.24, 25. Consider one
another to provoke unto love and good works: not for saking the assembling of
your selves together, as the manner of some is but exhorting one another: in
which the du^y o^ private and personal exhortation is plainly prescribed and
duly bounded; and the evil incident thereunto carefully cautioned, (...).
which is not to forsake the public assemblies, clearly expressed in the Greek
word, which signifies not only a coming together in the synag^gue or plane of
Assembly: (...)
and that in a concourse or multitude and great number: and also in the
discretive particle but d^fferencing the exhortation one of another, from the
duties to be attended in the assembling of our selves together: and enforceing
the caution by a sad instance and observation of an evil custom, to be
avoided as the manner of some is; so that schism from the Church appears to
^^ve been an old attendant on the con^erences of the godly. Calvin on this T^xt
tells us, we may here, see, that of old, Schism from the Church does ari^e from
the contempt thereof in men pr^ud of their seeming sanctity in mu^uall
exhortation: and Pareus does w^ll note that whilst we admonish and exhort one
another ^he Apostle does commend to us Reverentiam Erga ministerium Eccles^ae
and studium frequent^ndi Ecclesias^^c^s Caetus. R^verence and Reg^rd to the
public ministry and Assemblies. And as the holy Ghost does give us the command
of confe^ence, with the caution of its inconvenience, to be prevented by this
Apos^l, so we shall find the same duty e^j^yned by another Apostle; with the
suggestion of the self same danger, Jude 20. verse. But ye beloved Edify one
another in your most holy faith, the discretive particle leads us back to
something before spoken and that is, the properties of wicked sects, seducing
and seduced souls; who did separate from the Church, and are therefore branded
with it. These are they who separate, sensual, not having the spirit, verse
19. And are set as evil examples to be avoided, but ye, beloved, that ye may
not separate Edify one another. Holy conference should fit us for, and fix us
in, the Communion of the Church: and be our fence against Schism and sinful
separation: So that (Christians) be conversant in your private conferences, but
careful that you grow not by them into contempt of Gods public Assemblies.
Use your domestic so^ieties but despise not the Church of God, take heed that
you never give a parity much less a priority to your Charitative instructions,
with ministerial authoritative injunctions, to your friendly conventicles, as
brethren, with the congregation of Saints in the Church of God; keep not so
close in private, as to negl^ct the public administrations of God, give both
their due; pay, your Tith of Mint and Cummin; but Omit not the weightier
matters of the Law, know that your exhorting, admonishing, speaking one to
another is a duty: but preaching hearing and the Ordinances of God in the
Assemblies of his people; are greater duties: for these are public that,
private, these to the Church, and whole body, that to friends, brethren single
and particular members; these by office, and with the authority of Jesus
Christ, that is performed in Charity at the good will of men; These are fixed
and positive acts of worship; for time, place, method, order that; occasional,
when, where and how we can get opportunity: these ess^ntiall to the being of
Religion and salvation of the soul That convenient, comfortable, quickening,
advantageous and to the well being of the soul: so that there can be no parity
between them much less may we overthrow the public and standing worship of
God, by our friendly and fraternall intercourse; those that make holy
conference an occasion of contempt of public Assemblies, may edify fancy but
not faith; may grow in knowledge but not in grace: may make Religion shine with
a little splendour but not stand in a storm, for they do fasten it with a sinful
peg; or however Schism is, by the Saints of our age, minced and made of no
moment, it will prove destructive to the Church and damnable to the soul: for
being divided from the body they have forsaken the head and fall into an
imp^ssibili^y of nourishment: how horrid are the prophanesses both doctrinal
and practical acted by the pretended Saints of our age who have sprung up from
their private Conventicles into an open separation from the Church, and have
improved their desired Toleration to the confusion of the Church, increase of
all heresy error, and oppression of truth and order: Take heed that ye exhort
one another, but forsake not the Assembling of your selves together as the
manner of some is.

Set not upon soul Edifying acts which are out of your sphere, the Edification
of the Church, is ^he great end of all Gospell-administrations and friendly
admonitions of the brethren, and to be pursued with the utmost diligence, God
ha^h giv^n Apostles, Prophets, Evangel^sts, Pastors and Teachers, unto the
Edifying of the Saints. He has appointed every joint to be duly serviceable
by Admonition, Re^uke and consolation each of other as breth^en. He has
prescribed many different waves and means unto the accompl shment of this great
end; and Nehemiah-like studious to have the work of the Temple to go forward,
has distributed men into their several stations, and to distinct employments
in which each one must attend: and nothing does more hinder the work o^ God, or
b ing dishonor to Religon then disorder, and stepping out of our own places to
employ our hands in what is not to us allotted: Publ^ck ministry and private
conference are both appointed and conducible to the Edification of the Church;
but in their proper places, and order. The ministers of God may not hinder the
people of God from their holy conferences; Pre^atical violence against piou
Communion of brethren in praying each with and ^or other, and speaking one to
another was no mean pulback to Re igion: nor must priva^e conference Encroach
upon public ministry, or intermeddle with its administrations, Vzzah's
upholding of the Ark, when Shaken does but hinder its march toward its Resting
place; if men sin^ully break order and st^p out of their places; the work of
God must be hindered, whilst his angry hand does Reduce them into order again;
the straining of the privilege of private Christians unto their presumptuous
meddling with the work of Gospel-min^stry, has made the sun of the Gospel
stand still, nay go backward among us and so weakened piety; that the very
sinews thereof are shrunk and irreligion increases unto blasphemy, and almost
Atheism: Let it be your care (Christians) in your private Conference to keep
within compass, and manage those things which only belong to private
Christians? meddle not with matters that appertain to the ministry, though
they be edifying to the Church yet they must be extended by men of office:
consecrated to and invested with authority for such service: I would not
abridge private Christians of the least of their privilege, nor have them in
their conference. Go one step beyond their bounds; give me leave therefore to
appoint the borders of your holy conference; and that you may never hereafter
plead ignorance; I will tell you what private Christians in their conferences
may do: and what under the pretense of conference, private Christians may not
meddle withal, as they tender the edification of the Church, advancement of
Religion, and salvation of their own souls.

First then there are seven p^si ive and special acts of con^er^^ce; and
Communion of Saints which particular Christians and private brethren not only
lawfully may, but in duty must discharge each with and toward other: and they
are briefly these

1. Private Christians may and must pray one for another, in the behalf of
themselves and the whole Church of God: prayer is indeed an act of public
worship to be done in, and by the Church; whose mouth must be the Ministers of
God, Joel. 2.17. But it is also a private and personal duty, to be done by
every child of God, in secret and in society. It is Required that every
Christian do it: and that believers do pray one for another; James. 5 16. And
it is the promise of the covenant of grace that families and tribes shall every
of them pray apart and in the times of the Churches perplexity; even private,
Saints though there were no Ministers among them, should go together and pray
in Communion, and by joint supplication; thus did the men that feared God in
our Text and the many who were gathered into the house of Mary the mother of
John, and were praying in the day of Herod's Rage acts. ^2.12. Some have been
angry at, but never durst argue against the practice of Christians in private
fasts and prayers; no, it is their duty and privilege.

2. Private Christians may, and must confess their sins one unto another: none
but Papists will confine confession to a Priest or public officer: sin must
indeed be sometimes confessed in and to the Church, when she is become the
object of offense and scandalized by the miscarriage and so the finner become
the subject of her censure: but private brethren may not only confess their
sins one unto another, as they are the parties offended, but as they are
brethren and subjects of pity and of comp^ssion? who seeing his brother sin a
sin, not unto death, will pray for him, and it shall be forgiven him; private
brethren must not only pray against the guilt, but power also of each others
lust; and must not only pray against sin but be serviceable by other means to
the subduing the strength thereof, and saving the soul from the error of his
way; and therefore it is commanded that common Saints do confess their sin one
unto another: I presume I need not advise prudence in the choice of those
brethren to whom we will commit such secrets.

3 Private Christians may and must in their private conferences, Check and
Rebuke one another impieties and miscarriages; fraternall correption is a duty
beyond all exception commanded of God Thou shall in any wise Rebuke thy
brother, and not suffer sin up on him, Lev. 19.17. Appointed by Christ if thy
brother offend tell him of his faults between thee and him; as an hinderance to
sin and help in temptation: exhort (by way of Rebuke) one another least ye be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: It is the provocation of
Repentance; balm of a wounded conscience; desired by David Let the Righteous
smite me: it is the Restitution of a Relapsed soul, Gal. 6.1. The private man's
passage to glory, and provision for honor; covering a multitude of sins and
converting the soul: James 5.19.20. The end of mutual confession is mutual
Reprehension: these are the wounds of a friend more faithful then the kisses of
an enemy. Prove. 27.6. Where let it be Remembered that Reproof is the wound of a
friend done in Charity not out of office, with pity and successful by its
truth and justice not with power; prevailing by its Authority.

4. Private Christians may and must counsel and quicken each others graces.
And so spur each others duties, say come let us return unto the Lord let us
join our selves to God in an everlasting covenant; they must consider, observe,
have an eye unto each others ways and walkings, to warm the cold affections,
and provoke unto love and good works none but the slothful in duty and slaves
to profaneness; can be angry at, or argue against, the private Rebukes and
exhortations of holy conference.

5. Private Christians may, and must comfort one another in their anguish and
affliction: sanctity supplanteth no act of society; but sets us in a better
capacity, to perform to Reason much more religion leads friends to visit Job in
his affl^ct^o^, for to him that is afflicted: pity must be showed by his
friend. The not speaking consolation was the mistake of Jobs friends in all
that long conference they had with him: when our friends interr their dead we
are directed to comfort each other, 1 These. 5.11.
by conferring of the Resurrection of the body: the speaking of promises and
providence of God, so as to prop up a sinking soul and to strengthen the
feeble hands is the work not only of public communion but also of private
conference: the consolations of God must not be concealed but imparted as
occasion requires unto the good of others.

6. Private Christians may and must co^plain of the evil of the times, to
affect each others hearts with sense of, and sorrow for sin or Gods sad
providence; men's stout words against God, must be matter of expostulation to
them that fear God: Jonathan and David must into the field to confer of Saul's
wickedness and cruelty? Isreal's abomination must be made mention of among the
mourners for it; the d^eadfull dispensations of God, at the death of Christ
must be the matter of discourse to the Disciples as they wa^k to Emmaus: every
soul must see Gods hand observe Gods providence, and make the prosperity of
profaneness and escapes impiety, the matter of discourse unto his own and other
men's discretion to a due demeanor and suitable conversation.

7. Private Christians may and must confer with each other of the things of
faith and salvation; none but Papists who lock up the knowledge of the truth
from poor souls and the people of God; and impose on their faith what the
Church does believe will make it heresy to enquire into and debate of the
Articles of the Creed: Obadiah may without any sin or disobedience expostulate
the injunctions of the Prophets; and it shall be a note of Nobility to the
Bereans to enquire into the Scriptures to find the verity of the Apostles
doctrine. This is no other then the (...) and Christian conference allowed and
enforced by the ministers in jus divinum ministerii cap. 5. Pa. 81.
of this City: Nay and was honored by our Savior in joining in society and
debating with the Disciples that went to Emmaus; the death and resurrection of
himself; those great Articles of Christian faith: Romans 1.11.
and Paul's Errand to Rome was to confer of the doctrine of faith; and see his
Romans therein established and Schism, tending to an Apostasy from the faith,
must stir up the Saints that keep the Union of the Church, to hold the
Communion of it by Edifying one another in their most holy faith: so that it is
not to be thought that men must live by an implicit faith, to Receive what ever
is magisterially imposed; or be censured for maintaining a modest and humble
debate and expostulation or conference; about the fundamental points and
doctrines of faith and of salvation.

These things Christians you must know do belong to ministers as members of the
Church, and partakers of the same precious faith with your selves not as they
are Ministers and Officers of, and in the Church employed about peculiar
service which other may not undertake to manage: and although some of these are
actions to be performed ministerially such as is Rebuking, exhorting, and the
like; yet they have adjuncts peculiar, and an especial form, no, they become
ministerial and must not be meddled withal by private men: but in the matter
and substance of them they lie common to believers and members of Gods Church.
Christian brethren; so far would I be from co^demning that I would encourage
and in the name of the Lord command you to maintain your society and make
conscience of holy conference, and therein of praying together, con^^ssing your
sins one to another, admonishing, exhorting one another: and doing all the acts
of Communion, wherein were the people of God more conversant, piety would be
preserved and increased.

I have showed you how far you may go in holy conference, and hitherto not I,
but the Word of God will allow and justify you but be so prudent, as to keep
within your borders, and take heed you do not break your b^unds. I shall
therefore in the next place propose those edifying acts, which private
Christians in their conferences are to apt to be meddling withal, whilst indeed
they are holy, more holy than the ordinary and common acts of sanctity, and
must not be meddled withal by every common hand, although a believer, nay a
believer eminent for parts and piety; and they are likewise seven which I do in
the name of Christ adjure you to consider and avoid as out of your sphere, and
they are these, (viz.)

Private Christians may not constitute Churches: constitution of Churches is an
eminent act of authority and cannot be affected by any private hand: I well
know it has of late been the principle and practice of many pretenders unto
piety in their conferences (which were at first private) to constitute
Churches; the independent notions are that seven or eight fewer or more
believers conjoyning themselves into a Church, are thereby constituted, and
therefore in the gathering of their Churches, their Ministers have shamefully
renounced the ministry, and sinfully disowning the authority of Jesus Christ,
which they e^joyed, resolve themselves into a private capacity, as members, and
so by the Church gathered, received the Ministry: and indeed out of this
corruption of holy conference have risen most of our gathered Churches among
us: which way of Church constitution is irrational and Irreligious.
Irrational, because no political body can constitute it self, does not civil
policy call it a combination and conspiracy, where men embodie themselves
without public authority who will suffer them to enjoy the privilege or be
subject to their Rules and orders as a corporation who Receive not their
Charter from, nor are constituted by public Authority. Is not the Church a
body politic? and every particular congregation parts of the Church
Catholic? and how then shall they constitute themselves? Is there any thing
true and good in nature and contradicted in Scripture; is God a God of order in
the world and of confusion in his Church? is the Authority of the magistrate
essential to the constitution of any corporation, and company in any Town or
City, and shall men of Religion embody and give a Church form unto themselves?
shall simple consent be the Ratio formalis of a civil conspiracy, and
Religious constitution not only is it irrational but irreligious, without the
least color of Authority or countenance of Scripture I shall not be afraid to
challenge all the congregationallists to produce any commission from Jesus
Christ, by either precepts or president of self constitution of the Church. I
find indeed a Comm^ssion to go, and Disciple the Nations and by baptism to
constitute them Churches of Jesus Christ; but none dare presume to say, this
was given to private persons nor is it to constitute themselves unto a Church
if there be other commission in the book of God let it be produced: as there is
no precept so we find no pattern of a self constituted Church; we Read of the
Church at Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus; but which of them were of their own
constitution? had not every of them the Lord Jesus for their foundation; and
some of the Apostles for their founder in the name and Authority of Jesus
Christ? did not Christ institute the office of the minister, before he did
constitute the Church in the world: and sent forth ministers to Gather in the
elect, and to constitute and confirm Churhes so that the ministry is before
the Church and for the Church, essential unto its constituton: To Act without
a commission and warrant from Christ, is no less then superstition and
presumption: but to invert Christ his order and to neglect his method and
Authority is high profaneness: to constitute a Church without commission, is to
build in the sand without any confidence of Protection or preservation, to make
the ministry to arise out of the Church is to make it the ministry of the
Church not of Jesus Christ indeed I read of two self constituted Churches in
the Scripture; but they were both disowned by God and good men, the one was the
Church gathered by Corah and his company, with a cry of sanctity all the Lords
people were holy: they indeed flung off the ministry of Gods appointment, but I
need not tell you how good men flew from their tents, and how God flunge this
Church alive into the earth; take heed you perish not in the gain saying of
Corah, the other was the ten Tribes who casting off the house of David, did
also cast off the ministry of God and constituted themselves a Church, and so
consecrated to themselves Priests o^ the lowest of the people: but the Priests
of God and those who did fear the Lord throughout Israel packed from among
them, and they went to Jerusalem and continued in the Church constituted by God
and not only did good men, but God himself cast off this self-constituted
Church; have a care you walk not in the way of Jeroboam: Let not your private
society and conferences become the College of the Prophets, or Rather
conspiracies of Schism: however men seemingly holy and succeeding in their
gilded impiety do by doctrine and practice, direct you to self constitution in
Church way, decline it, depend upon Gods public ministry in disposing of you:
until you can make corporations without Civil; think not to make Churches
without Religious and divine sanction

2. Private Christians may not under the color of holy conference consecrate
things or Persons unto God: self constitution must needs produce sinful
consecrations, for no body politic can be preserved or Resolved into order;
and any capacity of acting without Officers, and therefore the
Congregationallists in plain the Independents, who make self aggregation, the
form of Church constitution, give not only power to men unordained, not
consecrated, to come nigh unto God, in the most holy and public of
administrations; but make that self-collected body the subject of the keys,
and Receptacle of all Church power from, and by whom, the administrators of
Gods ordinances must be appointed, and ordained: and thus their leaders having
resolved themselves members of such a society; Receive from that society a
ministry: but (beloved) do you consider consecration of any thing, or person
unto God, is an act of office and Authority: none may come nigh to God, in the
administration of holy things, but such who are thereunto consecrated: this God
has made manifest; by the Perez-Vzzah, made in Israel for Vzzahs putting forth
a common hand, to stay Gods holy Arc, when tottering, and Ready to fall: the
desire to support Re^igion in danger to fall, will not defend this impiety: and
by the leprosy of King Vzziah for presuming to meddle with the Priests
function and by the censers of Corah, and his company, be^ten into plates and
made Monuments of memorial that no unconsecrated persons, meddle with the holy
things of God, nor can it in Reason be thought, that the ministry should lie
common, to be taken up by any hand, and at pleasure: for that it is an office
and function, place and particular order in the Church of God: charged with
special service: appointed to a proper end: prepared unto by special
qualities and endowed wi^h special privileges? men will not let civil
offices lie common; who contend to lay open holy functions; and so dissolve all
order in the Church: as none but holy persons may come nigh to God; so nothing
unhallowed must be presented unto God as a part of his worship; if the sons of
Aaron pressed into Gods presence with any profane and unhallowed thing they
should perish: none but holy fire must burn on Gods altar: common Elements as
water in baptism and bread and wine in the Lords supper must be consecrated
before they become acts of worship, and seals of Gods covenant: It is blasphemy
and profaneness to make every table the Lords table; and common use of
creatures bread or wine the commemoration of Christ his death and sufferings;
the most sinful Schismatiques, will confess consecration of things and persons
necessary; and you must know that this is not the work of every, no, not of any
private hand: men cannot communicate what they have not received; nor stamp
peculiarity on others who never had it stamped on themselves. It is Gods
standing Law, that the Priests sons of Aaron, consecrated themselves, do
consecrate things, and persons that shall come nigh to God: and therefore, it
is Isreal's Horrid impiety, in their defection from the house of David, and
altar of God, that whosoevor would might bring a bullock and consecrate himself
a Priest unto the Lord? nor is the liberty greater under the Gospel; for it is
the method, and order of Christ; that the office of the Gospel ministry be
transmitted unto faithful men, by the solemn ordination of men themselves
ordained to that sacred function: we deny not the privilege of election to be
the peoples; but the power of ordination abides in officers: It is plain that
in the Church constituted by Gospel ministry at Jerusalem; charge of election
is given by, and power of consecration Reserved to, the officers of Jesus
Christ: Choose you out men whom we may appoint, and those who act any thing in
Christ, or his Ministers name without their Authority may expect to be
corrected by the Devil himself as were those Exorcists in Acts 19.13, 14, 15 v.
Paul we know and Jesus we know but whence are ye: whilst therefore you confer
as brethren take heed you consecrate not as officers: Remember, you may be holy
in your kind to your God; but not have a power to make other men or things holy
to the Lord: make not your selves a Church, make not your own ministers or
Sacraments.

3. Private men may not communicate ordinances to the Church, in the name and
stead of Jesus Christ, when you are in your conferences, used to speak take
heed you presume not to preach: whilst you play the men, in ministering
counsel; nay good men, in ministering holy instruction, and Religious
admonition, do not so manage it, as to presume in your selves, or proclaim to
others, you are more then private brethren, even public ^fficers the
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ: to this end you must take heed that your
administrations be not to the Church of Christ: nor in the name or stead of
Christ; these two are boundaries of ministerial instructions; which may not be
broken in upon, by private men, without palpable presumption, and prophannesse:
we shall willingly allow Christians their liberty; as Parents and masters of
families to speak instruction to their children and families; private and
particular brethren to exhort, admonish and Rebuke in their friendly societies;
Generals to make their orations (and that like Christians) to their Armies;
and Tutors to Read divinity Lectures to their Pupills in the Universities; but
(let their abilities be never so great we must bar them out o the Church here
they must be hearers not speakers: the Church is only the object of
ministerial instruction; when men presume to speak in, and to the Church of
Christ, they p^esse upon the function of Gospel ministry; and make themselves
Prophets unto the Lord, for all Agents in the Church appear as officers; and
are on that account to be Received, Reverenced, heard and obeyed: so that their
feet that thus bring glad tidings must be beautiful unto the hearers unto
prophesying which has believers for its object: mission is essential: sending
of the preacher, is one ground of faith in the hearer: how therefore can he
preach exept he be sent and as we bar private men from speaking to the Church
as their object so also from speaking in the name and stead of Jesus Christ the
instructions, admonitions, Rebukes, and exhortations of private men, must be in
amity not authority; as friends distinguished and dignified by their Relations
not deputed by Jesus Christ, or invested with his authority: only Ministers are
the Lords Emabassadors, beseeching us in Christ stead, as if he himself did
beseech us to be reconciled: to them it is indeed given in charge, and to them
only to teach and command, and in teaching 1 Timothy 1^.11 to exhort and rebuke
with all authority. Titus 2.15. as being over the Church of God. Whilst the
ministers of the gospel do require credence and obedience; to what they
declare, not only because true, and good, but because spoken with authority; in
the name and by the Embassy of Jesus Christ; private Christians must know that
the only weight and strength of their instructions lie in the turth and
goodness with some civil and natural circumstances thereof: and the refusal
of them, may charge the guilt of despising good counsel, and disregarding
friends, but not disobedience unto God and Jesus Christ: to your shame it may
be spoken; that many youngsters adjoyn themselves to your private societies, as
expectants of the public ministry; and having inured their tongue in your
conference to talk of the things of God; do with much confidence, impose on you
their discourses, in the name and authority of Jesus Christ, and at length
uncalled and unqualified, presume to step into the pulpit; and speak unto the
Church of God: as if your conferences were no other then nurseries of pride and
vanity: I would such as thus presume to prophecy would but seriously ponder
that which was certainly spoken in reference to gospel times, by the Prophet
Zach. 13.5. And the Prophet shall be ashamed, every one of his vision; and
shall no more wear a rough garment to deceive; but he shall say, I am no
Prophet, I am an husband man; men taught me to keep cattle from my youth: Their
faith can be but poorly edified, which is fed with a phantastique and imaginary
ministry: and followed with the curse of God, because they have run and I have
not sent them, they shall not profit this people. Jer. 23.32. Whilst you give
good counsel, do not cheat men of their salvation, by giving it with the
assurance and authority you never received.

4. Private Christians cannot, under pretense of conferense, cast out of the
Church: excommunication is the highest act of authority in the Church of
Christ: and however it has been highly asserted and hotly contended for, it
yet remains to be proved that the people or body of the Church are the subject
of the keys, the Savoy conclusions are neither Scripture nor Church Canons; nor
are they enforced with the least Scripture argument; or answer to what on the
contrary has been objected: be not magisterially imposed upon, by men of no
power: lock not your selves under an implicit faith, of what some pretenders to
piety, profess to believe: consult Reason and Religion; and you shall find
popular power unto Church censure repugnant unto both: casting out of the
Church is an act judicial; and that cannot be done by all; they must be Rulers
and judges that do execute it: if this be the whole Church where are the ruled;
and to be judged, when the incestuous person was cast out of the Church at
Corinth, it was done in the name of Jesus Christ by many, and as the word
signifies principal ones; nay by those who judged such as were within, not by
all the assemblies, or any private persons: I deny you not the liberty of
debarring from your friendly societies: I believe a strange and discountenancing
carriage toward every brother which walks disorderly to be a duty: but for
private men to deliver any over to Satan, is a grand impiety.

5. Private men may not in private conferences cancel the condemnation of the
Church or conscience: the same authority which does bind must loose: they who
shut must open: absolution is an act undoubtedly ministerial and
Ecclesiastic: the Officers of the Church can only acquit convicted guilt,
private Christians must confess their sins each to other, to provoke pity and
prayer; but not to procure a pardon; further then the offense concerns
themselves: they may comfortably argue and expostulate each with other the
hopes of pardon, unto the quieting of the anxious conscience; but he must be a
minister who does in the name of the Lord pronounce pardon and in the name of
the Lord ministerially though not Judicially cancel conscience, and quiet the
guilty by assuring Remission of sin; upon true Repentance: It was unto
Ministers that Jesus said whose sins you Remit shall be Remitted; and it is by
them therefore this ground of faith and foundation of hope: be must said as
private men have not authority to capitulate so they have none to conclude
peace between God and the soul: the many that punished, did pardon the
incestuous Person, and that in the name of Christ: and therefore with authority
to apply Gods poomises and require an acquiescency of soul is positive
profaneness.

6. Private Christians may not conclude orders and decrees, which shall bind
the Church. All acts of discipline are attendant on the keys of the Church;
such as wear them have the only power of prescription of things, Religious
Rites, and matters of decency and order in the Church of God: Legislation is
the height of authority, they that consult and conclude; for to bind the
Church; and require subjection; must be well commissionated: Church counsels I
doubt not may send a broad their (...) determined decrees: Acts 16.^.
and conscientious obedience must be yielded to them; but for private
Christians to prescribe unto the Church of God; cannot but be high presumption
and profaneness: However you conclude, prudentiall Rules, to preserve the peace
and order of your private amicable societies; let them never be imposed on
others, or prescribed to the Church: but know subjection is your station in
Gods Church, and Legislation above your Reach.

7. Private Christians may not commend a blessing to the Church, in the name
and authority of Jesus Christ: we deny not the power of parents blessing their
children by prayer and parentall option as did the Patriarchs, and Laban to
Jacobs children, or friends blessing one another by salutation and serious
supplication as Jacob at his coming in, and going out blessed Pharaoh; to be
common to all the people of God, and to be done by private men: but
ministerial blessing by pronuntiation thereof in the name of the Lord: unto
the Church is an act of worship to God, and argument of faith to his people and
therefore must be done by authority, and belongs only to his Ambassadors and
commission Officers: the Tribe of Levi is separated in Israel to stand before
the Lord and Minister unto him and to bless his name, Deuteronomy. 10.8. They must,
and they only must bless in the name of the Lord, for they are chosen to this
very purpose, Deuteronomy. 21.5. That your private conferences begin and end with
prayer is commendable, but that your society break up with a formal and
pronounced blessing in the name of the Lord is to be condemned: very prudent
was the practice of the Church when men unordained and only expectants of the
ministry did, for probation sake, preach, were barred from pronouncing the
blessing and thereby made known to the people not yet to have been consecrated
to this holy function.

Thus then (Christians) I have plainly prescribed, and let you see what is your
privilege; and what will prove your damage, wherein you as private members
and particular joints may duly make a supply unto the edification of the whole
body of Christ: and wherein you may be dangerously prejudicial to the Church
and destructive to your own souls: all holy duties are to be managed with
fear, but especially those which are occasional, and at humane liberty;
wherein without vigilance, and great care we shall be transported, by Satan's
temptation, and our own corruption: whilst we are tickled with a desire to
distribute what we have Received: and quickened by the sense of duty to
communicate, gifts and graces by exhortation rebuke, and admonitions: we are
too Ready Rashly to manage it; not Regarding the place wherein we stand, and
the method, and order, whereby we must be serviceable to the edification of the
Church: but break all bounds and presume to turn preachers; and assume to our
selves all ministerial power and authority, pressing on all the acts thereof,
consti^uting Churches, consecrating things and persons, communicating to the
Church in the name and stead of Christ casting out of the Church, cancelling
conscience, concluding orders for the Church, and commending Gods blessing to
the Church, I would our sinful age were not a sad comment on the exorbitancies
of Religious conference. You take it ill if your privilege be not asserted in
its latitude; but think much to be confined to your places; as you would not
have your Ministers discountena^ce your conferences, drive them not into a
sinful extent; avoid the evil that your nature gathers from them: for Gods
own occasional institutions are to be Removed for the prevention of a greater
evil: as was the brazen Serpent to prevent Idolatry: Christian liberty must be
restrained when it gives occasion to Schifme, Rebellion, and Impiety: know
therefore; that the Church will never be edified, by your doing acts of
edification out of your sphere, and without authority: keep at an equal
distance, from acts of profaneness; and acts of piety not belonging to your
places: It is all one in divine acceptance, to omit, and overact a duty: not to
serve him, and not to serve him in our stations: for (however men deem) he is a
God, and God of order; and order the beauty of his holiness must shine more
brightly in the Church; then in the world.

Now that I have bounded your liberty in holy conference by fit cautions, I
shall direct your duty unto the right discharge of it that it may be honorable
to religion; profitable to the Church, and comfortable to your own souls: The
directions I shall suggest are three.

Propound unto your selves Right all things Revealed and known may be matters
of discourse unto men; but all discourse befits not Christian men; I need not
tell you that Rude and Ribald language, foolish jestings, vile calumniations,
and contrivancies of profaneness and wickedness; are Repugnant to, and unfit
for humane discourse: It is a shame the Tongue man's glory should ever be
stained with such language: how much more is the contrariety thereof to
holiness and Christianity? this may be the language of the prospering profane
men which must provoke our speaking one to another, by way of complaint that
men should be so wicked: but must not be once named among you, as becomes
Saints.

The affairs of the world and concernments of our temporal and present estate,
are matter of Colloquie fit for humane society; and may in all commerce be
lawfully conferred of by Christian souls; sanctity does not make us cease to be
men, if we will not confer of the things of the world, we must go out of the
world: but but yet these things fall into Christians discourse, as men, not as
Saints, and common prudence will guide in the exercise thereof.

The conference which we have under consideration is Godly and special;
belonging to Saints, and stirred up by the stout words of the wicked, and
success of sin, springing from the fear of God, and thoughts of his name,
therefore the matter propounded to it, must be holy and Religious, like the
language of the virtuous woman, your mouths must be opened with wisdom, and
the law of kindness be upon your tongue. Prove. 31.26. So the matter must be
generally good, even the word of God which must dwell plentifully in us in all
wisdom, unto teaching and admonishing one another. Col. 3 16. Our discourse
must be such matter as is savoury, seasoned with salt, administering grace and
edification to the hearers. Col. 4.6. No corrupt communication, must come out
of your mouths but that which is good. Ephesians. 4.29. Good men must like
householders bring out in holy conference, things new and old but always such as
may witness them to be Scribes instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat.
13.5. So that in general, the ^ind of God, word of truth, doctrine of the
gospel, must be propounded as the matter of your conference but more
specially, propound not to your ordinary conference.

1. Jewish fables and genealogies or vain jangling notions, frivolous matters
which minister questions rather then godly, edifying in the faith. 1 Timothy 1.5.
fables because frivolous not because false, as Calvin ^otes on the text, many
genealogies, and other criticismes, are recorded in the Scripture, as necessary
appendants on the things written; which in themselves are not proper matter for
conference; because unprofitable, and the debate of them will be but a
laborious loss of time, a task not worthy the toil, like an Olive or Date
stone, hard to crack or cleave, and affording no kernel when divided: holy
conference must be employed so, that it should not fail of it is end, or hinder
union; and therefore we must see we never make that the matter of it which may
genderst rise, occasion snarling, administer questions, but afford no
instruction or edification; Suetonius tells us that the curious canvasing of
the genealogy of Priamus, to find out the Pedigree of Ajax and Achilles, was
ridiculous to all sober men, if frivolous things must not be the matter of
humane much less may they be the matter of Christian debates.

2. Confer not of curious and nice critical cases of conc^ence. R^m. 14.1. We
are required to rec^ive such as are weak in the faith, but not to doubtful
disputations: that is critical debates, concerning Christian liberty, which
indeed stir up scrupulosity; but do not edify: the weak will by scrupulosity
of conscience be discouraged in the ways of piety; let them not therefore be in
your conferences, perplexed with such enquiries; doubts are soon started, and
easily raised, but not so soon resolved; it is sad, when soul tormenting
scrupulosity becomes the effect of Christian society.

3. Confer not controverted matters of discipline and order in the Chrrch,
the things of salvation may be enjoyed in the Church where discipline is much
wanting, and neglected matters of order tend to the beauty but not the being of
the Church; articles of faith and acts of holiness may be followed by men that
are ignorant of the debates of Church order: disputes of circumstances becomes
many times the destruction of the power of godliness: it is noted of eminent
Mr. Dod that he never loved to meddle with the controversies of the times,
because they dulled his affections to holiness if in any thing, ^o^mon
Christian should be concluded by Church officers, it is in matters of
discipline and order.

4. Confer not the experiences of Saints, and manner of Gods work on the heart
and conscience because these are merely personal, and may prove prejudicial
unto others: conviction and consolation is the common condition of all
believers but the modus and gradus operandi measure and manner of it, is
different; ordinarily disposed by the temper and disposition of the subject:
and cannot be a Rule unto others the easiness of David's must not be the measure
of Manasseh his conviction: nor must the thundering conviction and conversion of
Saul be the square thereof unto Peter: experiences of this nature administer no
edification, but many times engender in some despondencies, and in other
presumptions: leave we therefore a wise God to work his own work, in his own
way; let us make the work it self object of our observation and discourse, not
much making known the manner and measure thereof.

These things I advice be not propounded as the matter of your conference
because repugnant to its end but instead hereof confer.

1. Profane practices of the wicked: with which your hearts are to be
affected, and that out of zeal to Gods holy name hereby dishonored; and piety
to immortal souls hereby endangered; and compassion to them who by their
prosperity in the course of impiety do become a stumbling block, temptation and
evil example to others; multiplying to themselves the wrath of God, unto which
they are by their present success prepared: This is more then probable to have
been the matter of which the men in our Text did speak one to another, we may
not always speak to the conviction of the wicked yet we may and must speak to
the confirmation of our selves against the temptation of their prospering
profaneness and successful sin.

2. Principles of which are ploin and obvious to every serious Christian
studious of Scriptuee and are essential to the v^ry being of a believer and
indispensably necessary to salaation: These are the foundations of the oracles
of God, by which we are con^^ituted Christians and capable of being edified:
ignorance and inconst^ncy in the principles of faith fits us for all heresy
and seduction from the truth: the matter of Christ his conference with his
Disciples in the coasts of Philippi as is evident by his, Whom say men that I
am? and whom say ye that I am. Mat. 16.13.16. Was the verity of the Messiah who
was to be believed: and the matter of his conference with the Disciples that
walked to Emmaus, was his death and Resurrection those great Articles of faith:
and Paul's Errand to Rome was by conference to establish the Saints in the
faith, Romans 1.11. The common work of the Communion of Saints is to edify one
another in their most holy faith: and therefore the principles thereof is the
proper matter of their conference.

3. Practices of piety which are to be performed unto these, being to the
gracious soul supernatural and and above his reach, beyond his natural
strength; nay contra natural unto which their flesh bears an enmity, they
cannot but be weak and dull, apt to be wearied; especially when under
affliction and all worldly discouragements: men speaking, and common course of
providence seeming to confirm their language, that it is in vain to serve God:
therefore we must consider one another to provoke unto love and good work, so
long as the willing spirit is Retarded with the weakness of the flesh the
words of the wise must be as nails and as goads.

4. Promises of Grace which must be the props of the soul, the uphold of hope
under the prospering providence that do attend the profane; and afflictions
which are incident to the Righteous: whilst the vision is delayed the just must
live by faith, and by discoursing of Gods promises and properties, establish
their expectation of a discrimnating deliverance out of all their sorrows,
though at the present the proud are called happy, etc.

If these, and things of the like nature, be made the matter of your
conference, it will produce its end; and prove an ordinance of edification;
informing your judgments; affecting your hearts, quickening and establishing
the soul in faith and holiness.

I have done with the first, and shall now pass to the 2. direction unto the
right management of conference.

proceed unto your conference with due prudence, wisdom is the ornament and
excellency of every action; and must be the especial property of believers,
that will put forth in exercises of Religion, they must proceed with much
prudence, and beware of betraying the same into scandal; by any acts of in
discretion: many are the snares which attend holy conference; and great are the
evils which our corrupt natures do draw from so good an exercise, we must
therefore be very watchful to improve it to its end and avoid its evil, though
accidental: the truly prudent will limit themselves in things lawful least
they Run into things unlawful: It is Austins assertion that he who knows not
how to deny what is in his liberty, will never be able to decline what is
forbidden: and the truly Godly must avoid the appearance of evil not only
the species but shows; the kinds but shadows of sin are to be shunned: let
therefore your conference be managed with all wisdom, in point of time, place,
manner, and order.

1. The time of conference is occasional as opportunity is offered; for holy
conference is not a duty fixed to any special season; but as divine providence
and humane condition does cast and call us into society, we are to speak one
unto another: as in the time of friendly visit in any affliction; familiar
intercourse in holy actions, or falling into each others company by appointed
or unexpected affairs; so that the Godly must watch for, and catch at the
opportunity of exhorting, and admonishing, comforting one another, by holy
conference: yet we do not deny or deem it unlawful for the Godly of any
vicinity and neighbor hood; by mutual consent to keep fixed seasons, wherein
to associate and speak one unto another in holy conference: only we advise
that the time fixed be our own, not Gods or our families, our own, I say, not
Gods, that is, not the Lords day: and the season of solemn assemblies and
public worship: holy conference (I confess) does well become the Sabbath; but
the Sabbath cannot well be the fixed season of conference: epecially the time
of public exercise; when God is by his Ambassadors speaking to the whole
Assembly, it becomes not private Members to be speaking one to another: the
Lords day is designed of God himself unto duties of Religion public,
domestic, and personal; and acts of society must be occasional: It is great
folly nay gross profaneness to spend the time of Church edification and
instruction, in private colloquie. I would we had not known some good men
guilty of it; do not many among us get into a private house, and employ
themselves in holy conference, unto the negle^^, nay at length the contempt of
public ordinances? or must we fix for holy conference, the time which is our
families that is to say the feason of our particular calling, in which we ought
to labor unto the subsistence of our selves and family: when poor men leave
their trades and spend much time in the society of the Saints and holy
conference, but leave their families in want, their affections to holiness may
be commended; but their indiscretion is to be blamed: no exercise of holiness
which is private and occasional must hinder our particular callings: when God
teaches we need not teach one another: and when hardship hinders special acts
of holy society, it is not required at our hands.

8. Nor must you manage your conference with more caution in reference to time
then to the Place: all places are in point of holiness alike; but not so in
point of prudence: ^he people of God may occasionally confer in any place,
and so in the Church, as well as an house: but when by mutual consent you make
conference a fixed duty you must in prudence avoid the Church, for private
duties do not become public places, the Church is a place purposely prepared,
and preserved for public Assembly, and administrations of the Church; and
therefore bears its name Church as the notation of its nature: and by long and
uninterrupted custom and practice of all Christian ages and nations, all holy
exercises in these public places, have the Church for their object, and
presuppose ministerial authority for their form: avoid therefore these places
as you would avoid all enchroachments on the holy function of the ministry and
the appearances thereof.

3. Nor must we have more care in reference to the time and place, then the
manner of holy conference: let us us not instead of conference, make set, and
formal discourses after the manner of ministerial instruction: I have come
into some private societies, who have assembled to confer, and heard one man
preach to the rest, rather then confer with them, and I have indeed sadly
observed that society to be a nursery of presumption to the ministry: I do not
say that private Christians are prohibited from inferring doctrines from
Scriptures and enforcing them with reasons and application; I doubt not but
masters may thus do in, and to their families; and tutors in the university to
their pupils; each according to their capacity: but for private Christians in
any fixed friendly society thus to do; is (in my eye) without the least of
warrant: for they want not only the ministerial, but parentall and magisterial
authority; which should award such a kind of instruction; I do believe the
prophetical priveledge of a believer is prescribed and limited to those whom
nature has put in subjection to him; and will not, nay, must not be extended
to his Peers and brethren: moreover they, in so doing, destroy the duty to
which they pretend, for their work should be to confer by colloquy, to
communicate each to other: their business is (...) mutual debate,
expostulation, colloquie, each speaking to other, answering one another, when
speak in order proposing their doubts, urging their objections, imparting their
thoughts; and so communicating one unto another; which is clearly destroyed,
where one only is the speaker, and all the rest are hearers: should a stranger
come into such an assembly, and observe that one instruct the others and that
withal magisteriall, nay ministerial circumstances, could he call this a
conference, or would he not rather conclude it a preaching to the Church.

4. Prudence must direct us unto order in our conference as well as care in
respect of time, place and manner: confusion is incident to, and must be
carefully set against by all society: when the godly meet to confer, they
must be orderly in the matter of their conference, laying the foundation before
they rear the superstructure; acquainting themselves with Rudiments and
principles; before they enquire into higher matters of faith: there are many
things in Religion which men whilst weak in, or ignorant of principles are not
able to bear: first confer of matters essential to says, and then go
forward: debate the duties, before the dignities of a believer; the high flown
Saints of our age can confer of nothing but their privileges and high
enjoyments of God, Christ and the spirit: and so nourish pride and fancy; but
not faith: and as you must be orderly in the matter, debating what may profit,
more then what may pleas: so also you must be in the manner, speaking one unto
another and one after another, suiting an answer proper for the thing
propounded, not speaking all at once unto confusion and distraction: and
whatever coms first into your mouth without any care of it is pertinencie to the
thing discoursed.

Having then associated each with other, and made your holy conference (a duty
in it self occasional and transient) to be fixed, manage it withal wisdom in
respect of time, place, manner, and order for by the miscarriage of these you
do expose your selves and exercise unto scandal, and just censures; giving way
to the Devil in a little, you lay your selves open to temptation: conference
in the time, place and manner of gospel ministry is but a praeludium to the
profane, contempt, and presumptuous undertaking that holy function,; give me
leave to enforce this direction with a sad example of the sinful issue of the
imprudent management of holy conference: which has fallen within my own time
and knowledge, which proved the prologue of apostasy from the Church and
Covenant of God unto the men that used it: In Audly parish in the County of
Stafford, lived many eminent professors of Religion with whom I have had sweet
Communion, and taken sweet counsel many times; many of them were men of
eminent parts unto prayer and conference, in which they were very conversant:
in process of time, they fell under a very weak and dull ministry; which gave
them occasion to be more frequent in their conference each with other; and
especially on the Lords day; pretending by themselves to make up the defects of
the ministry which was over them; until at length they fixed their conference
on one day in the week, and sometimes on the Lords day to be held in the
public place or Church and did call unto it by the tolling of the bell; and one
of them more apt then the rest, spoke unto the rest, of which miscarriage in a
private duty I had (by some more humble then the rest) notice given me and came
to the men and blamed their indiscretion, who in the sinfulness of pride,
scorned my instruction and would not be admonished; another grave and reverend
divine, (whom they had much esteemed) dealt with them on the same account but
all in vain; for in this course they continued until they brake out into the
contempt of the ministry; the separating from the Church; and casting off the
Covenant of their baptism; and constituted themselves a Church; unto which,
the men of best parts but most proud, are at this day become leaders, and
professed Ministers; be wise in time for it is sad to see how by pretense of
piety Gods ordinances are slighted and souls seemingly Godly are seduced from
the truth. Thus much for the 2. direction.

The 3. and last direction is this, possess a suitable frame of spirit unto
the due management of holy conference: It is the duty of every Saint, but such
as are most conversant therein, and will study to make it edifying, and enforce
it to its end, must be fitted thereunto, by these especial qualifications which
must be possessed. viz. the

1. Sense of Union and Relation, Union is the Reason of Communion, and Relation
engages communication: know we that we are brethren? this makes us familiar,
and members of the same body, it will provoke inspection and mutual supply and
corroboration. They must know one another that do know how to speak one unto
another. Strangers are ordinarily silent.

2. Spirit of wisdom and understanding. The lips of the wise must feed many;
the word of God must dwell plentifully in them, who will admonish one another:
men of holy conference must be Scribes furnished for the kingdom of heaven,
bringing forth of their treasure things new and old: be studious of Gods mind
Revealed in his word, if you study to be profitable members in Christ his body.

3. Zealous affections to God and holiness: apt to be grieved when men
transgress Gods law; and ready to plead for God and piety, when most men say,
it is in vain to serve God, out of the abundance of the heart the mouth must
speak, they must fear God and think upon his name, who will speak often one to
another in evil times.

4. Serious observations of, and sympathy with our brethren; though charity
begins at home yet we must love our neighbor as our selves: whilst our chief
care must be of our selves; we must not shut our eyes to our brethrens souls or
frailties: we must see the brother Erring from the truth, if we will convert
him: know his sin if we will Rebuke him: apprehend his temper if we will make
admonition affect him; all natures are not a like nor to be alike dealt
withal: see his sorrows if we will support him by our counsel; they must
consider one another, who will provoke unto love and good works: they must well
study the sins and sorrows; conditions and constitutions; actions and abilities
of their brethren; who will speak a word in season to a wearied soul.

5. Sincere desire to edify and be edified; to propagate grace and godliness
not to proclaim parts and proudly act abilities: if conference be Paul's Errand
to Rome, his only end is to impart some special gift that the Saints may be
established; and he be comforted by the mutual faith of one another: the
weakest member of the body is profitable in its place: every joint makes its
proper supply unto the increase of the whole body.

5. Special meekness and humility: submissely harkening to the counsel of
others and setting on them a due essteem; not puffed up with confidence of our
own knowledge: and with all tenderness of compassion Reproving admonishing and
comforting one another: if any that is weak in the faith be over taken with a
fault they that are strong must Restore him with a Spirit of meekness; knowing
that they also themselves may be tempted: and if we will fulfill the Apostles
joys in Christian conference nothing must be done, through strife or vain
glory but in lowliness of mind; each esteeming other better then themselves,
looking not every man at his own things but every man at the things of others:
Phil. 2, 3, 4, 5. Spiritual pride is the bane and baseness of holy conference.

Let (Christians) these directions be Remembered and carefully practiced by you,
and then what ever providence attends you or estate does befall the wicked, you
may, and must be frequent and fervent in holy conference and provoked to speak
often one to another: until the Lord hearken and hear and cause a book of
Remembrance to be written be: fore him, for them that fear the Lord, etc. And
so much for the 2. part of the Text (viz) the exercise of the Godly in the time
of the prosperous estate of the wicked.

Auscultatio Divina: OR, Gods Attention to good conference in bad times: the
third Part of the discourse on Mal. 3.15, 16, 17. Briefly touched on, in the
Sermon preached at West-Chester, July 17. 1659, But fully opened in some
Sermons since preached at Botolphs-Algate, LONDON.
Mal. 3.16, 17, 18. The Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of Remembrance was
written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
name.

They shall be mine (says the Lord of hosts) in the day that I make up my
jewels: and I will spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him.

Then shall ye return, and discern b^tween the Righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.


I Have heretofore considered the estate of the wicked, even the worst of men;
and laid before you their prosperity: and also the exercise of the the Godly,
They spoke often one to another; we now come to the third general part of the
Text, and that is the issue and event of both; and that is laid down in these
words, and falls into two parts.

1. The delight that God takes in, and due respect he expresses toward the
Godly, and their exercise. The Lord hearkened and heard, etc.

2. The discrimination between the righteous and the wicked. Then shall you
return, and discern between etc.

Of these in their order, and first of Gods delight in, and respect to the
Godly: and therein if I should delight in mincing the words into parts, I might
observe

1. The respect showed, and that in all the expressions thereof, The Lord
hearkened and heard: and a book of Remembrance was written, They shall be mine;
I will spare them.

2. The Author of this respect who it is that thus delights in the godly, it
is the Lord, the Lord of hosts.

3. The object of this acceptance They that feared the Lord and thought upon
his name,

4. The ground or Reason of this respect, they spoke often one to another in
evil times.

And every of these particulars would afford us very profitable observations:
but I intend not so long to insist on the words, and therefore shall not so
particularly discuss them: but shall gather the whole Respect herein expressed
and so the mind of God toward the Righteous in bad times into this general
point of doctrine. [viz.]

The Godly, and their holy exercise, in times of prospering profanensse: does
meet with special acceptance from the Lord of hosts.

This is a doctrine worthy our serious and second thoughts, as eminently
useful to the establishment, and encouragement of the godly under the increase
and success of profaneness: they had done their best endeavor amidst an
ungodly nation, and rude people; they clave to God themselves; continue in the
fear of the Lord, and thoughts of his name, and give proof thereof, in speaking
one to another, bestir themselves to the conviction, and confutation of the
wicked; comfort and confirmation of themselves: and this they do under the
greatest of discouragements imaginable; for notwithstanding all their
adhaerencie to, and activity for God; their condition was cloudy, and dark, the
providence of God were cross: calamity compasses them about; only The proud
are called happy, and they that work wickedness are set up, etc. In so much
that the profane insult over the Godly; and blasphemously say, It is in vain
to serve God, and there is no profit in keeping his Ordinances, or in walking
mournfully before him all the day: and how must we think God carries it all
this while. Do any serve God for naught? as the wicked men will have it
thought, has he no regard to the Righteous? yea surely: however the current of
providence seems to suggest, and and profane men speak: the Lord does hearken
and hear etc. and shows especial respect to the Godly, and accepts, with
much delight, their holy exercises maintained in times of prospering
profaneness: although a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
prolonged, yet surely it shall go well with them that fear G^d, which fear
before him. Eccl. 8.12. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the
earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect
before him. 2 Chronicles. 16.9. The Lord delights not in the strength of the
horse, he takes no p^easure in the legs of a man; The Lord takes pleasure in
them that fear him, in them that hope in his mercy. Psalm. 147.10, 11. The grief
of the godly meets with gracious acceptance; Gods complacency is in their
contests for his truth and glory in a cloudy day, more then in all the
glittering glory of the world: the mourners in Jerusalem, in the day of her
abominations are the marked of the Lord. Ezekiel. 9. and in his own time God will
restore comfort to Zion, and to her mourners: did ever the house of Jacob seek
God in vain, or serve him for naught, or stand up for his name, cause or
people, and not meet with eminent expressions of acceptance? Shall Abraham
arise to the rescue of an holy Lot, from the hands of the profane, and not
meet with his God to assure him that he is his shield and exceeding great
reward? Genesis 15.1. Genesis 19.16.
Or shall Lot's Righteous soul be greived with the filthiness of Sodom, and
not find the favor of God to pull him out of the destruction thereof? Knows
not the Lord how to deliver the Righteous? Joh 42.10.7, 8.
Shall Job serve God for naught, when stripped of all by the Devil? and shall
not God return the captivity of Job, and double his estate? Shall he maintain
his integrity against the proud censures of his prospering friends and not
become their advocate to pray the pardon of their sin? Shall David's courage
destroy the Goliath that defied the God of Israel, and must not the Daughters of
Israel sing, 1 Samuel 18.7.
David has slain his ten thousands? and Saul his thousands? Shalhe wait on God
in patience, and not lay his hand on the Lords anointed, (though himself
anointed to the Kingdom) to make way for the possession of Gods appointment
and shall not his Throne be established? Shall Daniel in the midst of Babylon
make supplication for oppressed Israel, Dan. 9.20.
and not be comforted by the Angel Gabriel, and assured that he is greatly
beloved and his supplication is heard? Shall any give a cup of cold water to a
Prophet, Mat. 10.40.41, 42.19.28, 29. M^r. 10.29.
in the name of a Prophet, and not receive a Prophets reward? Shall any lose
his houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or Wife, or
Children, or lands, for Christ his names sake, and not receive here an hundred
fold and hereafter eternal life? in a word, when the dispensations of
providence are darkest toward the Church, the diligent discharge of holiness
is most delightful to the Lord: when his Spouse is in holes and clefts of the
Rock, then he takes pleasure to see her countenance, and to hear her voice.
Cant. 2.14. When all Israel are turned aside by Ahab then: Gods regard is to
the Remnant that bow not the knee to Baal: when all the inhabitants of the
earth receive the mark of the beast and follow the Whore, R^v. 13.10
then the Lord triumphs in, and insultingly observes the faith and patience
of the Saints, when the prosperity of profane men, swells them to blaspheme
and say that it is in vain to serve God, if then they that fear God do speak
often one to another, then the Lord shall hearken and hear, etc. He accepts
their service done in so sinful a time, nay he expresses special acceptance
as we shall evidence by the several degrees and acts of it, as they are
declared in the Text.

The specialtie of divine acceptance of the Godly, and their holy exercise in
times of prospering profaness does appear and consist in three steps or
gradations. viz. The 1. Regard God has to them and their service. 2.
Remembrance of them and their service. 3. Recompense for them and their service.


The first degree and expression of Gods special acceptance is, The Regard God
has unto the holy exercise of the godly in evil times: 1 degree of divine
acceptance.
and that is ardent and affectionate, he hearkened and heard: he heard not
only, but hearkened, importing diligence and delight in his attentition, as one
that was affected with the discourse of the Godly in those dark times; hearing
is an act of observation, but seems to be formal, superficial, and careless,
yet when it is referred unto God, it notes his serious observation and delight,
unto the answer of the prayers of the poor and needy. Psalm. 34.17.69.33. But
harkening is an act of attention; and that with all earnestness and activity,
that we may apprehend what is spoken and not miss of it, or mistake it, but be
resolved into it as, the direction of our ways and therefore it is emphatically
expressed by the Prophet Isai. 32.3 The eyes of them that see shall not not be
aim: gestus diligenter auseul tantis.
The ears of them that hear shall hearken. Man's most serious attention is always
expressed by a harkening unto the Word of the Lord; and Gods most special
acceptance of his peoples desires is said to be hearking to their prayers; Thus
God hearkened to Leah and to Rachel. Genesis 30, 17.22. and he hearkened to Moses,
when he moved for Israel. Deuteronomy. 9.19, 10.10. Hearking is an act of regard and
respect not only to Attention but Auscultation, they that hearken do obey,
yield, assent, and admit of the thing hearkened as true and good: so that when
the godly spoke one unto another, though, to men, it seemed to be in vain, and
they would not regard it; yet the Lord heard, and he had respect unto it, nay,
he hearkened, listened, laid his ear unto their discourse, with all diligence
and delight, assenting unto the truth and goodness of what they had spoken;
and admitting it to seize and settle upon his heart, as that which must command
the great Jehovah which he could not gainsay, out would constrain him at the
length to break his attention, by an open asserting the verity of their
discourse and the integrity of them that in so evil a time, and under such a
general apostasy did fear him; and think upon his name: and zealously speak
one to another. But

2 degree of divine acceptance.
Secondly Gods acceptance of the Godly, and their holy exercise is not only to
listen and regard but also to record and remember: he does hear and hearken
with all pleasure and delight, in so much that he has a book of Remembrance
written before him for them that fear him and think upon his name. This Judge
of the whole earth does not only listen carefully to the language of his
Advocates, but lest any of their pleas should pass without pondering and due
answer, his Notaries are at work, and enter in a book their discourse all their
acts and arguments of holiness; least they should be forgotten: note-books are
notations of affection, and care of recordation: what we write we deem worth
remembering: Records are kept of matters of moment to be regarded, and acts of
loyalty and fidellity to be rewarded. Catalogues and Calendars of eminent
persons and service are prepared for Kings, as the evidence of their respects,
and direction of the dignities they shall confer: Chronicle^ are written for the
consideraon of most Royal Emperors as evidences of their esteem of things
transacted; and dictates of recompense for noble achievements: Tamerlane the
great, was so well pleased with the diligence and faithfulness of his servants
that he kept a Catalogue of their names and services which he daily read, and
the Chronicles of Persia were kept and consulted by the King Ahashuerosh that
if his list or leisure could not confer a present recompense upon faithful
Mordecai, for his good service, an after opportunity may do it: Now God is not
forgetful as man, nor needs he any record: it must needs be in a distemper that
David shall demand, has the Lord forgotten to be gracious? Psalm. 77.9. Isaih
49.14.
or Zion determine the Lord has forsaken me, and my God has fogotten me; For
the Butler may forget Joseph, and Joseph may forget his former toil and Fathers
house: nay a woman may forget her sucking child; but God cannot forget h^^
people: and therefore when God makes mention of a book of Remembrance, it is
but after the manner of men, to manifest and make known his high esteem of his
people and their holy exercises, whose names he is said (after the manner of
noble Princes) to enter in a book of of life, and their diligence in duty for
him and his name, to register in a book of Remembrance: that although their
devotion be disowned and despised by men, and devoted to oblivion, and their
present estate suggest it disregarded by the Lord; yet they may know it is
observed, and esteemed as an high act of holiness: it shall be registered in
his Chronicles, books of acts and Monuments that they may not lose, but
hereafter reap their due Reward. And therefore.

The third and last degree of Gods special acceptance of the Godly and their
holy exercise is, 3 degree of divine acceptance.
Recompense and reward thereof. God regards unto Remembrance, and remembers
unto recompense; he does not only hear and hearken, but cause a book of
Remembrance to be written before him, nor is his Record useless and a bare
rehearsal of the holiness of his people in evil times. But the Dictator of
the reward to be conferrd on them for diligent adhaerence unto him under
prospering profaneness; they must not lose that leave all for God in a day of
temptation; He will soon resolve that enquiry, Master what shall we have, who
have left all and followed thee? With an assurance, none that have left any
thing for him shall be losers, but shall reap their comfort an hundred fold, and
have eternal life in to the bargain. Mark 10.29. None that are steadfast,
unmovable. abounding in the woak of the Lord, shall labor invain, the God that
accepts will in his time approve the acceptance of their service. He that hears
and hearkens, will remember, and he that remembers will recompense, so as that
after all the contempts of men, by reason of the cloudy providence that attend
them, a man shall say, verily there is a reward to the Righteous, verily there
is a God that judges the earth. Psalm. 58.11. And the acceptance of God will
appear to be the more special, if we consider the quality of this reward, they
shall receive that speak one to another in evil times, which consists in
these two things, viz. Their 1. Propriety and Peculiarity of relation to God,
They shall be mine when I make up my Jewels. 2. The Paternal carriage of God
toward them. I will spare them as a man spares his own Son which serves him.
1 Part of Righteous men's Recompense



The first ^art of this reward is, the propriety and peculiarity of their
relation unto God, they shall be mine in the day that I make up my jewels: their
propriety is unto God, they are his, the Lords people are his portion, and
Israel is the lot of his inheritance. Deuteronomy. 32.9. This is the high honor of
Israel, to vouch God for their God, and to have God to vouch them for his
people. Deuteronomy, 26.17, 18. The great Charter of all our privileges even the very
Covenant of grace concludes us but in a propriety to God I will be your God,
and you shall be my people, nor indeed need we any more, for happy is that
people, whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 144.15. In the utmost of distress, nay
when drawing nigh unto death, the holy heart desir^ no more then to beable to
determine this God is our God, our God, and he will b^ our guide even unto
death, Psalm. 44.14. For what is there in Heaven but God, and what can we desire
in all the earth besides the Lord. Psalm. 73.15. To stand entitled to God is to
enjoy Abraham's portion, a God allsufficient, there can be no want where God is
possessed, where God gives himself he becomes a shield, and an exceeding great
reward. Relation to God is the Reason of all good; divine counsels cannot be
concealed from Gods Abraham's, or Christ his friends: Egypt must not think to
Captivate Israel, Gen 18.1^. John. 13 14, 15 Isai. 43.44. Zach. 2.8.
but to their own ruin, because the Lords own people: Wrath though provoked
must be restrained, when it goes out against Gods heritage: the fire must not
burn, nor water drown Gods Israel; the utmost of preservation, even as of the
apple of the eye is the portion of such as belong to God: no argument can be
more affectually urged in prayer then that, though Abrahad be ignorant of us,
yet thou art our God. Isai. 93.16. No greater assurance of support in
affliction can be given, then to cry unto the Lord in the midst of the furnace,
my God, and for God to answer, my people. Zach. 13.13. nor yet of salvation,
out of all sorrows, then for God to say unto Zio^, thou art my people. Isa.
51.16.
Relation to God is the Reason of Christ his redemption, and intercession; he
seeks men's souls because they are his Fathees, and he prays for their
preservation, on this ground, they are thine, thou have chosen them out of the
world. Joh. 17.9. Christ his argument of support, under his absence is the
propriety of his people unto God. I go to your God and your Father. Joh. 20.17.
The utmost of Saints endeavors, is to see a propriety, in God the sormallity
of saving faith is to say sincerely, my Lord, and my God; the satisfaction of a
gracious heart in the saddest of affliction is to see that it is the Lords. The
utmost design of the Devils envy at the Saints, is, to make them deny their
relation to God and Gods affection to them, knowing that the estranged to God
are exposed to all woe and wickedness; so that a propriety to God is a prime
reward. Well may the pious speak often one to another under the prosperity of
the profane, if they stand in propriety to God, they need not matter how the
World goes. They may well be disowned by men yet devoted to, and diligent in
acts of holiness, if owned by the Lord, and he say of them they are mine. But
yet again

These men are not only in propriety to God, but in peculiarity also: they are
not only the Lords, in common course and providence, as the earth is the Lords
and the fullness thereof, but in special relation and peculiar esteem, they
shall be mine when I make up my jewels: they are not ordinary household stuff,
but Jewels, gold and silver, like the Treasure of Solomon, peculiar Treasure of
Kings, Eccles. 2.8.
they are picked and chosen out of all the earth, like pearls of prize: to be
of prime esteem with God, like Israel, a peculiar Treasure unto the Lord, above
all nations of the earth: In brief, however they lie scattered at present among
the objects of common providence, yet they must be manifested to be a chosen
generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that they
should show forth the praises of him that called them out of darkness into his
mavelous light. 1 Pet. 2.9. God has not only the propriety of a Creator in
them, but the peculiarity of a Redeemer; they are the Redeemed of the Lord,
bought not with corruptible things, a silver and gold, but incorruptibl, the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb without spot and blemish, who gave
himself for them, that he might redeem them from all iniquity, and purify them
unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. 1 Pet. 1.19. Tit. 2.14.
And to them therefore are given the great and precious promises of God, and
these are they who partake of precious faith, possess special and peculiar
graces, and are fitted for special and peculiar duties and destinated to
special and peculiar dignities, they are jewels in efficacy and operation, and
so must appear in esteem and acceptance. They are the bright Diamond, that
sparkles in the darkest times and places of profanesse, therefore fit to be
fixed in Gods Crown; they are the flourishing Amaranthus, that continues green
and fresh in the most parching places of prospering pride, the splendid Amiants
which retain their oriency and brightness under the most polluting
prophanesses, which pass upon them and are kept by the power of God, through
faith, to the exercise and approveme^t of it as more precious then gold tried
in the fire, 1 Pet. 1.7.
unto prais honor and glory, for them therefore is reserved the Amarantine
Amiantine Crown, the inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not
away: so that however at present they are mingled with the men of the world,
and the providence of God pass upon them in common, with others and there is
no discrimination, save only in their duty: they cannot be known to stand
related to God, save only by their standing to and for God his name, truth and
people, against the opposition which profaneness makes, and prosperity
heightneth: yet God has his day of segregation, a day of gathering up his
Jewels, and seeking after his scattered pearls, and then he will make the very
World to see and know they that spoke often one to another were his, when their
souls were sadn^d for the sins of the times and places where they lived: they
were his peculiar ones, even his Jewels. God has a day of collection, and it
is a segregation, he gathers his people into the receptacles appointed, and
when pearls are brought into the Cabinet they appear to be pecious and peculiar
Treasures. Sometimes before a day of Common calamity, God gathers his Righteous
ones from among the wicked into the receptacle of the grave, so as that the
Righteous are taken from the evil to come. Isai. 57.1. Thus Augustine died
before the sacking of Hippo by the Vandals. Paraeus before the taking of
Heidelburg by the Spaniards; and Luther before the wars in Germany, therefore
thereby God manifested his esteem of them in providing for them who were vexed
by the sins, to rest in peace under the sorrows of the places of their abode.
Sometimes God gathers his Jewels into an estate of conservation in the midst of
the many troubles, and common calamities that destroy the wicked and thus he
marketh out his mourners over sin to see, but not sink under the sorrows of the
wicked; which seem to strike equally at the just as at the unjust; he supports
and saves his people in an evil day Noah's Ark derided by the World, defends him
from the deluge, and Lot is conducted to, and conserved Zoar a City of Sodom:
Daniell and his three Companions are safe in Babylon, when Israel perish in
Egypt. Baruch, Jeremiah, Ebedmelech and Gedaliah are preserved in the sacking
of Jerusalem. And thus Gods acceptance is expressed to his people in his
peculiar preservation in the midst of evil, he as it were calling on them,
Come my people enter into thy Chambers, shut thy door, hide thy self as it were
for a little moment, until the indignation be over-past. Isai. 26.21. So that
they are brought as Jewels into a Cabinet; nay sometimes God makes his rescue
of his people from the rage of the enemies, to evidence the peculiarity of his
right, and relation to them, as men pick up pearls from before Swine, that
trample them in the mire: So God redeems his people from the pride of men. Thus
God observing the miseries of Israel does aggravate them, and excite himself
to put a period to them by the peculiarity of the peoples relation to himself;
I have forsaken mine house I have left mine heritage; I have given the dearly
beloved of my soul into the hands of her enemies, many pastors have destroyed
my Vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they have made my
pleasant portion a desolate wilderness; Jer. 1^ 6, 7, 8, 9. etc.
therefore I will pluck out the house of Judah from among them, then will I
return and have compassion on them: the day of salvation, is the day in which
God shows the esteem he has of his people, and this day God has in this
World many times, but when the day of judgment comes, in which the Lord shail
send out his Angels to gather out the good from the bad and the righteous from
the wicked, and shall say, Come ye blessed of my father inherit the kingdom
prepared for you. What ever providence have passed on them in the World, they
shall then be made manifest to, be in propriety, and peculiaritie of relation
to the Lord, he then witnesses these are mine in this day that I make up my
Jewels, and that is the first part of their reward.

The second part of the reward of holy men, The second part of the Righteous
men's Recompense.
that do exercise piety in times of prospering profaneness is the Paternall
carriage of God toward them. I will spare them as a man spares his own Son
which serves him: They behave themselves like Children, and he will behave
himself like a Father; They are sons of zeal and affection, he will appear a
Father of pity and compassion; They complain of the dishonor done to God, and
God will complain of the disasters that befall them: Whilst they are grieved
for sin, he is grieved for their sorrow: they are indeed willing and studious
to keep consciences void of offense toward God and man, yet in many things
they miscarry and commit sin, and provoke God to scourge them with the rod of
men, but in their perplexity he is full of pity and when provoked highly to
chastise them, he will spare them as a man spares his own son who serves him:
Such is the pity of a parent that it is ready to run into a sinful indulgence
of the sons perverseness if not barred with a sacred prohibition, Let not thy
soul spare for his crying, Psalm. 103.13.
and look what pity parents bear to their children, such pity bears God to
them that fear him: he passes by transgression and sin: he blotteth out their
iniquity, nay many times beholds not iniquity in Jacob, nor transgressio^ in
Israel: he winks at small faults, he sees many a wanton trick which he
observes not: he covers their wants and weaknesses, for were he severe to
mark all that is amiss, who should stand before him: He enters not into
judgment with his servants knowing that in his sight no flesh living can be
justified. He may check miscarriages, but corrects Rebellions. As long as the
counsels of the Word will restrain, he uses not the rod; they run into
disobedience before reduced by chastisement. And when his soul is provoked to
correct, and he may not spare the rod least he spill the child. Oh! with what
yerning bowels does he give up his people to be afflicted? in pity he parleth
and persuades, Be thou instructed Oh Jerusalem, least my soul depart from
thee; With what paternall conflicts does he chastise? How shall I give thee up
Ephraim? How shall I make thee as Zeboim? How shall I set thee as Admah? my
repentings are kindled within me, Hos. 11.8. The least remorse in Ephraim will
engage great repentings, in God I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself; thou
have chastised me, and I was chastised; after that I was turned I repented,
etc. And presently Gods hand is stayed, his heart is moved, and his compassion
cries out, Is not Ephraim my dear son? Is he not a pleasant child? for since
I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are
troubled for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord, Jer.
31.18, 19.20. Gods hand is long ere it be lifted up against his sons; and
often lifted up, and yet does not light upon his children; nd when he is
necessitated to strike, yet he does not strike them as he strikes others; He
stays his rough wind in the d^y of the Eastwind, for this is all the end the
taking away of their sin, Isa. 27.9. When the cup of his wrath does go round
through all the Nations. Israel does not but sip at the brim, not drink near
the bottom, much less drink off the dregs, no, that is for his enemies. When
his wrath is most outrageous, his mercy lays a restraint on it, and in
compassion, he says, surely they are my people, Children that will not lie,
and so he becomes their Savior, Isai. 63.8, 9.
in all their affliction, he is afflicted with them, and the Angel of his
presence saves them: So that this is the reward of the pious, that even when
perplexed by the prospering profane who are Gods hand, sword, and Rod for
their correction, yet they are Sons, and spared as sons that serve him, his
whole displeasure does not arise; he punishes them much less then their
iniquities deserve; he deals with them as Children, and will e're long bring
them from under his Rod, and make them that smote them to see and know that he
spared them as a man spares his own Son who serves him. And thus then we see
that how sad or cloudy soever the providence of God may be to the Godly, when
wicked men prosper, and in their pr^dederide pi^ty, and determine it is in vain
to serve God, and to walk mournfully before him. Yet the truly pious and their
holy exercise meets with especial acceptance, for it is Regarded, heard and
hearkened to, Remembered and written in Gods Register, nay, Recompensed with a
free and full reward of propriety and peculiarity of relation to God, and
paternall carriage from God. They shall be mine in the day that I make up my
Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own Son who serves him.
Let us therefore pass unto the reasons of this especial acceptance thus
extended.

The Reasons and grounds why the Godly and their holy exercise in times of
prospering profaneness do meet with such special acceptance from the Lord of
hosts, are reducible to three heads.

1. They are a special people. 2. They perform special service. 3. God is
under special engagement thereunto.
Of these in their orders, and first of the first.

Reason. (viz.) The Godly and their holy exercises in times of prospering
profaneness find special acceptance with the Lord of hosts because it is the
service of special people: the quality of the persons puts a luster on the
performance, the Lord minds not so much how well as by whom holy actions are
performed? The method of God is to consecrate the person that must approach
unto him: he Redeems unto himself a peculiar people, that may, and must be
zealous of good works, Titus 2.14.
and makes unto himself a peculiar people, and Royal Priest hood, that they
may offer up acceptable service, a chosen Generation, that they may show forth
the praises of him that has called them out of darkness into his mavelous
light, 1 Pet. 2.7.9. Titus 2.14. For God has respect to Abel, and to his
Sacrifice. Genesis 4.5. And Daniell is dearly belo^ed; and therefore his desires
are accepted. Dan. 9.23. God accepts the person, and then the performance, the
naked person without any qualification is accepted by the Lord. Jacob, having
done no good, is loved, because the Lord will exclude humane boasting, Romans
11.9. Josh. 24.2.
and magnify his grace: Abraham was of the family of Terah, and served other
gods, when singled out to be the friend of God: and Israel was no more holy
then other nations, Ezekiel. 16.
her Father was an Amorite, and her Mother an Hittite, when lying in her blood
God passed by and pitied her: and chose her to be a peculiar people, to come
nigh unto himself: and David was the the most despicable of the family of
Jesse, but the chosen of the Lord, before saved, and succeeded by the Lord: the
person of the wicked being disowned their best performances are rejected. I
know you not, is a bar to divine acceptance of any action: whilst weak and
imperfect performances pass current for an acepted people; for as the
providence of God is peculiar to man, above all other Creatures, because of the
specialty of their creation; so among men it is most specially conversant about
the Godly, for they are most special persons, and that in these two respects.

1. Specialtie of relation to God. 1. the special Relation to God
2. Specialty of qualification for God.
1. By the specialty of relation to God, They are his people, and peculiar
Treasure, and the lot of his inheritance. Above all people on the earth, they
are not only Creatures, and the noblest of Creatures, but amongst the most
noble of Creatures, they are the choicest, not only are they the household
stuff, but Jewels of God, Vessels of honor fitted for the Masters use, and
this specially of their relation unto God is in respect of their Election.
Redemption. Vocation.


2. specialtie of the Godly.
They are specially related to God, and that by Election they are the chosen of
the Lord, and so the subjects of special favor. Psalm. 106.3, 4, 5. We read of
the good of Gods chosen, the favor of the Elect, which gives it an Emphasis:
Election is a note of high honor, and assurance of choicest blessings in the
most sad and perplexed condtion; I^r^els most encouraging Epethite is the
chosen of the Lord. Psalm. 105.6. 1 Chronicles. 16.13. And so under the gospel,
though they be a people scattered through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asin and
Bithynia. Yet it is their honorable Epethit^, Elect according to the fore
knowle^ge of God. 1 Pet. 1.2. and a chosen generation 1 Pet, 2.7. For indeed
E^ection is the sum of all happiness. Psalm. 22 12. Happy is the people whom
God has chosen: It is the Reason of support under saddest pressu^es. Jacob
whom I have chosen, thou art my servant; I have chosen thee and not cast thee
away; fear thou not, I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God. I will
strengthen thee, I will uphold thee by the Right hand of my Righteousness.
Isai, 41.8, 9 10. And of Salvation ^u^ of most desperate dangers: nay the
enjoyment of all good is assured in, and by our Election. Oh! Jacob my servant,
and thou Jesuron whom I have chosen; I will pour water on him that is thirsty,
and floods upon the dry ground, I will pourmy spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessings upon thy Offspring. Isai. 44.2, 3. Election is the Fountain of all
favor, not only vocation, justification, sanctification and glorification,
but even redemption. The reason of all these is the result of our Election; we
are indeed chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4.
but Christ was chosen for us; he is Caput Electorum, not Causa Electionis, the
head of the Elect, but not the ground of election. God did not choose us because
he would show his wisdom in the redemption by Christ, but does show his
wisdom and redemption by Christ, because he had chosen us; our Election was
the enforcement of our redemption, for the foundation of God abides sure, 2 Timothy 2.1.
the Lord knows who are his, and of his chosen he will not loose any: so that
the holy services of the Godly must needs find acceptance, for they are a
special people in Gods eye, and election from all eternity, in whose behalf he
has purposed and provided the utmost good that can be, for they are indeed in
special relation to him, and shall be specially regarded by him, however they
are suffered sometimes to lie common as of no esteem. Again secondly,

The Godly are in special Relation to God, Redemption
because Redeemed by him: they are not only his by creation, wherein yet the
Emphasis lies on the Godly, for in planting the Heavens, and laying the
foundations of the earth; He has said unto Zion thou art my people. Isai.
51.16. But also by redemption: Psalm. 8.
great is the dignity stamped on them by cretion, wherein he was made but
little lower then the Angels, but much greater is the dignity of our
redemption, wherein we are made higher then Angels, who are but ministering
spirits to the redeemed of the Lord. Redemption is the assurance of highest
favors, for it is the result and expression of greatest love and good will;
the redeemed are those who have cost God dear, Heb. 1.14.
and therefore must not be despised, he has bought them, not with coruptible
things as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
1.19. It is the highest Epethite of honor, They shall be called the Redeemed
of the Lord. Isai. 62.12. For that is the Evidence of their Election, and
effect of unspeakable compassion, and cannot but assure them, and however they
are now disregarded, dispersed and distressed in the World, yet they shall be
looked after and returned with comfort, for the arm of the Lord shall awake,
and make a way through the Sea, for the ransomed of the Lord, to pass through,
and the Redeemed of the Lord shall return to Zion with singing, and everlasting
joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow
and mourning shall flee away. Isai. 35.9.51.10, 11. Can God be mindlesse of his
Church, bought with his own blood? has he not spared his Son, but given him
for us, Romans 8.^2.
and shall he not much more spare us all things el^e? has he bought us with a
price to glorify him in soul and body, and redeemed us to be unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works, and shall he not have special respect
unto our performancies? vocation.


Lastly, the godly are in special Relation to God, by their vocation, they are
the chosen from eternity, Redeemed with inestimable price; yea, and the called
of the Lord: the Elect of God lie sometimes in the estate of darkness, and by
nature are no less liable to the wrath of God, then the worst of men running
with others in the same excess of riot, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Titus 3.3.
subject to the God of this World and serving diverse lusts, thus it was with
Abraham, and thus it was with the ^postles until the grace of God appeared,
and called them out of darkness into his mavelous light: Heb. 3.1.
but the godly are made partakers of the heavenly calling; an estate of honor,
unto which not many wise, not many rich not many noble do attain. 1 Cor. 1.26.
Vocation is the execution of Election, and extention of favor intended from
eternity: whom God praedestinated, them he called Romans 8.39. Our calling is
that which actually entitles us to the privileges of grace, and brings us into
con: formity to, and communion with God, engages us to walk with G^d and
assures that he is our God alsufficient, our shield and exceeding great
reward: we are culled and called to bear up Gods name in the World, and
therefore must needs be cared for by him above the rest of the world, he has
called us and must needs conserve us to his heavenly Kingdom.

If the cry of the called and chosen of God, be of more value then that of the
slighted and rejected of the Lord; if the complaints and holy conservation of
the Redeemed be worth regard, then the Godly and their holy exercise must
needs meet with special acceptance: this specialtie of relation is the great
Reason of the Saints affliction, and suffering by the World, and shall it not be
the reason of their support and safety, the World hates them because chosen out
of the World, and shall they not then be kept in the World, and from the evil
of the World? John. 17.
the the Devil rages against them, because the redeemed of the Lord, and shall
they not, through divine favor, shortly bring Satan under their feet? their
friends forsake and contemn them, because the Called of the Lord shall not God
then favor and fill them with joy in the light of his countenance? So long as
the godly stand in this special relation by Election, Redemption and Vocation;
they cannot but find special acceptance of their service in sinful times. But
secondly.

They are a people specially qualified for God; they are not only Vessels of
honor, but fitted for the masters use: they have not one-divine election,
Redemption and Calling, to enforce Gods affection toward them, but singular
holy qualities in their own mind and spirit, to attract and draw unto
themselves the divine favor, like good Children are beloved by the Father not
only, for that innate Reason because Children, but because good, they are the
subjects of all those qualities which are the objects of divine complacencie,
they do what God delights in: they are godly, and has not godliness the
promise of this life, and of that which is to come? and they are employed in
holy exercises, and that is profitable, when bodily exercise profits not. The
Text takes notice of their rare qualifications, and they are two they fear God
and think upon his name: they are both habitually and actually holy: the fear
of God that spring of prudence, and beginning of all wisdom, designing
matters of highest importance, discerning dangerous and difficult oppositions,
and directing all way and means for the accomplishment of it is great design of
favor and Reconciliation. That spur of duty that trembles at Gods Word,
trampleth on all obstructions, and travelleth with constancy and cheerfulness
in the way of Gods holy Commands: That strength against corruption and
temptation curbing lusts, casting off allurements, and courageously standing
against humane fury which can only kill the body, the fear of God which made
Abraham leave his Fathers house and follow God he knew not whither; Mat. 10.28.
which made Joseph faithful in Potiphars house, not daring to commit lewdness
with his wanton Mistrisse; that made Obadiah compassionate toward, and careful
to preserve the Prophets of God; that kept Job upright in the East, and
restrained the Idolatry imposed on the three Children, and spurred Daniel to be
exact in devotion, when never so much liable to danger, that filled the Martyrs
with zeal in adhaerence to truth, under hellish torments. This fear of the Lord
is the quality, habit, and disposition of such as live godly in evil times,
for indeed others that want this, cannot do that; the want of divine fear is
the very ground of a^l impiety, and shall not this special quality make them
acceptable to God? the fear of the Lord is to be prized above favor which is
deceitful, and beauty which is vain. Prove. 31.30. And the Lord seeks such as
fear him to serve him, and his eyes are on such as fear him his ears are open
unto their cry, Psalm. 33.18. And his pity is to them as a Father to his Child.
Psalm. 103.13. The fear of the Lord tends to life he that has it shall be
satisfied, and shall not be visited with evil. Prove. 19.23. but if visited he
that fears the Lord shall come out of all evil: such is Gods delight in this
special quality, Eccl. 7.18.
that though the sinner do evil an hundred times and be delivered, yet
certainly, it shall go well with them that fear the Lord. Eccles. 8.12.

But they are not only united unto God, by the fear of his nam^, but do also
act it unto his honor: ^. By thinking on his name.
they have not only this holy habit imprinted on, and implanted in their
hearts, but it is operative and sends forth its fruits and effects, they that
feared the Lord thought upon his name, and spoke often one to another. The fear
of God fills the Godly man with the thoughts of Gods Name; and so fills him
with grief and jealousy, because of the blasphemy which is belched out against
this holy name, and the dishonor that is done unto it: like ingenious children
they are affected with the Fathers disgrace, and the very zeal of Gods house
consumes them their cry is, what shall become of Gods holy name: the thoughts
of Gods name fixes them in faith, and fills them with fervor, to cleave
close to God and his Covenant under the utmost of opposition. The name of the
Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous run into it and are safe. Prove. 18.10.
They trust in the name of the Lord, when others trust in Chariots and in
horses. Psalm. 20.7. And so by the fear of the Lord they depart from iniquity,
for let what trouble will befall the godly, they deal not falsely in Gods
Covenant, because, they forget not Gods name: the dread of Gods name is on the
spirit, to deter impiety, to drive on duty, and quiet the soul in dependence
on the same: not only does the fear of God stir up the thoughts of Gods name,
but engages the Godly to speak one to another, to be much in complaints and
conference each with other: their hearts swel with holy thoughts, and their
tongue give vent unto the fire, they can, not but speak against fin, in defense
of God and holiness, when the wicked say, it is in vain to serve God, etc. But
of this in the next Reason: we see then that the Godly are fitted for divine
favor, being affected with, and afflicted for Gods name, in an evil, dark and
cloudy day; and can it choose but engage Gods affections unto them: but so much
for the first Reason, why God hearkens and hears, causes a book of
Remembrance to be written, and shows special respect to holy services in
times of prospering profaneness: they are the performances of special persons
related to, and qualified for God, for if the tears of a Mother could move an
Alexander to o^liteate all accusations, how much more shall the tears and
prayers of the Elect, Redeemed, Called, and them that fear the Lord, and think
on him. Render savouries the services of holiness.

They perform special service, and therefore must needs meet with special
acceptance: holy actions are always good, but sometimes they shine with more
then common splendour; God as well as man has extraordinary services to put his
people upon: some special acts of sanctity are laid on some hands which are
not on others, and done at sometimes which are not to be done at others. Thus
prayer is the work of every day, but holy fasting and Religious vows are the
extraordinary service of extreme affliction: and so Christian conference,
though the very act and du y of the Communion of Saints, yet this speaking one
unto another in the day when men speak stout words against God, and say it is
in vain to serve him, is special and peculiar service. It is special service
unto God in respect of the matter of it to speak one unto another by way of
complaint, of Gods great dishonor, by way of comfort under such sad prospering
providence to the most profane: and by way of confirmation one of another,
under so strong temptations to apostasy: this is no ordinary work to express
such sense of, and zeal for God; It is not the work of every soul, no not of
every Saint: to instruct many and strengthen the weak hands, to speak words
that may uphold the falling, to strengthen the feeble knees as did Job; to
preach a sermon, pen a Psalm, and become a pattern of patience, Job. 3.3, 4.
Isa. 37.
as did David, in perplexing times of prospering profaneness is no ordinary
service, no, this requires strength and measure as well as truth of grace; they
must be strong in the faith, that restore a fallen brother with a spirit of
meekness.

To speak one to another is special service, in respect of the principle that
animateth and acts the same, the fear of the Lord, that excellent, useful
and acceptable grace before spoken of, is, the primum mobile spring of this
motion, wheel of this Clock, Reason of this zeal for Religion. The thoughts of
Gods name is the oil that makes this lamp to burn, and the fullness of those
holy hearts who speak out of their abundance; but on these I intend not to
insist.

The specialtie of this service which indeed sets the luster on it and sends it
with strength and holy violence toward Heaven, is the season in which it is
performed. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another: Pro.
25.11.
every thing says Solomon is beautiful in it is season: and a word spoke in
season in like apples of gold in pictures of silver. It is the season that sets
a luster on these holy exercises, they were performed in that juncture of time
which eminently called for them, and Gods attendance to the discharge of them:
Then they spoke often one to another, when all men almost spoke against them
and their God: then when the multitude did wickedly, and walked stubbornly
against God: they walk submissively with God, then when the prosperity of the
wicked made men embrace impiety, as the step to honor, and stirrup of
authority, when only they that tempted G^d were delivered, and such as wrought
all manner of wickedness were set up: they clave close to piety, and the
practices thereof; they patiently wait on God, and plead his Cause and provoke
one another to courage and constancy, then when every tongue was tipped with
blasphemy against God and Religion, they spoke in the defense of both, and
witness it is not in vain to serve God, or walk mournfully before him, that
God is just and gracious and has regard unto the Righteous, so that their then
holy exercises were vindications of God and godliness; convictions of wicked,
profane, contempts of piety and blasphemies uttered commonly against God.
Confirmations of weak brethren, ready to stumble at prospering profaneness, and
complaints of zeal and affection to Gods holy name, dishonored so that they
run counter to the common cry of the multitude, set to do evil, and were
singular from their neighbors, the subjects of scorn and fury: speaking for
God and Religion, when common policy, nay almost Christian wisdom did
conclude it an evil time in which the prudent should keep silence. For all the
fruit to be expected was opposition and persecution, so that this is indeed
special service. To live as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation, Phil. 2.1^.
holding forth the word of righteousness: If God have respect to his Children,
much more to his Champions; he cannot but take it well to see men best in the
worst times.

Shall he slight them that stand for him, against the very pride of prospering
profaneness? Shall he not see to them, that make all the world see; They can
serve God for naught? Has God registered all the holy men that have served him?
no, only such are made Eminent in sacred and Ecclesiastic story, who have
done especial service to God. Noah a Preacher of Righteous, Lot whose
Righteous soul was grieved for the sins of Sodom: Job a mirror of patience,
under the prond censures of his prosperous friends: David a Cham: pon of piety
against the pride of Saul: Paul whom bonds and imprisonment did attend in every
place: Origin the pillar of truth against Pagan philosophy: Athanasius, that
hammer of the Arrian Haerisie: and Luther, that trumpet of the World, and
monster of men for his opposition of Pope, Empire and Devil. These and such
like are monuments of divine support, preservation and favor; because patterns
of true courage, zeal and piety. Antipas must not only have an honorable
mention, but be made an honor to the Church at Pergamus, because Gods
faithful Martyr slain where Satan dwells; and it shall be the only note of
Renown to the Church her self to dwell where Satan's seat is, and yet to hold
fast: Rev, 2.13
sinful compliance, shameful connivance, and odious Toleration of false
Religions is the blemish whilst zealous, constant adhoerence to God, and
courageous opposition of impostors is the duty and only dignity of seven famous
the Churches of Asia: this is the especial service enjoined, and expected; and
when it is done cannot but be esteemed. God loves to see our garments clean,
and unspotted insoyling and dirty times: he must lend an ear to that one
tongue that speaks for him and his truth against common talk, and cause a book
of Remembrance to be written for them that repine at the prosperity of
profaneness, and read Lectures of patient pursuit of piety, when it seems to
be in vain to serve God, and make them Jewels in esteem who were soe^ in
efficacy and operation sparkling in adverse time, and spare them in the day of
his visitation, who spare not them selves, nor are spared by others in the hour
of temptation: It adds no small Emphasis to prayer, when we can appeal to God,
for thy sake we are killed all the day long; and are counted as sheep for the
slaughter. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, or dealt
falsely in thy covenant: But so much for the second Reason.

The Godly and their holy exercises in evil times do, 3d Reason,
and cannot but meet with special acceptance because God is specially engaged
to reward them: with the pure, the Lord cannot but be pure, and righteous
toward the righteous, though he does not always discover it unto humane sense;
yet he is so i^ himself and his peoples faith: his love once fixed is never
re^^ved, but yet it is not ever displayed or discerned. It is consistent with
the sharpest of chastisements, though seldom so conceived: In justice, wisdom,
and faithfulness he many times hides his face from his dearest David, and
gives the beloved of his soul to the oppressor, and suffers proud men to
prevail and trample on his truth and people and succeed in such horrid impiety
as may make the wicked to say, God regards not the righteous, and it is in
vain to serve him: nay it may stumble the Godly themselves, and make them
almost slip, and say, in vain have I washed my hands in innocence, and God has
forgotten to be gracious: but yet whilst God stands at this distance from his
people, and seems so much to own and countenance the wicked; God is bound (to
spaek with reverence) in unviolable bonds to respect the righteous, and openly
even in the sight of men to give public testimony of such special respect.
Hereunto he is engaged not only by the common course of piety, but by special
engagements and peculiar obligations which arise partly from himself, and
partly from his people

First, God engaged by himself.
God is under special engagements of special respect to them that are Godly,
in evil times and that from himself, and they are two, the 1. Vindication of
his name and properties. 2. Verifying his word and promises.


The first engagement that lies on God to show respect to the godly in times
of prospering profaneness is the Vindiction of his name and properties: So
long as the wicked prosper and the godly are oppressed Gods properties are
clowded, and his name contemned: but after return of the godly the cloud is
dispelled, and contempt discharged: the favor of God is extended to the
righteous of out his fear of their enemies: For God is jealous of his name,
and glory and will not suffer the honor thereof to be given to another: Gods
chastisement of his children is many times checked by the pride of the rod,
which rises up against himself, whilst it rages against his people: the
prosperity of the profane and perplexitly of the pious, puts God on the
Vindication of his power and justice, holiness and truth: All which are
arraigned at the Bar of humane fancy, and there condemned; some times, and
that often, the wicked charge God with positive impotencie but ever attribute
to themselves the acts of his power, in their own prosperi^y and his people
^fflictions they often say because God was not able to bring them into the Land
of which he swear, therefore he slew them, Numbers, 14 16. And what is the Lord
that he should deliver out of my hands? Is he able to do more then the Gods of
Hamath and Arphad, and the Gods of Sepharvaim dumb Idols that had no power
says railing Rabshakeh? Isa. 36.18. And so tauntingly insult over the faith of
the godly with a Where is your God, and he trusted in God, let him save him if
he will have him; Christ cannot be crucified but his Divine power must needs be
denied with a now he cannot come down from the Cross and save himself, who
would build the temple in three days: these are the wild conclusions of such
as know he had saved himself from their rage until the appointed time: and
when they do not positively speak Gods impotency, they attribut to themselves
the ^ct of his power, and cry, our hand is high and the Lord has not done all
^his. D ut. 32 27. And by the str^n^th of my h nd have I done it and by my wi^d
m, for I am prudent. Isa. 10.14. So that there is a nec^ssi^y laid upon God to
restrain his wrath toward his provoking children, least the enemy behave
himself proudly, and say my hand has done it: and God must r^scue Is^^^ll from
Assyria, the rod of his anger, because The Rod shakes it self against him that
lifts it up: So that a more pregnant argument cannot ^e urged in prayer, for
Gods appearance, then the necessity of making, known his power unto the end of
the Earth: Nor is God more engaged to vindicate his power, then his Justice,
and holiness, how often have the heathen concluded by the prosperity of the
profane, that either there is no God, or he is not a Righteous God but that he
loves impiety? as Dionisius concluded, the Gods take delight in Sacrilege;
but we need not traverse profane, whilst sacred story ab^unds; with such
sinful instances, how do the most wicked oppress the righteous? and cry God
does not see, God has forgotten it, and hides his face, he will not see nor
does he regard it, Psalm, 10.11. It is in vain to serve God and no Profit, to
wa^ke mournfully all the day, for we call the proud happy, etc. And so that God
is taxed to be an hard master, and holiness is j^dged vanity, nay the very
godly themselves ^re ready to condemn the generation of the just to be a
company of fools that do in vain wash their hands and cleanse their hearts
because they are afflicted all the day long: They sometimes rash y conclude God
has forgotte n to be gracious; and so lay injustice to Gods charge, nay the
pride of the profane carries to conclude, because of Gods silence, that he is
all together such an one as themselves, an a bettor and approver of their
profaneness and therefore do begin their impious designs, with prayer to him,
and return their success in sin, with solemn, pr^ises to him, can a God of
jealousy heart his blasphemy and not remove its cause, and set the iniquity of
the wicked before their eyes and by making the godly see that the prospering
profane men stand but in slippery places that so they may conclude, truly God
is good to the righteous, and by rescuing the just from the power of the
oppressor make all the world proclaim verily there is a reward for the
righteous, verily there is a God who judges the earth: Psalm, 58.11. Nor is
God more necesstated to manifest his favor to the godly, to vindicate his
justice and holiness, then many other of his properties, and the righteous
course, of his providence, in directing all things to the good of them that
fear him; which I must not stand to explain, but pass unto one property, more
and that is his truth, faithfulness.

And this leads us to the second special engagement, which is from himself,
laid on God, to manifest respect to those that are godly in evil times. viz.

Verifiying his word and promises the Lord is just in all his works, and true
in all his sayings: His word is establ shed for ever, no I^t^ of it must fall
to the ground, many are the gracious promises God has made to the righteou^,
and the de^ay of their accomplishment makes them many times the derision of the
wicked, who blasphemously demand, Where is the promise of his coming? And so
mock the Prophets of the Lord: and therefore, though the vision tarry for an
appo^n^ed time, yet it shall come, it shall not ^arry; though the children of
God many times doubt, and their enemies deny the truth of what is spoken
concerning Israel, yet all must be accomplished, that God may be proclaimed
faithful and true; God has said it, and shall he not make it good, he has
spoken it, and shall he not accomplish it? Shall be the reason why, no
enchantments can prevail against Jacob.

We see then however the wicked prosper, and the godly suffer for a season Yet
their labor cannot be in vain, they must come into God's thoughts, and be
honored amongst men, Who are faithful to him in evil times And; the very
height of the wicked helps forward the salvation of the just, for Gods
properties must be vindicated, God's word must be verified, and that is the
first p^rt of the reason, but secondl^.

God is under a special engagement, to show special respect unto the godly,
and their holy exercises in tim^s of prospering profaneness and that in
respect of the godly themselves, and that to.

Prevent the danger of sin. Plead the cause of the just.
The first engagement laid on God in respect of the Righteous, is to prevent
the danger of sin: the prosperity of the wicked is the saddest stumbling stone
that can lie in the way of the Godly, on this they have done and many times do
fall and fearfully wound themselves; continual sorrow on the godly, and
success to the profane, will make the very best of men ready to shake hands
with piety, and strikes hands with the wicked: but God is faithful and will
not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, and therefore will not
suffer the Rod of the wicked to lie always on the lot of the Righteous, least
they put forth their hands to do wickedly. Psalm. 125.^.

The second engagement on God is, To vindicate the Righteous cause of his
people. The time of cross providence is the time of the proud censures of the
profane: when God seems not to Regard, the wicked are subject to Reproach the
godly: if Job be in adversity, the sting of it shall be his friends false
accusations of hypocrisy; and if David be driven from Jerusalem b^ his son
Absolon, he shall be cursed by Shimei, and called a man of Beliall, and a man of
blood, and a traitor to his Master Saul. If a Viper be on Paul's hand, he shall
be determined a murderer, but when God arises and delivers the Righteous,
and sets him in saf^ty from him that puffs at him: then shall the tune be
changed, if God return the captivity of Job, his censorious fr^ends shall be
the first that come to comfort him; and if David return in peace, Shimei shall
be the first that meets him with confession of his wicked curs^ng: and if
Paul escape the venom^ of the Viper then h^ shall be called a God: For men's
censures are as changable as their condition; the Resurrection of name and
estate goes together, and therefore it is, that Gods appearance to the rescue
of the Righteous from the proud, is said to be a pleading their cause: the
godly under the clam^urs of the wicked, commit their Righteous cause to God,
silently bear all reproaches, and wait for Gods righteous judgment, and
therefore God is engaged to restore their estate and cause their Righteousness
to break forth as the sun at noonday: so that if we well w^igh the Specialty of
Relation, Gods people stand in unto him, the special service they do for him
in the time of prospering profaneness, and the special engagements which lie
on God we must needs see that there si great reason for the special respect he
shows them, for it is a just thing with God to render tribulation to them
that trouble you, and to you that are troubled, peace with him. 27 These. 1.6, 7.

I now pass then to the application of this doctrine, and shall only improve
it unto two uses. viz. To 1. Check and abate the insolences of the wicked. 2.
Cheer and animate the discharges of the Righteous.


Is it so? as certaainly so it is; that the godly and their holy exercises in
times of prospering profaneness do meet with such special acceptance from the
Lord of hosts? let this then check and abate the insolences of the wicked, the
ungodly cannot prosper, but they are proud, nor the Children of God be
chastised, but they are condemned by the wicked: the Proud cannot be called
happy, nor they that work wickedness be delivered, etc. But they blaspheme God
and Religion, and insult over and reproach the Righteous. God cannot a little
frown on his people, but the wicked cry he has forsaken him. Psalm. 71.11. and
follow them with mocks, taunts, and reproaches, as the very sting of their
affliction: David can no sooner be driven from Jerusalem by Absolon, but he is
cursed and called dead dog, man of Belial, and bloody man, and counted a rebel
unto Saul (whom he durst never resist) by a blaspheming Shimei: nor shall Jobs
sorrows seize on him without the proud censures of his prosperous fri^nds:
Christ cannot be delivered into the hands of men by the determinate council of
God, but he is accounted stricken, smitten of God and forsaken, nay the pride
of the wicked carries them out unto blasphemy against God, as one that sees
not, regards not, fogetteth and sorsaketh his people: that is impotent and
cannot, or mindlesse and will not save, or show favor to the Righteous, and so
the rich oppress the poor, condemn and kill the just and none resist them, and
cry out in insolence, Aha, so we would have it, and there is none that can
deliver out of our hands: and so conclude it is in vain to serve God, and walk
mournfully all the day, not only in their pride, treading down the godly, but
tr^mpling on their holy exercises, in such evil times, as of no weight or
moment, meeting with no acceptance from God or men; little considering the
special favor God bears to them, who all this while fear before him, think
of his name, and speak often one to another, as resolved to bear the reproaches
of the wicked, yet not to forget God or deal falsely in his Covenant, though
they be killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter: but
let the wicked well weigh in their thoughts the special acceptance that the
godly and their holy exercise, in evil times, does receive from the Lord of
hosts, and it will cool their courage, abate their insolency, check their pride
and blasphemy, whilst the language thereof is that of the Psalmist, in Plas.
75.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. I said unto the fools, deal not so foolishly: and to
the wicked, lift not up the horn: Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with
a stiff neck; for promotion comes not from the East or from the West, or from
the South, but God is judge he puts down and sets up another: for in the
hand of the Lord there is a cup and and the wine is red; its full of mixture,
and he pours out the same; but the dreggs thereof all the wicked of the earth
shall wring out and drink them, the horns of the wicked shall be cut off, and
the horns of the righteous shall be ex^lted. And under all the prosperity of
the profane, and oppression of the righteous, we may hear the godly thus
courting the wicked in the language of the ^fflicted Church. Rejoice not over
me, oh mine enemy, though I ^al, I shall rise again, when I sit in d^rkness
the Lord shall be a light unto me: I will be^r the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause and execute
judgment for me, he will bring me forth to the light, I shall behold ^^s
Righteousness, then she that was mine enemy shall see it and be ashamed, Mic.
7. ver. 8 9. Let Babylon boast. Rabshakeh r^il, and the wicked insult over and
reproach the godly, at what rate they will, when in ^ffliction and distress,
yet they must know they are related to, and accepted by the Lord: he
hearkeneth, and hears the conferrence. and complaints constrained from them
by the prosperity of profaneness, and remembers to reward them: they are no
less in his esteem then his jewels, or under his correcting hand, then sons,
only sons who serve him, and whom he must spare, the vile vassalls and base
slaves may see the dear children chastised, and deride them under the Rod, but
their rejoicing is only from the teeth outward, being checked with this
consideration, they are children, and will be cockered as soon as corrected:
could but the wicked, when employed to chastise the righteous whom God gives
into their hands, hear that voice of God? I have forsaken mine house: I have
left mine heritage, I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of
her enemy. Jer. 12.7. It would (as the hand writing on the wall against
Belshazar) make the hearts and bones to tremble, for every word is an
emphaticall expression of affection and enforcement of a favorable return:
mine house, mine heritage the dearly beloved of my soul he must needs hearken
and hear. This special acceptance of the godly and their holy exercise does
suggest unto us sundry special considerations, which may check and abate the
insolency of the wicked, and teach them to assuage their pride toward the
Righteous and their blasphemies toward their God and the course of Religion,
and they are these (viz.)

1. Enmity of God is consistent with the enjoyments of the world: peac, plenty,
health, liberty, wealth and dignity, the utmost enjoyments and highest of
prospering providence are attendants on impiety, and no expressions of favor
and friendship of God: however they be extension: of general goodness they are
not the least Evidences of peculiar armity: the wicked may be advanced to
afflict the righteous, and yet never be accepted of the Lord, nay have God for
their very enemy, and one that designeth their ruin and rejection: they are
not more the objects of Saints deprecation and imprecation then of Gods
indignation: however they at present succeed in sin and God stands silent, he
will e're long set their sin in order before their eyes: though they are called
happy and delivered, and set up in the World, they are proud workers of
wickedness, tempting God, whom the Lords soul hates: though they may tender
unto God some sacred services, and solemn sacrifices God has no delight in
them shuts his eyes to their offerings, his ears to their cries, and counts all
unsavory: The very incense and and prayers they offer is an abomination: they
can, by the serious observation of an awakened conscience, see nothing but
frowns, wrath, enmity and hatred toward them in the face of God: their very
enjoyments and blessedness are expressions of displeasure: they are indeed in
his service and do him some work, but it is mere drudgery, fit for slaves, not
sons to be employed in; he uses them but his Rod, Axe, saw or sword, which are
usually employed against the objects of his affection, his dearest friends and
choicest children; with the exceeding grief and compassion of his spirit, and
having done this work must be rejected, and ruined: what reason has Assyria to
be lifted up, and in his pride to boast of the might of his power and multitude
of his Princes, and brag of his cruel purposes, saying in his heart I will
destroy nations, not a few, whilst in all his glory and puissance, he is only
the Rod of anger toward others, and object of his hatred in himself; and so
soon as God has done his whole work upon mount Zion, and upon Jerusalem, he
will punish the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high
looks. Isai. 10.12. What is Babylon better for sitting as a Queen, and exalting
her throne above the stars of God, ascending the height of the clouds, and
being like the most high, smiti^^ the Nations with a continual stroke, ruling
them in anger, and persecuting, without respect, unto the reproach of Zion,
with a now sing us our Hebrew Songs whilst God is her enemy, and will certainly
bring her down: were the prospering providence of this life any certain
evidences of favor and friendship with God, they might be some causes of
confidence? but to be thus raised for the greater fall, and enjoy nothing but
what is consistent with, and an expression of anger and enmity, as a
reservation and fitting to the day of destruction; may well abate insolences,
and cause low and humble enjoyment of present comforts: this may well check the
joy, curb the triumph and make bitter the sweetest morsells of the wicked: when
common blessings do come with and spring from the remission of sin, they
occasion serious joy and thanksgiving, because they are the tokens of amity,
but whilst the wrath of God abides, joy, much more insultatio^, is to be
checked: the Prophet Oded does check the triumph of Israel when they had
obtained a victory over their brethren of Judah by the suggestion of Gods wrath
against themselves. 2 Chronicles. 28. You have slain your brethren with a Rage which
reaches unto heaven and now you think to carry them Captive, as if there were
not sins among you, or the wrath of God did not abide on you. Sad are the
victories of brethren over brethren especially where the conquerours are no
less obnoxious to divine; displeasures, if not much more then the conquered:
Thus also the Apostle James does call men most prosperous, to mourn on the
memorial of the last judgment which must manifest Gods enmity to them, in
James 5.1. Go to now you rich, howl and weep, for your miseries are coming
upon you, etc. So long as the enmity of God abides on any, the best of outward
enjoyments afford no cause of jo^, or triumph much less of insolency and
blasphemy.

2. Especial favor is every way consistent with the utmost of external, and
present afflictions: the righteous may be despised of men, and seemingly
disregarded of God, and yet be the dear children of God: They may lie common
amongst other men, in all outward condition, and yet be jewels in Gods
account: Abraham may wander in the World as a mere stranger, and yet be Gods
friend. Pharaoh and Abimelech may begin to deal with him as one forsaken, and
yet find he is the favorite of the great God who rebukes Kings for his sake.
Ephraim may be spoken against, and yet be a pleasant child. Job may be left to
the power of the Devil, and proud censures of his prospering friends and yet
be accepted of God as the only upright man of the East: Israel may be
delivered into the hand of the enemy, and yet be the dearly beloved of Gods
soul: and this is no mean check to the insultings of the wicked, how ever
afflictions abound on the godly, Gods affections abate not toward them. Never
was Antipaters accusations more curbed with Alexanders affections to his
accused mother, with an Nescitne Antipater? etc. Knows not Antipater that one
tear of a mother will wash away all accusations? then the wicked are by Gods
continued Respect to the Godly and their holy service, Cain is cr^ssed in
nothing more, then that his brother m^ets with more acceptance then himself,
nor is Esau more enraged at any thing then Jacobs carrying away the Fathers
bl^ssing; it avails not Haman any thing that he is the greatest Prince in
Persia, if Mordecai the Jew ever become the Kings favorite, let the estate of
the Godly be never so miserable, yet if God favor them, the wicked are sure to
fall before them, the envy of the wicked admits them no content, so long as the
sorrows of the Godly may consis^ with their access to, and acceptance with
God. It is storied that the holy Monks of Bangar were slain by King Ethilfrid
the Saxon, King of Northumbria, for no cause but fas^ing and praying for the
Britains in West Chester. Oh the envy at access to God!

3. Especial acceptance of the godly and the holy exercise in times of
prospering profaneness does argue falsehood and folly in the wicked: they draw
many sinful conclusions from the sad premises that do befall the godly, and
that both against God, godliness and godly men. They suggest and say God has
forsaken the earth, has no Regard to the Righteous, has forgotten his people,
and cannot, or will not deliver them, they conclude him, by their own success
in sin all together such an one as themselves, they conclude piety to be
vanity, and say it is in vain to serve God, or walk mournfully all the day
long, and therefore they restrain prayer before God, and shake hands with God,
let him depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of his ways, they embrace
impiety as the thing in which God delights, with lying, stealing, adultery,
murder and what not iniquity? they come and fit before the Lord, and say we are
delivered to work all these abominations: They pass proud and false censures on
the Godly, brand them with hypocrisy, pride, ambition, charge them with
grossest profaneness, conclude Gods hand on them to be austere punishments of
their impiety, implacable expressions, of his provoked fury; tokens of hatred
and utter rejection, as if there were in God no favor toward them, or their
captivity should never be returned, thus did Jobs friends falsely censure him,
from his suffering condition; and cursing Shimei, lay treason, blood, perfidie,
and rebellion, to the charge of a suffering David, and the blasphemous Jews
upbraid the faith of the Lord Jesus as vain, for that God had forsaken him,
when fallen into their hands: nor is it wonder to hear such falsehood from
profane tongues, whilst the perplexities of the godly, and prosperities of the
wicked, make the best of men ready in their have, to say all men are liars,
Psalm. 116.11. and I have washed mine hands in vain, and God has forgotten to
be Gracious: But the favor of God does charge falsehood on all these
suggestions, and convince the wicked to be liars indeed, enslaved to a spirit
of fallacy, for when the Lord evidenceth the acceptance he had of holy
exercises in evil times, and the esteem he had for holy men, when God comes
to make up his jewels, and to lay open before men his attention to, and
Recordation of the constant piety of his perplexed people, and redeemeth them
from their distress, he makes the worst of m^n, to give themselves the lie,
and to change their tune, and say, verily there is a God that rules the earth,
there is a reward to the righteous: Truly God is good to Israel, to him that is
pure in spirit, God will not forsake his people, now he pleads, their cause,
and brings out their integrity, as the sun at noon day, and sends Jobs friends
to do penance for their proud censures, past on him, in the day of their
prosperity and his disttess, and beg his prayers for their pardon, when God
returns the captivity of Job, all his friends do change their censorious
tune, and charge falsehood on their Conclusions.

Nor does Gods special favor to the godly, argue more of falsehood, then
folly, in the wicked who follow the godly with feirce fury, and proud hearts,
as if forsaken and forgotten of God, whilst indeed they labor in vain and do
but kick against pricks: whilst the wicked pursue the righteous with purposes
of extirpation, and proudly insult with a, we will pursue, we will overtake; we
will destroy; we will root out the name of Israel: and in their haughtiness
they do proceed to blaspheme God; as one that does not see, or regard, does not
mind his people, or matter, what does become of them, or else is impotent and
not able to deliver out of their hand with Goliath blaspheming the God of
Israel, and with railing Rabshakeh: blaspheme reproach, extol their voice,
and lift up their eyes against the holy one of Israel: as not able to
withstand his multitude, and puissance, and so keeping the judgments of God out
of his sight, he puffs at all his enemies, and because they escape many
snares, conclude none can prevail against them, and so grow secure, and sin in
the height of presumption, undertaking the most desperate achievements,
extending the most cruel rage and oppression, against the godly, and that with
the most God-provoking perfidie pride and blasphemy, confiding in their deep
counsels; and puissant Armies: but when God arises for the oppression of the
poor and sighing of the needy to set him in safety, from him that puffs at
him What shame shall cover their faces and folly be found in all their devices?
The favor of God manifested to the godly gives just cause to befoole the
wicked in their simple apprehensions of God, and to say with David, understand,
ye brutish among the people, and ye fools when will ye be wise, Psalm. 10.7.
he that planted thee are, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he
not see? he that chastises the Heathen, shall he not correct? You must know
that the men whom you oppress, are the blessed whom God chasteneth, and so
teaches out of his Law: When God shall show favor to the righteous, the wicked
are to be befooled, for their acquiessencie in their present prosperous estate,
where honor seems to court and force it self on them with importunity, they
become Lords of all, and every knee boweth unto them, so foolishly secure are
they in their slipperie state, that if any Mordecay be too stout to bend before
them, a lofty Gallows shall take him down, and his whole nation, feel the power
of the wrath of the greatest Prince in Persia, but the brutish man knows
not, neither does the fool understand, and this when the wicked spring as
grass, and all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be
destroyed for ever, Psa. 92.6.7. Was ever folly greater or more manifest, then
that of Haman swelling in the height of his rage against a forlorn Jew, when
in his confidence of, but asking and receiving, he prepared for Mordecay his
execution: in the height of his ftownes, he finds the favor of ^hashsuerosh,
to be to the despised Jew, as remembered to have been his faithful, servant in
an hour of danger, and now the proud fool instead of listlng up Mordecay his
head on his prepared Gallows must Crown it with a Royal Crown, and become the
Jews Lacquey to cry before him the Kings favor: now his wife and friends can
see when it is too late, it is no fingring thorns, or kicking against pricks,
or meddling with Gods Israel without certain and shameful destruction; little
did this fool think in the morning that he must take the Gallows, and the
despised Jew sit in the Throne next to the King of Persia before night: thus
also will God befool all the profane, who are secure in their prosperity;
advancing what they despise, making the stone which the builders refused the
head of the corner, and so manifesting that he which sits in the heavens has
them in derision, and when their calamity comes suddenly will laugh at them:
little wisdom will the wicked find acted by them in casting out those whom God
will gather into his Cabinet as Jewels: could but the wicked in time consider
this their folly and falsehood with which they are sure to be charged, and of it
openly convicted, when gods favor to the righteous does appear it could not
but check their insolency by fear of shame.

4. Envy and enraged fury will hasten the expressions of Gods special favor
to the Godly: Excellently well does the wise man counsel the wicked in his
success against the Righteous. Prove. 24.17, 18. Rejoice not when thine enemy
falls, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth, least the Lord see
it, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him. Et in te
convertat, and turn it against thee. Mercer well adds: for Gods anger must
have an obj^ct; if the pride of the wicked put a period to it is expressions
against the Righteous, it must be extended to themselves: God does indeed
bring his saints under the rod of correction, but yet his favor and fatherly
pity is toward them: he will spare them, as a man spares his own son which
serves him; when the rod expresses sharpness, cutteth deeper, and smarteth
beyond the fathers intention it stays his hand, stirring up his compassion:
The wicked are indeed Gods sword and rod, the righteous are turned over to them
to be chastised, and God Employeth them in the correction of his dearest
children; and they rejoice in this service, read their commission, and so one
see they are left of God unto their fury: but they regard not the Cautions and
restrictions charged on them by the Lord: Like Joab they march out with
resolution against Absalon, so soon as ever he receives commission from David;
but never regards the restriction laid on it by the pity of a father, deal
gently with the young man, even with Absalon for my sake, but fret and rage
against the man that has regard unto it: will David's affection be so far moved
with the sense of relation as to limit a commission given to subdue treason and
rebellion? and shall not the bowels of Gods pity work much toward the
righteous, his dear children? with what confidence can the rod rage whilst
every stripe on the child cut^ the father to the heart? Can the wicked insult
in the day of Ephraims woe, whilst God weeps and stands over him in his
afflictions? Is he not my dear son since I spoke against him, my bowels are
moved within me? when God sends the wicked against his people, their severity
does engage him, soon to call them back, and although the chastisement of his
dearest children, is the service of his own appointment, yet the severity and
cruelty thereof is a property of the envy, provoking God to rescue his people,
and return his wrath against themselves: Gods great quarrel against Babylon is
her insoleney against Zion; against whom he thus pleads, I was wrath with my
people; I have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou
did show them no mercy, upon, the ancient have thou very heavily laid the
yoke, Isai. 47.6. So also when the Philistines prevail against Israel, they
provoke God because they take vengeance with a despitefull heart to destroy it,
because of an old hatred, in Ezec. 25.15. Gods jealousy for Jerusalem makes
him sore displeased with the heathen who help forward the affliction of his
people when he was but a little angry, Zach. 1.15. If Edom do but insultingly
behold his brothers affliction, it provokes God to his own destruction. Obadiah
the whole prophecy does proclaim it; the envy and enraged fury of the wicked
against the godly, strains them beyond Commission, shows the malice, hatred,
and enmity which is in their heart, slighteth the God and hand by which they
strike, and stirs up such sighs and groans, fervent prayers and importunate
supplications, that God hearing, cannot but arise to set the Righteous free
from him that puffs at him. Psalm. 12.5. Let the wicked never lift up their
horns nor in their prosperity trample on the Righteous, though left to their
power, for they are still in their Fathers affection beloved as sons, looked
after as Jewels, and will appear objects of especial favor and acceptance.

Let these considerations check and abate the insolency of the wicked.

Secondly, this doctrine is useful to the righteous, seeing that the Godly and
their holy exercise in evil times does meet with such especial acceptance from
the Lord of Hosts. Let the consideration hereof cheer and animate the godly in
their lowest ebb and greatest affliction to be lively in, and affectionate
toward acts of piety and true Religion: Lift up your heads under all the
pressures of prospering profaneness; let your tongues plead for God, when all
men speak stout words against him; when piety is concluded vanity, cleave
close unto devotion; whatever crosses befall you, deal not falsely in Gods
Covenant: Remember no smart wild dissolve a solemn vow made to God, if Jepthahs
vow extend to his only daughter and dearest darling, he has opened his mouth
to the Lord and must not go back. Let me say to the godly in the language of
the Apostle, be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15.58.
Let your constancy to Gods Covenant, cheerfulness in holy discharges, and
Colloquie each with other, be such, as may bespeake you in Communion with God;
and comfortably apprehensive, you are loved and looked after by the Lord of
hosts when lowred upon and laid aside by profane men: approve your selves
Jewels in holiness and the splendour of a conversation, as ever you would be
found Jewels in honor and divine approbation: show your selves Sons ready to
serve, as ever you would be spared by a Father: and the more men labor to
write your names and services in the dust; perform the service, speak the
language, which may be recorded in Gods Register, that he may hearken and hear
and cause a book of Remembrance to be written before him: when prosperity does
so much attend the profane that it is a general conclusion, it is in vain to
serve God; be so lively and lightsome in all acts of true devotion; as may
manifest you can serve God for naught: and you are sensible of the acceptance
of God under the the utmost discountenance of men; to this end consider and
have in your thoughts

1. Outward afflictions are consistent with, and arguments of divine affection:
no condition should make us to mistake our Fathers affection: when Satan and
censorious spirits do infer from the affliction, wrath, enmity and hatred
from God, and impiety, wickedness and hypocrisy in the Godly, they reckon
without their Host; and do conclude most falsely; inferring what their premises
will not allow; and must with Jobes friends do penance and beg the prayers of
their reproached friends; if ever they obtain the pardon of this soul deadning
error: we cannot indeed deny but that the very godly are surprised with this
temptation, and check their joys and duties by misinterpretation of of outward
dispensations of providence: yet they in a composed spirit will convince
themselves of a brutish apprehension of their present condition, which made
them draw such belluine conclusions: how does David befool himself for this
very error? we have before showed you that Gods common course of providence is
no rule to know by, it is no demonstration of Gods special frowns or favor;
the most wicked may be most successeful, and the truly godly most afflicted: if
affliction and divine acceptance were inconsistent, how came Abraham (Gods
friend) to be the wandering stranger of the World? Job that upright man in the
East, to be poor and miserable Job? David Gods darling to be hunted like a
Partridge? Daniell zealous in devotion to be devoted to the Lions den? the only
beloved son of God, to be stricken and smitten of men and forsaken of his
father? the Israelites so forsaken to fall once and again before Bejamin? and
the Elect of God to be strangers scattered through Pontus; Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asla, and Bythinia? have sober observers lived in any age, and not seen the
dearly beloved of Gods soul given into the hand of the enemy? Shall any then
read implacable indignation, and eternal reprobation in any outward
affliction? No, the Fathers pity boileth within him, when he will not spare
correcting for the childs roaring.

Gods love and affection is most rationally and religiously argued from our
outward affliction, and that if you consider it as chastisement or temptation
of a Father. Chastisement I have before noted is an Act of parentall care and
pity for the brideling lust, and purging away sin, and so a fit and full
argument of affection: and Trialls of faith and patience, do speak Gods high
esteem of us; for he will not that stumbling stones lie in the way of weak
Saints: If you were not chastened you were not children: and if not tried in
the furnace you could not be boasted of as pure metal; God outvieth the
Devil by disposing Job into distress; and makes Hell to see, his service to
God is not slavish, but candid and ingenious, serving God for naught: so that
passion and prejudice, ignorance and unbelief must blind their eyes that see
not a consistency between Gods affection and the Saints affliction, nay argues
not the one from the other.

2. Gods favor and acceptance is the only acquiescency and content of a
gracious heart: His study is to approve his heart to God, not to men; It is to
him an easy matter to be judged of men for he expects his judgment from the
Lord: Godliness with content is his only gain. Let the men of the world have
their corn and wine, he only craveth the light of his countenance: Let their
bellies be filled with Gods treasure, so he can but keep a confidence of
awaking in Gods likeness, and seeing his face in righteousness, he is
satisfied, Psalm. 17.14, 15. What ever curb or check his outward condition puts
upon him he keeps close to God; and continues in duty; in the sense of divine
favor and acceptance: if his dearest relations befool him; he matters not; he
will be yet more vile in playing the fool before God: Let but God listen to his
language, all the world shall not silence him; he will speak though all speak
against him: If fire and faggot, sword or gibbet, axes or Engines of torments lie
in the way of his duty to God, he with cheerfulness and courage passes through
all; assured in himself of divine acceptance. It is storied of the Landgrave
of Hessia, that enduring a long and tedious imprisonment with much cheerfulness
and constancy: being asked how he could endure it, professus est se sensisse
divinas Martyrum consolationes, he answered that he felt the comforts of the
Martyrs, the sense of Gods special acceptance made Geneva more delightful to
the noble Galleacius Caracciolus then the enjoyments of a Dukedom, and
honorable pleasure of the Emperors Court.

Thirdly, and lastly, Obvious and open discrimination of the righteous from the
wicked, is and will be the effect of Gods favor and special acceptance: in
the course of Gods common providence the godly and wicked are mixed together;
there appears little or no difference, it is with him that swears as with
him that fears an oath; for all things com alike to all men, only the pebbls
being more in number do cover the pearls: The oriency and luster of them is
abscured, and they bear no note of excellency amongst men, save their piety
which makes them the object of men's enmity and reproach: they adhere indeed to
God and his covenant, and appear in their places for both, though to the
abhorrency of the wicked, for that the proud are called happy: they live
slighted among men, but seen unto, and regarded by the Lord: who is approaching
as a swift witness against the wicked, to plead the cause of himself and his
people against the stout words and scornful carriage of the prosperous
prophane-Gods time is coming when his countenance cannot be hid, his compassion
must and will break out into the expressions of favor to his people; his
justice must be vindicated by making all the world to change their blasphemous
tune: he says to the wicked ye shall return and discern between the righteous
and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not:
when the wheel of providence has run its round, and the children of God are
taken from under the rod of correction; then shall the horn of the wicked be
broken, and the horn of the righteous be exalted: then shall the Lord pick up
his Jewels and proclaim their dignity by the dispensations of his favor
toward them: that now the wicked shall see and say, It is good to wait on the
Lord; It is not in vain to serve him: The very worst of men shall wish they may
call themselves by the name of Israel, and shall now cry out verily there is a
reward to the righteous. Truly God is good to Israel, When Dives in Hell sees
despised Lazarus in Abraham's bosom; when the envious Jew shall see many come
from the East and West sit down in the kingdom, and themselves thrust out; when
the Goats and sheep are sundred, shall not the favor of the Lord be obvious,
and the discrimination of the righteous be open? be therefore contented Oh ye
that fear the Lord comfort your selves by mutual colloquie and conference: know
that God hearkeneth, hears, and his time of reward approaches, and then they
that reproach and rage against the godly shall return and discern between him
that serves God, and him that serves him not.

FINIS.

