To the Right Honorable The COMMONS of ENGLAND Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The Humble Petition of Sir NICHOLAS CRISP Knight.
SHOWING,
AS God has made You Instruments of Glorious things, in being the Restorers of
many Distressed, and the Repairers of the great Breaches of this Nation; So it
is hoped and prayed by Your Petitioner, that yet before You rise, You will give
Relief to Your Petitioner, whose hard and most deplorable Case, is scarce to be
parrall'd in this Nation; Who before the late Long Parliament was Owner of a
great Fortune, and in a thriving Condition, as any man in that time of his
Quality: Who only for being a Farmer of the Customs, but for Two Years, and
for his Loyalty in adhering to His late Majesty, of ever blessed Memory, as he
was bound by Law, and his Oath of Allegiance, was not only spoiled and
plundered of all he had, even the very Bed his Wife lay on: But which is the
highest of Afflictions, He is now a Prisoner for above 200000. l. of the Late
KINGS Debts, for money lent and advanced for the furnishing of his Navy, and
Bread for his Household at Whitehall; which Debt stands reported before you, to
be 253200 l. paid in money to the Exchequer: For the discharging whereof, and
freeing the Farmers, the Long Parliament took of them 165000. l. (which
discharged their Two Armies, assuring them to free them of the Debt of 253200
l. Both which Sums amount to 418200. l. which with the Interest, swells the
Sum to about a Milleon, the Farmers Petition only being to this Honorable
House) to state the Payment of the 253200 l. upon the remaining foreign
Excise, Tax, or any other way, that they may be delivered out of prison, and
be just to their Creditors; which though lengthned in the time for payment,
will be very comfortable to those that have lain languishing, now, near Twenty
years prisoners: Which if it prevails not with this Honorable House, for the
Farmers in general, He humbly hops and prays, in that his Case differs
from all the rest of his Partners the Farmers, who besides this being involved
with them in that great Debt, was deprived by a Seizure of his Stock, Trade,
and Castle of Guinny, which cost him in the Discovering and Settling of it,
above 50000 l. clear out of purse, which he may plead as a merit from his
Nation, being the first Discover and Setler of that Trade; from whence he
imported half a Milleon of Gold, before it was taken from him, by the late
Parliament, which Castle is now possessed by the East India Company, who from
thence yearly have the Gold they manage the East India Trade with, and will
yearly yield to the Nation for ever 50 or 60 Thousand pound a year: To which
his merit, your Petitioner may add (by his industry) the erecting of
Allome-works, Copperise-works, bringing the Invention of Pan-tyles, Growing and
Making Madther in England, in which above a thousand persons are every day
employed and fed; Your petitioner and his Wife having sold their Land and
Houses, by which they have freed and discharged themselves of above 100000 l.
of those Farm Debts, (more then his Partners) that he might quit himself from
being a prisoner, to pursue those things which may provide for his numerous
Family (now in great distress) and employ his remaining time in his Service of
his Country, and not dye in prison.

His Humble Prayer to this Honorable House is, (the Premises being
considered) there being due to Your Petitioner for what he has paid out of
his own estate, toward this great Debt, about 30000 l. That, you will be
pleased out of somewhat, to order the Payment of 20000. to Your Petitioner,
with which he shall be able to discharge himself from the Remain of these great
Debts, and free himself out of Prison, which will render him not only, after
the long misery of his Family, to be a comfort to them, but give him a capacity
to serve his Country, in his great undertakings, and will be a Badge upon him
of this Honorable Houses good affection toward him, for his Signal Loyalty,
Doings and Sufferings, and in not letting him to suffer for it, under the marks
of greatest dishonor, as to dye a Prisoner, and not pay his Engagements; which
will be a greater affliction unto him, then the highest torture of the
eminentest Rebels, Dishonor being the greatest wound that a man can suffer in
this World; which falls upon him only for his Loyalty: All which he hops
will prevail with this Honorable House, that before Your Rising, some or all
of you, to whom this Petition comes, shall obtain it to be read, and do
something for the releiving of the Farmers in general, or Your Petitioner in
particular; That he may rejoice, and not break his Heart, which certainly will
be his portion, if you do nothing for him, for then his Creditors, being
hopeless, will be more violent then ever. Your Petitioner being yet confident
that he shall be in the number of those who shall ever commemorate the great
Deliverance received from Your Hands,

Shall ever pray for Your Prosperity, etc.

