THE CRIES OF ENGLAND to the PARLIAMENT, For the CONTINUANCE of GOOD
ENTERTAINMENT To the LORD JESUS his AMBASSADORS: Collected as they came up from
the several Counties.

Wherein you have, 1. The Calling, Benefit, and Maintenance of the Godly
Ministry of England attested. 2. The endeavors of the wicked one to root it
out, (though but by withdrawing its Maintenance) abominated. 3. And the power
of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, owned and encouraged.


London, Printed for Tho. Underhill, at the Sign of the Blue Anchor in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1653.

To the Honorable, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
The humble Petition of us Gentlemen, Free holders, and other Inhabitants in
the County of WILTS.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners having to their unspeakable grief observed the workings
of Satan, transforming himself into an Angel of light, tending to the
undermining of holiness and Christian Religion, by a generation of men who cry
down Learning, Ministry, Ordinances, and almost whatever belongs to us as
Christians or Civil men. And having observed the endeavors of some, by so
many ways to disturb and remove the so long settled way for the maintenance of
Ministers, established by the same Laws by which any property is enjoyed in
this Nation, without any regard to the settling of a sure and full maintenance
in stead of it, Conceive themselves bound in Conscience both of Duty to God and
to the Commonwealth, to give in their testimony against them in their
practices. We dare not be silent, when in the Language and the workings of many
amongst our selves, the Ministry and Ordinances of Jesus Christ are so
manifestly exposed, not only to the insultings of men openly and professedly
profane; but (which is more to be lamented) to the scorn and contempt of such
as pretend to great lights in Religion, which do so manifestly tend not only to
the utter subversion of all Religion, but, as a necessary consequence of it, to
the destruction and dissolution of all bonds of Civil Government. To whom under
heaven should we make our moan, and before whom should we spread our
complaints, but before your Honors? to whom we cannot but with all thankfulness
acknowledge the goodness of God toward this Nation, in governing and disposing
your Honors hearts at such a time as this, when there are so many desperate
suggestions and attempts against Universities, Ordinances, Ministry, and their
necessary Maintenance, to declare your selves, as you have done, real
countenancers and supporters of them all; which gives the godly of this Nation
ground of hope the Lord will further honor you to be instruments for
establishing and countenancing of all these, for the glory of his great Name,
and for the settling of the Gospel in purity and power, to be a blessed
inheritance to succeeding generations; and to whom we thought it our duty in
our places to declare that your Petitioners, in consent (as we humbly conceive)
with the people of God generally in this Land (whatsoever some suggest to the
contrary) do greatly rejoice in those your Christian actings, that so your
hands may be strengthened in the work of God; and therefore are farther
encouraged to make their humble addresses to this Honorable Assembly, with
these (as we conceive) necessary requests.

1. That by your wisdom and care, the Ordinances of Jesus Christ may be
countenanced and preserved from the scorn, contempt, and profane neglect, to
which they are exposed, both by some Ministers themselves, who give too much
occasion thereof by their ignorance and scandalous living, old empty
formalities still continued, and also by many others both profane and humorous
persons.

2. That Pastors and Teachers for the work of the Ministry, and edifying of
the body of Christ, may with the like wisdom and care be countenanced, your
Petitioners being well assured that it will be a very acceptable service to
Jesus Christ, your Lord and ours, to own and encourage those Ambassadors of
his, to whom he has committed the word of Reconciliation, and with whom he
has promised to be to the end of the world, and in whom we have found (by
sweet experience) upon our souls, the power and the sense of Jesus Christ
according to his promises.

3. That as the Lord of old settled the Schools of the Prophets amongst his
peculiar people, and has blessed our Universities and Schools of Learning, for
the breeding up and sending forth many choice instruments of his glory, both in
Church and Commonwealth; so you would be pleased to continue our Universities,
and other Schools of Learning under your special care and protection.

4. That for preserving the Ministry from contempt, freeing them from the
temptation of men-pleasing and humane dependencies, from distracting diversions
in the work of the Lord, enabling them to works of mercy, and for supplying
them with necessary provisions for their Studies and Families, that so they
which preach the Gospel, may live of the Gospel; Your Honors would be pleased
to continue their maintenance, with necessary enlargement in those places where
means are wanting.

These things we humbly and earnestly request of your Honors; and who knows
whether God has not raised you up for such a time as this is? in the
performance whereof, you shall the more engage the Lord Jesus to defend both
you and us, who has so eminently appeared hitherto in our preservation, and
will be the surest defense of those that act for him: and you shall also make
glad the hearts of the godly in this Land, stop the mouths of those who are so
ready to speak evil of you, and also prevent the designs of those who are
contrary minded, and further oblige us to pray.

The Gentlemen of the County being called in, had thanks, and a good Answer:
but for its not being affixed verbatim, they may thank themselves, because they
did not commit it to the care of a Stationer.



To the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.
The Humble Petition of the County of South-Hampton, Subscribed at the late
Assizes held at Winton, by the Grand Jury and near 8000 of the Gentry,
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the said County.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners (informed by the Word of God) are very sensible, that
the enjoyment of the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ (by fit men set apart to
that sacred work) is to be esteemed the choicest mercy wherein any people are
blessed of God; and the removal thereof after such enjoyment, the greatest
judgment threatened or inflicted on any Nation.

With much thankfulness we acknowledge the goodness of God blessing this
Nation of ours, even above others our Neighbors, with this rich Privilege; and
which (notwithstanding our own unworthiness, and all the oppositions of Satan
and his Instruments) he has been pleased for many years past, and unto this
present, to continue among us.

What a Blessing this Nation has enjoyed in a learned and godly Ministry,
honored by the Reformed Churches abroad; what a testimony it has had from
heaven, in the conversion of Multitudes from the power of Satan unto God; what
their labors and sufferings have been, contending for the Faith, against
Popish, Arminian, and other Adversaries; (wherein we are in these present times
more sensible then ever of the need of their labors) are things so clear, that
there are very few but will acknowledge.

That this mercy has been continued amidst those great oppositions which godly
Ministers have met withal, next to the goodness of God, we cannot but
thankfully acknowledge and ascribe it unto your many Acts and Declarations, both
for a settled Maintenance and continuance thereof, with liberal Augmentations
allowed by you, to the great encouragement of those who are employed in that
sacred Work.

Nevertheless we have with much sadness observed the actings of many, in
sundry places of the Nation, who by their professed opposition to their Office
and Maintenance, have and still do busily endeavor the discouragement and
destruction of the godly Ministry of the Nation. And this so boldly attempted,
even during the sitting of this Parliament (which has so eminently declared
and appeared to the contrary) fills the hearts of many of the godly with
jealousies, fearing lest by such attempts they be at length deprived of this
Mercy; and with it, of all the visible profession of Religion. For should such
endeavors prosper (which the Lord in mercy prevent, by making your Honors
continued instruments to stand in the gap) we sadly apprehend how great the
triumphs would be of Jesuits, and all other professed adversaries of the Truth:
The advantage Satan has already made of the present contempt of the Ministry,
sufficiently discovering how sad the consequence would be of their utter
removal.

Therefore out of a due respect to the glory of God, the good of souls, the
peace of the Church, the preservation and purity of Religion, the welfare of
the Nation, and faithfully to discharge our own duty, for the countenance of
Learning, the preservation and encouragement of those that labor in the Lords
work; We do earnestly desire, that laying to heart the Interest of Christ, (who
will shortly be your Judge and ours) your Honors would seriously consider these
our humble Requests and Proposals.

1. That the Universities, with other Schools and Nurseries of Religion and
Learning, may be continued, and enjoy what God has given them by Benefactors.

2. That you would continue to speak comfortably to those who teach the
knowledge of God; that their hands may be strengthened in the work of the
Ministry, the disturbers of them repressed, all due encouragement afforded;
particularly, that Tithes, and other their present settled Maintenance may be
continued unto them, until some other as full and certain a way thereof may be
found out and confirmed upon them.

3. That unsavory Salt may be cast out: and such as know not the worth of
Souls, and are only skilful to destroy them, may be removed.

Lastly, That there be a settled Order established according to the Word of God,
for admitting of persons Orthodox, and fitly qualified, into that work of the
Ministry:

And your Petitioners shall always pray, etc.

Friday 8. of April, 1653.
THE House being informed that diverse Ham-Shire Gentlemen were at the Door,
they were called in, and being come to the Bar, Major Hooker informed the
Parliament, that he, with Cap. Terrye and Cap. Chase, were desired by the
Justices of the Bench, Grand Jury, and Gentlemen of the County of
South-hampton, Freeholders, and Inhabitants of the said County, to present
their Petition to the Parliament; and did thereupon present a Petition to the
House, which after the Petitioners were withdrawn, was read, and was Entitled,
The Petition of the County of South-hampton, subscribed at the late Assizes by
the Grand Jury and near Eight thousand of the Gentry, Freeholders, and other
Inhabitants of the said County.

Resolved,

That the Petitioners be called in, and that Mr. Speaker do give them the
thanks of the Parliament; and let them know, that some of the matters contained
in the Petition are already, under consideration, and that the rest shall be
taken into consideration in due time.

The Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Speaker by command of the House,
gave them this answer:

Gentlemen, The House has read your Petition, and considered seriously of it,
and has commanded me to give you thanks.

And in their name I do give you thanks. And I am further to let you know, that
the Parliament have many of the matters contained in the Petition under
consideration, and that they will take the rest into consideration in due time.

Hen. Scobell Cleric. Parliament'.

FINIS.
London, Printed for Th. Underhill, at the Sign of the Blue Anchor in Paul's
Churchyard, 1653.


