Catechizing Gods Ordinance: OR A SHORT TREATISE CONCERNING That Ancient
Approved Soul-edifying Singularly necessary
Exercise of Catechizing.

DELIVERED In sundry SERMONS at Botolphs Aldgate, London.

By Zach. Crofton Minister of the Word.

Jesus Christ in his childhood submitted himself to this Ordinance of God,
though he were replenished with all divine wisdom. Downam of Catech. p. 334.

Knowledge of the Word is as necessary an art for Christians, as the art of
husbandry is necessary for husbandmen. Greenh. p. 383.

Invisa possumus cupere, incognita nequaquam. Aug.

Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it. Prove. 22.6.

Whom say ye that I am? some say Elias, some John the Baptist, some Jeremiah or
one of the Prophets. Whom say ye that I am? Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God. Mat. 16.13, 14, 15, 16.

London, Printed by E. Cotes for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns over
against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside, 1656.

To his much honored and truly endeared in the Lord, the Christian Inhabitants
within the Parish of Botolphs without Aldgate, as well without as within the
Liberty of the City of London.
Endeared in the Lord,
I Present to the view of you all, what has been plainly preached to the ears
of such whose hearts God has inclined to attend on my public Ministry. It is
the chief and plain heads of sundry Sermons without all Pulpit-repetitions,
which would have swelled the volume too much; and without all flourishes of
Fathers sentences and citation of Authors, which might have made it nauseous to
the minds of such who judge things goodness by their pl^^nnesse: the main
scope and drift of it is to vindicate the dignity of a despised, and due
authority of a denied Ordinance of God; to revive in the Church an anciently
exercised; and too too long exiled privilege; to excite and quicken to that
too too long neglected duty of Catechizing in all Christian societies. This
work I confess has been done by many more able and eminent Ministers of the
Church, as holy Mr. Greenham, reverend Mr. Downam, acute Mr. Forde, and the
reverend Provincial Assembly of the Churches of God within the City and
Province of London; many times I had it in my thoughts to have commended these
to your reading, but fearing what in that case I should desire might pass in
at one ear and out at another; and I being by some desired, and by the Province
enjoined to preach on the nature of this duty; and having calculated the
doctrine for your condition and capacity, thought it might most sure with you
to put my own digested considerations into your hands; the which cannot but be
the more welcome to such whose ears heard them, and whose hearts were touched
in the public delivery: the acceptance of them by such is not to be doubted;
and by all others it is desired, that they may be so far accepted as to be
taken up, read without passion or prejudice; the Doctrine therein taught may be
revolved in your deliberate thoughts; and prayer may be put up to the God of
Wisdom, to open your eyes unto the apprehension and acknowledgement of the
truth: This acceptance is the rather desired, for that

1. This little Tract is presented to you as a taste of that pity, and
testimony of that true affection I bear to you in the Lord, as your Minister:
against which though I strongly resolved, yet providence has so disposed, that
after all the sad changes, and Religion-ruining revolutions, to which the times
have subjected you, you are committed to my care and charge, and I hope I can
unfeignedly say, you are now my Dearly beloved and much longed for in the Lord.

2. This Tract travels in this public way to seek out them, who by reason of
the spirit of delusion and profaneness, withdraw their ears from hearing it
when preached; I thought it a duty to preach to the eyes of them whose ears are
shut to such absolute Religion-preserving ordinances, as this is of
Catechizing. I hope you have more charity then to suffer a Parish Child born
amongst you to pass by your houses without one nights, nay a few hours
entertainment: and I desire none may appear so cruel, as to spurn and kick it
out of their houses for the fathers sake, and the rather for that the father is
to be found ready to traverse all inditements against himself or doctrine, if
he may but enjoy a patient hearing; but in special take heed that none look
asquint at it, and carry doggedly toward it for propounding a duty, and
pleading for a piece of piety, for therein they engage the God of wisdom and
holiness to plead his own cause. As for such as shall be ready to flight it on
a seeming scrupulosity of conscience concerning the novelty, or antiquity, or
formality, etc. of the exercise for which it contends, I desire they will with
patience read it through, it may be the resolve of their scruples may make them
more esteem it.

3. The duty herein pressed, is that which concerns you all of what ever age or
condition: Are you ignorant? Catechizing is the way to knowledge; and
certainly, knowledge in rudiments of Religion, is an absolute duty incumbent on
every man, be he rich or poor, high or low, young or old. It is a very good
observation the Provincial Assembly have in their exhortation to the same
duty, and I desire you may well note it, it is this:

It is the rare privilege of the Romish Synagogue to have such a power over
ignorance, as to command her to employ her self as a tender nurse to their
blind devotions; but the Church of Christ has ever found her such a froward
piece, as that she has churlishly handled all the genuine issues of truth and
piety; and as fondly cockered all the misshapen monsters of error, though
never so strangely composed of an heterogeneous commixture of superstition and
profaneness. And as they, I must needs say, we cannot nourish our selves with
the least hope as to see ignorance become serviceable to true piety: we know
the affections cannot outgo the apprehension of truth, till she be known,
cannot be reverenced, cannot but be hated.

Are you knowing? yet Catechizing concerns you not only in that thereby you
communicated knowledge to others (according to your duty) but also the
Catechism is to you no less useful then the compass to the most skillful
Mariner, to steer your course with method and order in these boisterous days
of confused notions, as a touchstone to the most discerning Goldsmith to try
metals, and detect the most glittering falsities that are spread before you
with a Christ, Christ, as a rule to the most understanding Architect, by which
you square your actions in the spiritual edifice of your immortal souls.

Are you poor? Catechizing is a very cheap and easy way, in a few hours time,
in two pence expense to make you rich in faith.

Are you rich? Religion will make you civil, literature will be your honor,
and none so much as Catechism, which will be the very glory of a Princes Crown.

Nay not only does the duty pressed, but the very pressing of it concern you
all; and that in order to the quickening of your lukewarm spirits, convincing
your very consciences of a duty to Catechize and be Catechized: Has not the
long neglect of this exercise to some, lost the divine stamp of it, and armed
young men (when called to Catechizing) with impudence to call its authority
into question? how many stick not to call it an humane invention? how many
others account it good, but not necessary; allow it where it is used, but live
without the discharge of it themselves, as if it concerned not them? if ever it
had need to be pressed now with most power and plainness, pregnant and
persuasive arguments; the youth of this age through want of Catechizing, are
captivated with Heresies and Schism; and if the neglect be continued, the youth
of the next will be capable of turning Pagan or Papist; but in the past ages of
the Churches by this very means, as you have heard and may read, young children
were prepared for Martyrdom in the defense of their Religion.

If any enquire and wonder that I preach and present to your reading so low,
plain, common, and ordinary Doctrines in this high flown, wise and knowing age:
I desire such to know, I am not insensible that the age in which we live, is an
age of comforts, and that the now great enquiry of our Saints is after joy, not
duty; assurance, not assent of faith; but truly I study not what may please
you, but what may profit you; the practices of holiness in Word, Sacraments,
and Sabbaths, are more for your profit then the privileges of a Christian: and
whilst your heads are lifted so high, that you tread and trample under your
feet the principles and positive duties (pearls of no small value) it is high
time to set the luster of them before your eyes, and to make wantons know sweet
meats were not intended to work a contempt of common and ordinary food: and
again, you have been too long pleased and puffed up with high flown doctrines:
nay and the spiritual riches under which you travel (I mean that heady
disorderly knowledge, uttered in free, but very confused discourses) makes me
very jealous they were not wholesome. Lastly, I have cause to fear that
generally you cannot yet bear higher Doctrine; if God will, I shall leave the
first rudiments, and go on toward perfection, when I have first laid the
foundation, you will do well to consider some men (who desire to make the
bounds of Christ his Church narrower then the Lord has set them) has under
the notions of gathering Churches, stirred you in many parts and private
congregations, and unchurched (as much as in them lies) your whole bodies
holding the place of a public Minister, but neither owned nor discharged the
duties thereof in your instruction, nor yet giving way for others to do it:
nay, nor yet have they instructed the poor souls seduced into their societies:
great is the ignorance in foundation principles I find, and greater I fear
amongst you; nor, when I consider how it has been with you, do I wonder; but
only this I say, how shall they be capable of the comforts that flow from the
enjoyment of Christ, that are yet to be convinced that Christ is present to
every believer in the Sacrament, not only by way of efficacy, but also of real
existency, yet not corporal in a Popish sense. But I will hold you no longer
at the threshold; the Doctrine I have preached to some, and printed for all, I
tender it to you as a Minister of Jesus Christ; nay, as your Minister set over
you by the Lord, and watching for your souls, and desirous to give up my
account of you with joy, and not with grief, as such and I, this small Tract so
tendered, I beseech you, nay I charge you in the Lord, receive both me and it. I
am not ignorant that some amongst you who are ready to deny the existency of
Gospel Ministry, despise it as Antichristian; determine the cry of holiness
sufficient ordination, and the Ministry to lie so common, that any man may
(though to them none must) be manifest; and are so far from subjecting, that
they set themselves over others, boldly Catechizing the Catechizers, will be
ready to disclaim and deny any subjection or relation to me, and dispute my
authority as a Minister: But to such I say the Fathers authority is better
exercised then debated amongst froward children. I have offered openly and do
offer again to give to the sober dissatisfied soul (that will with patience and
meekness hear) full satisfaction, not only concerning this, but all other
principles, of which this Scepticall age has caused them to doubt: I may not
now stand to answer further, but invite them home, and in the mean time expect
the duty pressed to be embraced, Catechizing to be restored to your Families
and Schools, your children and servants to be duly presented when called to
this duty in the Church: and fervent prayers for a blessing upon it and upon
me, that God would enable me to do the work which concerns your everlasting
welfare; which is, and by Gods grace shall be sincerely and fervently followed
by

The meanest of the Lords Laborers for your Souls salvation, Zach. Crofton.

The Contents
IN this Treatise you have discussed this Doctrine:

Catechizing is Gods Ordinance, very useful to his Church, page 11 The word
Catechize explained, and the thing described, p. 1, 2, 3 The reasons that
enforce the Doctrine, and they are drawn from its 1. Excellency in respect of
its Prescriber, God, p. 15 Professors, Saints, p. 17 Prime matter, p. 19 Proper
end, p. 20
2. Antiquity, p. 21 3. Necessity, p. 28 4. Vtility, in that it 1. Preserves
Religion in purity, p. 31 2. Propagates to posterity, p. 35 3. Prepares for
increase of Knowledge in Christ, p. 36 4. Profits by the Word, p. 37 5.
Prevents Apostasy, p. 38 6. Presents fit Communicants to the Lords Supper, p.
41 7. Powerfully disposes to duty, p. 45
5. Easiness and familiarity, p. 46
The proper matter about which Catechizing is conversant, p. 47 The forms to
be used and manner how it is to be managed, p. 57 Under which is noted those
that must Catechize; 1. Ministers in their Congregations, p. 60 2.
Schoolmasters in their Schools, p. 65 3. Masters of Families in their Families,
p. 70
All that are ignorant, and in special youth, and why they must be Catechized,
and how they must carry in subjecting to it, p 78
The Doctrine applied.
1. To inform of the necessity and dignity of Catechizing, p. 86 2. Reproof of
Superiors neglect, p. 93 Inferiors not submission, p. 110
To exhort to the duty, which exhortation is enforced with several motives, p.
125
ERRATA.
Page 7. for them read then, p. 27. lin. 21. r. Canons of the Councels at, p.
32. l. 22. r. Cooks.

Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.

To the Reverend the Provincial Assembly of the Churches of God within the City
and Province of London.
Reverend Fathers and Brethren,
DEdications of Books, and inscriptions of the names of men of worth and
honor, are grown so common, that the plainest Truths and meanest Tracts
discussing the same, cannot pass without them, and thereby a craved and
engaged patronage: if this small Tract of so plain a duty must seek any, for
many considerable reasons, it must seek you, and none but your selves, as its
Patrons.

1. That the Author may hereby testify to the world and your selvef his
thankful acknowledgement* os Gods great mercy to his Church, not only for your
being in these times of envy and indignation at all Church order and
authority; but also for your vigilance over, and industry for the good of the
Churches of God, eminently approved not only in your elaborate vindications of
Government and Ministry, but also in your late grave, serious, and
authoritative exhortation unto Catechizing; wherein by many pregnant and
persuasive reasons, you do provoke Ministers as well as others to a duty, the
long neglect of which, with its sad effects, is to us in the sight of God and
his Church, matter of shame and sorrow.

2. To you it is directed as authors of its resurrection, though not first
being, though at my first coming into your City (in the pursuit of the duty) I
did some years since preach it to the people of whom I had the inspection, At
James Garlickhithe.
yet I had laid it by me as dead, and determined it should never see the light,
nor sound in the ears of men any more; yet the sound of your exhorting trumpet
put again life into it, and caused it to be preached to a more public audience
for the benefit of a much greater people, to all whose ears the sound not
reaching, I was constrained to make it thus public, that by reading what they
should have heard, they might be convinced of, and counseled unto duty; and
now it is cheerfully submitted to your censure, at whose command it was
preached, though not the first yet the second time.

To you it comes in obedience to your command and conformity to your order,
which requires an account to be given from the several Classes of what
proceeding is made in the work of Catechizing, to which you exhort; let this
small Tract assure you of the cheerful submission of the meanest of your
brethren to your exhortation, and full resolution to revive that ordinance of
Catechizing, so necessary, useful, and advantageous to the Church of God;
prefessing that the greatest comfort that ever my soul enjoyed in all my
ministerial endeavors amongst the people with whom I lately labored, James
Garlickhithe.
was in the instruction and (so far as I and others of their Christian
acquaintance can judge) sanctification ^f some young men and young women, that
did with constancy and diligence, against all discouragements submit unto and
study their Catechism.

Lastly, To your patronage it is commended, for that your exhortation to the
duty pressed in it, and pursued by it; gives the Author full assurance of your
readiness to patronize it, and by your power to protect it against the common
carpers and cavillers at every truth and duty, with which our age abounds, and
with the clemency that becomes your assembly, indulge the infirmities of its
author in the weak management of so weighty a matter.

Having given you the reasons of my boldness in this Dedication, I must crave
leave to apologize in one thing, my not complying with your exhorting
directions for carrying on the work of Catechizing: that is in respect of the
Form to be used, I do not indeed use, nor have I put into the hands of my
people the Catechisms of the late reverend Assembly, not that I do disown, or
in any thing dislike those Forms, I sully assent to the Characters by you given
of them, and by which you commend them; but the form I have chosen and put into
the hands of my people, is that of reverend Mr. Ball, the goodness, nay
acceptablenesse of which, among people is proclaimed by the very many
reiterated impressions of it; neither does it differ in doctrine any thing, and
in form not much from the Assemblies. The impulsive cause of my using this form
was this, In the country where I lived this was the Catechism used in common,
in the use of this I had by the blessing of God been constant: some that had
learned this under my Ministry in the Country made mention of it amongst the
people with whom I then labored, in so much that they generally desired this
Catechism, and would admit no other: I condescending to their desire in a three
years use of it, not only did the fame of it come to the ears, but many
Catechisms into the hands of this people before your exhortation came abroad;
so that I could not conveniently alter the form: herein I must beg, and cannot
but hope, that none of my brethren will be offended or censure me as guilty of
singularity, and the rather for that you cannot but all conclude by this
Catechism, Exhort. to Catech.
youth may be taught who made them, why he made them, how good and happy man
was made by God, how evil and wretched he made himself, what need he had that
the Lord Jesus should die for him, that the holy Ghost should regenerate him:
what privileges he does enjoy and may expect by Christ, what duties he is
obliged to by those privileges, how he is to present his petitions to God, how
to receive the seals of Gods gracious covenant; which being granted, I must
expect your promise not too morosely to stand on circumstantial differences,
where there is so fair an accord in material principles.

Reverend Fathers and Brethren, now that you have so seriously and seasonably
called unto Catechizing, I could heartily wish, that confirmation of children,
which I cannot but look on as an engagement to the study of the Catechism, were
taken into your serious and second thoughts, and if found (as it has been
deemed) an Ordinance of God, some means were propounded for the reviving it in
the Church: but herein I may seem too bold, and be thought to prescribe matter
to your considerate debates: I shall therefore forbear any further to trouble
you: but assure you that God will counsel you in things which concern his
Church: make men in place and power a blessing to his Church: give to brethren
a spirit of union with and condescansion to your just and pious resolves, and
to our people of ready and cheerful submission to your exhortations and
commands, and that not only because you exhort and command duties, but also
with the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, is and shall be the hearty and
constant prayer of

Reverend Sirs, The meanest of your brethren and servants in the work of the
Gospel,Zach. Crofton.

CATECHIZING Gods Ordinance: OR, A short Treatise concerning that ancient,
approved and edifying exercise of Catechizing.
HEB. 5.12. and 6.1. When as for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need
that we teach you what are the principles of the Word of God.

Leaving therefore the Doctrine of the beginning of Christ, let us be led
forward to perfection.


THE Author of this Epistle, (whether Paul, as is most probable, or any other,
we shall not now dispute) being singularly studious of the confirmation of the
Hebrews, in the Doctrine of Jesus Christ they had received: in opposition to
the dangerous seducing doctrine of such as endeavored the drawing them back to
the Leviticall priesthood, and law of ceremonies; does at large dictate, and
make known, the dignity, certainty, and perspicuity of the Lord his priesthood:
(the consideration of which, with the several privileges thereof, is the duty
of every Christian soul well initiated, in the first and chief principles of
Religion) does pursue their edification and establishment herein, by two things
amongst others, to be specially taken notice of in the text, as the parts
thereof.

First is a Hebrae^rum animos pulsat placida reprehensione stuporis eorum.
Pareus in Loc.
Redargution or sharp check for their unprofitableness under the Word, and
Doctrine of Christ: of which they are convicted, by their haesitation in the
first principles of the Christian doctrine, and religion, without any
progress, nay almost any knowledge of them, as in chap. 5.12.

Secondly, a serious Objurgationi tarditatis subjicit exhortationem ad fidci
profectum. Par. c. 6. ver. 1.
Exercitation, or rather a solid declaration of his intention, to lead them
(not of, Jubet autem omitti ejusmodi rudimenta, non quod eorum oblivisci unquam
debeant fideles, sed quia in illis minime est haerendum. Calv. in Heb. c. 6.
ver. 1.
but) from the beginnings of the Doctrine of God, unto the further and fuller
consideration of higher matters, that concerned Christ, their establishment and
perfection in him.

Again in the redargution, we may (for the further: understanding of the words)
observe, first a duty employed, as necessary and useful in the Church of God:
and that is to be instructed and taught to know, what are the first rudiments
of religion, so as to be able to teach others therein: for we must not learn
and leave them (i. e.) forget them, no, but we must not stick fast there and go
no further: he is an idle and unskilful architect, that is always busy in
laying a foundation, and never rears up a building upon it: Pemble Preface.
where duty is not to be neglected, can be no ground of reproof, for the time
ye ought to be teachers, etc.

Secondly, the Hebrews failing in and sinful neglect of this duty, subjecting
them to a necessity of being continued in and under the same: ye have need, etc.

Again, from the exhortation or intention of the Author, we may take a serious
view of his motion in the edification of the people of God; and we see,

First, the terminum a quo, term from which he moves, and it is expressed
either

1. Generally, leaving the Doctrine of the beginning of Christ.

2. Or in the particular heads thereof: as repentance from dead works, faith in
Christ, the Doctrine of Baptism, of laying on of hands, resurrection from the
dead, and eternal Judgment: which according to the judgment of all Expositors
on the Text, were the Catechetical heads of the Apostles Catechism, as we shall
note hereafter.

Secondly, the terminum ad quem, the term to which, was to be led forward
toward perfection: where by the way we may observe the Apostles method of
teaching the Doctrine of Christ suitable to every Infant capacity, that can only
digest milk: as well as men of years, that did require stronger meat: nay that
the word is to be dispensed, first in rudiments or Catechetical principles, as
a foundation, on which must be built firmer Doctrines.

Having divided the words into their main and proper parts: before we come to
conclude the doctrinal observation that arises from them, it is expedient a
little to explain them, and in the explication thereof, we shall find there is
not much difficulty, that which principally as to our purpose calls for
consideration is what the Apostle means by the (...): the elements of the
beginning of the Word of God, which he expresses in the 5. chap. 12. verse. and
calls in the 6. chap. 1. verse. the Doctrine of the beginning of Christ: in the
clearing of which to your judgments, we shall commend to your serious and
second thoughts three considerable things in the Text.

1. The first is the Epithet, whereby the Apostle does denominate the same to
us: for denominations demonstrate the quality of things.

2. The second the Apostle his Method of teaching, touched on before.

3. The third the Matter recited and expressed by the Apostle himself.

From all which we shall find, that these elements are no other then the main
and principal heads of Christian Doctrine, Catechetically taught in the Church
of God: and first of the first, and that is

The Epithet or denomination; the Apostle calls them, elements of the beginning
of the Word of God: Now elements are nothing else but the first principles and
standing verities of any Art or Science compendiously expressed, that being
true in themselves, they may be rules from which the fuller doctrine does flow
by clear and undeniable inference, and by which it may be proved for the
initiating and edification of such as are studious of that Art or Science: such
are the ABC to children, the parts of speech to the learning of Grammar, the
Predicables and Predicaments in Logic, and the like: this description of
Elements in general we may find suggested by the various Etymologies of the
Latin word Elementum, which some so call quasi alimentum, nourishment; because
others are begotten and brought forth by it; Some Elevamentum, an aiding or
listing up; because other things take their beginning by their help, or that
they are lifted up above, or before other principles, as more essential and
necessary: or Elicimentum, deduction or drawing out, because other things are
extracted or drawn out of them.

When we see them Elements in themselves to be first verities and consider them
related to the Doctrine of God, the result cannot but resolve the Apostle to
speak of Catechetical doctrine, especially when we add to it the second thing
propounded, which is,

2. The Apostle his Method in speaking to them, which in the division of the
Text we have before noted to be by way of check or blame for not being diligent
in those doctrines which had been most necessary for their first setting
forward in the profession of Christ: which had been as milk for babes, suitable
for their weak capacities, and prepared them for the right and ready receiving
of higher doctrines, that conduced to perfection: and then by proceeding from
those things which were to have been learned for the initiating them in the
Doctrine of Christ, unto those things that should increase and build up their
knowledge toward perfection, that so he might not always rest in the
foundation, what can we imagine the Apostle to mean by foundation, and first
doctrine from which he would thus in order go forward, but the Catechetical
heads and standing verities of the Gospel?

Thirdly, if we observe the several heads recited and expressed by the author
himself in chap. 6. verse. 1, 2. as the things they ought to have learned, but
had neglected, (being such as these before named, repentance from dead works,
faith in Christ, Doctrine of Baptisms, laying on of hands, resurrection from
the dead, and eternal Judgment) we cannot but determine them to be
Catechetical heads taught to the novices and young Christians for the grounding
of them in the Doctrine of Christ, the which we find also resolved by the
learned in their Expositions on the Text, as Deodate on the place says, These
are the heads of Christian Doctrine or Catechism, which were taught little
children and novices in a plain, lowly and rough manner: Aretius thinks, that
from hence may be gathered what were the principles and chief heads of the
Catechism of those times. Beza affirms they were the chief heads of
Christianism, which they call Catechism, and were delivered in short and few
words to the ignorant. Pareus calls them the first rudiments of Christian faith,
were wont to be learned by and required from Children and young Christians. But
Calvin determines (from the testimony of the Fathers) that they were certain
heads which the Pastor used to ask the Catechized: resolving that the Author
of the Epistle did look back to the form of Catechism then used in the Church:
with whom Marlorat does agree not only in judgment, but also in expression.

These things being seriously considered, cannot but convince every one
studious of the mind of the Holy Ghost, of the necessity and divine authority
of Catechizing, whilst we see the words thus divided and explained, to lay
before the Hebrews, and in them all other Christians those two positive and
undeniable duties.

1. The first is to be well Cathechized or instructed in the first and main
grounds and principles of the Christian Religion, that thereby as by a
foundation laid, they may be made capable of higher Doctrines.

2. That being prepared by their Catechism, they must not haesitate in (though
not renounce or recede from) first elements, but diligently proceed to grow in
the knowledge of the doctrines of a higher degree dictated to them: the first
of these is that I desire may be taken into consideration: and therefore from
the particular duty dictated by the Apostle to the Hebrews, I shall resolve for
our instruction this general Observation or point of Doctrine.

Catechizing or instruction in the principles of Religion is a Gospel-exercise,
and of necessity to be used in the Churches of God.

In the prosecution of this truth, we shall endeavor this Method, to which I
shall desire diligent attention.

1. By way of illustration, we shall consider the word and thing Catechize.

2. Propound the reasons that may confirm and clear the truth to your
judgments.

3. Further illustrate the point by considering the matter and manner of this
exercise.

4. And lastly make some use or application of the point.

First of the first of these, and that is, to consider the word, and thereby
the thing Gatechize. Concerning which I must desire you to observe that the
word Catechize is no proper English word, (...) of (...) as (...) of (...).
Viva voce instituo, or dicta repeto.
but derived of a Greek word which signifies to teach or instruct by a lively
and audible voice, by the repetition of words as by the reflection of an echo;
and it is generally used for any kind of instruction or information
whatsoever, as in Act. 21.24. (...).
They are informed concerning thee. Gal. 6.6. Those that are taught in the
word, to him that teaches. But more especially and properly for instruction in
the first rudimeuts of any doctrine: but most especially and principally the
Christian Religion, see Romans 2.18. Catechized in the Law: (...) imbu^t, docere
incepit, paulat^m assuefecit.
so in Act. 8.15. Luke 1.4. this word Catechize in the Greek, answers unto
Hanach in the Hebrew which signifies to instruct, to begin to teach, to
accustom by a little; alluding unto Dyers, that by degrees do dip and give
colors to their Stuffs; hence comes the Hebrew word Hanich, which signifies a
novice, or one in learning the first rudiments; both which are frequently read
in the Old Testament. From the signification of the word thus opened we may
easily collect and conclude what is the thing, and we shall find that

Catechizing is a plain, perspicuous and familiar way of teaching the ignorant
and weak capacities in the first rudiments and principles of the Christian
Religion, drawn from the Doctrines of the Prophets and Apostles.

This is that exercise whereby babes in Christ are fed with milk, and prepared
for the receiving and digesting of stronger meat: this is that that lays the
foundation of Christ in the soul, which must by higher Doctrine be built up
unto perfection: and this then is the Ordinance of God and Gospel exercise to
be used in the Churches of Christ.

Having briefly past the Consideration of the word and thing, we come now to
speak to the second thing propounded, and therein to lay before you the reasons
that may prove Catechizing to be a Gospel exercise, and to be used in the
Churches of God; the which we shall resolve into these heads, which being
cleared to our judgments cannot but convince of the truth of the point. 1. The
excellency of Catechizing. 2. The antiquity of Catechizing. 3. The necessity of
Catechizing. 4. The utility or profit of Catechizing. 5. The facility or
easines of Catechizing.


excellency of Catechizing; for that which appears to be a duty excellent, will
plead divine stamp and call for entertainment in the Churches and amongst the
people of God the excellent upon earth, Psalm. 16.3.

Now (my brethren) we shall on serious observation find Catechizing to be so
far from a base, low, carnal and beggarly exercise, that it has always been
in the Church of God, and been had in great esteem and reverence as very
excellent, yea as such an exercise which the greatest Emperors, most honorable
Senators, and chiefest of Martyrs for Gods truth thought suitable to themselves
and worthy their subjection: nay to which also the wisest Philosophers and most
reverend Fathers of the Churches: such as Justin Martyr, as Augustine, Ambrose,
and others, cheerfully submitted to when God opened their eyes and inclined
their hearts to the embracing and profession of Christian Religion: Justinus
Martyr inserts the use of Catechizing as an excellency to the Christians in his
persuasive Apologies exhibited to the Emperor and Senate of Rome: it caused
admiration in the Fox Acts and Monuments.
French Doctors when but exercised by the children of Merindoll: Martin Luther
thought it his glory to profess himself discipulum Catechismi a learner of the
Catechism. But the excellency of this duty will appear by laying before you,
1. The prescribers of Catechizing. 2. The professors of Catechizing. 3. The
proper matter of Catechizing. 4. The peculiar end of Catechizing.


First evidence of the excellency of Catechizing is from the prescriber of it:
Evidence of the excellency of Catechizing.
the Author of every work adds much to the luster and excellency of the same:
the excellency then of this exercise is exceeding great, whiles it owns no
other author then, excellency it self, the wise all knowing, and all sovereign
God, who taught it by his Spirit to his people in the days of Adam, and of
Abraham, and afterward commanded it to his people the Jews, in Exodus 12.26,
27. When your children ask. etc. you shall say, It is the Lords passover.
Psalm. 78.5, 6. He commanded our fathers that they should teach their children.
From these places, as also from Deuteronomy. 4.9. Teach them thy sons, His direction
for Christian life. lib. 3. p. 37.
Mr. Downam infers Gods command for Catechizing. Moreover, in Deuteronomy. 6.7. we
see God enjoining this duty, whilst he commands that they rehearse or whet on
the minds of their children his Laws: so likewise Deuteronomy. 11.19. the word which
is used to rehearse, comes from an Hebrew root Schanan, to whet or sharpen by
repetition of strokes, These commands ( Ainsworth tells us) the Rabbis do
understand of Catechizing; who himself also tells us God preseribes here a brief
Catechism in the grounds of Religion. Besides we find Wisdom expressly to
direct this exercise, in Prove. 22.6. Train up or instruct (it may be read
Catechize) a child in the days of his youth: the Hebrew reads it, teach a
child at his mouth, that is, as nurses feed Infants with the breast or spoon at
the mouth: so teach children by putting words into their mouths, which can be
no other way then by Catechizing: so we shall also find it prescribed in the
New Testament, to pass by the Text which does clearly declare it to be a duty:
we shall find Christ directing, nay commanding Peter, and in him all Ministers
of the Gospel to feed as well his lambs as his sheep: which Mr. Downam notes to
be an imposing of this duty or exercise of Catechizing on Ministers: and God by
Paul directs fathers to bring up their children in the instruction and
information of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. So that I may well conclude God himself to
be the Author of Catechizing, and it therein to be exceeding excellent.

Secondly, Evidence.
As Catechizing is excellent in respect of God the prescriber thereof: so also
in respect of the professors and practitioners thereof, whom we shall find to
have been the Lords bosom friends and endeared people, the righteous who are
the excellent on earth, such as God has highly prized and admitted into
familiarity with himself, as Abraham, Joshua, David, Jehoiada, which in the
second reason (shall God willing) be more fully manifested, and it is more then
probable that Jesus Christ did countenance and commend as exceeding excellent
this exercise by his submission to it at twelve years of age, (although full of
wisdom and understanding, able to reason with the Doctors) this Mr. Downam
collects from Luke 2.46. where it is said Christ sat among the Doctors; he
conceives amongst the Catechumeni under the Doctors, which conjecture seems to
be suggested by Calvin and Marlorat on the place, who declare their judgments
to be, that Christ sat under, or before the Doctors of the Law, not in their
chair, for that the time of his preaching was not yet come.

Thirdly, Evidence.
the proper matter of Catechizing, proclaims the excellency thereof: in that it
is the Doctrine of God, the sum of the Gospel, the chief heads and principles
of the Christian Religion, inferred and clearly flowing from the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles: this is that excellent and celestial matter with
which the mind being enlightened takes up the whole affections and carries on
a man to the contempt of all excellencies under the sun, yea even of life it
self for the enjoyment of it: this is the sum of Wisdom more precious then
Rubies and most precious Pearls, in the finding of which is life and the favor
of the Lord. Now that this kind of Doctrine is and ought to be properly and
principally the matter of this exercise, as the Ordinance of God in his Church,
I shall more fully clear to you in the third thing propounded to be spoken to
(viz.) the matter and manner of Catechizing.

Fourthly and lastly, Evidence.
the excellency of Catechizing appears by the peculiar end thereof, which is no
other then the highest excellencies of Gods glory and the salvation of the
soul, to which we may see this exercise to carry, by planting the knowledge and
remembrance of God in youthful, even infant minds; by putting posterity into
a capacity of sounding Gods praises for past favors; powerfully bending the
soul into the good and righteous way from which it will not depart in old age,
by preserving truth in its purity, and the soul from apostasy, and placing in
the heart principles directive to all duties in all conditions and estates
whatsoever: this end is not only commended to us in the divine constitution of
this exercise, and as it is the Center of all Scripture instruction: but we
shall find it expressly declared, that Timothy his knowledge of the Scripture
in and from his childhood (which with Downam and Calvin we may conclude more
then probably he had learned by instruction or Catechizing from his Mother and
Grandmother) is able to make the man of God wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy
1.5.3.15. the excellency of Catechizing appearing to be thus great, I hope will
expel all base thoughts concerning it, and persuade your spirits that it is a
Gospel exercise to be used in the Churches of God. We therefore pass from that
to the consideration of the second reason of the doctrine.

antiquity of this excellent exercise. For that which is most ancient is
always granted to be most true: the Christian Religion is most ancient, and
this as a special part thereof, will be found of equal antiquity; and when we
shall consider it to have stood in the Church as long as the Church has stood
on the earth: to have been of old esteemed, observed and practiced in the
Church of the Jews and Christians, it must needs be the more authentic, and
lay the greater obligation upon us for the continuance of the same; and in
enquiry after the age of it we must needs resolve it elder then Methuselah,
whilst we may trace the footsteps of it from Adam to this present age: this
duty was before the flood practiced by Adam (as the learned do conclude) whose
sons we find offering sacrifice to the Lord, in Genesis 4. unto which their
father had instructed and brought them up, as well as to labor in the world,
catechizing them in the Doctrine of the Fall, and of the Seed of the woman,
typified by their sacrifice, whereby they were fitted for the right and
reverent performance of the worship of God. Also it may be probably
conjectured, that others of the Patriarchs did practice this duty; Henoch the
seventh from Adam (of whom it is recorded, that he walked with God, Genesis 5.14.)
received his name Henoch from an Hebrew root Hanach (before noted to signify,
to initiate or instruct in the principles of Religion) as one dedicated unto
God, or instructed from his youth: after the flood they had this exercise of
Catechizing in the principles of Religion, which was after put in writing,
Greenh.
as the learned conclude, and called the oracles of Sibylla, which were nothing
else but things taught and delivered by word of mouth. It is most clear, that
Abraham did use this exercise with much fruit and good in his family, we read
in Genesis 14.14. that Abraham brought out and armed three hundred and eighteen
men brought up (the Hebrew word Hanichim will bear it) catechized or instructed
in his house when he went to the rescue of his brother Lot: Mr. Greenham
observes, Greenhams Treat. of Cate. p. 312.
Isaac his going out to pray: and the servant his pious and faithful
prosecution of his Masters oath, in Genesis 24. to be the effect of Abraham, his
Catechizing: and Mr. Downam does very well observe Abraham's care and diligence
in Catechizing, to be the ground of Gods revealing his secrets, and making
known his Judgments to him, in Genesis 18.19. I know him that he will command his
sons and his household, Downam's Directions.
that they shall keep my ways. From this reason Doctor Willet observes,
Willet in Locum.
that it was the godly practice of the Fathers to Catechize or instruct their
families in the Doctrine of the creation of the world, transgression of man,
destruction of the old world, Gods providence, the Messiah to be revealed, and
everlasting life to come: with whom Paraeus does concur adding that before
the Law, Paraeus in Locum.
there was no public Ministry, but the Fathers were Priests, Pastors and
Teachers, and the family were the Catechumeni, learning the Doctrines above
recited: neither may we think this duty to have been neglected by Isaac, Jacob,
or Job, and others of the Patriarchs: the Hebrew Rabbis tell us, See also
Pemble's Preface.
that Samuel was brought unto Eli, that he might fit before Eli the Priest, and
be by him accustomed to, or taught in the Law, or the Precepts as the
Catechumeni were wont to be taught. David and Bathsheba were very diligent in
the Catechizing or instruction of Solomon their son, in the ways of wisdom,
as himself declares in Prove. 4.4. He taught me and said unto me, Let thine
heart hold fast my words: from whence Lavater inserreth the duty of, Lavater in
Loc.
and induces by the example, all Christian parents betimes to instruct their
children in the chief heads of Christian Religion: also Jehoiadah the Priest
had well taught and instructed the young King Joash: whereby he was enabled to
rule, and did rule well all the days of Jehoiadah; neither may we think this
duty was neglected by Josiah that good King, who in the time of his youth, set
himself to serve the Lord with zeal and sincerity: and also after the
captivity, if we believe the Hebrew Rabbis, from the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes unto Christ, there were never under four hundred houses of
Catechizing in Jerusalem, at which time also they made their Decree, that at
thirteen years of age their children should be put to Catechizing: to which
practice S. Paul seems to allude, when he speaks of the Jews, as Catechized in
the Law, Romans 2.18. And as we find the footsteps of Catechizing in all the ages
of the Jewish Church, so we shall find it ceased not in them, but was also
practiced in all the ages of the Christian Churches since the time of Christ;
for besides what was before noted of Christ his submission to it at twelve
years of age, amongst the Jews he seems practically to commend it to us by
Catechizing his Disciples concerning their persuasion of himself in opposition
to the ignorant conceits of the men of the world, in Mat. 16. chap. 13.16.
verse. Whom say men that I am? Whom say ye that I am? after Christ's ascension,
this exercise was very perspicuous: Greenham's Treat. of Catechizing, p. 664.
Mr. Greenham brings in Aegisippus report, that by reason of Catechizing, there
was never a Nation in the world, but received an alteration in their Heathenish
Religion within forty years after Christ: in the Apostles days and primitive
times of the Church of God, there were two sorts Catechized, the one adulti,
Infidels converted to the faith, such was Theophilus, who is in Luke 1.4. said
to have been Catechized: so also Apollos, Act. 18.25. the Eunuch and Cornelius
his household: such was Raib Augustine, Ambrose, and diverse others; some of
which were called to Martyrdom, when in their Catechism: all which were
instructed in the Catechetical heads of the text, and then baptized.

A second sort were Children, such as were born under the covenant of believing
Parents who were baptized and afterward Catechized and made able to profess
their faith when they were confirmed by the laying on of hands.

We read of many that bare the office of Catechizing in the Church of God: some
think Paul to have been employed in it by reason of that expression, 1 Cor.
14.59. that I may Catechize others. Eusebius mentions Mark to have been
Catechizer at Alexandria, as also Clemens, Origin, and Heraclas, and others of
the Fathers in other places, Gregory Nyssen, Cyrill, etc. The Church had the
Books of Augustine, De rudibus Catechizandis, and Books de Symbolo ad
Catechumenos: also Athonasius his Synopsis of sacred Scaipture, with others of
the like nature. In after ages this exercise was owned and enjoined by the
Canons of Neocesaria, Iberis, Braccaria and others before Luther's time; who
also in his time among other things contended for Catechizing with a spirit of
zeal, making it of absolute necessity in the Church as Lord and Ruler; urging
the continuance of it without intermission, condemning the neglect thereof
after whom the several reformed Churches enjoined it, and exhibited the
necessity of it in their several confessions, composing Catechisms suitable to
the degrees of reformation enjoined and obtained. This exercise of Catechizing
appearing to have been thus anciently observed as well in the Jewish as
Christian Churches, I hope will silence all thoughts of the novelty thereof,
and lead us to the consideration of the third reason, which is the necessity of
so ancient a duty.

exceeding necessary: which necessity upon serious and second thoughts, will
appear to be great unto all such as desire to be found good proficients in the
School of Christ, even as necessary as ABC to a child first going to School;
as the rudiments of any Arts or Science a man desieth to know and profess; as
a foundation to building, without which it cannot stand; as milk for babes new
born; and therefore it is in Scripture held out in such terms, and similitudes
(viz.) Principles, Elements, Foundation, Milk, etc. All which the Apostle uses
in the Text, teaching us that this neglected, the soul cannot be established in
the Doctrine of Christ, but be always unstable and as children ready to be
tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, cannot be prepared for, and
made capable of higher learning, to read readily the Doctrine of the Lords
Priesthood, and their privileges thereby, and those things that should tend to
the perfecting of their faith, and completing of their comforts; this was the
great cause of our Authors sharp reproof of the Hebrews in the Text; for when
he came to communicate to, and teach them higher lessons in the School of
Christ, they were not yet perfect in the first form of the principles of
Religion: nay they cannot grow forward in the graces of Gods Spirit, but like
children without milk be lank and lean, always ready to exspire that principle
of life that is in them: nay, lastly, they cannot unchatechized, act and move
orderly and methodically in the practice of their Christian duties, but be very
incident to confusion and disorder: for without all doubt, one great cause of
all that confusion that is in men's minds, and actions in these days, is the
want of Catechizing; whereby they might be enabled to digest those general
notions that fly in their brains into certain solid heads, and principles,
which might be standing rules for their direction. It being then an exercise so
very necessary; I hope none can or will deny it to be a useful duty in the
Church; especially if we consider the next Reason, which is the profit and
comfort of this exercise.

profitable and comfortable to the Church of God in general, and the subjects
of it in particular: for by serious enquiry, and sensible observation, we shall
find it no barren plant in the Lords garden; nor yet fruitless ordinance to
be rejected; but that which rightly used, and skilfully, improved, does produce
to the comfort of all Gods children, these several advantages.

Advantages of Catechizing.
1. The preservation of the purity of Religion. 2. The propagation of it to
posterity. 3. Preparedness to increases in the knowledge of Christ. 4. Profit
by the Word. 5. Prevention of falling into error. 6. Present capacity of
communion at the Lords Table. 7. Powerful disposition to duty.
preserves the good estate of the Church, in the maintenance of purity of
Religion: for a Catechism rightly framed and grounded on the Scripture, is a
brief abstract and compendium of the Law and the Testimony, whereby all
corruptions of doctrine or practice is easily and suddenly discerned and
detected: and by diligence in this exercise, truth is made like the Goldsmiths
touchstone, ready to receive with approbation all golden doctrine thereunto
consonant: but to make men fear to tender, (or if any dare presume) readily to
reject all base metals of false doctrines, or practical innovations that are
thereunto dissonant, and yet may be sometimes imposed on the Church; for this
sum of Scripture (as it may be called) or to use Luthers word, Bible of the
people, or sum of Christian Religion, does with more perspicuity and celerity
conclude the truth, and with more facility and speed pull off the vizard of a
Sic dixit Dominus, thus says the Lord, from the face of all false Prophets and
Seducers: then the reading, comparing, and considering of the whole body of the
Scripture, and resolving the same into Catechistical principles: which must be
the way to oppugn the untruths imposed, even as Hippocrates Aphorisms in cases
of Physic: Cokes Institutes in cases of Law; and the short axioms and
standing principles of Philosophy do more quickly and sharply detect all
contrary assertions, then the more large and ample Treatises and discussions of
the same. Hence it may be more then probable, that the reason why the Lord
Jesus did no more particularly (by quoting books, chapters and verses) prove
the truth and purity of his Doctrine preached to the Jews, was for that as the
Apostle says in Romans 2.18. they knew his will and tried those things that did
dissent from it, being (as was noted before) catechized in the Law: we may afso
observe that Paul gave Timothy a Catechistical sum of Christian Doctrine, which
in 2 Timothy 1.13. he calls a (...), in Romans 6.12. it is called, (...), Analogy of
Faith.
form of sound words: and charge him to keep fast the same, as a preservative
of the purity of Religion, against the corruptions which our nature is too
prone to receive: hence also it was that the fathers of the primitive times did
usually resolve certain Catechistical As the Nicene Creed, Ephesine, and of the
several Councels against the Haeresies of Arrius, Macedonius, and Eudoxius,
Nestorius, and Eutyches.
verities, into short and standing principles for the defending of the Church
in the pure truth of Christ Godhead, and the like against the Arrian and other
Heresies: and moreover we may observe the Devils strongest engine, against the
purity and prosperity of Religion to have been the obstruction of this
exercise; when he stirred up Julian the Apostate, as his cursed instrument to
make a more furious attempt, and prevailing assault then the ten first
persecutions on the Christian Religion; by taking away Christian books, and
putting down all Schools of Cateehizing: for the Devil and his instruments
were, and are sensible that Catechizing is the thing that impedes the rising of
his kingdom; for that by it the foundation of Christian Doctrine does not only
remain firm, but also the meanest members of the Church are made in some
measure capable of contending for the truth, and communicating the same to such
as by the enjoyment of other parts and abilities are likely to enter the lists
with truths opposers in its defense, though many eminent pillars, even
faithful Ministers of the Gospel be by their rage cut off: so that Martyrdom
cannot master it, but rather propagate it; For sanguis Martyrum becomes semen
Ecclesiae by watering these Catechetical heads of Gospel Doctrine; and
therefore the Spanish Jesuits were wont to say they had most hopes when there
was least Catechizing; nay the Pope himself with all his cursed crew, do
acknowledge the ground we have gotten of them has been by Catechizing: the
Pope complains, that the greatest hurt that the sons of the Heretics had ever
done him, was by their pestilential writings adorned with the title of
Catechisms: and the ground which they have gotten again of the Churches of God,
has bren by their more strict exacting of their Catechisms and our neglect of
so profitable a duty.

propagation of Religion to posterity: which lies on every Christian as his
positive duty to advance and endeavor, and therefore God commands the knowledge
of his Works and Word to be made known to sons, and sons sons, children, and
childrens children, Deuteronomy. 4.9. It was this standing Law of transmitting
Religion to posterity by Catechizing Children, that induced the Psalmist to
propound, publish and provoke attention to the Catecheticall Doctrine of the
Jews, in Psalm. 78. And one great reason why God would make known his secrets
unto Abraham, was that care God found in him by Catechizing to convey the
knowledge of him, his works and judgments to posterity. By this means
succeeding generations are enabled to accomplish the undertaking of progenitors
in the solemn commemorations of the special mercies of God: Hereby the Jews,
as the Rabbis tell us, retain a reverent esteem of their deliverance out of
Egypt, with all its concomitants and effects; nay by this the truth of
Christian Religion has been continued above sixteen hundred years, and
notwithstanding the rage and fury of persecutors endeavoring the utter
eradication and extinction of it, has by Catechisticall seed been derived
unto, and revived by succeeding generations.

prepares to ripeness in knowledge, being as the first draught of a picture,
the base and groundplot on which the building is set; the first rules of any
art or science, which well learned makes ready for perfection in the Art and
Science, and therefore it is called, the beginning of the Doctrine of Christ:
and it is to be observed on experience, that they that have attained to the
most perfect measure of knowledge of the Doctrine of Christ, were by
Catechizing well entered into the beginnings of it.

profit by the Word, when read by, or preached to us, whilst by Catechizing
men are enabled to refer what they read to their proper heads of Divinity, and
resolve them into summary conclusions, which are very much informing to the
judgment, and convincing to the conscience, and clearly to discern truth from
error, and distinguish between truth and truth, and see their dependence one on
another differ the Law from the Gospel with their different ends of humiliation
and comfort: whereby their understanding acting clearly and orderly will help
the memory to retain, quicken the affection, and make their growth sensible and
discernible, which being clouded by a confused knowledge, makes many times
profiting Christians to complain of barrenness under the Word. The care of the
Apostles, to feed first with milk of principles such as they endeavored to make
and approve profitable under the meat of higher Ministerial Doctrines, does
clearly commend to us this benefit of Catechizing: besides, the cause of the
Hebrews incapacity of receiving and profiting by higher Doctrines, is expressly
declared to be the little proficiency they had made in the principles of
Religion: and experimental observation does witness, that preaching does
little good where Catechizing is wanting; for we may well say with Bullinger,
Bulling. Decad. 5. Ser. 4. fol. 907.
How shall the people profit, when they understand not their Pastor when he
preaches Law, Covenant, or Grace, etc.

prevents their falling into fundamental errors, and following pernicious
doctrine; whilst by this means truth is founded and firmly fixed in their
minds and memories as a rule ready at hand to try all that is preached in the
Name of the Lord; as a touchstone, reserved to detect all such falsities as are
gilded over with the name of Truth, when directly contrary thereunto; as a root
whose several branches being soundly settled in the soul, makes them bear up the
head, and stand to their Christian station, against the stormy tempest of all
seducing doctrine: nay these are seeds of such solid comforts, and earnests of
such eternal joys, as bears up the heart cheerfully to embrace, and readily
to submit unto the most exquisite and cruel torments hell or earth can execute
upon them, rather then to deny the Faith, recede from the Truth, and make
shipwreck of a good Conscience: souls soundly Catechized, are noble Bereans,
receiving and believing the Word, because confirmed by, and consonant to
Scripture; not because spoken by Apostles: their judgments are swayed to the
receiving of principles by sound reason, not by by a seeming sanctified life of
the author or publisher, knowing that false Apostles are deceitful workers, 2
Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.
and transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ: and no marvel, for Satan
is transformed into an Angel of light: it is no great thing then, if his
Ministers transform themselves as though they were the Ministers of
righteousness, whose end will be according to their works: such are
Merindolian Martyrs, able to exhibit such Scriptural confessionsof faith, as
shall convince and confound such doctors as are appointed to convince them of
Heresy, or (more properly) to seduce them from the truth of Christ, (which
they called Heresy) so as to confess, that an eight days study of such a
confession, does teach more Scripture then all the days of their lives As did
the Doctor appointed by the Bishop of Caveillon to detect the Heresies in the
confession by them exhibited.
before; whose children are hereby enabled to confound learned Prelates, and
astonish reverend Doctors; making Catechisticall teaching, to As the religious
man of Paris did profess hearing the Children of Merindoll Catechize one
another. Fox his Acts and Monuments, p 866.
transcend the divine Disputations in the Schools of Sorborne in Paris: (nay in
a word) by this means they are so confirmed and established in the faith, that
they will sooner submit themselves, their wives and children, I and their whole
town to the cruel rage of outrageous enemies, then suffer themselves to be
moved away from the truth received and professed by them. This exercise of
Catechizing has been so effectual, to the establishing of souls in the truth,
that many by it have been prepared to Martyrdom, and enabled with admirable
patience to endure bitter scourging, and cruel torments, Seven of Origens
Scholars at one time.
and burnings (even in their young and tender years) in defense of the truth:
it is to the everlasting honor of some of the Martyrs, Chronicled in
Ecclesiastical story, that they received the crown of Martyrdom, being yet but
Catechumenists, whereas the reason of others falling away from the faith in the
time of persecution, is noted to be, that they were not yet fully instructed in
the Doctrine of Christ.

puts into a present capacity of communion at the Lords Table: it prepares the
heart unto the right and worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
and thereby delivers the soul from the great danger of eating and drinking
judgment to himself: whilst that by Catechizing, they are fully informed and
convinced of that faith and Doctrine openly professed, and sealed by the Lords
Supper, and therefore necessary to be known, before the participation of this
ordinance, whilst hereby they are invested with that necessary qualification
of knowledge, concerning man's misery by sin, recovery by Christ; Gods Covenant
with man established in the hands of a Mediator, the author, end, and
institution of this Ordinance; all which being Catetheticall heads must needs
encourage the desirous communicants, readily to submit themselves to the trial
of the Church, with their desire of admission to the Lords Table, with an
assured confidence that their communion cannot be denied on the account of
ignorance, whilst hereby they are enabled to the discharge of that necessary
duty of self-examination required by the Apostle in the Name of the Lord: 1
Cor. 11.28.
in that by Catechizing they come to know all those necessary qualifications
requisite to render the soul suitable for communion with God at this Table,
whilst they are made capable of discerning the Lords Body; in a Christian way
to distinguish the outward sign from the inward grace and thing signified;
whilst hereby (being delivered from Popish darkness) they are well taught
that outward elements are set before their outward senses to resemble and
represent to the inward man the body and blood of Jesus Christ: nay in a word,
whilst hereby they have in readiness matter of contemplation (suitable to such
an Ordinance) to the affectation of their hearts and excitation of their
affections in their enjoyment, hereby they are in a good capacity of renewing
their covenant with Go^, of receiving the sealing efficacy of that Ordinance to
the soul, and with the Jews to render an account to any that shall demand of
them the ground and end of their so frequent celebration of their Christian
Passover; whereas through the want of this exercise, men are in danger of
rushing unworthily and unpreparedly to the receiving of this Sacrament, to
press unreverently to take those things they do not know or understand the
ground, end, or meaning of; to taste those dainties that belong not to them,
and take in hand those duties they know not how to manage: in this regard the
primitive times always by their Cry of holy things for holy men sent away
among the common hearers and penitentiaries the Catechumeni, or such as were
learning their Catechism, as men not yet suitable for this Sacrament. Hence also
it is, that the Canons and constitutions of the Church of God in all ages, even
in the most corrupt times require that every one be Catechized before they
receive the Sacrament: and this is the cause why the Discipline of the Church
in this age and time requires an account of the knowledge of every one desirous
of the Lords Supper, that if any be found ignorant by reason of the past
neglect of this duty they may by diligent Catechizing be made fit for it, and
so be admitted to it.

puts on a man a powerful disposition of discharging his duty toward God and
man: in that by Catechizing they are not only taught to know the several
Commandments of the first and second Table, but also are well instructed to
distinguish duties appertaining to God from such as belong to man, and to
discern the several sins forbidden, and duties therein commanded: Isaac's
prayer and meditation, his submission in all things to his father; and the
servants prayer to the God of his Master Abraham, and faithfulness concerning
his Master's Oath, was before noted to be the fruit of Catechizing: and it is
to be observed on experience, that such are most apt to rebellion and
disobedience toward men, who are not Catechized in the Doctrine of God; and
therefore Constantine when he would select to himself such of his Court
Officers as he would confide in to be trusty Counselors and defenders of his
person and Kingdom, tried which of them were best instructed in the faith and
fear of God, declaring such only were worthy to be about a Prince as servants,
that being true to their God would be loyal to him.

easiness thereof: which is very much, and so found upon experience, for it
suiteth the Doctrine of Christ to the weakest capacity that is, and puts words
into the mouth; so as that by diligence in this exercise, the soul that is most
ignorant, knowing nothing of God, may be able in a short time to give an
account of his faith to any that shall ask it: because of the facility of it.
Children are in Scripture declared to be the subjects thereof, and it is called
rudiments, in which children, not men of years, are wont to be instructed;
milk, with which babes and not men of strength are to be nourished: and
although at the first it may seem (as all other ordinances of God) something
difficult, yet a willing and diligent mind will prove it very easy; for it
being a piece of the Lords yoke, which is all of it easy to be borne, cannot
but be pleasant to the willing spirit, although the flesh may be found weak in
submission to it.

Having thus briefly past the Reasons of the point, which I hope upon serious
thoughts may clearly convince any of the divine stamp of this exercise, and so
justify the use of it in the Churches of God, we come in the next place by way
of illustration to the truth, to consider what must be the matter and manner of
this exercise of Catechizing. And,

First then of the subject Matter to be taught by Catechizing, which must not
be as the Papist (wickedly corrupting this exercise and Ordinance of God) do
make to teach matters altogether unprofitable, nay vain, false and frivolous,
as the traditions of Fathers, the Canons of the Council and constitutions of
the Church inconsistent with the Doctrine of Scripture: nay in many things
directly contrary thereunto: neither yet must it be nice and curious points,
though true yet fruitless and unprofitable, tending more to tickle the brain,
and affect the sense, then to take with the heart and inform the judgment: but
the matter of Catechizing must be all and only the chief heads and standing
verities of the Christian Religion, summarily extracted out of the Scripture,
and solidly grounded upon the same, that they may be propounded as infallible
rules for the trial of the assertions, as standing principles, whence may
naturally flow all conclusions conducing to the profession of Christ with
steadfastness and comfort, and as a sure foundation upon which the fabric of
grace and of the knowledge of Jesus Christ may be erected and built up without
all doubt of falling, nay with confidence of standing against the tempestuous
assaults of all false doctrine and fiery persecution: and therefore the Church
of God has in different ages propounded those principal and special
verities, that in such ages have been oppugned by gainsayers of the truth and
the enemies of the Church, as Catechetical Doctrine to establish the people of
God in the Truths resisted. Thus did the Nicene Council in the time of the
Arrians Heresy, and therefore the learned considering what should be the heads
of the Catechism, some have resolved in general the Law and the Gospel: others
the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments and Creed (commonly called Symbolum
Apostolicum, Apostles Creed) others the Doctrine of Gods Will and his Works:
others the Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Doctrine of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, and Prayer: others the misery of man by Sin, his recovery by Christ,
and thankfulness to God for so great mercy: but not to stand on the
determination of the several particular heads, we may confound their several
judgments, and find them all center in the general before expressed, in which
we may safely acquiesce, that the heads and principles of Christian Religion
must be the matter of Catechizing, which may more fully be proved by these
Reasons.

prescribed by God to his Church, in that by his Spirit he taught Adam to
instruct his sons in the promise of the Messiah as the ground of Sacrifice: and
to Abraham, the matter of whose Catechism may be probably conjectured to be the
Covenant God made with him and with his seed: he expressly commands the Doctrine
of the Law and Passover, to be the matter of the Catechisms taught by the
Jews to their children, when in Exodus 12.26. When they celebrated the
Passover, God enjoins them to show their children, how God passed over them in
the land of Egypt, and the Doctrine of the Law, and Gods dealing with the
Israelites, Moses in the Name of the Lord prescribes as the matter of
Catechism, in Deuteronomy. 6.7. and from this Catechetical matter it is, that Paul
calls them Catechized in the Law, in Romans 2.18.

propounded by Christ and his Apostles; for we shall find the sum or matter of
their Catechizing, to be the main principles of Christian Religion; as in
Christ his instruction of his Disciples was in that main standing principle of
Religion (so much oppugned by the world) that he was the Christ the Son of the
living God: and the author of this Epistle gives us a very clear account of the
main heads of the Apostolic Catechism in these five heads, Faith in Christ,
repentance from dead works, doctrine of Baptisms, laying on of hands, and the
Resurrection of the dead, Heb. 6.2. Which are clear Scriptural and fundamental
notions: and Timothy being Catechized, is said to have learned the Scripture
from his youth, 2 Timothy 3.15.

This was the matter of Catechizing in the primitive and pure times of the
Church after the Apostles; for they instructed in the Doctrine of the Trinity
and faith in Christ the Mediator and the like, as may appear by ancient
writings, and the Caterhisms of the Fathers, as Augustine and others: We read
of many converted to the Faith of Christ in the Catechizing School of
Alexandria, and so well grounded in the Faith of Christ, that they were fitted
for Martyrdom, and cheerfully submitted to the same. Six of Origens Disciples,
whereof some were but learning their Catechism, are recorded at one time to be
led to Martyrdom: certainly then the matter of this exercise could be no other
then the chief principles of the Christian Religion.

The fourth Reason, It is only Catechizing in Scripture Doctrine and principles
of Religion, that train up in the fear of God in truth and godliness, which
all children ought to be educated in: this matter is proper to that excellent
end of this exercise (viz.) the glory of God and salvation of the soul, before
spoken of; and therefore this only must be the matter of Catechizing; for in
all effects to be produced, there must be a sutablenesse between the causa and
the causatum. These precedent reasons being seriously considered, I hope may
clear it to every rational man's judgment, that the matter of Catechizing must
always be the heads, and yet only the heads of Christian Religion that are
matters of Faith and standing principles. And now before I proceed to make
known to you the manner of this exercise, I must make a little stay to remove
an Objection framed from this matter against this exercise, thus:

sum of Christian Religion extracted out of Scripture, as Repentance, Faith,
Sacraments, Resurrection, and the Doctrine of the Trinity and the like, must be
as you say the proper matter of Catechizing, Wherein does it differ from
preaching? which we all know to be an ordinance of Jesus Christ treating of the
Doctrine of the Scripture, and that very matter that you have mentioned to be
the matter of this exercise; and if it do not differ, may it not be sufficient
that we submit to Preaching, but we must needs have Catechizing, which does but
the same thing imposed on us, as so necessary a duty, and distinct from
Preaching?

Word, and administration of the Sacrament commend to us the same matter of
Christ crucified, in so much as that they are called the one verbum audibile,
the audible word to be heard; and the other verbum visibile, the word to be
seen, and so both the Word; yet it will not follow, but that they are different
and distinct Ordinances, and not the same, even as the learning of ABC is
different and distinct from ready reading, which is but a recital of the same
material letters: and the learning of the first rules of any Art or Science is
different from more perfect proceeding in the same Art or Science, whether
Logic, Philosophy, or the like.

distinctly subjected to in the Churches of God, I shall satisfy my self in
showing you wherein they differ, which I hope may satisfy you that they may
not be confounded; the which Mr. Greenham that reverend and godly Author has
in part done before me, who notes them to differ in these three things, unto
which I shall add two other.

First, Preaching is the dilating of one member of the Christian Religion into
a whole Treatise: Catechizing is the contracting of the whole into a sum.

Secondly, Preaching is unto all sorts, but Catechizing only to the younger,
and rude, or ignorant.

Thirdly, Preaching is not exacted to be repeated, Catechizing is exacted.

Fourthly, Catechizing principally informs the Judgment in the Theory of
Christian Religion: but Preaching does chiefly excite the affections, and
directs the heart in the practice of the same.

Fifthly, Catechizing lays the foundation of Christ in the soul, and
preaching builds upon it; that teaches the ABC, or first rudiments, this
perfecteth the knowledge of Christian Doctrine. Having thus spoken of the
matter, we come in the next place to speak unto you of the manner of
Catechizing, concerning which we shall propound three things to be considered.

First, Some rules concerning the forms of Catechism to be used.

Secondly, Who must Catechize, and how they must demean themselves in this duty.

Thirdly, Who must be Catechized, and how they must carry themselves in it.

First of the first of these, concerning the forms of Catechizing to be used,
observe these four rules.

1. The matter, heads and grounds of Catechizing, are contained and expressed
in Scripture, and therefore always the same; but the forms are not, but left
to the liberty of the Church, and therefore variable so, as that we are not so
precisely tied to the form as we are to the matter.

2. Such forms are most fitting, as may be found to tend most to the
edification of the Church, in confirming them in the truths and principles most
opposed, in which respect the Church has taken liberty to vary.

3. It is very expedient and profitable, that there be in the Church two forms
of Catechism, a shorter and more easy for the younger sort which are not yet
able to learn and commit to memory a larger; and a larger wherein for the riper
sort the principles of Religion are more fully handled.

4. Every form used must be found brief, plain, orderly, and by way of question
and answer easy; for that this form of teaching is most expedient, as by way
of question and answer.

First, it is most suitable to the rude and ignorant infant capacity by putting
words into their mouths, helping them to answer and understand when they see
the question propounded and answer to be rendered.

Secondly, As enjoined to the people of Israel, who are required to whet upon
their children their Catechetical Doctrine, which can no otherways be done,
then by repetition of the strokes of the same subject.

Thirdly, As practiced by Jesus Christ when willing to receive an account of
his Disciples profiting under his Ministry, and to confirm them in the Faith in
opposition to the common fame of the world, Whom say ye that I am?

Fourthly, As that which puts them into an aptitude and readiness of rendering
an account of the faith that is in them to every one that asks, being hereby
better enabled to retain and resolve answers proper to questions suddenly
propounded (but before known) then the knowledge of bare notions without the
questions to which they answer.

The second thing considerable in the manner of Catechizing, is the persons
that must Catechize, together with their carriage in this duty; now the persons
that must do it, will be found to be three sorts of men:

1. Ministers in their Congregations.

2. Schoolmasters in their Schools.

3. Masters of families in their families.

The first sort that must Catechize must be Ministers, that have taken upon
them the Pastoral charge of a congregation to feed them with knowledge and
understanding according to the several capacities of the souls, as well young
as old under their charge: and that it is their duty, may appear by these
ensuing reasons.

First, The careful performance of this duty by the faithful Ministers of Jesus
Christ, and most eminent and reverend Fathers of the primitive times: not to
stand upon the probability of Paul's Catechizing, from 1 Cor. 14.19. it is much
more than probable, that it was done in the Church of the Hebrews by the
Author of this Epistle, who sharply checks their non-proficiency in this duty.
Eusebius tells us, that before Pantenus, Clemens, Origin, Mark the Evangelist
did Catechize at Alexandria, which was commended in him by Philo Judeus, which
three were themselves Catechizers in the same Church of Alexandria in the years
of our Lord Two hundred, and two hundred and fifty, each succeeding other,
Origin being set up by the diligent oversight of Demetrius their Bishop; and
after whom succeeded Heraclus, and Dionysius Alexandrinus, and others: also
about the same time we read of Optatus, Catechizer at Carthage in the days of
Cyprian: also the several Catechisms of the Fathers, as Cyrill, Gregory,
Nicen, the books of Augustine de Catechizandis rudibus; and his four books ad
Catechumenos; Athanasius his Synopsis of sacred Scripture; and Fulgentius de
fide ad diaconum, do proclaim that conscionable care they had to the discharge
of this duty: and the duty of Ministers for the edifying of the body of Christ
being always one and the same, their conscionable discharge of this exercise
does declare it to be a Ministerial duty.

Secondly, A Minister by preaching does not discharge his duty, if he neglect
Catechizing: because thereby he instructs only those that are adulti, men of
years, and strength to digest such meats, and either wholly neglects to feed
youth, no less committed to his charge as members of the Church, or else
administers that food which is unsuitable and cannot be by them digested, in
stead of the milk of principles of Religion, of which even babes in Christ and
almost in years are capable: and truly we have cause to suspect one great cause
of young men's high flown opposition of the truth and Ordinances of God, to
spring from their affected hearing of those things in preaching which they
cannot digest into orderly nourishment, because they have not by the milk of
Catechizing been prepared thereunto.

Thirdly, Ministers ought to Catechize to make all his pains and preaching the
more profitable to his hearers, by keeping fresh in their minds and memories
those standing notions of Christian Religion, which he does by preaching more
particularly illustrate, more fully prove, and more powerfully apply to their
affections.

Fourthly, That thereby he may more clearly discern the estate of his flock,
observe the Masters of families in their proper places to discharge their
duties, and see their proficiency in grace and knowledge under all the
Ordinances of God by him dispensed, confirming them in the truth learned, which
is clear to have been the reason of Christ his Catechizing of his Disciples
after his long preaching, and many miracles amongst them, in Mat. 13.51. Having
preached to them many parables, he asks them if they understand: and Mat.
16.13, 14. Whom say men, whom say ye that I am?

Fifth and last reason why Ministers must Catechize in their Congregations, is
that they may detect all lurking deceivers that lie in wait to seduce the
people committed to their charge from the truth, and discern when any of them
begin to be tainted with error and false doctrine, whereby they are directed
how to improve themselves as skilful workmen in the Lords house, dividing the
Word aright, defending the truth and soul with which he is charged, stopping
the mouth of all gainsayers: which is the great reason of that general
Apostolical charge of holding fast the form of sound words, in 2 Timothy 1.13. and
commendation of obeying the form of Doctrine in Romans 6.17. which the learned
conclude to be Catechism.

Having thus given you the Reasons why Catechizing is the duty of Ministers, I
shall pass from this with this hearty desire, that God would put into the
hearts of all his Ministers to perform their duty herein in these backsliding
days, wherein the principles of Religion are so generally unknown and
declined: and so I come to consider the second sort of Catechists, which are
Schoolmasters in their Schools, whose diligence in the discharge hereof should
write really what is worthily written on the walls of that famous School of this
City at Paul's, Schola Catechisationis puerorum in optima and maxima fide
Christi; and for these following reasons.

1. That the main and chief end of erecting Schools, was always instruction
in, and preparation to divine worship: for even among the Pagans they did
appoint Schools to the end that the Oracles of their gods might be read to the
youth, and they Philosophically prepared to pursue the summum bonum of the
soul: and among the Papists to instruct and train up in traditions of the
Fathers and C^nons of the Church concerning the corrupt worship of God; whom it
were an exceeding sin and shame for Christian Schoolemasters in the reformed
Churches to come short of by not instructing in the true worship of the true
God.

2. As this was the end of Schools in general, so we shall see that in Church
of God, among the Jews and also among the Christians, Schools were constituted
and conserved by the special providence of God, for the instruction of youth in
she Doctrine of his worship, as well as other learning. The eight and forty
cities of the Levites were dispersed abroad through all the tribes of the
children of Israel, that they might be as Schools wherein the youth might drink
in the Doctrine of the Law and the Prophets, together with the knowledge of the
liberal Arts: such as these were the Schools of the Prophets in Shiloh, Ramoth
gilead, Jericho, Bethel, and Mount Carmell, and the Scholars thereof were
called the sons of the Prophets, 1 Samuel 9.10, 5. 2 King. 2.3. and 4.25. and
6.2. And it is worthy observation, that Samuel was Master of the School of the
Prophets at Naioth near Ramah at such time as David fled from the presence of
Saul, 1 Samuel 19.20. And such a School as this Gamaliel kept, of whom Paul
declares himself to have been taught like a child the knowledge of the Law as
well as other learning, Act. 22.3. and as these Schools were among the Jews,
so we shall find them in the Christian Churches: Eusebius reports out of
Philo Judeus, that there was at Alexandria in Egypt an ancient School founded
by Ptolemeus, famous throughout the world; when Mark the Evangelist preached
the Gospel there, he turned the same into a Christian School; the which did
afterward so continue; and in it Origin was Schoolmaster, and when by reason of
the multitude of the Scholars that resorted to it, (...) found himself not able
to perform the duty, he chose Heraclas (a man expert in holy Scripture and
studious of divine things, very eloquent, and not ignorant of Philosophy) to be
his Usher, fellow-helper, dividing the company, did appoint him to initiate and
enter them in the faith, and he himself did teach them that were riper, not
only in Philosophy Geometry and other liberal Arts, but in divine things also.
So Pamphilus a Christian Philosopher did ordain at Cesarea, a famous School
both for divine and humane learning: and Nazianzen doubted not to call the
School at Athens a golden parent of all speech and learning. To this reason we
might add an evidence of God's constituting of Schools as fountains of
Christian Religion from Satan's enmity against the same, expressed by the cruel
martyrdom of famous Cassianus of Forum in Italy, by his Scholars at the cruel
command of the Emperor, and the putting down of such Schools by Julian the
Apostate in his devilish design of rooting out all Christian Doctrine.

Thirdly, Schoolmasters ought to Catechize, because it is impossible for youth,
to go well forward in virtue and good manners (the end of all learning) unless
they be well instructed in the principles of Religion and Doctrine of Christ:
for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.

Fourthly, Without Catechizing, godly parents do miss of the end of all their
care and charges in setting their children to school, which is to be educated
in the fear of the Lord, and instructed in the true Religion: which neglected,
a Pagan were as good as a Christian, a Papist as good as a Protestant
Schoolmaster for them.

Fifthly, In not Catechizing, they transgress the Law of Church and all
Christian Commonwealth: which requires that a Schoolmaster should subscribe to
sound Doctrine: because he ought chiefly to teach Religion.

Lastly, Prayers (which we suppose to be in Christian Schools (unless they
will come short of Paganish tutors, who used to begin their lessons with
invocation to their gods) cannot but be profaned and used unreverently, where
Catechizing is neglected: because through want of instruction, the youth
understand not the duty in general, nor petition in particular, and so it is
unto them as in an unknown tongue.

Having thus showed you the Reasons why Ministers and Schoolmasters should
Catechize, we come now to consider the Reasons why this duty is to be performed
by Parents and Masters of families, which are briefly these:

First, God commands and commends it in them, in Deuteronomy. 4.9. and 6.7. and 11.19.
Thou shall teach thy children, thy sons and thy sons sons; in Ephesians. 6.4.
Parents are required to bring up their children in the instruction and
information of the Lord: besides that command in Prove. 22.6. Train up a child
in his youth: and this duty has been commended in Abraham, in Genesis 14.14. and
18.19. and the effect of it in Timothy.

Secondly, That they may (as much as in them lies) help forward the
regeneration of their children: to whom they have conveyed an evil and
corrupted nature. To this Catechizing is singularly helpful by laying in the
soul the Word of God, by which is conveyed the immortal seed, informing them
in the Doctrine of God, sinful nature and their own covenant with God in
Baptism.

Thirdly, That they may propagate Religion to posterity according to their
duty, in Deuteronomy. 4.9. Genesis 18.18. unto which end, as we before noted, Catechizing
is singularly instrumental.

Fourthly, That they may prepare their families even in the time of their youth
to bear witness to the truth, unto the confusion of the enemies thereof, as
did the Children of Merindoll: nay under the most exquisite torments, to
rejoice in and encourage to patient constancy in the faith of Christ: for this
has added much force unto the truth of God in all ages, that it has not only
been sealed with the blood of men of age and gray hairs, but also youth, even
of Infants, who have been unmovably fixed in it: which how could they have
been, or their parents encourage them to it, and endear them to themselves by
it, if they had not been well instructed in the Doctrine of Christ, and their
Parents discharged their duty in Catechizing them betimes: of the which we
shall find several instances in the third persecution under Adrian the
Emperor, we read of Symphorisa a godly matron martyred with her seven
children: and Sophia with her three children: also in the fourth persecution
under Antoninus Verus, we read of the seven children of Felicitas cruelly and
diversely martyred before her eyes, her self cheerfully also sealing the truth
with death: so also a woman of Syria and her two daughters, and Athanasia and
her three daughters: What shall I say of young Eulatia, and others under the
Heathens, besides the constancy of a boy of eight or nine years old well
instructed by his father: John Fatty, who was by Bonner cruelly whipped for his
profession: What shall I say of Vitalis, who suffered with his godly Master
Agrico: of John Leaf, an Apprentice, who was with Mr. Bradford burned at the
nineteenth year of his age: of Tho. Hinshaw, cruelly whipped in Bonner's garden
for the Truth? but above all I cannot pass with silence the Child which
witnessed the truth of God with renowned Romanus when but seven years of age,
who having witnessed the profession of it under cruel whipping, and at last
having his skin pulled off his head, was thus encouraged by his godly Mother:
My child thirst after the cup of which the Children of Bethleem did drink;
remember Isaac 's obedience unto death: suffer a little my child, thou shall
anon go to him that will cover thy naked head with a crown of eternal glory:
and when after with a smiling countenance he had approved himself invincible by
suffering torments, and was cruelly beheaded to the grief of the beholders, and
great joy of the Mother, only standing by with dry eyes singing to Gods glory,
All praise with heart and voice,
O Lord, we yield to thee,
To whom the death of all thy Saints,
we know most dear to be.
This constancy of the child, and comfort of the Mother, must needs witness
the truth of his answer to the Captain that he sucked in the Doctrine of Christ
with his mothers milk: and much enforce this Reason for Masters of families
Catechizing.

The fifth and last Reason why Masters of families should Catechize, may be
this, That they may preserve the Church of God in their houses, faithfully
discharge the Prophetical office (to which they are redeemed by Jesus Christ)
in instructing their families in matters of Faith and obedience, whereby they
are enabled to discharge their several duties toward God and man, that they
may sweeten relation, and the performances of their priestly office in prayer
and praises to be presented with faith and fear, with fervor and feeling,
whilst by diligent Catechizing they are enabled to do all with knowledge and
understanding.

Having thus showed you who must Catechize, we shall briefly show you what they
must do in the performance of this duty, before we show you who must be
Catechized.

First, The Catechism ready and the Catechized present, they must (as in every
other Ordinance of God) begin with hearty and earnest prayer to the most wise
God for his blessing on this divine exercise, that it may tend to the
edification of all concerned in it.

Secondly, Propound the questions, and require an audible answer thereunto: for
it is most expedient that the Catechism be by question and answer, as was
before noted.

Thirdly, Audibly repeat the question and answer, that such as stand by may be
sure to hear, observe, and have it the better imprinted in their minds and
memories.

Fourthly, Cause the Catechized according to their capacities to prove the
several propositions expressed in the questions and answers, by some suitable
places of Scripture, that they may be able to discern them to be the truths of
God grounded on his Word.

Fifthly, according to their several abilities, and in their proper places,
they must explain the several propositions that they may the better be
understood, and the heart be the more affected with the same, and also take
notice of the principal errors that do oppose them: they must perform the whole
duty cheerfully and reverently, as becomes an ordinance of God; praising the
forward, encouraging the willing, patiently bearing with the weak, and gravely
admonishing the unruly.

We come now to show you who must be Catechized: in the consideration whereof,
we shall first show who were wont to be Catechized in the primitive times: and
then who amongst us ought to subject themselves to this duty.

In the primitive times they did usually Catechize two sorts, the one before,
and the other after Baptism: those that were Catechized before Baptism, were
Heathens converted from their Paganism to the knowledge of the true God, who
before they were received into the fellowship of Jesus Christ, were Catechized.
Justin Martyr in his second Apology for the Christians, declares, that if any
Heathen man desired to be received into the fellowship of the Church, he was
first Catechized in the principles of Religion; and then hearing further the
Word of God, as it were the conditions of the covenant: afterward came into the
face of the congregation, and made a profession thereof promising their
obedience thereunto, and so they were baptized, and received as members: such
an one was Augustine, when converted from Manichism, he was Catechized, and
then Baptized, in which time of his Catechism he wrote many books: so Ambrose
was in his Catechism and not baptized when chosen Bishop of Millaine: such as
these were the Burgundians whom Socrates declares to have been seven days in
Catechizing, and baptized in the eighth day: Jerome ad Pannachium makes mention
of such as were in his days Catechized forty days, and then baptized: in
Tertullian's days they did Catechize till Easter or Whitsontide, and then
baptize: in a word, such as these were Catechumeni and novices sent away from
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

The second sort Catechized, were the children of the faithful, who had been
baptized in their Infancy: who when they came to years of discretion were
taught how great things the Lord had done for them and for their forefathers,
in receiving them into his covenant; the which things when they had learned,
and were able to render a reason of the same, they were brought into the
Congregation, and made a profession of their Faith, promising obedience
thereunto; and so in their own persons renewed covenant with God, and were
confirmed members of the Church, as Deodate infers from Heb. 6.2. Laying on of
hands: and so also Calvin, Beza, Hemingius, and others on the place.

Having thus showed who were accustomed to be Catechized in the primitive times
and Churches, we may take notice amongst us all being baptized in their
infancy, we are not in capacity of admitting that difference, and therefore we
must in general resolve, that those and all those that are ignorant of or not
well instructed in the main and fundamental grounds of Religion and the
Christian Doctrine, must be Catechized, whether they be young or old, rich or
poor, high or low, married or unmarried; for ignorance is always the ground of
this exercise, and therefore whilst age, quality and condition cannot expel
or dispense with ignorance in any, they cannot exempt any from this instructing
ordinance of God: but if indeed we might conclude those that are of years to
have been Catechized, then we only make youth the subject of this exercise, who
would be put to it by their parents as soon as they are capable of any thing
else, and be presented in the Church so soon as they can quietly abide, and
give a reasonable account of their capacity to be instructed; that so being
betime seasoned with this spiritual liquor, they may always retain the savor
of it: and trained up in it in the days of his youth, they may not depart from
it when they are old, Prove. 22.6. that thereby the Word of God may grow up with
them as a light unto their feet, and lanthorn their paths, in directing them to
mortify lust betimes, to avoid disobedience to parents, unthristinesse,
idleness and vanity, and other profaneness, to which youth is very prone and
subject; and to teach them to remember their Creator betimes, know their duty
to God, their parents and others, and when inflamed with youthful lust, to
consider that for all things they must come to Judgment.

But more particularly children and youth ought to be exercised in this
ordinance of Catechizing, and approve themselves the subjects of this exercise
for these special reasons: That,

1. Covenant to them confirmed in Baptism may be understood and improved: want
of Catechizing makes Baptism ineffectual; the Jews by Catechizing made their
children to understand the nature of Circumcision and the Passover, and
covenant thereby sealed: Confirmation of children was used, when by Catechizing
they were able personally to claim and engage in the covenant.

2. Counsel unto duty may be ready at hand: Children as soon as they can act
their reason, are engaged to duty to God, Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in
the days of thy youth: and Catechizing acquaints them with it. I have before
noted Isaac's meditation, and Abel's sacrifice to be the fruit of Catechizing:
how could King Josiah at sixteen year old seek the God of David, and at twenty
years old zealously destroy Idolatry, if he had not been well Catechized? and
how should King Edward the sixth his zealous resistance of Popish superstition,
have proclaimed more Divinity in his finger then in Bishop Cranmer's head, if
he had not well studied the Catechism? And as they owe duty to God, so to men,
to their parents obedience, to their elders in age or office reverence, which
they are counseled in by Catechizing.

3. Curb may grow up with their corruptions: a mention of coming to judgment,
gives a check to youthful lust, to the young man's rejoicing in his youth, and
taking his pleasure, Eccles. 11.9. A well Catechized Joseph will in childhood
out of enmity to impiety complain of brethrens miscarriages, Genesis 37.9. an
enlightened conscience will be able to dispute with the Devil, and silence
suggestions unto sin.

4. Change in their nature and disposition may be wrought: the work of grace is
not in any by natural generation, nor infused by any extraordinary inspiration;
it must therefore be effected in the use of ordinary means, whereof none suit
infant capacity as Catechizing; by this the word that incorruptible seed by
which we are born again, 1 Pet. 1.23.
is implanted in them to the informing judgment, persuading the will, and
transforming nature.

5. Capacity exercised in Christianity may be enlarged: We are most capable of
the art or trade in which we were trained young; our children can best
apprehend, judge, discourse of, and invent those things about which they spent
their youthful years: if then they were but exercised in principles of
Religion and Doctrines of Christianity, they would more readily understand,
discourse and judge of them when they come to years: the great dexterity of the
Jews in the doctrines of the Scriptures, was the result of their Catechism:
the ready answers of the children of Merindoll, and the renown^d child which
suffered with Romanus, was no other then the effect of capacity exercised in
Catechizing.

6. That they may continue a stable course in profession and practice of
Christianity: A vessel when old, retains the savor of the liquor with which
it was seasoned when new, Horace.
Quae semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem, etc. says the Poet, as the
reason why youth must be instructed in best things: and God teaches us to
train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not
depart from it: custom does obdurate in any way, and in ways of piety enables
to withstand temptation: the tree when it is old, stands against all strength
and storms as it was bent when young: Paul persuades Timothy to continue in
the things he learned, his persuasive is that (...), from a sucking child he
had known the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.14, 15.

I have showed you ought to be Catechized, and why children are in special to
be the subjects of this exercise: I shall briefly show how they must carry in
it, and so pass to the application: As to their carriage that are to be
catechized, note these rules.

1. They must with all cheerfulness and constancy sit under Catechizing as an
ordinance of God, appointed for their eternal good, not being discouraged by
any reproaches of the wicked, nor diverted by any temptation whatsoever.

2. They must with all eager diligence commit to memory all the principles and
heads of Christian Doctrine commended and committed to them, not breaking off
from the work on any sense of difficulty in, or indisposition to the exercise.

3. They must be always ready with an holy boldness, to give a reason of the
hope that is in them to every one that asks.

4. They must with all reverence and modesty give audible and distinct answers
to the several questions propounded.

5. That they may not lose the end in using the means they must diligently
study the answers they do repeat, observe the questions to which they answer,
resolve the question and answer into entire and distinct propositions, hearken
with all meekness and reverence to the instructing exposition, consult annexed
Scriptures, observe their pertinency to prove the principles, and (according to
their capacities) commend all to Gods blessing by prayer; hereby they will take
off the scandal cast on Catechizing, and make it to appear their faith is not
pinned to another man's sleeve, but they see with their own eyes, assent to
principles they understand, and are ready to contend for those Doctrines of the
truth of which they are clearly and fully convinced.

Having thus laid before you the doctrinal consideration of this Truth, and I
hope informed your judgments in the great necessity of such a duty in the
Church of God, I shall now briefly suggest the improvement or application
thereof, for the exciting of your affections toward the same: and first it is
useful to information of judgment in these truths.

1. Catechizing is not an exercise of indifferency, but of positive necessity
in the Church of God: men may not choose whether they will instruct or be
instructed in the principles of Religion and foundations of the Doctrine of
God, and persuade themselves they do well, if they exercise and submit to such
instruction, but sin not if they refuse or neglect the same; for if there be
(as I hope you see) a divine stamp on this exercise, as an ordinance of God
morally and not ceremonially binding, it must needs impose an absolute and
undeniable duty: the parents among the Jews might not conceive themselves at
liberty in respect of conscience, whether they would teach their children and
childrens children the ways and ordinances of the Lord, or no; neither yet the
children might think themselves at liberty to choose or refuse subjection unto
such instruction, whilst God had enjoined the same as duty: neither yet may
Christian parents under the Gospel choose or refuse the bringing up their
families in the nurture and fear of the Lord, by this childish way of
Catechizing, nor yet children choose or refuse subjection to the same, whilst
it appears to be an Ordinance of Gods prescription. And what is thus instanced
concerning parents, holds good concerning Schoolmasters and Ministers,
according to their relations, and in their proper places: Ministers may not
think they have discharged pastoral duty, when they have preached once or twice
a week and neglected this exercise, but must know that it is absolute and
undeniable duty for them to see that all such under their charge as are
ignorant of the principles of Religion be therein Catechized; and then people
must know it their duty, willingly to subject to the same: the Apostolical
persuasion did dictate absolute duty of feeding babes with milk, as well as
strong men with strong meat; of laying the foundation of God, as well as
building up to perfection; of disciples to be exercised in and prepared by
principles to receive higher doctrines; which was the undoubted ground of their
resolving the Christian Doctrine into Catechetical heads and constitution of
Catechizing Schools, and order in, the Christian Churches: nay, moreover had
instruction in the principles of Religion been a matter of indifferency and not
of duty, the neglect thereof had not been a matter reprehensive and chargeable
on the Hebrews as a matter of iniquity. I fear my brethren, it is a too
generally received fancy (as well among such as should catechize, as such as
should be catechized) that Catechizing is good, but not necessary; commendable
where it is used, but not duty: this fear may be justly grounded on the neglect
thereof; nay on childrens and servants refusing subjection to such ways when
thereunto called, not only by their Ministers but Parents and Masters: nay in
affirming that though it is good, yet it has not any ground in Scripture: it
were well if the lukewarmnesse of some in it, and the perverseness of some
toward it, did not lead them to determine this exercise to be iniquity, and
denominate it the Antichristian weapon of the late Assembly; but whosoever
seriously considers the care of the Bishops, the constant pains of Catechizers,
the cheerful submission of Christians (of all ages, sexes, ranks, and degrees)
to this way of instruction, and the continued practice of the primitive times
of the Christian Churches, seconded with the Canons of Councels, constitutions
of all Church assemblies, composed Catechisms; conscientious discharge of the
duty by the most faithful Ministers and servants of God in all the succeeding
ages of the Church to this day, must conclude it to have been apprehended as
absolute duty: which appearing to be a Gospel exercise, yet to be used amongst
us and the Churches of God that shall succeed, must be accordingly continued,
not as a thing of indifferency, and that may be done, but of necessity, and
that must be done.

2. It may inform us that subjection unto Catechizing in the principles of
Religion, is not base and shameful, but good and honorable, not with
blushing, but boldness to be undertaken: I know not what madness possesses
men's brains, to make modesty the main obstruction of this duty; may we not see
such as are not ashamed to be ignorant, ashamed by this way to be instructed?
nay and to note it as a ground of contempt and derision, even by laughter and
digitation, to such as subject unto the same, as if God had stamped divine
authority on such ordinances as might not with modesty and honor be exercised:
or had called for such duties in which his Church and servants might not be
seen without shame: Is any Gospel ordinance to be declined as shameful and
contemptible by such as would be called Christians and Gospel professors? Did
the Apostle ever upbraid or leave it as the brand of the Hebrews, that they
were Catechized and subjected to this ordinance, or not rather that they had
not been sufficiently Catechized, and made such proficiency in this School and
lesson as they ought to have done? Was it a shame for Christ to be found among
the Catechumenists of the Jews? Could not the Apostles answer without blushing
to Christ his Whom do ye say that I am? Was it the shame of Theophilus,
Apollos, and others, that they had been Catechized? I find the Apostle Paul
indeed stigmatizing the Jews with not practicing Catechetical heads and rules,
as a note of their perpetual infamy; but never with being Catechized, which had
been their glory, and now was the great aggravation of their iniquity. Nay is
it not the everlasting renown of the Schools at Athens and Alexandria, that
they were Schools of Catechizing and good learning? Did wise Philosophers, and
honorable Senators, and reverend fathers of the Church, when becoming
Christians, submit with shame unto this exercise? Is not the name of Origin
famous in the Church for his Catechizing? Is it not recorded to the glory of
Ambrose, that he was in his Catechism, when called to the charge of the Church
at Millaine? Let men therefore consider, it may be a shame to want Catechizing,
but it must be our honor to submit to this exercise and be Catechized: and
whosoever shall make it a brand of reproach to be Catechized, to be ashamed of
doing duty themselves, and deride others for their cheerful discharge thereof;
let it be their brand, that they have through ignorance vilified and despised a
Gospel exercise; and let the people know and settle it in their judgments,
that Catechizing being a Gospel exercise is good and honorable.

2. Use of the point is to reprove: seeing that Catechizing is Gods Ordinance,
a Gospel exercise to be used in the Churches of Jesus Christ, it does justly
bespeak matter of blame and rebuke for the general neglect of this exercise in
the midst of us in these reforming days: is it not almost laid aside in
congregations and families, as if it had been a tradition of men, rather then
an institution of God, a Prelatical fancy and imagination to vanish with them
and the ceremonies as unsuitable for times of reformations? Oh Christians, is
divine stamp done away from this exercise, that it is done away from practice?
is Gospel direction no guidance to this action, that it is laid aside by
eminent professors of the Gospel? are there in the Churches of God no subjects
for it, that it is so silent? nay is it not sad to see, and may we not with
shame and sorrow consider ignorance, error, lukewarmnesse, to Christian
Religion and contempt of the Gospel, so to increase as to cast off (if not cast
out) this instructing, initiating, grounding exercise? Is it any marvel to
find men Scepticks in Religion, now believing this, now that, who were never
taught nor learned the principles of Christian Doctrine and standing verities
necessary to be believed unto salvation? can we wonder to see souls seriously
affectionate to piety and godliness to act the duties thereof precipitately,
and irregularly, and suddenly fall off when we remember that they have no
principles fixed in their minds to guide their practice and support their
spirits? shall we think it strange to find painful preaching little to
profit, when we consider Catechizing has not laid the foundation, on which
preaching higher doctrines should build? if the Hebrews non-proficiency under
this exercise made them incapable of instruction and edification by higher
Doctrines, what capacity can be expected in those Churches where this duty is
wholly neglected? have we not cause to fear Popish and blasphemous doctrines
catechetically propounded, easily to captivate poor souls from very fundamental
truths, whereof for want of Catechizing they must needs be ignorant? In a word,
my brethren, In the Cracovian and Biddles Catechisms.
is it not sad to see, and may we not with shame consider the light of nature
teaching, and the care of men pursuing all Arts and Sciences by principles,
axioms and standing verities: and only Christian Doctrine neglected to be thus
taught and learned? did not the past ages of the Church of God commonly both
teach and learn the Doctrine of God by this exercise, as the way of the Lords
prescription: and shall we in this age neglect and omit it; Let all therefore
subjected to the guilt of this great iniquity of neglecting this Gospel
exercise, consider the same seriously, and take to themselves this reproof thus
justly exhibited, and reflecting in special on these two sorts of men.

1. Such who by virtue of their places should, but do not call to Catechizing
such of their relations as are under their charge and tuition in the Lord:
Ministers, Schoolmasters and Masters of families, who can live from year to
year without once calling to their relations to seek knowledge and
understanding, without counselling and instructing them in the fundamentals of
Religion: without commanding, and by the authority with which God has invested
them compelling subjection to this duty: I have before showed, that it is the
duty of such to Catechize, yet how many shall we find neglecting the same, if
not many Ministers (as I fear too many) contenting themselves with their
preaching to people of years, and never calling for the lambs and young ones of
their flock, to receive instruction and be fed with milk of Christian
principles; yet I fear Schoolmasters generally so neglective of calling on
their Scholars to learn and give account of the ABC of Christianity, the
special rules of Gospel Doctrine, the axioms of truth and true Religion,
whilst they lay out their power and authority in teaching the first rules of
Arts and Sciences. And Masters of families I may (with more confidence then I
delight in) charge to have left their children and servants at liberty to learn
or not to learn, to be Catechized or not to be Catechized: How many are there,
that if their children and servants of themselves will learn and do gain
knowledge in the principles of Religion, will not blame them, nay will commend
them for it, and take comfort in it, whilst yet themselves leave them to
liberty to do what they list, neither commanding them to learn, nor calling for
an account of their diligence therein? whereby in the most families Catechizing
is a stranger, unacquainted because unused: ignorance is nourished, and when
good natures are called by their Ministers to be Catechized, though they learn,
they are ashamed to answer, to give an account of what they have learned,
because unaccustomed so to do: when we consider humane nature so subject to
novelty, as not without difficulty to be kept up with constancy in any way,
though never so good; so indisposed to the things of God and the soul, as to be
at enmity with the dictates of, and directions unto piety: to be defirous of
liberty, and to be loose from every duty, and observe the golden reigns of
sovereignty to be thrown on the youthful neck, which sensible thereof, can
wantonly run off its due course, and the due authority with which God has
invested superiors for the keeping up to duty to be suspended: shall we admire
to see Catechizing neglected, ignorance nourished, or think it strange for
Ministers many times to call families to answer their Catechisms, and have
seats and pillars sooner then many children and servants to give answer?
However such are not ignorant who should be Catechized, yet we cannot but
charge the guilt on such who have authority and ought in duty to bring them to
Catechizing, and prepare them for the same by keeping to it in their families,
but do not: for from youth at liberty we can expect no other then a neglect of
duty, and therefore give me leave to affect your hearts with this sin by laying
before you these few considerations.

1. Duty is neglected, whilst you do not Catechize your selves, such as are
under your charge, and call upon them to learn; nay in thy place command, and
according to thy authority compel to be Catechized. That it is your duty to
Catechize, I have before showed; if that it be not done, duty is neglected:
indisposition and averseness of the children and family will be no excuse to
thee; for has God put the rod of correction any more into thy hand in vain,
then he has put the sword into the hand of the Magistrate? has he not
ordained thee in thy sphere, to be a terror to such as do evil, and encourager
to the good? has he not put in subjection to thee such as he has placed under
thy charge? does he not require from thy hand that thou and thy house should
serve the Lord? It is the good note of learned Zanchy on the fourth Command,
that it does not command, remember to keep holy the Sabbath, and to persuade
thy children and servant to keep it holy, implying it is the duty of the Master
and father to compel to the keeping the Sabbath; and therefore it is said thou
shall do it, and thy son, and thy manservant, and maidservant; for God and
Nature takes it for granted, that the subject family conform to the command of
the Master of it. Those several commands in Scripture of teaching our children
and household to know the Law of the Lord, and to train them up in the nurture
of the Lord; must necessarily imply the laying out or exercise of authority, to
compel their averseness unto duty, and command their attendance on, and
diligence in instructing means; and not to teach them if they be willing, and
neglect it when they are unwilling: and the Gospel command to childrens
obedience to their parents, to hear their instructions, to bear their reproofs,
and to obey their commands (as Zanchy notes) must needs imply a parents power
and duty to instruct, reprove, and command; and therefore to close up this
consideration, mourn for your subjection to old Eli his sin of slack rebukes
and neglect of paternall authority: and let me tell you, that I do believe the
neglect of paternall power and due exercise of that authority, God has given
to call and compel to duty, will not be found the least of relative sins in
the day of the Lord.

Secondly, You are degenerated from the practice of the people of God in past
ages, whose resolution was not only for themselves but theirs also, that they
should serve the Lord. The Patriarchs and people of God among the Jews did
teach and command their seed to serve God: thus did David as a dying man charge
Solomon his son, and so others whom I have before mentioned: and I have before
noted, that God exceedingly extols Abraham for this very reason, that he knew
he would use his paternall power, to see his children and household to keep Gods
ways: on which words a reverend Divine notes, that Abraham did not leave his
children and servants to their own genius, their own counsels, their own lusts;
nay he would not allow them in such a liberty, as would have enticed them into
the worst kind of bondage. Oh consider brethren, is paternall power any less
now under the Gospel then before, and under the Law? or are not we more
degenerated from the pious property of authoritative acting zeal for duty, then
they were whose posterity we profess to be, and whose practice we would be
thought to follow?

Thirdly, You deal worse for the soul, then for the bodies of your relations,
in that you will leave them to liberty in respect of the ways of God, when you
limit them in matters concerning the outward man: How many men will compel
their servants and children to this and that way of serving them, though they
are never so averse, that yet will let them study the ways of God when and how
they will; and if averse thereunto, let slack their authority, set them at
liberty and indulge their neglect of duty: many a man will from day to day, and
week to week call for accounts of the service done to themselves, that cannot,
or rather will not from sabbath to sabbath call for an account of their
families progress in their Catechism, and rudiments of Religion: nay, and will
not many men make the rod to caution and command from dangers to the bodies of
their children, that can pass in silence the desperate dangers to which the
soul is subjected? Will they not many times put out their power to prohibit
such company and courses as may endanger their persons or estates, and upon
their blessing charge and command such and such courses as may conduce to their
supposed happiness? which yet can let their own genius lead to or from the
duties that may advantage the soul for ever: O fools and unwise, can you think
that God gave this power into your hand for your selves alone, and not rather
to command for him? and is not the immortal souls of your dear relations much
better then their mortal bodies? what shall be their profit to gain the whole
world and lose the soul? but will it not be the shame of Christians, that as
men of this world, they should be wiser in their generation then as the
children of God?

But these Reproofs are by some staved off by some Pleas, which they think to
be not only sufficient to acquit them from the charge of sin, but also to
justify their neglect, as if it were good and warrantable. These Pleas are so
weak, that they were not worth taking notice of them: had not notable ignorance
and the nice and sinful scrupulosity of our times given them strength enough
to keep off from positive duty; weak Christians but inclining the least to the
pretended and much cried up new lights in our days: therefore such as they are
I shall set before you with answers to them. Whereof the first is,



To this I answer,

1. The Apostles did deliver to the succeeding Ministers a form of sound words,
and gave it in charge that it should be held fast, as did Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.13. and was this sinful and to be condemned? or if ours be a form, is it
of unsound words? if so, let them make it to appear, we will then lay it aside;
till then, we must conclude to charge and cast off Catecheticall Doctrine
because in a form, is not only to condemn the generation of the just, but also
the very Apostles of Christ.

2. The Ten Commandments are a form, (nay and such a form as is expunged out
of these men's books, and exiled their families) yet God commanded the Jews to
teach them their children, and whet them diligently upon them, as well as keep
them in their own hearts, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Shall we be afraid to teach our
children the ten Commandments, when we find it to be the lesson God himself
has set them? may not we that are Gods Ushers safely teach in the method that
our Master has propounded? nay, must we not of duty do it? Is it not eminent
piety and devout scrupulosity that makes us question and cast off divine
prescription? Rather, is it not the Devils cavil against duty, it is done in a
form?

3. That our Catechisms are thus in Forms, does most answer our main end of
Catechizing, which is to teach men and women from their Infancy, to think and
speak the same things that the Members of the Church may be of one mind and
one mouth in the Lord. Certain it is, that the Church never tuned discords in
Doctrine so high, as since we stood at a distance from the form of sound words.

4. Is it not the Form that constitutes the duty, and distinguishes from other
duties? I have before noted, that Catechizing is a teaching by words, a
repetition of the same strokes, an echo or reiteration of the same sound; so
that to quarrel at the form, is to quarrel at the duty: does not experience
witness, that the crying down of forms is the casting down of all duties of
public worship.

The second Plea for not Catechizing is,



I answer,

1. The intellectuals of some children are very early ripe, and some things are
so plain and easy, that they may be soon and easily understood: the speeches
that have dropped from some children at four, or five, or six years of age, do
sufficiently demonstrate how easy some truths have been apprehended by the
understandings, yea and wrought on the consciences of little ones.

2. Stands not this objection contrary to the Scripture, which prescribes
children to be the subjects of Catechizing: commending Timothy for having known
and been acquainted with the Scriptures from his long coats and cradle, 2 Timothy
3.15. Nay, does not our Savior justify and defend the little children who
cried Hosanna to him at his riding into Jerusalem? Mat. 21.16, 17.
yet it is more than probable, they understood not what they cried, but only
accompanied the multitude, and according to the objection, should have been
condemned for it, as the Pharisees desired: have not these pretended pious
scruplers need of a Solomon's Be not righteous over much; and the check of a
Peter's vision, Act. 10.15. What God has cleansed call not thou common?

3. There is more danger of both present and future profanation of Gods Name
by swearing, cursing, profanation of Sabbaths, etc. for want of Catechizing:
principles of Religion are a curb to corruption: and the light kindled in the
understanding when young may grow up and be a strong restraining, if not
renewing light; and if profaneness prevail much in catechized children, what
must it do in the uncatechized who have no principles of death, judgment and
hell, to curb or restrain them? certainly such must be drowned by the
overflowings of impiety.

4. This Plea does not only bar us from Catechizing children, but all kind of
instructing elder persons known to be wicked and profane; for there is more
likelihood that such will profane holy things, and yet no Minister is to take
the profaneness of his hearers as a sufficient discharge from his duty, but
persist in instructing even those that oppose themselves to see if God will at
any time give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth, 2 Timothy 2.25.
The profanation of Gods Name is not the proper result of instruction; but the
accidental corruption of a wicked heart: and if such effects shall discharge
from duty, what duty shall be discharged? the word of God may prove the savor
of death to death, yet it must be dispensed both by preaching and Catechizing,
and the dispensers are to God a sweet savor.

Having noted the reproof against superiors for not calling and commanding such
as are under their charge unto Catechizing: we now come to the reproof of
inferiors; and it is to blame them which have been declared the subjects of
Catechizing, for shunning the same as a matter of shame: nay many for stouting
it out and stubbornly refusing subjection to it, as a matter of sin. How sad is
it to see many young people spending their time in vanity, and studiously
learning things scurrilous and profane, yet slighting and setting at a distance
the principles of piety and rudiments of the Doctrine of Christ, as if
unsuitable to their age, and unprofitable to be known? nay, much more is it a
shame to see many stubbornly resisting parental commands, and scornfully
shunning Ministerial calls to Catechizing, as if they owed no subjection to such
relations, or were by them summoned unto things uncivil and unwarrantable. Let
me tell you Christians, a youth ignorant in principles of Religion, is the
shame of Christianity, and scandal of the reformed Churches: herein we fall
short of Heathens, who are studious to educate their children in morality and
the worship of their Idols, and come behind the Papists, who are diligent in
studying their superstitions: How many are unwilling to be Catechized, that
will take on them to teach others? but unto this I shall as in the former
reproof aggravate their sin, and answer the Pleas by which they would evade the
reproof.

Let such as shun or stubbornly refuse subjection unto Catechizing, consider
that in so doing they do

1. Cast off divine prescription: it has been noted and proved, that God
himself is the Author that appointed Catechizing, and assigned all that are
ignorant, but in special, youth and children to be the subjects of it; and
will youth refuse and rise up against it? is this your remembrance of God your
Creator in the days of your youth? or did you but seriously remember your
Creator to be a God of Sovereignty and power, that may and can require
submission to his prescriptions, of justice and severity that will punish every
disobedience and resistance thereof: how could you sinfully slight or
stubbornly refuse subjection unto Catechizing? If God put a period to your
days under the contempt of his prescriptions, how perplexed would your
ignorant souls be found? how willing to learn and be Catechized if then you
might?

2. Contradict the practice of pious progenitors, who have subjected to this
exercise, and herein are become our patterns: Which of all the Saints in
Scripture did refuse or resist Catechizing? were not these the children of
Wisdom, who well knew the duties commanded of God, and convenient, nay
commodious to themselves? does not your stubborn resistance of, and stiff
contests against subjection to this exercise, charge the generation of the just
with folly and vanity?

3. Content themselves to be captivated by Satan, subjected to corruption and
condemnation: Ignorance is the Devils chain, and sin's cords by which the soul
is taken captive at his will; Catechizing cuts them asunder: this the thread
that leads out of the labyrinth of confusion and disorder, to which we are
subject by nature: but Satan as the Prince of this world, studies to blind your
eyes by keeping you from and setting you against the means of instruction and
illumination, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image
of God, should shine into you; hereby your strength serves corruption, and your
glorious youth is in bondage to Satan: nay, and not only so, but condemnation
must needs justly pass upon you: for light is come to you, and you love
darkness: you have souls capable of, and liable to condemnation, and your
youth will be no apology to acquit you; for that God has by Catechizing suited
his Word, which is able to save the soul, unto youthful, nay infant
capacities; but you have slighted or stubbornly resisted subjection to it.

4. Contract on themselves the guilt of stubbornness and disobedience to
superiors, Ministers and Christian Parents: Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft, and disobedience, as iniquity and idolatry; so detestable was
disobedience to parents, that the disobedient son was to be stoned: were this
Law in force, how dreadful would be the confutation of many who withstand
subjection to Catechizing, when thereunto counseled and commanded by parents?
what obedience can be expected in things civil from such, who resist commands
enforced with special divine authority?

5. Cannot stand in a storm: the ship cannot sail steadfastly in a tempest, but
roll to and fro, when not well balanced: Children in understanding must needs
be like children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine: Will not
experience witness our uncatechized youth, to have wandered from error to
error, being led up and down with the ignis fatuus of new lights that have
appeared? and certainly such as cannot stand in the storm of seducing
doctrines, will never endure the force of fiery persecution: how shall any
contend for the faith, in which they have not been Catechized?

You have seen the reproof with its aggravations, we shall now answer the Pleas
made to stave off the strength of the reproof, and they are such as are not
worth noting, yet some of them I shall consider, and they are these:



In answer to this consider,

1. Thou may not stand alone: thy example may draw others to be Catechized,
many are convinced of the duty, and willing to set to it, but not persuaded to
be the first seen at it; deal herein as in your sports, some must begin, then
all will follow.

2. If thou be alone and derided, is it not the lot of the righteous? does not
Christ declare his children to be for signs and for wonders, in Isa. 8.18. and
will thou be discouraged in, or driven from thy duty by the derision of the
wicked, whilst it is the common portion of the pious?

3. To be alone, is thy honor, and will be thy comfort: thou shall lose no
credit in the Church, nor comfort at the day of Judgment, by being Catechized
alone: Was it not the honor of Lot to be alone, in Sodom? and Noah to be alone
in the old world? do thou think thou shall sit down in heaven surrounded
with pensive thoughts, that thou did travel alone in the way thither? How
many men can be glad to drive a singular trade by which to grow rich? can not
thou then be contented to use alone that course that will make thee rich in
faith?

4. The use of the duty will make thee to see their gazing and laughing at thee
to be ridiculous: whilst thereby you will be more and more convinced of the
duty cleared in your apprehensions of its indispensable necessity: nay suck
sweetness and taste the abundant benefit thereby acquired to the soul, will
plainly convince thee, that it is a matter plainly ridiculous in them to deride
not only an Ordinance of God, but of abundant advantage to their own souls.

5. God will laugh at the calamity of such as stand in their ignorance, and
scorn the means of knowledge and understanding, in Prove. 1.22. How long you
simple ones, will you love simplicity? scorners delight in scorning, and fools
hate knowledge? and in verse. 26. I will laugh at your calamity, and mock when
your fear comes. Is it not better to be mocked by men then God? do thou thy
duty, leave them to bear the burden of their profane derision.



In answer to this consider,

1. Shame belongs to sin: sin and shame were born together into the world; Adam
in innocence was naked and not ashamed, but when he had sinned, saw himself
naked and was ashamed; whilst then thou pleadest shamefacednesse, thou
chargest Catechizing with sin, and of that thou have cause to be ashamed, for
it is Gods prescription, no humane invention, and the holy one of Israel cannot
sin, neither does impose on men any action of which they should be ashamed: if
God have enjoined, it is duty, and it is a sinful shame to be ashamed of duty:
thou must take heed thy shame of duty make not Christ ashamed of thee; for he
has said, He that shall be ashamed of me or of my words, of him will I be
ashamed when he comes in the glory of the Father with all his holy Angels,
Mar. 8.39.

2. Art thou not past shame in matters of sin? can thou not study and speak
lewd and lascivious songs? base, obscure and ribald discourses, that the light
of nature blusheth and is ashamed to hear uttered? and yet art thou ashamed to
learn the rudiments of Religion, and Doctrines of Christianity? modesty in this
nature is madness, spiritual madness to be rebuked and blamed.

3. Art thou really and indeed shamefaced, thou should set to the duty with
the greater resolution, for that thy constitution becomes unto thee a
temptation unto sinful neglect of duty: Satan is apt and ready to lay before
temptations from without thee; but none will so much prevail and prove so
difficult to master, mortify, and subdue, as those that spring from thy
constitution.

4. Do thy duty when thy modesty or shamefacednesse appears real and
irresistible, it is more then probable it will be indulged; study thy
Catechism, though thou answer in a corner, better so then not at all.

by reason of our age conceive our selves to be excused, and so much the rather
for that we have attained to some ripeness of understanding, and are in a
better capacity of gaining profit by the Word preached and read, then we were
when young.

To this I answer.

1. It is your shame to be men and women in years, and children in
understanding? Is it not a shame to be gotten into your teens, and not able to
repeat the Ten Commandments: How many children go beyond you in knowledge of
principles of Christianity?

2. So were others when they were Catechized: as Abraham's servants: Theophilus,
Apollos, Ambrose, and Augustine, most of the primitive Christians: those were
not ashamed when their beards were grown, to be publicly Catechized.

3. Vncatechized thou can not well profit by reading or hearing the Word: for
thy knowledge thereby must be immethodicall and confused: nay many terms used
in preaching cannot be understood by the uncatechized; thou may fill thy head
with confused and indigested notions, which will never nourish the heart, and
be like the child which wanting breast-milk is big-headed by the Rickets, but
very little and weak bodied: and with these airy and indigested notions, thou
art puffed up with pride, ready to step into the Pulpit, and to preach to others
before thou be Catechized, as is the common practice of many Prentices.

The third and last Use of the point, is of exhortation to superiors and
inferiors in their places, to own, exercise, advance and subject unto this
ordinance of God, Catechizing: let me in the Name of the Lord, earnestly
entreat all such as have the charge and oversight of youth, diligently to
instruct them in, and require a constant account of their Catechism: and all
such as are in subjection, with all readiness and resolution, alacrity and
audacity, study and subject your selves to your Catechisms. Parents and Masters
of families, in your houses duly use your abilities in counselling, and
authority in commanding unto Catechizing, as you make conscience of duty, or
expect comfort in your family; let your houses be houses of Catechizing, your
children and servants be constantly Catechized: Schoolmasters in your Schools
be no less careful and studious to teach rudiments of Religion, then other
Arts and Sciences, and instruct in Christianity as well as Morality the
children committed to your care: let the fame of the School at Alexandria and
Athens, be the renown of your Schools; Ministers make consciences to minister
this milk of principles by Catechizing to babes in Christ, with no less
diligence then to feed men with the meat of higher Doctrines by constant
preaching; let not youth upbraid us to have baptized them into a Religion in
which we never Catechize or instruct them; and whilst superiors are required
to do their duty, let inferiors take heed they do not sinfully slight, or
stubbornly resist subjection to this ordinance of Catechizing, unto the
persuading both superiors and inferiors duly to discharge their respective
duties. I need propound no other motives then what has been before urged.

Consider but the Reasons of the Doctrine, and if Excellency may induce,
Necessity enforce. Antiquity engage, Vtility exasperate, or Easiness and
Familiarity excite to a duty, reject, resist Catechizing if you can: moreover,
reflect on, and revolve in your serious thoughts the particular reasons
rendered, why Parents in their families, Schoolmasters in their Schools, and
Ministers in their Congregations must Catechize: why the ignorant in general,
and youth or childehood in special are subjected to this ordinance; tell me
whether you have not pregnant persuasions unto Catechizing? yet that I may not
close the Doctrine without some heart-moving, soul-quickning considerations,
weigh seriously these several motives, I desire to suggest to superiors and
inferiors jointly to stir up the one constantly to Catechize, the other
cheerfully to be Catechized.

That principled pious youth is a pleasure and delight to God, but provocation
and displeasure unto Satan: This is that which God calls for in Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth before the days come wherein
thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. Will thou leave those days to God
of which thou will be weary thy self; can God take pleasure in that time which
thou can take none thy self? For des Sermon of Catechizing.
It is an observation of the Rabbis on Levit. 1.14. that Turtles may be
offered in sacrifice at any age, but Pigeons when they are young: we should
consider our children are not turtles (that is, Christ's sanctified ones) by
nature, but are Pigeons to be dedicated to God when young: and as God calls for
a pious principled youth, so he commends it, 2 Timothy 3.17. Nay it lays an
engagement on God to communicate his Counsel to Abraham, that he knows that
he will command his household and his children that they shall keep the way of
the Lord, Genesis 18.17, 19. And whilst it pleases God, it displeases Satan;
for pietas juventutis est Diaboli flagellum: Hence it is he surrounds youth
with such variety of temptations unto sin and obstruction unto duty.

Pious order is produced in well principled families: Catechizing counsels
every soul to their relative and personal duties; Abraham's family was
Catechized, as was before noted: and what a harmony of duty is to be observed
in all the parts of the family? his wife is humble and reverent to her husband;
the Scripture takes special notice of Sarahs calling Abraham Lord, and
propounds her as a pattern of meekness and submission, 1 Pet. 3.6. His son
Isaac is subject and obedient to his father, cheerfully bearing the wood on
which he should have been sacrificed; nay subjecting his throat to the
sacrificing knife; leaving the choice of his wife to his fathers pleasure:
besides his pious education expresses it self in his daily meditating
devotion, Genesis 22 6. and 24.41. and 6.31. So also his servant Eliezer is
faithful to the oath sworn to his Master, and pursues the same with all piety
and prudence: so that the effect of Catechizing is seen in all the members of
the family, making it a Church for its constant, orderly and pious performances
of duty.

proper means for edifying the Churches of Jesus Christ: God never denied the
Infants of Christian parents admission into his Church; nay since his Church
was visible on earth, he owned as Members of it parents and their seed; and
therefore for the preservation and due edification of it, ordained Catechizing
constantly and lawfully to be used, and infants members of the Church to be the
subjects thereof (as was before noted). By Catechizing the sap of Christianity
is communicated to the youngest sprouting branches of the Church of God: the
great piety of our age is placed in a pretended gathering (but real
sca^tering, by cutting public solemn assemblies in private meetings) of
Churches, and by many cutting Infants off from the Congregation of Gods people;
but sure I am, that the sinful suspension of Catechizing, cuts short
Christianity, and is likely (if God prevent not) to give us real cause (in the
return to infidelity) to gather Churches indeed, and by nipping buds and
suffering sprouts to wither, to replant into the faith of Christ, such as must
bear up his name in the world.

4. Catechizing prevents the Devils design, by prepossessing the mind with
principles of truth and piety: Satan, as vigilant and subtle enemies, endeavors
to enter the soul betimes, and blind the eye whilst yet tender, to infuse
into the soul principles of blasphemy and profaneness, knowing that
possession is eleven points of the Law; and Leases of ejectment may lay
foundations for long and vexatious suits: the soul possessed by Satan will
abide many powerful persuasions, piercing reproofs, patheticall entreaties,
prevailing prayers, and pinching pangs of conscience, before it will be
recovered: an illuminated conscience and judgment well informed in the truth,
will abide variety of temptations and assaults of Satan, before it will
renounce and recede from the true religion. Was not this the stratagem of the
Councels and Fathers of the primitive times against the blasphemous Heresies of
those days? is not the re-entry of the same blasphemies an engagement to us to
countermine the Devils devices by putting Creeds and Catechisms into the hands
of our people? nay, is not the vigilance of Satan and diligence of his
instruments in casting the Arrian and Socinian Heresies in Catecheticall forms*
nay in scattering abroad the Cracovian and Biddles Catechisms, the check of our
long sinful neglect of Catechizing, and a loud call to set to the duty with
vigor?

5. Catechizing puts into a capacity of living with credit, or dying with
comfort, Catechizing in doctrines of Christianity, does as well civilize a man
as Christianize a soul, it instr^^^s in du^ies to be done toward men, as well
as toward God: youth not educated in principles of Religion, may live with
shame and die with sorrow; for they know not what to do or how to carry
themselves whilst they live, nor yet wherein to center their hope of future
happiness when they lie: How many infants, young children, have by Catechizing
been famous in their religious lives, being de^terous in duty, constant in the
faith, and courageous under temptations? and when they have come to die, have
cheerfully given up their souls to God through Christ, in knowledge of whom
they have been Catechized? Whilst youth have souls rational and capable of
education, let them not want instruction in those things that may make them
serviceable to God in their generation; and whilst they have souls immortal
that may be damned or saved, when they depart out of their bodies, let them not
want Catechizing in the ways of everlasting peace.

Thus then you have seen the Doctrine proved, illustrated, and applied, in the
application you have been exhorted to the duty, consider seriously the duty
pressed on you, and motives by which you have been persuaded, and if you would
pleasure God, produce order in your families, pursue the due edification of the
Churches of God, prevent the Devils design, or put youth into a capacity to
live with credit, or to die with comfort: Let me charge you in the Name of
Jesus Christ, as superiors be constant in Catechizing, as inferiors be
cheerful in being Catechized, showing by your diligence in it the dignity of
the exercise, your submission being a seal of the divine institution of it;
proclaiming unto all, that it is Gods ordinance to be continued in his Church.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the sign of the Three Crowns,
over against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside.
DR. Richard Sibbs his Commentary upon the Second Epistle to the Corinthians,
published for public good by Tho. Manton. in Folio.

Mr. John Cotton his Exposition on the First Epistle of John, with Doctrines,
Reasons and Uses. in Folio.

The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian, wherein is contained directions
for the right method of keeping and using, according to the rules of practice,
a Day-book of National and Politic, personal and private passages of Gods
Providence, to help Christians to thankfulness, and experience. By John Beadle
Minister of the Gospel at Barnstone in Essex.

Cathechizing Gods Ordinance, or A short Treatise concerning that Ancient,
approved and soul edifying Ordinance of Catechism, by Mr. Zach. Crofton
Minister of the word at Bu^tolphs without Algate, London; in Octavo.

Courteous Reader.
THou may expect within a short time to see published some new Pieces of Mr.
William Fenners, who was so famous when living, and his works (though he is
dead) has such a sweet (though silent) voice.

T. P.


