THE PEOPLES NEED OF A LIVING PASTOR: Asserted and explained in a SERMON,
Preached November. 4. 1656. At the sad and solemn Funerals of that late, learned,
pious and eminently hopeful Minister of the Gospel, Mr. John Frost, Bachelor
in Divinity, late Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge, and Pastor of St.
Olaves Hart-steeet, LONDON TOGETHER WITH A Narrative of his Life and Death. By
Z. C. Minister of the Word at Botolph-Aldgate, London.

ACT. 20.38. Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that they
should see his face no more.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Thomas Parkhurst at the Three Crowns over
against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside, 1657.

To the Inhabitants in the Parish of Olaves Hart-street, London.
Gentlemen and Christian Friends,
I Know not to whom the inscription of this ensuing Discourse can more properly
belong, then to your selves; the occasion of it being the sad Funerals of your
deceased Pastor: it being spoken specially in your ears, and designed to affect
your hearts, and direct you to a serious Christian endeavor under, and
improvement of so sad a providence. To you therefore I do present it, not
doubting your readiness to patronize and defend it; of which had I no
testimony of respects to my self, yet that high respect you did bear to your
late hopeful and learned Pastor, witnessed by your importunate desires of him,
eminent delights in and unexpected union under his Ministry, with your
sorrowful celebration of his Funerals, and the importunate desires of many
among you to read these Observations when you had heard them, does give me good
assurance. The scope of the following discourse was, and yet is to inform your
judgments of the necessity of Ministers life, and so to affect your hearts
with Ministers death: directing your mournings to be from a right Principle,
that so they may regularly stream into their due measure and proportion, and
proper end: you must know every Minister falls under a double notion, as in his
life, so in his death, as a man, and as a Minister; in the one a member of
humane society, in the other a main Pillar of Christianity, in both he is
desirable whilst living, and deplorable when dead. But you must know Nature
entertains him under the one, and Grace under the other. Men are apt to admire
acute parts, profound judgment, amiable carriage, and learned language, where
they find it, but never regard the Office in which a Minister stands, and
Authority by which he acts in his place; no, this is the work of Grace: for it
is religion must teach men to receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, and
to account of Ministers as the Ambassadors of Christ, and to esteem them living
and dying for their work sake. Whilst I would not deny you the liberty of your
lamenting your loss in your late Minister, by reason of his natural parts and
endowments, which I have noted to have been great; I would desire in special
to find your sorrow Christianized, seizing on your spirit, from the
consideration of him as a Minister, spiritual Guide, and Father, and so
witnessing that you lived under his Instructions, as under the word of God, not
of man: and indeed under this notion you have much cause to lament him; for
that he was unto his Ministry excellently qualified, in it very industrious:
and of the duties imposed on him by virtue of his Ministry, very conscientious
for your good. And his death under this consideration is the sad Symptom of
Gods displeasure, and of smarting influence on your Congregation. I have for
some years observed your carriage in this case, in reference to a Minister:
your selves know, and I hope yet remember your sad divisions, and smarting
distractions into which you fell on a Ministers relinquishing his work among
you: God was pleased to cement all, and settle you in peace and unity, and good
tendency to order, by your now deceased Pastor; by whose death you are again
liable to the like danger. I pray that you may be warned and preserved from it;
and that you may lay to heart this hand of providence, in the loss not only of
a man excellently qualified, but a Minister of the Gospel, very hopeful in and
to the Church of God; to which end, I entreat your serious reading of this
following Sermon, and if it prove in any thing effectual, give God the praise;
and that shall be the honor of him who unfainedly condoles your loss: and
praying that the Lord may make up this breach among you, remains

Yours in all neighbourly Offices in the work of the Gospel. Zach. Crofton.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THere is not a truer Maxim in Nature, then that Man passes away like a
shadow, and vanishes like smoke, as the flower of the field, it to day
flourishes, and to morrow withers. Nor a truer Principle in Divinity, then
that the Prophets do not live for ever. These are both of them witnessed daily,
not only by audible voice of Mourners for the dead, but also visible objects,
spectacles of Mortality. Death is a condition so common and inevitably certain
to the Sons of men, that neither age, nor excellent endowments can stave it
off: but young and old fools, and wise men, are followeed to the Grave. An
evident and undeniable testimony hereof is eminently hopeful Mr. John Frost,
Being 30 years old.
who in his youth, strength of days, and sparklings of glory, is fallen to the
dust: and thereby calls for the discharge of duty due to dead men, viz.
mourning for him, and memorial of him: both which as they are commended by us,
by the counsels and constant practice of the wisest Heathen, not affected with
a Stoicall stupidity, and senseless apathy; so also by Scripture, if Moses or
Samuel die, all Israel must mourn, and the Holy Ghost will dictate the
memorial of them. Jer. 16.5. Ezekiel. 24.23. Jer. 22.
It is a judgment threatened against the wicked, they shall not be mourned for,
and their memorial shall perish from the earth; but the remembrance of the
righteous shall be blessed, it is their privilege to die lamented: God takes
notice of it as lasie, that the righteous perish and no man lays it to heart:
Yet it is the common guilt of our age, to let the Prophets die without
lamentation; nay, amongst too many with high insultations for their death. God
has of late taken from us many a Samuel, and Paul, and hopeful Timothy, and
yet our Israel are not affected with it, nor in themselves afflicted for them;
they mourn not over them, nor mind the memorial of them. Certainly the great
cause of this evil, is insensibility of their worth and serviceablenesse, and
our own want of their Ministrations. As a cure therefore to this cause, this
Discourse is put into thy hands; let me entreat thy serious reading of it, and
second thoughts about the necessity of Ministers lives, for the Churches good:
And certainly if there be in thee any measure of Grace, thou will sorrowfully
bewail the loss of so many needful and shining lights, and sadly fear it to
be a presage of some future judgments upon our Nation and City. And to the
affecting of thy heart, the memorial of their parts and endowments, will be
desired by thee, and the Narrative thereof be read with much pleasure. And
amongst others thou will find Mr. Frost (at whose sad Funerals this Discourse
was uttered) not to be the least lamented. Not therefore to hold thee in the
Preface, or swell with Apologies, I cast this work on thy censure, hoping that
thou will exercise a spirit of candor and charity, if not toward the living
Author, yet the dead man, of whom it is thy duty to think and speak no way
detractive; and whose life thou have annexed on the most certain and clear
account that could be had from Natural relations, Academicall acquaintance,
and the Personal knowledge of him, who has done his duty for the deceased,
(desiring thee to own nothing that may come abroad under his name, unless
attested by his sorrowful Father, Brother, or my self, who shall freely
midwife what is fit for public use) and now pray that thou may have grace
to do thine, and to that end, find helpful this Discourse.

Thine in the Lord, Z. C.

THE PEOPLES NEED OF A LIVING PASTOR: Asserted and explained in a Sermon
Preached November. 4. 1656. at Olaves Hartstreet, London, at the Funeral of Mr.
John Frost, B. D. and Pastor of the said Church.
PHIL. 1.24. Nevertheless that I abide in the flesh, is more needful for you.


SEnse of worth engages sorrow for want: Bona a terge formosissima.
when once a people are affected with the absolute and indispensable necessity
of a living Ministry, they affectionately rejoice in the enjoyment; and as
passionately lament the loss of it: evident this is in the Philippians joys in
and for Epaphroditus recovery from death-threatning sickness: and the Ephesians
passionate weeping at S. Paul's ultimum vale, last farewell, with a You shall
see my face no more, Act. 20.38. And let me (to pass by Londons too too late
instances increased) say it is evident in that joy with which you of this
Parish did begin to be transported in the enjoyment, and that exceeding grief
with which you are this day dejected in the loss of your learned and hopeful
Pastor Mr. John Frost, whose sad Funerals we do now celebrate: on which
occasion give me leave to lay before you the necessity of a Ministers life: and
the greatness of your loss in the loss of this particular Minister of the
Gospel: the one from the text, the other by the narrative of his hopeful parts
and high endowments: and first in reference to the Text.

The Apostle Paul having been (by an especial call from God in a vision)
acquainted with Macedonia her want of the Gospel Ministry, Act. 16.9, 10.
went thither and there preached the Gospel to good purpose and with good
success, and planted a Church of Jesus Christ at Philippi, the chief City
thereof: from whence being soon removed, his care was to confirm them in the
Faith they had received; and counsel them to the due order of a Gospel
conversation: to this end he wrote to them this Epistle from Rome, and sent it
by the hand of Epaphroditus: and according to these two ends the Epistle
divides it self into two parts.

1. A confirmation in the Faith received: and that is in this chapter.

2. Counsel unto a Christian conversation in the following chapters.

The confirmation in the Faith, is in this chapter, and (not to stand on the
analytical parts of the chapter) it is managed by the removal of the then great
stumbling block of Christianity (viz.) the Cross, to which the Apostle was
subjected, to the startling of the Saints in his death-threatning sufferings;
and themselves seemed to be nigh unto danger for the very cause of their Gospel
profession; now this the Apostle removes by suggesting to them this threefold
consideration.

1. The access of the cross advances the Gospel of Christ Jesus, verse. 12. I
would that you should understand brethren, that the things which happened unto
me have fallen out rather unto the furtherance: (...).
the progress of the Gospel, whilst thereby it is spread in the publication of
the cause of his calamity, Hist. of the Council of Trent. Edit. 2. lib. 5. p.
418.
whilst it might be said of him as of Au du Burge, a Senator of Paris, that
the death and constancy of a man so conspicuous, did make many curious to know
what Religion that was for which he so courageously endured punishment, and
made the number to increase. Not only was the Gospel spread, but hereby also
others out of spite and envy, or sincere zeal were stirred up to preach Jesus
Christ: and every good Christian rejoices under all curses and crosses that
advances the name of the Lord, saying with Luther, Prorsus Satan est Lutherus,
sed Christus vivit and regnat, Amen.
I am accounted a Devil and I know not what, but be it so, I matter not whilst
Christ is magnified: and therefore must neither dismay them in, nor divert them
from their profession.

2. The access of the cross would be his advantage in life or death: in life
causing the luster of his graces to shine; or in death giving him communion
with Christ in glory, and therefore love to him could never lead them into
backsliding fears: and this is urged from verse. 19. to verse. 27.

3. The access of the cross would be their advantage, if endured with patience:
whilst it is an honor and privilege not only to believe, but also to suffer
for the name of Christ: so that the cross should be so far from driving from
their profession, Fox his Acts and Monum. p. 1330.
that they should say as father Latimer answered to the sentence of death by
burning, O I thank God most heartily, that he has prolonged my life, that I
may in this case glorify God in that kind of death.

The words of the Text fall under the second consideration propounded, to
remove the stumblings at the Cross of Christ, and is a part of an answer to an
objection from thence thus framed.

for us it were more needful that you abide in the flesh.

that I abide in the flesh is more needful for you: and I hope I shall so do.

The words then we find to be an assertion of the necessity of a faithful
Ministers life, which is established by the peoples apprehension; the
Philippians plead it, and the Apostles assent, St. Paul he grants it: and in
this assertion we have two parts:

1. The subject or matter, that I abide in the flesh.

The predicate or thing asserted of it, it is more needful for you.

For the explication of the terms, we may enquire what it is to abide in the
flesh? And to this we must note that the flesh admits of various acceptations,
which I cannot now stand to mention, but must desire you to note that in this
place it signifies natural life and present being in the flesh, or in the land
of the living: and thus it is used 1 Cor. 7.28. and also of the natural life of
Christ, 1 Pet. 3.18. So that to abide in the flesh, is to continue in the
enjoyment of natural life and being; to be freed from subjection unto death and
annihilation: it is a phrase answerable to that in 2 Cor. 5.6. At home in the
body it is more needful for you: the terms are comparative and relate to
something before spoken, the correlate to which they are to be referred, are
one of these two.

1. The advantage that should accrue to the Gospel by the access of the Cross,
and then the meaning is this: The Gospel will be furthered by my sufferings,
but much more by my life, for that must be spoken of every where as the cause
of my death; yet when I have life and liberty to go up and down and preach in
every place, not only would Jesus Christ be mentioned, but by my Apostolical
parts and power be convincingly exhibited to your confirmation and many others
conviction.

2. Or the Correlate is the Apostles gain by dying under the Cross of Christ:
thereby he should enjoy a personal plenary possession of Christ, which is best
of all, and would be to him the height of happiness; but they by his life would
enjoy mediate communion with, and much edification in Christ, which would be
the Churches very great advantage: and to this I adhere, for certainly the
Churches good by a Ministers life, counterballanceth his own good in his death,
and brings him into the Apostles straight what to choose.

I shall not now stand to consider the words in their comparative sense, but
only positive, as they are an assertion of the absolute necessity of a
Ministers life; and therefore shall gather up the meaning of the Text into this
Doctrinal conclusion, which I shall briefly prosecute.

The life of a Faithful Minister is a matter of great necessity to a Christian
Church.

This Doctrine is an established truth from this very Text, though it should no
otherwise be argued; for it is apprehended by the people and assented unto by
the Apostle, yet for the more full demonstration of it in this age wherein
living Ministers are accounted needless burdens, and many eminent Ministers are
laid in the dust with little or no lamentation: give me leave briefly to
confirm it with these three arguments: Gods esteem of Ministers lives. The
Devils envy at Ministers lives.


The Churches express experience of the necessity of Ministers lives.

the great esteem which God has of his Ministers lives in reference to the
Churches good: certainly God best knows the necessities of his Church and
people; he is the great father of the family, that casts and cares for the
necessities of his house; and by his esteem the whole family may well be
determined; and as none may count that polluted and unclean, which he has
called pure; so may no man call that needless, which he determines needful:
and that the life of godly Ministers is by him esteemed in refefence to his
Churches good may be many ways manifested: Ministers in their discharges under
the saddest events are unto God a sweet savor, Patriarchas velit in tu^o esse,
quia sunt uncti, deinde quia sunt Prophetae. Mail. in loc.
yea though of death to wicked men, 2 Cor. 2.15. in all the checks and charges
he gives to the world, he provides for Ministers, touch not mine anointed,
goes not without and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.15. Mollerus on this
Text notes, that the Ministry was the guard of the pilgrim Patriarchs. And
Piscator thence infers, Piscator. obser. in Text.
godly Ministers are hereby assured, that God will save them from the tyranny
of the men of the world: nay, when a Ministers life is hunted, God will hide
him, and miraculously feed him, as he did Elias by the Ravens, and not wasting
meal, 1 King. 17. And as God did express his esteem of his Ministers lives and
persons under the Law, he does no less under the Gospel: exceeding great is the
doom that he threatens to such as disrespect his poor Ministers, that deny them
entertainment, Mat. 10.14, 15. Whosoever shall not receive you, it shall be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah then for that City: abuse of Prophets
highly provokes: the violent shedding of their blood and euding their lives, is
the very apex of impiety: ripens a people for ruin; 2 Chro. 36.16.
they are so dear to God, that if once they be abused, his wrath arises till
there be no remedy: Eminent is that esteem that the Lord Jesus sets on the
least courtesy that can be showed a Minister, he that receives a Prophet in
the name of a Prophet shall have a Prophets reward, Mat. 10.41. And every way
remarkable are the delivering providence extended to and exercised about
Ministers lives, which are mentioned in sacred and Ecclesiastical story: What
shall we tell you of Peter's delivery out of prison upon the prayers of the
Church, Act. 12.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. or of St. Paul's rescue from the cursed
combination of the Jews obliged by oath not to eat or drink until they had
killed Paul: of which you read, Act. 23. To which we might multiply many
remarkable deliverances of Athanasius of Alexandria, from the secret
conspiracies and malicious open violence of the Arrians, whilst Paulus,
Lucius, and Georgius, all Arrian Bishops perished: who ever observed his
dangers could have thought he should have continued Bishop of Alexandria 46
years? Time fails to give an account of Austin, of Chrysostom, and many other
of the Fathers, whose dangers were death-threatning, and to the eye of reason
inevitable, and yet they were delivered: and what shall we say of Luther, who
drew on himself the enmity of all the Christian world, that ever he should die
in his bed? and so also Calvin, and almost all our reformers, whose lives were
followed after by Papal fury, but preserved by God. When I consider the
heretical envy at Gospel Ministers, with which our Age and City abounds, the
many opportunities that might be taken to destroy them, I can not but admire
that a Gospel Minister should die in his bed: but we see very fully, that God
esteems the lives of his Ministers at an high rate, and it is no marvel, for
they are his servants, his Ambassadors and instruments of his Churches good, as
we shall note anon; and therefore the prayers of the people is the Preachers
guard: I trust that through your prayers I shall be given unto you, Philemon 22.

Satan's envy at Ministers lives, is an evident argument of their absolute
necessity in the Church of God: for Satan is the adversary envying the Churches
good, and always endeavoring to deprive them of things needful, that thereby
he may destroy them, and constrain them to renounce the profession of Christ
and his truth, to their utter ruin: 1 Pet. 5.8.
the Devil is that roaring lion who daily goes about seeking whom he may
devour; he is the malicious red Dragon, who pursues the woman into the
Wilderness, Revel. 11.
and he and his Angels makes war against Michael and his Angels; he erects his
Synagogue where ever God builds his Church, and knowing that these two cannot
stand together, studieth how to hinder Gods Temple from going forward and being
built to perfection: and finding Ministers to be laborers both stout and
skilful in the work of the Lord, against them he levels all his malice, and
improves his power and policy to put a period to their lives, and so their
abilities and endeavors: saying in all Ages, Nehem. 4.
as Tobiah and Sanballat, the Arabians, Ammonites, and Ashdodites, Let us
conspire and hinder the work: even by cruelty we will go up against them; they
shall not know nor see till we come in the midst among them and slay them, and
cause the work to cease, constraining the builders in Gods Temple to be working
warriors, to labor in their armor with their swords gird to their sides, and
spears in the one hand and trowels in the other: craft in the Church of God
without cruelty against faithful Ministers, could never effect the Devils
design; hence he is a subtle seducer of souls from the truth, until he gain
power into his hand, and then by bloody persecution he ever proclaims open war
and pursues with fire, and sword, specially bending his force at the Ministers
of the Church: thus he did in all the apostasies of Israel unto idolatry,
giving cause of Elijah his complaint, The children of Israel have forsaken thy
Covenant, thrown down thine Altars and slain thy Prophets, and I, even I only
am escaped, 1 King. 19.10. in all the Ages of the Churches of the Jews, the
false prophets ever studied to cut off the lives of the true Prophets; and
contracted that grievous guilt on the whole nation of the Jews and City of
Jerusalem, with which our Savior upbraids them Mat. 23.27. O Jerusalem that
killest the Prophets, and slayest them that are sent unto thee: and as this was
his course under the Law, we shall find he forsook it not under the Gospel:
with what envy may we observe him acted toward the life of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great Prophet of Gods Church; when his temptation would not succeed
to draw him into sin, and so to destroy the design of our redemption: how does
he maliciously engage against him to put an end to his days? Mat. 2.
exciting Herod to the cruel murder of all the Infants from two years old and
under in Bethlehem, Melius est Herodis esse porcum quam filium. Macrob.
and the coasts thereabout; not sparing his own son, giving Augustus Caesar
cause to say, It were better to be Herod's swine then son: and that to the end,
so eminent an author of future good might have been cut off before he could
work, nipped in the bud, and crushed in the shell. And all the time of his
appearance in the earth, what counsel and conspiracies against his life? what
rage and malice was continually expressed? how many times may we observe they
would have laid hands on him, and durst not for the multitude? would have
stoned and violently put him to death, if he had not miraculously conveyed
himself from them; and yet they never rested until they crucified the Lord of
glory: and as they dealt with the Master, so also they persecuted his servants
with those very death-threatning dangers foretold by our Savior to attend his
Disciples: daily and bloudily persecuting the lives of the Apostles on this
very ground, they taught the people, and preached through Jesus the
resurrection from the dead, Act. 4.2. Which of the Apostles of our Savior did
the Devil suffer to die a natural death? nay he did not so much as exempt James
the Just, though a man beloved by the people, but brought him to a violent
death to the very detestation of all men: and as it was thus in the first Age
of the Church, may we not trace all the Ages of the Church, and find the
Devils design to destroy the Church of God by cutting down faithful Ministers?
what shall we mention to you the many pious and grave Bishops of the Church,
that suffered under Pagans; and the constant curious search that was made for
Ministers to bring them to their death? As was Athanasius for the death of
Arsenius hidden by the Arrians of purpose to destroy the good Bishop.
nay and if any do but read the persecution of the Arrians and Donatists, what
an enmity is observable against Ministers lives? the orthodox Bishops and
Ministers are the men especially hated, maliciously accused as guilty of
murders and villainies, deserving death, cruelly banished and put to death;
Alphonsus Diazius not being able to reduce his brother John Diazius from
advancing the truth, never rested until he murdered him.
nay if we come nearer, what shall we say of the Popish persecutions,
principally directed against Luther, Calvin, Latimer, Ridley, Cranmer, and
famous reforming Ministers. The time would fail to tell you the stories which
might clearly manifest the Devils envy at the lives of godly Ministers: and
witness to the Church, that Ministers are no less needful to them and useful
among them, then Alexanders demand of the Orators out of Athens did witness
them to be Athenian guards, as Mastiffs are the defense of the flock against
the fury of the Wolves; and so engage every Christian to esteem the life of
Ministers.

the expressed experiences of Gods Saints and people in all Ages; who upon
their own experimental observation, are constrained to say with the Apostle,
nevertheless it is more needful for us that you live: they see the sundry
dangers to which the Church of God is obnoxious, and the several services
wherein the faithful Ministers are useful for their good: they want counsel and
correction; and find Ministers qualified for, and appointed unto such an end;
and hence whilst others envy, they esteem them; whilst others destroy, they
endeavor to defend them; and whilst others do rejoice in their death, they lay
it to heart and sadly lament it: by three eminent expressions the people of God
have ever witnessed their experience of Ministers lives to be needful to the
Church of God: 1. Providing for their safety. 2. Praying to God in the time of
their danger. 3. Praising God for their deliverance.


First they express their experience of the need of a living Minister, and that
by providing for their safety in a time of danger, as the instruments of Satan
has in all Ages sought the ruin, so the people of God have ever studied the
preservation of the life of a godly Minister. The good Kings of Judah were no
less solicitous for the safety and comfort of the Priests and Levites, then the
idolatrous Kings were severe in seeking their destruction: and with the Princes
of Israel will study to hide Jeremiah the Prophet, and Baruch the Scribe, from
the wrath of Jehoiakim the King that would destroy them, Jer. 36.19. and to
deliver them from the violence of such as would put them to death; pleading in
their behalf, and powerfully withstanding vulgar violence, which would destroy
them, Prove. 26.16, 17, 18. And by this very course we shall find that
Nicodemus gave testimony of the necessity of our Saviors life, pleading for
him among the Pharisees, Joh. 7.50, 51. And the Saints at Damascus gave this
experience of the sense of this want of St. Paul's life, when discerning his
danger, they let him down by the wall in a basket, Act. 9.25. Many are the
eminent and remarkable instances recorded in the Ecclesiastical story, of
Christians care to provide for the safety of Ministers in times of dangers:
Heathen Emperors did not more destroy them, then Christian Emperors defend
them: Constantine herein became a real nursing father to the Church,
cherishing and comforting the poor persecuted Bishops: he waged war against
Licinius his co-partner in the Empire, Socrates Scholast. hist. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Greek 3. translat.
because he decreed that the Bishops should not discourse of Christianity to
the Gentiles, and thereupon raised persecution against them. The Princes of
Bohemia were the Patrons of John Hus and Jerome of Prague, and the Duke of
Saxony of Luther, when their lives were pursued by Papal power; and not only
shall we find men in place, but also common people according to their
capacity, providing for the safety of their Ministers: three days was
Polycarpus hidden by the people, when sought for by the bloody persecutors: and
when Chrysostom was to be sent to Jerusalem, the Prefect of Antioch was
constrained by a slight to convey him away for fear of the people; and when to
be banished from Constantinople, the people plead for him with a Satius est ut
Sol no^ luceat quam Chrysostomus non doceat: better we want the sun to shine,
then Chrysostom to teach: and they watch his house night and day, the holy
Pastor is fain to steal into banishment, lest the peoples affection betraies
the City into commotion. What shall we say of the people of Alexandria,
confessing for their Bishop Athanasius against the Arrians? but among many
others eminent is the example; the people in Merindol and Cabriers, who when by
the Parliament of Provence, they with their whole town and families were
decreed to be destroyed, sent away their Ministers that they might escape in
safety: and admirable was the counsel of the Waldenses to the Bohemians in the
heat of persecution, to have an especial care of their Ministers, that they
might maintain a succession. Time would fail me to multiply the many remarkable
examples of peoples care toward their Ministers, pleading their cause, hiding
their persons, defending their lives to the utmost of their power; and when
they can do no more, expediting their flight, and hasting to give them warning
of imminent and impending dangers, crying vigorously, as the Senator of Hale to
Brentius, Fuge, fuge Brenti, cito, citius; citissime: be gone, be gone with all
speed, lest danger overtake thee: and certainly this exceeding provision for
their safety, is an evident expression of their experience that it is to them
needful that they abide in the flesh.

Secondly, When the Saints cannot provide, they pray for the safety of their
Ministers: and ce^^^^nly the prayers of the people of God, are expressions of
their sense, they wrestle not with God for things of no moment and value;
prayer it is a most serious and solemn duty, and also signifies the sensible
and restless desires of the souls suing for such blessings with greatest
fervor, that are found of greatest need: the sting of the Church her sorrow,
which gives strength to her heaven-piercing prayers is, our Prophets are all
gone, Psalm. 74.9. the want of a faithful Minister is many time the woe of heart
to a wicked man, Job 33.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. when he is chastened with pain upon
his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain: then a messenger one
of a thousand, is very desirable: how many that in health would have been the
death of a Minister, on their sick beds seek to them, and when they come to die
pray for them? pinching perplexity will convince Saul so far of the want of a
Prophet of God, that it will provoke when he has no hope to speed with God, to
complain to the very Devil, I am sore distressed, and God is departed from me,
and answers me no more, no not by Prophets, 1 Samuel 28.15. How much more do
the people of God who are sensible of, and subjected to ministerial privileges
pray to God to preserve their lives? you shall find that when Herod the King
stretched forth his hand to kill James and imprison Peter, the poor Christians
that had no other weapons betake themselves to God by prayers and tears, and
importuned till they obtained the life of Peter, Act. 12. and St. Paul having
escaped some eminent death-threatning danger in Asia, directs the glory of it
unto the prayers of the Christians, as his only guard by civine grace, 2 Cor.
1.10, 11. Who delivered (...) from so great death you helping with your
prayers: and to the prayers of the Saints he flies as his fence in time of
danger, as in Phil. 1.19. and Phil. 22. I trust that through your prayers I
shall be given unto you: Tertullian Apologizing for the Christians notes, that
in all their dangers prayer was their refuge, Preces fundimus, coelum tundimus,
misericordiam extorquemus: we besiege heaven for mercy, and wrestle till we
prevail. Te supastitem faciat mihi Deus: hoc peto and v^lo, and fiat voluntas
mea. amen.
When Luther came to visit M^conius being very sick, and considering how useful
he had been in the reformation, not knowing what else to do, he prayed that he
might outlive him: and hence Miconius was wont to say, Luther's prayers
preserved his life: and Justus Jonas said, Luther could in prayer have of God
what he would: and certainly none can observe the prayers put up for Gods
Ministers in the day of their danger, but must needs say, O how do they love
their Ministers, and how needful did they apprehend their lives!

Thirdly, As they provide for their safety, and pray for their deliverance, so
also they praise God for and rejoice in it when obtained: the life of a godly
Minister is not more earnestly begged of God, then thankfully received;
heaviness under want, must needs fill with high joys when obtained; the past
provision made and prayers put up for the life of a Minister, must needs engage
a very grateful receiving of them as from the dead: even with an ecstasy of joy
transporting their spirit, that they know not well how to entertain them: as
the Damsel that found Peter at the door, Act. 12.
for joy left him knocking, and could not open to let him in. St. Paul sends
Epaphroditus recovered from deaththreatning sickness with speed, that the sight
of him (the fruit of all their sighs and prayers) may fill them with joy, Phil.
2.28. The people of Alexandria and Constantinople did not with more complaints
nor sounder cries part with their faithful Bishops Athanasius and Chrysostom
when banished from them, then they did with joy and acclamation receive them in
their return: and certainly their serious joy, sensible praises, solemn
thanksgiving, and general acclamations for the lives of godly Ministers, are
legible testimonies that on good experience they found that it was more
needful for them that they should abide in the flesh.

I have done with arguments that may prove the Doctrine, and besides the
Philippians apprehension and the Apostles assent, it appears by Gods esteem,
the Devils envy, and the Churches experience, that the life of a faithful
Minister is of great necessity to a Christian Church: give me now leave to
propound a reason or two of this necessity, and I will close the Doctrine with
a word of application.

The Reasons why a Ministers life is of such absosolute necessity to a
Christian Church are many: I may not insist upon them all, I shall therefore
render these two Reasons: Life gives them liberty unto Society with the Church
visible. Service in and to the Church.


Society with the Church visible, and the Saints of God here on earth; and
their society is exceeding sweet and comfortable, eminently to be desired and
embraced: society of Saints that are common and ordinary is full of comfort and
content, how much more Ministers, who are lights of an higher or be, and stars
of a greater magnitude; who are elder brethren, and special members in the
body; most supporting and useful to the body? Never yet did any taste the
sweetness and consider the comfort of Ministerial society, but would freely
entertain it, and fervently desire it: a faithful Shunamite will prepare a
chamber, 2 King. 4.10.
a bed, a table, a stool, and a candlestick for the man of God to turn in, that
she may but have his company: Act. 16.
and a faithful Lydia will importune Paul to abide in her house. Men naturally
esteem at an high rate society with sacred persons: hence the Heathen had their
Orators, but especially their Priests in high honor; Micah thinks himself
happy if he have but a Levite in his house, Judge. 17.13. How much more is the
society of Gospel Ministers esteemed by sincere Christians, who consider the
comfort of that relation in which they stand, to sweeten their communion? they
are brethren and elder brethren, and brotherly love must lead them to take
pleasure in their company: they are fellow servants of the same household, and
servants of more high employments then common Saints; and how sociable are
naturally servants in the same family? But further, they are fathers that beget
them in Christ, and care for their good and comfort: well may Elisha then
lament the loss of Elijah, with a My father, my father, 2 King. 2.12. and in a
word, they are husbands, who espouse us unto themselves in Christ; so that if
the society of brethren, the fellowship of a father to his children, the
company of an husband to an endeared wife be desirable, the society of a
faithful Minister is desirable to the Church. Not only do faithful Ministers
stand in a relation that should render their society desirable, but are also
singularly qualified with those things that may render their communion
profitable and delightful; for they enjoy a spirit of sense and sympathy under
all the estates and conditions of their company, they are ready to rejoice when
the people rejoice, and mourn when they mourn, to make their condition as their
own: the Shunamites soul cannot be troubled in her, 2 King. 4.
but Elisha the man of God will be affected with it; and St. Paul declares in
respect of his sympathy with the Churches of Christ, the very care of all the
Churches lay upon him: Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I
burn not? 2 Cor. 11.28. Magis de ecclesiarum statu quam de suis periculis
augebatur.
Theodosius the Emperor said of Ambrose Bishop of Millain, that he cared more
for the Church then for his own life: and Beza in the life of Calvin, says he
was no otherwise affected toward the Churches, then if he bare them on his
shoulders: How much sweetness does sympathy yield to friends, and so make their
society supporting each to other? and as Ministers sympathize with the Church
in their condition, so they are stored with excellencies and endowments, which
they freely communicate unto such as accompany them as Christ their Master.
Ministers, go up and down doing good, Act. 10.38. they have parts above others,
gifts and graces beyond others, experiences of humane infirmities, and divine
support more then others; and they are free and willing to distribute
wheresoever they come, they well know these qualifications are not given to be
kept private, but to communicate unto others: on this account they long for
society with the Saints, Romans 1.11. I long to see you, to the end I may impart
unto you some spiritual gift, to the end you may be established: and they are
ready to comfort others with the self-same consolations with which they were
comforted themselves, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. How ardently then should their society be
desired by the Saints? But further, their society is honorable and profitable:
communion with a faithful Minister, is neither base nor beggarly, dishonorable
nor disadvantageous; they are company for Constantine: no serious Christian
King would be without the company of faithful Ministers; God ever coupled the
King and the Priest together: and indeed if we consider them invested with
Christ's authority, immediately attending on his service, engaged ever on his
Embassy, and enjoying fellowship with the Father and the Son, we may well
think their Ministry must needs succeed unto that end mentioned 1 John 1.3.
That your fellowship may be with us, and our fellowship is with the Father and
Son: and never can any lose by communion with Gods Ministers, they are
observant of all kindnesses, studious of requital, speaking the language of the
man of God to the Shunamite, Thou have been careful for us with all this care,
what is now to be done unto thee? 2 King. 4.13. They have an affectionate
spirit of prayer, by which they obtain blessings of God for men, they have
authority and commission to bless in the name of the Lord, and that which is
above all, they have a tender Master that blesses every family where Joseph
dwells, and every house of Obed Edom, where the Arc abides, that resents kindly
every courtesy that is conferred on his Ministers, promising a ministerial
reward to a cup of cold water to them given, and assuring that such as receive
them receive him, Mat. 10.40.

You have seen that singularly good is the society of Gods Ministers: now it is
life only that gives liberty of this society, there is no communion of persons
nor communication of graces in the grave: the dead know nothing, says Eccles.
9.5. and when David was shut out of communion, he counts himself as one among
the dead: death destroys all communicative power, the living communicate not
to the dead, nor the dead to the living; dearest relations when dead are not:
hence the qualifications with which friends are endowed, and communion whilst
living lie on surviving friends as a sad aggravation of their sorrow over their
death. Seeing then that death does deprive of society so desirable and
delightful, so honorable and profitable, when it takes from the Church a
faithful Minister, is it not much more needful that they abide in the flesh?

gives liberty of service in and for the Church: life is the principle of
promotion and power enabling to every action, and when death depriveth of it,
it puts a period to all proceedings in duty to God, or service to his people.
It is the living, the living that praise God and preach to his people, but the
dead make no mention of his name. The Ministers of God are eminently
serviceable, and their service exceeding necessary to the Church of God whilst
they do live, they are qualified with parts and power for the good of the
Church abilities and authority unto the administrations of Gospel ordinances
for the edification of the Church of God, and in general they are of as much
necessity to the Church of God as Laborers in harvest time, Fishermen in a
town or city, Stars and glorious lights in their orbs, Watchmen in a garrison
of war, Guides to pilgrims in a strange country, Rulers in a Commonwealth,
Nurses, nay Fathers in a family, that if life giving liberty to these to be
serviceable in their stations be needful to them, then is it needful to the
Church of God, that Ministers abide in the flesh; for the faithful Minister is
qualified to all these offices, given of Christ to these several ends, and
authorized to those intents and purposes: and to many more which I cannot stand
to mention: but more particularly the faithful Minister is qualified for, and
authorized to these four especial acts of service, which whilst he lives he
performs to the good of the Church: Curb the domineering of sin. Contradict
and convince of damning errors. Counsel the dark and dubious soul to duty.
Comfort the desponding spirit in misery.


The first service of a living Minister is to curb the domineering af sin: 1.
Service of a living Minister.
sin is subtle and not easily detected, and impudent and not easily restrained,
but the Minister is appointed to study the fallacies and detect the deceits
thereof; and is to rebuke with all authority, that disorder and profaneness may
be ashamed and blush; nay, and as they are hereunto appointed, so they are
qualified with wisdom, gravity, zeal, meekness and power to this end: sin is
ordinarily ashamed, and the sinner afraid of a faithful godly Ministers
presence; not only are the godly whose spirits are acted by supernatural grace,
awed by the observance and rebukes of their sin by a living Minister, but many
times those that are wicked, disorderly and unruly, void of the fear of God,
are restrained by his presence, and ashamed that their sin should come to his
cognizance. It Is very observable to this purpose, what is spoken of Joash the
King, 2 Chronicles. 24.2. He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all
the days of Jehoiadah the Priest: but in verse. 17, 18. when Jehoiadah was
dead, he left the house of the Lord God of his fathers, and served Idols: nay,
the loss of this good Priest, was the losing of a bridle to a brutish profane
spirit, which now rushed into sin without any restraint, until he slew
Zachariah his son. The grand divisions and gross disorders and profanenesses
which did arise in the Church of Corinth, did generally spring from that pride
and profane tumor which grew in Diotrephes and others, on a sense of the
Apostles absence, and persuasion, he would return to them no more, as is
evident in 1 Cor. 4.18, 19. Some are puffed up as if I would not come unto you:
and 3 John 9, 10. We find men have much need of that exhortation in Phil.
2.12. As ye have obeyed in my presence, do it much more in my absence:
Ministerial presence does by plain discovery, piercing rebukes, and powerful
censures of and for sin, much curb and restrain it, filling the sinner with
shame, and many times constraining them to cry out as did the wicked
conspirators against Athanasius, they could not work their wickedness, because
of the good Bishop: Ministers presence laying no less check on men's spirits and
lusts, then the fathers eye lays on a wanton child: but when they are once
dead then does iniquity break out as a land flood, and run with force and
violence: if Moses be but apprehended by the people as so gone that they look
for him no more, they will make Idol calves, and cast off the worship of the
true God.

to contradict and convince of damning errors in doctrine, which destroy the
very foundations of Christanity: The constitution of Gospel Ministry gave a
check to heathen oracles, constraining the Devil to complain, Christianity
hinders his Oracles from speaking: such is the skill of a faithful Minister in
the discovery of the truth, and dexterity to defend it to the stopping of the
mouths of the gainsayer, and authority in warning the people against false
doctrines and seducers, that false teachers many times lie lurking in the
bosom of the Church, and dare not appear to advance their damned errors, nor
to assemble their followers: of this St. Paul had clear experience, and
expressed his knowledge of it to the Elders of the Church at Ephesus, Act.
20.29, 30. For I know that after my departure, shall grievous wolves enter in
among you not sparing the flock, and of your own selves shall men arise
speaking perverse things, and drawing away disciples after them: the zeal of a
faithful Minister in defending the truth, and condemning all falsities, does
anticipate the Devils design, that errors cannot spread and enrage his
instruments to study the ruin and death of them: Elijah his zeal will not
suffer Israel to follow and worship Baal; the false Prophets cannot prevail, if
Micaiah and Jeremiah be at liberty; the Arrians cannot spread their
blasphemies, unless Athanasius and the Divines teaching the Doctrine of one
substance be exiled: many are the remarkable instances of the contradictions
and convictions of horrid Heresies by the Fathers of the Church, with which
Ecclesiastical story abounds: hence it comes to pass that all Heresies end in,
and are advanced by persecution; for the enmity of truth and falsehood is
irreconcilable: and herein some of Gods Ministers are more instrumental to the
Church of God then others, as they are more eminently qualified by God and
nature, for such knotty and controversial work: thus Athanasius was of all the
contestors for the truth of one substance accounted the (...), the bulwark of
truth: and of all the first reformers of Christian Religion, none obtained the
title of Conqueror of the world save only Luther: and lastly we may observe the
insultations and triumphs of seducers from the truth at and for the death of
faithful Ministers, with their free and forward publication of their damned
Doctrines, when they conceive there is none that will or can oppose them and
their opinions, saying as Flaccius Osiander when Luther was dead, in the bold
oppugning of the doctrine of Justification by faith alone, Leonem mortuum esse,
etc. the Lion was dead, and he cared not for the Foxes (meaning Melancthon and
and others) as an evident testimony that their false doctrines cannot spring
under Ministerial air: and this engaged the Apostles to write the Doctrines
they had preached with many a charge, that the Christians should hold it fast,
that they might have it in remembrance when they were dead, 2 Pet. 1.15. and
that they might earnestly contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints,
Jude 2. For that when the faithful Minister is once dead he can neither warn
the people, instruct the seduced flock, convince the gainsayer, nor reject the
Heretic, or use any other means to stay the spreading of error, and for the
safety of the Church.

to counsel unto duty every dark and dubious soul: in this respect the covenant
of God is with them, and the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, 1 Pet. 4.11.
and the people must seek the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2.7. the Ministry of the
Gospel is as the Oracles of God under the Law, unto which men must have
recourse in all straights and doubts; and by which they must be resolved. When
the strife is great at Antioch about the Jewish ceremonies, an appeal must be
made to the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, Act. 15. and there (...),
determined decrees must be the guidance of every Christian, and all the
Churches of God: and what ever doubt is in the Church of Corinth, St. Paul must
be sought unto, and determine it: hence Ministers are called lights in
darkness, and guides in deserts to the people of God. The Levites were
scattered in all the tribes of Israel, and had their houses near the
Synagogues, that the people might on all occasions resort to them for counsel
and advice in matters of doubt and difficulty: the people resorting to Calvin
for counsel by colloquy in private, was one means that was observed to waste
his spirits, and weaken his nature, and hasten his end: and in in respect of
this special service, the people of God have cause to lament the death of a
faithful Minister as did the Jews in their captivity, Our Prophets are all
gone, there is none to tell us how long: or as Saul over Samuel, The Lord is
departed, and answers me not by a Prophet.

to comfort the desponding soul in a day of danger and distress: he is the
messenger one of a thousand, Job 33.23.
sent by God to show unto man his uprightness when he is pained on his bed, and
perplexed in his thoughts; and to this end the covenant of peace between God
and man is in his mouth, and the supporting sealing Sacraments are in his hand,
and authority given to him in the name of the Lord to cheer the soul and
pronounce pardon of sin: and it is charged on them to comfort the mourners in
Zion, and they are qualified with skill to bind up the broken hearted, and to
heal the wounded spirit by speaking a word in season to a wearied soul, so that
the death of a faithful Minister may make the Church to complain, as Lam. 1.16.
The comforter which should relieve my soul is far from me.

Whosoever then sees a necessity of sin to be checked, error contradicted,
doubtful souls counseled, and desponding spirits to be comforted, and that
this service is imposed on the Ministers of God: and life to be the twelve
hours in which this work must be done, death to be the night in which no man
works, must needs conclude, that the Minister abide in the flesh is
absolutely needful.

We have done with the Doctrinal part of this observation, and have given you
by arguments and Reasons to see that the lives of faithful Ministers are of
absolute necessity to the Church of God: give me now leave to wind up all in
one word of application: and to pass by all other uses that might be inferred,
I shall only improve it by way of exhortation.

Let it then exhort every one of us in our proper places to carry toward the
Ministers of the Word, as convinced that their life and abode in the flesh is
more needful for us: It is our shame and sin that we carry toward living, (I
and dead Ministers) as if at the best they were indifferencies, and matters of
conveniences; in the enjoyment of which we seem to be little better, and in
the want of them nothing worse, they are certain spangling ornaments, but not
essential to any society whatsoever: in the enjoyment of them our being is
something more honorable; but in the want of them, we retain our being with as
much compleatness and certainty as needs: so that the Ministers are to most
that carry it fairly in the Church, glorious superfluities that may well be
spared: how far is this from the esteem God sets on them, and requires his
people to have of them, whilst it is an imposed duty, to know them that are
over us in the Lord, and that labor among us and esteem them very highly, with
an honor due to things essential, without which we cannot be, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
How far is this from the expressed sense of Ministerial worth in the primitive
Christians, who would pluck out their own eyes in preservation of Ministers
life, received them as an Angel of God, accounting themselves blessed in the
enjoyment of their life and presence, Gal. 4.14, 15. and how does this evidence
our insensibility of Ministerial work and service? can pilgrims count their
guides conveniences, and children their father indifferences, and garrisons
their watchmen and sentinels superfluities, and Christians the Ark of Gods
presence the Oracles of the most high, the stewards of the mysteries of God,
the earthen vessels in which the heavenly treasure is brought, and without
which it cannot be enjoyed, honorable ornaments and superfluities: certainly
such thoughts are sugestions of Satan, sprouts of ignorance and lukewarmness,
and certain signs of hypocrisy and apostasy.

But much more profane and wicked are they which account Ministers not only
superfluities that may be spared; but needless burdens, the peoples pressures,
the Churches excrements, that must be removed and rejected; that groan under
their lives, and account the death of a godly Minister their greatest joy:
their study is to load their name with reproaches, and their lives with
distress and dangers railing on their persons and profession: reviling them in
all companies, exciting against them the powers of the world, by false
accusations, representing them troublers of Israel, sowers of sedition, and as
Haman did the Jews, men scattered abroad and dispersed among the people, Esth.
3.8.
whose Laws are diverse from the Laws of all people, and so are good for
nothing. (Beloved) though the spirit of Satan has appeared against godly
Ministers in all ages, yet in this age of ours it does more openly and
impudently appear then ever, making the Ministerial office a manifest crime in
any person, and give us cause to say in the complaint of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4
9. (...) dicebantur homines vilissimi and abjectissimi, item scelerati, and
exitiales item sacri seu piaculares, quorum nece and exitio publicae
calamitates expiabantur. Tertul. apol. cap. 1.
God has set us forth as it were men appointed unto death, for we are made a
spectacle unto the world, to Angels and to men: and verse. 13. we are made the
filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day: they
were so accounted that were the vilest and basest men, wicked and to be
banished the sacrifices of the people, to be offered to their gods, whose death
expiated the calamities of the people. The debauched expressions and traducing
terms that are in the mouths of the most of men do loudly witness the spirit
of Campian that grand Jesuit to possess them, whilst they can utter of
Ministers no sound but that of his Ministris eorum nihil vilius: nothing is
more vile then their Ministers: but (my brethren) how far is this short of the
Philippians frame of spirit, which constrained the Apostles assent in the Text,
Nevertheless it is more needful for you that I abide in the flesh: but (my
brethren) the disrespect of the people in our Age constrains Ministers to see a
necessity of their death, giving them an aptitude to say with Melancthon the
Ministry is Miseria miseriarum: the misery of miseries: but I would gladly hope
better things of you even in this very case, things that concern salvation, and
entreat every of you in your places to witness by your carriage that you are
sensible that the Ministers life is needful to the Church of God, if ever your
sense of it must appear, this is the time when all the world almost say the
contrary; and God by death takes from us not only Paul the aged, but also
hopeful Timothy. Let me therefore direct you in a word how to express your
assent to the Doctrine; and herein I shall apply a few directions to all in
general; to my brethren in the Ministry in particular; and to you of this
parish and congregation in special.

First in general to us all: Exhort. to Christians in general.
Christian brethren, we are all members of the Church, subjected to the
influence of those glorious stars God has fixed among us, and guided by the
lights which at the present possess Gods Candlesticks in general, we have a
common advantage by the lives of the faithful Ministers of God which labor in
his Church in this generation: let it then be our care to carry toward them as
convinced that their lives are our advantage, their being our necessity, and
their death would be, nay and is our exceeding damage: to this end let me
commend to you these few directions.

Appehend their worth: this is that which will affect your hearts with want:
study therefore the authority by which they are appointed, and the work to
which they are assigned, nay the necessity of their interposing between God and
us, to the end we may enjoy communion with our God. It is not in vain that God
calls Moses into the Mount, nay when Israel comes to be a little affected with
the glory of divine Majesty, and the dazzling splendour of immediate glory, they
will see the necessity of a Ministers interposition, and say to Moses, Speak
thou unto us and we will hear, but let not God speak unto us lest we die, Exodus
20.19. Does not our own observation and experience witness the fancy of
immediate enjoyment of God and Christ, founds the slighting of the Ministry of
Gospel Ordinances. I beseech you therefore see the Ministers, servants of Gods
own appointment to give you your meat in due season, and you may not count them
unuseful: they are the earthen vessels by which we enjoy the heavenly treasure
suitable to our capacity, and as we are able to bear, and therefore not
unnecessary: Christ when he ascended up into heaven, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
gave Ministers to perfect his Church and fit it for glory; there is no
enjoyment of God here, nor expectation of God hereafter, save by the medium of
ministerial endeavors, they are therefore needful: Oh see them to be the
chariots and horsemen of Israel.

Adore with admiration the Providence of God in the preservation of their
lives: the providence are many and remarkable in the deliverance of Ministers
lives, sometimes from outward violence of the sword, sometime from the inward
assaults of death-threatning distempers; and these are much to be eyed and
adored; Ministers that are delivered from death, should be received with joy,
and held in great reputation, Phil. 2.29. nay the appearance of an imprisoned
Minister should be to the astonishment of praying Christians, as was Peter's,
Act. 12.16. Shall not children adore the providence that rescued their fathers
from death-threatning dangers? How many of us Christians do owe our spiritual
and eternal life, to the natural life of this or that Minister of the Gospel of
Christ; and shall we not admire their escapes, and adore the God of their
deliverances? they live not for themselves, but for our good; life may be their
lamentation and burden, they are thereby kept from Christ; but it should be
our gladness and Joy, our thanksgiving unto God, for thereby we are kept from
hell, and carried unto heaven.

Actively improve their lives: the Prophets do not live for ever, it must make
them laborious, and us attentive: the fountain that now flows and is likely to
be soon drawn dry, should be sealed and singularly improved: the showers that
fall from heaven are transient, and drunk into the earth with greediness; our
Saviors hearers followed him from place to place, and hanged on his lips with
constancy and diligence, as convinced they would not always drop honey: St.
Paul in his journey to Rome, from whence he must return no more, traveled
night and day in the work of the Ministry, by reason of the insatiable desires
of the people: Elisha will not be shaken off by Elijah when ready to be taken
from him: the ingenious pupil is very studious of his art or science, and
inquisitive into the mystery of it when his master is dying, and he in danger
to lose it for ever. Calvin being naturally thin and spare in body, as one
expecting death daily, drew the consultations of the people to him to his own
consumption: How duly, how diligently should you sit under and suck in the
instructions of your Ministers, seeking satisfaction to all your doubts,
establishment to all the uncertainties of your mind and weakness of your
faith, when you consider they are dying, and the day coming when they cannot
direct you: well is it with the Minister that is weakened with the peoples
waiting on his Ministry and endeavors, it is an argument they see it needful
that he abide in the flesh.

Constantine may contest against Licinius for Ministers lives and liberty of
teaching the people; and people must stand in a readiness of plucking out their
eyes for their Ministers safety, standing in their defense, and supplying their
wants, taking heed that the Ministers of God be not at any time arraigned for
the truth, and record that sad indictment against the people, at my first
answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me, the Lord lay it not to
their charge, 2 Timothy 4.16. but in our contests we must especially strive with
God by carnest prayer and supplication, besieging heaven and not ceasing till
Paul be delivered unto our prayers: if Hered stretch forth his hand to kill
James and imprison Peter, the Church stretch forth their hearts to God, and by
prayer break all bolts and bars in the prison: prayers of the people is the
Pastors guard, the Preachers physic and most powerfully recovering potion.

Affectionately resent Gods providence in the death of Gods faithful Ministers:
the very heathen would lament more the loss of one Philosopher, then many
Orators; for these taught them to speak, but those to live: Is not an house of
Funeral solemnities without solemn mourning, a very soloecism in nature? shall
a father die, and the family not be filled with sadness? sure then they are
full of stupidity: Elijah may not be removed, but Elisha will lament with a My
father, my father! and the Ephesians are cut to the heart, and cannot but weep
most of all for that they shall see the Apostles face no more: and indeed the
relation in which they stand, the services which lie on their shoulders, may
make the loss of any of them to be lamented; they are the horsemen and chariots
of Israel; they are the foundations of the Church, which when removed may
constrain us to cry, What shall the righteous do? nay and brethren, many times
the death of the righteous do presage some general approaching judgment;
before the sacking of Hippo, Augustine and the other Ministers die; and before
the sacking of Hidelberg by the Spaniards, Paraeus died: when they die, shall
we see the righteous perish, and no man lay it to heart? shall they be taken
from the evil to come, and no man consider it? My brethren, God has of late
years taken from England many eminent Ministers, and has come into London with
many a sad stroke, Isa. 57.1.
some aged Fathers have been followed to the grave, and hopeful young Ministers
laid in the dust (the Lord grant this do not presage some sweeping plague) we
are now celebrating the Funerals of as eminently an hopeful Minister as our
Church enjoys; Mr. Gataker, Whitaker, Gouge, and the never to be forgotten
Bishop of Armagh, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Fenton, with many others.
can I do other then call on you all to mourn over so sad a loss, and lay to
heart with sense and feeling Gods hand in cutting off men of parts and piety,
the help and hope of his Church and people; and yet why to call to mourning a
people whose eyes full of tears argue their hearts to be full of grief: Let me
Christains limit this counsel, and check your sorrows by provoking you not to
mourn over Ministers death as men without hope: but in the midst of your
heaviness consider:

1. Ministers are men; mortals, subject unto death: Zach. 2.5.
the Prophets do not live for ever, and their death is no temptation, but what
is common unto men.

2. Ministry surviveth the Ministers persons: they may die, but it shall abide;
their persons are mortal, Mat 28.20.
but the Gospel is everlasting, their function must be maintained to the end of
the world; I will not say to England, but to the Church of God: loss of a
Minister must cast you down, Gods providence in succession must cheer you up.

But I have done with the exhortation that relates to us all in common: our
apprehension of Ministers worth, adoration of Gods providence in their
preservation, active improvement of their life, ardent contests for their
being, and affectionate sorrow for their loss, are the duties by which we
witness with the Apostle, that they abide in the flesh is more needful for the
Church: my next exhortation is to my brethren in the Ministry, Exhort. 2. to
Ministers.
and to my self: Let us so carry as to witness our sense that our death might
be our gain, but life our peoples advantage: our affection toward the Church
for whose good we are appointed, must not only bring us into a straight what to
choose, but must cast the scales of our thoughts, and constrain us to say and
confess that it is more needful for them that we abide in the flesh. To this
end we must

1. Carefully preserve our lives for the Churches good, not casting our lives
away: it is indeed true, if the cause of Christ and the Gospel call for them,
Act. 20.24
we must not count our lives dear; but readily lay them down: but yet our care
must be to preserve our lives in the due use of all lawful means, and prevent
where we can do it without sin, our sufferings and death, and that we must do
with the more care for the Churches good.

2 Conscionably lay out your lives for the Churches good, not sparing our pains
in our Ministerial duties, for fear of hastening our end, the Ministry is the
end of our life, and our life is the only time of our work; let us therefore
work, and that with diligence; the night is coming when we cannot work, it is
good to check our fainting in Gods work through fear of approaching death, with
the answer of famous Dr. Rainolds, nec propter vitam vivendi perdere finem, and
say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.15.
we are willing to spend and be spent for you: we are lamps lighted up that we
may be wasted in giving light to others: now that God has taken off another
painful labourer, the work lies the more heavy on our hands; let us not
loyter, but improve lively the time and the strength we do enjoy, lest our
studies, affections and endevou^s be anticipated by our death: sed verbum sat
sapienti.

Lastly, I shall speak a word, Exhort 3. to the Parish.
and but a word to you of this Parish and Congregation, on whom in special God
has made the breach by the death of this reverend and learned Minister; Mr.
Fenten, and Mr. John Frest.
within these two years God has removed two very eminently hopeful instruments
of his glory and his Churches good; you cannot but see the footsteps of a
furious God in these sad providence, I pray God sanct^fie them to you, and let
me entreat you as convinced of the truth of the Doctrine; and in special, that
it had been more needful for you, that this your reverend and hopeful Pastor
had abiden in the flesh, carefully to discharge these duties.

Lament your less; it is great to the Church, it is greater to you, your
particular edification under his Ministry, made him a blessing to the body: you
were objects of his especial care, study, and qualifications; and constant
subjects of his able and holy administrations of the Mysteries of God and
salvation; if he be laid to heart abroad, and not lamented at home, it will be
the scandal of his name, but the sin and shame of your souls. But some may be
ready to object and say,

Sir, Why should we so much lament the loss of this Minister? he was but a man
as we are, and must die, and though he be gone, we can soon get another.

Answ. This objection is too full of stupidity and profaneness to deserve an
answer, yet let me say to it thus much:

1. Though the temptation be common, he was a man and mortal, yet the breach is
present: you are a people without a Pastor, your shepherd is smitten, and you
must needs be scattered: were it not a stupidity would make nature blush, to
see a wife senslesly, nay and sensually interre a deceased husband, rendering
this reason, that he was mortal, she may have another; so God loses the end
and effect of the present smart and breach:

2. Pitiful distractions and divisions may overtake you before you enjoy
another: Mr. Carter since dead.
when you were to fix one on the late resignation of a Minister, you know what
distractions and divisions you run into before you did agree; in this your late
Minister you did agree, I pray God his death do not subject you to new
divisions.

3. You may obtain another, but not easily such another: Mr Frost was not
ordinary, as you shall hear anon: you lie open to seducers: Wolves in sheeps
clothing among us abound, and may if not wisely prevented become your leaders
unto ruin: nay you may enjoy a lawful and pious Minister, but he may want Mr.
Frosts parts and prudence, learning and piety.

4. It is not with souls as with calves, that change of pasture should make
them fat; Botolph Aldgate, Sept. 15 1656.
but of boys change of Schoolmasters make them backward in their learning: it
was his own note at my Church in the late morning exercise, the word preached
does not profit, because the hearer keeps not fixed to the preacher: another
must study your temper and disposition, lay foundation work for Catechizing and
principling in Religion, before he proceed to edifying dispensations: this he
had done, intending to leave principles and carry you forward if God would, but
it is evident God will have you yet back again.

If then you are any way sensible of Gods hand, and serious in reference to
your own good, you see cause to lament your loss.

lives and conversations now he is dead, witness that it had been more needful
for you that he had continued in the flesh: your union in him, your resorting
to him, your acceptance of him, and attendance on his Ministry, did witness the
necessity of his life among you, there now wants the piety of your lives as an
evidence of your proficiency in grace under his Ministry to witness it: let me
tell you Christians, he did travel in birth to have Christ formed in you; he
studied the keeping of your affections for the good of your souls; he delighted
in your free and forward attentions to his Ministry, it was his comfort on his
deathbed, So much he did declare.
that he had preached to you the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and your duty to
search them from Joh. 5.39. for he believed it seized on your hearts as he
preached: take heed you do not frustrate his hope, and witness to the world you
loved to hear him, but would not do what he said, when he shall meet you in the
judgment of Jesus Christ; how heavy will it be to you, that he shall see you
deceived his hopes, and he labored in vain among you; your practice on what he
preached will make all to say, What pity was it Mr. Frost lived not longer at
the Crouched Friars.

3. Labor to supply his place by a a lawful, pious and prudent Divine: blessed
be God you may be stored, be speedy in making up your breach, beg of God to
direct your choice, agree among your selves, and the Lord give you a man that
may stand up in his stead.

In the careful and conscionable performance of these duties, you will witness
the life of a faithful Minister to be of absolute necessity to the Church of
God; and constrain the Ministers of the Word to assent unto your apprehensions
in the words of the Text, with which I shall conclude this first part of this
discourse, Nevertheless that we abide in the flesh is more needful for you.

Having presented you with the necessity of a Ministers life in the general as
it relates to the Church of God; let me now affect you with a sense of the want
of this Minister, learned Mr. John Frost in special, by presenting you with the
hopeful parts and high endowments, which rendered him serviceable whilst
living, and may make us sorrowful in such a loss now he is dead.

That the memorial of the just may be blessed and preserved, whilst the
remembrance of the wicked does perish; it has been the constant and
commendable custom of good men, to make honorable mention of the graces and
eminent endowments of deceased friends; famous are the Panegyric Orations made
at the Tombs of the primitive Martyrs: memorable are the several Orations of
the two Gregory's, Nyssen and Nazianzen on the death of Basil the Great. This
laudable practice has been ever used, and still is in the midst of us; we have
too too lately had published the lives of too many learned lights, and
eminently pious Ministers, pillars of the Church of God, not only in the
Country, but also in this our City; learned Gataker, judicious Vines, acute
Gouge, affectionate Robinson, pious Whitaker and profound Usher, with many
others, have been lately added to Londons Catalogue of deceased Ministers (the
which if the Lord stay not his hand is like to swell into no mean volume) their
worthy praises have sounded in our ears, and been laid before our eyes. I am
this day to trace the same course, and to characterize this eminent person and
hopeful instrument, whom God has to our sorrow added to this sad Catalogue,
whose worth deserved to have been advanced by the Tongue of some Angelical
Doctor, or present Academical Orator, rather then to be depressed by my rude
and plain expressions: yet seeing this work is cast on my hands, I shall
according to my ability give you an account of him, as I have received it from
his nearest relations, best acquaintance, or my own personal knowledge, and
herein let me mention him in general and particular.

In general I may say of him to the aggravation of our grief, he was from his
cradle to his grave eminently commendable, for he was admirably endowed by
nature, adorned by the acquirements of learning, and advanced by ministerial
qualifications which might have made him exceeding useful as ever any our age
(may I not say our nation?) produced and gave occasion to many eminent Divines,
to say of him as Erasmus of Philip Melancthon; he is an excellent Grecian, and
a most learned man; he is a youth and stripling if ye consider his age, but one
of us if you look on the variety of his knowledge almost in all Books, he is
very exquisite in learning, I pray Christ this Youth may live long among us.

In particular, Mr. John Frost was son and eldest son to an ancient
reverend and pious Divine Mr. John Frost, Minister of Fakenham in the County of
Suffolk, His relation.
where he has resided above twenty years past, and yet exercises his
Ministry, surviving, and sadly this day lamenting the loss of his firstborn,
his might, the beginning of his strength, the excellency of his dignity, nay
the comfort of his old age, honor and hope of his gray hairs: So that if
descent from, and relation to the Tribe of Levi, Ministers of the Gospel be (as
blessed be God it has of late been asserted, and publicly appeared to be) an
honor worthy a public association, let the constituted Company of Ministers
Sons lament the loss of this glorious Pearl, and glittering Diamond which is
fallen out of their Crown. He has three brothers, all surviving. Thomas Master
of Arts, and Minister of the word. James now Student in St. John's College in
Cambridge: and Richard an Apothecary in Cambridge, (and now present to condole
the loss of such a Brother:) to two of them learning (his ornament) is become
essential; and to the other, the chief ingredient that compounds his calling.
May it be our hearty prayer this day to God, that the two intended Ministers
may revive Mr. John Frost, and arise in his stead, and that a double portion of
his Spirit may rest on them, as did the spirit of Elijah on Elisha, for the
good of the Church of God! Amen.

This is the person, and thus related in Nature, whose life whilst I relate in
your ears, I shall observe him and represent him to you in a threefold estate,
Childehood, before his going to the University, Growth in his behavior and
acquirements at the University, and perfection in the exercise of his
Ministry: in all which you shall see he was a promising Sprout, and primely
growing Tree, plentifully bearing fruit in its perfection.

First, in reference to the first. In his Childehood, His Infant disposition.
even from his Cradle he was so well tempered by nature, that he was always
towardly and hopeful, no way subjected to the wildenesse or wantonness, much
less to the wickedness of other children: he was mild of nature, harmless in
behavior, soon snub'd for any defect, and submissive under any check even from
his Fathers Servants: so gentle, sweet, and amiable was his disposition, that
it rendered him dear to his brethren, delightful to servants, neighbors, and
all that knew him, and the Darling of his Parents. So that in this respect,
were it not a saying too hyperbolicall, I might say of him, as it was said of
Bonaventure, In hoc homine non peccavit Adam. Adams depraved nature was scarce
visible in him. Being grown into some competency in years, and by his Father
found docible, ingenious, and pliable to every thing that was good and
religious, and greatly desirous of learning, he was sent to School, and placed
under the tuition of an eminent Schoolmaster at Thetford in the County of
Norfolk, where he continued till the thirteen or fourteenth year of his age, to
the great improvement of his natural parts, in the attainment of knowledge in
the Latin and Greek Tongues, and indeed the perfection of Grammar and
Rhetoric, to the glory and comfort of his Schoolmaster, and the admiration of
his School-fellowes, whom he much out-stripped; His School demeanor.
for Nature had endowed him with all helps to learning, an healthful and good
constitution of body, a quick capacity, a critical and enquiring head, an
industrious studious spirit, and a strong memory, and that which was the Spur
of all, an exceeding love to and an insatiable desire of learning: and now he
was apprehended by his Father, and adjudged by his Schoolmaster, fit to be
transplanted and placed in the University, and was by his Father thither
designed: but fearing himself not yet ripened for those higher Studies of
Logic and Philosophy, and finding his youth obnoxious to temptations, he
appeared unwilling to go, and desired to spend some more of his time in some
other School, the better to fit himself for Academicall Lectures, and according
to his desire, his Father sent him unto the School at Bury in Suffolk, and
placed him under the tuition of one Mr. Stevens, a grave, learned, and
industrious Schoolmaster, yet alive, and teaching in the same School. His
Master here, from his first entrance, esteemed him the glory of his School: his
mild behavior and studious spirit won to him much love from his Master, and
high respect from his School-fellowes, among whom he was as a Master, rather
then Companion. In this School he read Juvenal, Persius, and Salust, Homers
Iliads, and Isocrates, by which means he attained such a readiness in the
Greek and Latin Tongue, that he was well able to encounter Aristotle, and all
Academicall study in Logic and Philosophy, in any art or science: and in this
preparation for the University, is he not an eminent pattern to such as
ambitiously affect a relation to it, not duly maturing themselves for it; who
when admitted, find their rawnesse to remain, as a great obstruction of their
study, and many times the ruin and overthrow of their high intentions.

In all this his Childhood not only did his carriage bespeak him good by
nature, being obedient to Parents, loving to brethren, Youthful picty.
courteous to Servants and neighbors, submisse to Tutors, studious at his
book, and gentle in his whole behavior: but as one sanctified from the womb,
and unto whom the water in Baptism was effectually and indeed the Laver of
Regeneration: Religion gave a luster to all his naturalls; for he was a
diligent Reader of the Scripture, and with Timothy knew them from his youth: a
great Student in his Catechism, and betimes became acquainted with the form of
sound words, a constant hearer of the word, and an earnest lover of them that
feared God: a Zealous reprover of vice and profaneness; his Companions Oaths
and idle discourse has driven him from among them: in his youth he much eyed
the Ministry, and with many a sigh has been observed to pray that God would
fit him for it.

You have seen him in his Childhood, and if you have seriously observed it, you
have good assurance, so hopeful a Plant cannot but prosper, and grow soon unto
good perfection if placed in good Soil, and under temperate air, as indeed he
was: for,

About the sixteenth year of his age, Admission into the University.
he was admitted into St. John's College in Cambridge, where he did abide for
the space of 13 years. As soon as he was admitted, by reason of the acuteness
of his mind, the mildness of his behavior, and his intentivenesse at his
study, he was observed as ardently desirous of learning, and all the time of
his abode in Cambridge he was hugged in the bosom, and dandled on the knees of
his mother the University, as a more then ordinary child. And when he was to
remove from it, to this place, he was as one drawn from the breast, to no less
grief to the mother, then trouble to the child.

During his first four years in the College, he was eminently studious, and
ingeniously apprehensive of whatsoever his Tutor (learned Mr. His advancing
carriage.
Clark then Fellow of that house) then read unto him; so submisse to and
observant of his Tutor, that an ancient Fellow of that house said of him by way
of Emphasis, he was Mr. Clarks Pupil, not only by subjection, but impression:
bearing in all things his very image; which engaged his Tutor to account him
his delight, and indeed to study to advance him. Constant he was at the
public prayers in the Chapel, and at all public Acts and Lectures in the
Schools: and whenever it was his turn to appear in the Schools, he failed not,
but did perform his whole part with high applause. And in a word, such was his
whole behavior, that an ancient Fellow then resident in that house said of
him, that his four years did make Master, Fellows, and all superiors ambitious
to advance him, inferiors all very much to reverence and esteem him; insomuch
that in the whole house he had not any man to be his enemy; by reason whereof,
he was scarsely graduated Bachelor of Arts, before a Fellowship was conferred
upon him, His preferrement.
and he thereby called unto Rule and Government: for which he was marvellously
well qualified. Being made a Fellow, be betimes became a Tutor unto young
Students, and read the Lectures of Logic and Philosophy, with so much
diligence, plainness and judgment, that he became famous, His diligence and
fame as a Tutor.
and surpassed any the Fellows of his own house, nay almost any house in
Cambridge; whosoever sends a Son to St. John's College, must, if possible, have
Mr. Frost to be his Tutor, especially Gentlemen of note and quality; and if the
number of Pupils be the Tutors praise, glorious was his Crown in this respect,
having forty Pupils at a time, many of them fellow-Commoners, such a mixture of
meekness did qualify his gravity in his carriage among his Pupils, that he
allured some, and awed others to their studies, and attracted all their
affections to himself. Six of his fellow Commoner Pupils gave him their
Pictures, which at this day hang up in the Hall of his house, as Emblems of his
honor in this employment. One thing more I must not pass in silence, Depth
and plainness in his Lectures.
which adds not a little to his honor: So accurate, plain and profound were
his Lectures read in private to his Pupils, that other Sophisters under other
Tutors in the house and other houses, reading them, did transcribe them, and
make them the particular master of their study: especially in the crabbed study
of Metaphysics, in which he was very accurate.

In this College and University he served all offices, and took his Degrees,
His learned progress in his Degrees.
Bachelor and Master of Arts, and Bachelor in Divinity, all in their order,
and in his own person, and not by proxy, performing all acts and exercises
required in reference to them openly in the Schools. The last of these he took
this year, at the public Commencement, in order unto which he preached the
Commencement Sermon on that Text in Act. 17.23. To the unknown God, the
inscription on the Athenian Altar; this he did with that depth of judgment,
clegancy of style, ardency of mind, and easiness of utterance, that he
approved himself a Workman not to be ashamed, His public Acts at this years
public Commencement.
wisely dividing the word of truth, and witnessing to all his prositing in his
past studies. In his public Act, he exhibited a very learned and judicious
Thesis, in defense of that Principle against the contrary errors of the Church
of Rome. Fides justificat sub ratione instrumenti. And disputed against the
Arminian fancy, in defense of that Principle, Cognitio naturalis non sufficit
ad Salutem. Both which Theological questions he handled very copiously, and
asserted with much plainness and strength of Argument; and defended them both
with much acuteness and learning against the acurate and knotty objections of
the learned opponents; His sharpness in dispute.
the which he did not evade, but fully resolve with much judgment, and many
times retort with much ingenuity, manifesting himself to be an accurate
Disputant, and able Convincer of Gainsayers to the truth, as well as a profound
and well read Divine: He was not constrained to answer with a Reverende
Professor ingenue confiteor me non posse respondere huic argumento, and so to
crave the clemency of the Professor in the obtainment of his Degree: nor yet
was he with Melancthon reduced to a Cras tibi respondebo, but managed the whole
dispute to admiration of all Auditors, and abundant satisfaction of the whole
University, obtained his Degree with high applause and approbation, being
discharged from his Act by the Reverend Professor Dr. Love, that magnum
Academia ingenium, with a Descend onustis laudibus.

Thus then you have seen how this hopeful Plant grew in Academicall Air and
Soil, unto a very great maturity, that now the Church of God could not but
expect to gather fruit in great abundance by his ministerial endeavors in the
midst of them. And this leads me to commend to you the third capacity in which
he was admirably commendable, viz. his Ministry.

The Ministry was his aim, His entrance into the Ministry.
and the ultimate end of all his studies, it came not to his thoughts a
posteriori, as a recompense of his past study and piece of preferment, into
which his spent time gave opportunity and advantage to leap: but a priori, as
the Goal unto which all his time, studies and endeavors must run, and that
employment in which all other rejected he would live and serve his generation,
and to which all his time and diligence must mature and ripen him: hence sprang
his sighing prayers in his Childhood, Oh that God would make me a Minister, and
fit me for the Ministry! And this made Divinity the byasse of all his learning,
and reading, his Ministry was the Mistress on which all other Arts and
Sciences did attend as Handmaids: and yet herein his desires were commanded by
discretion, that he might not make more haste then good speed, so as that he
did not rashly leap from his Rustic Study, and School-form into the Church
Pulpit, nor as many wild, hasty youths in this licentious age, did he esteem
his Matriculation into the University, his ordination unto the Ministry, but
wisely studied the skill of this profound Mystery, and stored himself with all
learning that might mature him for this employment, and took the honor of his
diligence, the Degrees of Batchelour and Master of Arts, and wore the Livery
thereof some time before he durst be ordinarily seen in a Pulpit. And when he
would begin to go and try his Ministerial strength, he did not as many, run
giddily into Country Churches, but leans on his Mothers arm, preaches in the
University, sometimes in the College, and sometimes in the Town, and in both
he approved himself well accomplished for preaching work, and gained much of
approbation, and encouragement, and finding himself fitted in some good measure
for his Masters work, his spirit waxed hot, and provoked him hoc agere to
Church work: and setting himself most seriously to it, he took himself to
Bennet Church in Cambridge, where for two years space he preached to the great
satisfaction and profit of his hearers, with much solidity and and affection.
And here he became famous as a Preacher, and a Teacher of Christianity, as well
as a Tutor in Philosophy. His fame herein extended unto London, and in special
to Crowched Friars, who were desirous to enjoy him, but being among themselves
divided, had Mr. Fenton, an hopeful pious man, put upon them, who lived but a
very short season, before he was removed by the same distemper that took off
Mr. Frost. On his death, their affections revived toward Mr. Frost, they chose
him to be their Minister, he accepted the choice, and place, came among them
with general acceptance of the people, and set his hand seriously and indeed
to the Plow, intending never to look back. And as a Star now fixed, he sent
out his beams of light with freedom, and began to be eyed by all Ministers, and
people in this City. But ah alas, he shinea too bright to continue long: but
here he did approve himself a man eminently accomplished for the work of the
Ministry, By the graces of his mind. Gift of utterance or expression. Glory of
life and conversation. Ministerial qualifications.



First, 1 Qual.
he was admirably accomplished for the Ministry, by the graces of his mind,
which were all ministerial, and he enjoyed them in an ample measure. Seven
especial ministerial graces, were the Pearls that put a luster on his
ministerial Crown. He was

1. Sound in the faith, 1 Minist. Grace.
and well studied in Polemicall Divinity, able to assert the truth, and
contradict nay convince the Gainsayer, holding fast the form of sound words, to
the establishment of the peoples faith, and in special against Popish and
Arminian fancies, a testimony of which his Theological Disputes gave to the
University, and a taste thereof he gave the Church of God, in his Sermon about
three weeks since preached at St. Gregory's by Paul's, where he asserted very
judiciously Gods free Grace against man's free will, in the work of our
sanctification, to the disturbance of many of the Disciples of this
grace-darkening Doctrine: Some of them (as he himself told me) came to his
house to catechize or rather to correct his Doctrine there delivered, but on
discourse with him, acknowledged their mouths to be stopped, they knew not what
at present to answer. Oh how sad is the loss of an Orthodox Minister in an
heterodox age of the Church of God!

2. Singular in practical Divinity pressing duties with powerful and
persuasive reasons, rebuking sin with much skill in the detection of it, and
severity in dehortation from it, discreetly directing to all Christian
corversation, as became Gospel profession, prudently dismissing all scruples
of Conscience that might darken or obstruct our passage. He was well acquainted
and apted for the resolution of cases of Conscience, unto the cheering and
quickening of the spirits of Gods people in their holy course. A testimony
hereof he gave his people in his constant preaching, October. 12.
and a taste to the City in general, in his Sermon preached at Paul's, before
the then Lord major and Court of Aldermen; in which with singular dexterity, he
showed the several reasons of peoples not profiting by the Gospel preached:
the which he amplified and further prosecuted at the morning exercise in my
Church, October. 15. to the abundant conviction, counsel and comfort of many of
the people of God.

3. Stout in fundamentalls of Doctrine or practice, but sober and submisse in
circumstantials. Foundations of faith, and the unity of the Church, were very
dear to his soul, and high in his esteem. The skepticall shakings of the one,
and schismatic distractions of the other, sat as sad burdens on his
spirit. With strength and much resolution would he contend for essentialls of
salvation: and things that must be believed, he would often press his people
to hold without controversy, noting it to be the shame of Christianity, to lay
the Creed open to common disputes. And very studious he was to cement
differences among brethren: slow he was in censures, but free in rebukes of,
and complaints over brethrens distance. Earnestly he desired, and studiously
endeavored an union between Episcopal and Presbyteriall Divines, in things
relating to the discipline of the Church; many times he has in my hearing
lamented the want of Discipline, and observed the animosity of both, as no mean
hinderance to its restitution.

4. Solicitous to do every duty, not doing the work of the Lord negligently or
to halfs, as too many do. He could not content himself with edifying preaching,
but was also careful to administer the Sacraments for the souls strength and
support, and was studious to discharge Catechizing work, to which he had
prepared his people by some Sermons on Psalm. 110.139. The entrance of thy words
gives light; it gives understanding to the simple: nay not only did he
preach, catechize, and administer Sacraments, and do public work, but also
made much conscience of private visitation of, and conference with his people,
especially when sick, he stayed not to be sent for by any other messenger then
the Bill by which the prayers of the Church were desired.

5. He was zealous and fervent: he ever steered his checks and and counsels by
sobriety, but suffered not his spirit to fall into tepidity and lukewarmnesse.
His reproofs were ever awakening, and to that end many times in particulars his
exhortations ardent, and affectionate, as if Christ had entreated by him;
though his Doctrines were delivered with his (...), milder expressions, yet his
application was enforced with his (...), more eager and earnest affections,
many times boiling over into holy passions, as one sick of love, and traveling
in birth till Christ were formed in the soul.

6. Circumspect and wise: he prudently pondered all circumstances that might
make admonition acceptable, having respect to nature, temper, disposition, not
dealing with mild David, as with profane and obdurate Saul: his reproofs were
ever pinching to the Conscience, but not provoking the spirit; plain and
positive against the sin, but not personal to discredit the sinners. In a
word, his whole preaching did run so even on the wheels of Circumstances, that
they were as the words of the wise, Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver.

7. Sensibly affected with the worth of Souls. This was the spring of his
motion, and spur to all ministerial action, many times he would aggravate
ministerial charge to his own spirit, and to his brethren, with an It is cura
animarum. He much rejoiced in the peoples acceptance of and attendance on his
Ministry, saying, I hope it will do their souls good. In any thing that he was
to perform, he would ponder its necessity, and prudently cast with himself, how
to make it consist with his peoples affections, saying often, If their hearts
be once set against me, my Ministry will do their souls no good. And indeed his
zeal and sedulity in the whole course of his Ministry, did witness, that
knowing the terror of the Lord, he did persuade men: and soul-salvation was the
greatest thing he designed.

You see then, by these seven qualifications, that his spirit was well stored
with graces fuitable to his office. And now, to the end they might be
serviceable. God had blessed him with the gift of utterance, which is the next
thing considerable in his accomplishment to the Ministry: 2 Minist. qual.
this is the Churches great advantage, and therefore prescribed as the matter
of the peoples prayer, Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3. And this is that by which all the
parts and high endowments of a Minister are drawn out to the refreshing of the
Church of God: and herein he was well qualified: for whatever he preached, was

1. Engraven on his mind by meditation, and imprinted on his memory by method:
he ever noted a straightened Tongue to be the proper effect of a loose and idle
mind; and rude indigested expressions to spring from raw notions, and
non-convincing apprehensions. He spoke much in commendation of Demosthenes care
for the Athenians, to consider before he spoke: ever noting unstudyed Sermons
to be dull and obscure in the delivery, dead and unprofitable in the sequel
and issue.

2. Expressed with ease, power, and plainness; ease to himself, Pulpit
discourse was no toil or burden to him, he had hot affections, uttered high
expressions without much sweating or inflaming labor: his preaching passed
from him so freely, that the hearer might find he took pleasure in it: he was
plain in the expression of most profound points in Divinity, even to the
weakest capacity of his hearers. It was a happiness not ordinarily incident to
Academicks, that he that had been so long conversant in School terms, should
speak terms common to the meanest understanding; but he ever concluded it was
the best Oratory which was the easiest to be understood. Power did ever
accompany his plain expressions; though his words were the words of a man, yet
the majesty of the matter was manifested in them, pierceing the soul, pricking
the Conscience, stirring the affections, and provoking the hearers to cry out,
Of a truth God is in him.

3. Enforced with pressing words and patheticall affections: evidencing his end
in preaching, to be as well to persuade the heart, as engage the ear; and
therefore he spoke not coldly, or as one asleep, or indifferent of prevailing,
but with feeling and fervor, as one whose entreaties assault with violence, and
would neither be refused nor evaded. You see the graces of his mind, and his
gift of utterance, give no small luster to his Ministerial Crown; but it
sparkles most in the glory of his conversation, which was every way answerable
to his other endowments, and won much with his people, and those with whom he
did converse: for his carriage was

1. Courteous and affable unto all men, with due respect to superiors, equals,
or inferiors, which rendered him acceptably sociable unto all, emboldening many
to come to him, which stood at a distance from others, which were more strange
and retired. He was in all Companies freely communicative, mildly hearing, and
freely answering all enquiries: some of his Parish sadly lament his loss on
this very account. He would have come to us, been so familiar with us, we could
have moved any question to him, he would have freely resolved us.

2. Grave and meek; he had a gravity which kept his person from contempt, his
levity never led any to despise his youth; but the gravity of his carriage
convicted men, that he was considerate of the place in which he was, and work
which lay on his shoulders, in common conference he was ready to rebuke with
all authority; yet his gravity was natural, not affected, tempered with such a
meek and amiable disposition and countenance as made him acceptable to all,
that it might have been said of him, as of Anthony the Monk, he might have been
known among hundreds of his Order, by his cheerful countenance, though an
humble serious and mortified man.

4. Holy and exemplary. What he preached to others he first preached to
himself, and after to them, by practice as well as in the Pulpit. I have heard
him say, he would not deny but God might use a profane Minister to be the
Instrument of Conversion, but he observed he rarely did, and was persuaded
would not. So studious was he to be an example to his people, that he daily
prayed, Lord give me so to walk, that I may say to thy people, So walk as ye
have me for an example. He made it his great care, that his Family should serve
the Lord, and on his deathbed he gave it in charge to his Yoak-fellow (whom he
has but a while enjoyed) that she should be careful of the worship of God in
her Family. And this his piety as it ran through his life, it did sparkle with
much beauty in his death; the which we shall briefly note, and so conclude.

In his death much may not be expected, by reason, His dying carriage.
that the disease gave neither time nor opportunity to his friends, to be
frequent with him, in observing his frame of spirit. His distempers seized on
him with force on Monday the 27. of October; such was his care and respect to
his friends, that he would not suffer his friends to come to him, he
apprehending his distemper to be contagious, Being the Smallpox.
and fearing it might fasten on them; for indeed his more then ordinary fear of
this noisome distemper, His only infirmity.
was the great infirmity of his flesh: but he was very silent under and
submisse to the hand of his God, when herein inflicted, desirous he was, and
diligent in the use of means for recovery, (I pray God pardon the feared
preposterous course held with him by his Physician:) He continuing very ill, on
Friday received the sentence of death in himself, and on Saturday morning sent
to me, if I were not afraid, to come to him: which I accordingly did, and
coming to him, found him much composed in his spirit. Discoursing with him, he
declared himself much comforted and encouraged in the prayers of the people of
God, Saints prayers his souls comfort.
he heard that he did enjoy: and desired me to pray with him, which I did, he
very seriously attending, and assenting to every Petition: He declared himself
willing to live for the good of the Church, in special his own people, whom he
comfortably apprehended to have been much moved by his last Sermon on the duty
of searching the Scriptures, from Joh. 5.39. And hoped would be bettered by it;
yet he was submisse to the determination of God. When I asked him how he did,
he still answered me, full of silence and sweet patience in submission to and
dependence on God my Savior. Last Act.
When I was gone, the pangs of death began more forcibly to approach, of which
he being sensible, called together his Family and friends, and in his own
person prayed with much liveliness and affection: this was the last act of his
life, that as it becomes a Minister to die praying or preaching: he was no
Sabbath out of Heaven, when taken off his preaching, and prayer was his last
performance on earth. Prayer being ended, he called to his Brother for
something to drink, which having received, he cried out, Vincimus, Vincimus;
his wife lying in his bosom, not understanding it, he did himself translate
it, We have overcome, overcome, and so spoke no more, but remained quiet until
the midnight following. When his conflict ended, his Soul was crowned with
glory, and his life hid with Christ; at whose appearance we may expect to see
him again. In the mean, let us leave him to rest in hope; and do our own work,
lamenting the loss of him, for that he was a

Good man, and so is a great loss to humane society.

Gracious Minister, the want of whom is a great damage to the Church of God.

Of great parts, and by his death the hopes of Gods people are frustrate.

Newly fixed, and his sudden removal is a sad Symptom of Divine displeasure.

Suitable for our sad times, wherein seducers do abound, and gainsayers of the
truth, call for such as are able to convince. And cause has this Congregation
to fear now he is gone, men will arise teaching perverse things, and drawing
away Disciples after them. And therefore we may all weep, for that we must see
his face no more.

FINIS.
In page 47. l. 22. for master, read matter.

Books printed, are to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, who prints and sells this
Sermon of Mr. Zach. Crofton, at the Sign of the Three Crowns, over against the
Great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheapside.
THE Dead Saint speaking, to Saints, and Sinners living: In several Treatises.
By Samuel Bolton, D. D.

There is newly come forth Mr. William Fenner his Continuation of Christ's Alarm
to Drowsy Saints, with a Treatise of Effectual Calling: The killing power of
the Law: The Spiritual Watch: New Birth: A Christians ingrafting into Christ.
Fol.

The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian, wherein is contained Directions
for the right method of keeping and using, according to the Rules of Practice,
a Day-book of National and Public, personal and private passages of Gods
providence, to help Christians to thankfulness and experience. By John
Beadle, Minister of the Gospel at Barnstone in Essex, large 8.

A learned Commentary, or Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, by Dr. Richard Sibbs. Published for public good,
by Thomas Manton. Fol.

Mr. Robinsons Christian Armor, in large 8.

The young man's Guide to Godliness, by Will. Penkins. 12.

FINIS.

