A COPPIE OF Lieut. Genesis Cromwels Letter; Concerning the taking of WINCHESTER
Castle: With a List of the particulars.

Where was taken; 7. Pieces of Ordnance. 17. Barrels of powder. Musket bullets
2000. weight. Match 800. weight. Beef and Pork, 38. hogsheads. 15000. weight of
Cheese. 800. pound of Butter. Wheat and meal, 140. quarters. Biscuit, 7000.
weight. Strongbeere, 112. hogsheads. French Wine, 3. hogsheads. Salt, 10.
quarters. Oatmeal, 20. bushels. Candle, 70. dozen. Wood, 30. load. Charcoal,
40. quarters. Seacole, 30. bushels, for the Smith. Sheep, 14. Fresh Beief, 4.
quarters.


Together, with Mr. Peter's report made to the House of Commons, from Lieutenant
Genesis Cromwell.

Commanded to be printed, and is published, according to Order.

October. 9. London, printed by Jane Go. 1645.

Mr. PETER'S his report, made to the House of Commons.
MR. Peter's, Minister to the Army, being sent from Lieu^enant General Cromwell
from Winchester, came to the House of Commons, with the Lieutenant Generals man
attending him to the House; with a Letter from his Master to the Speaker,
concerning the taking of Winchester Castle; and the House gave Mr. Spavin, the
Lieutenant Generals Secretary, 50. l. And forthwith called Mr. Peter's into the
House, who went in attended with the Sergeant at Arms with the Mace before him;
where the Speaker giving him thanks for his unwearied labors in the
preservation of this Kingdom, and assuring him that the House took care for
him, who had so often brought them good tidings* and hazarded himself so much;
and told him, that he had liberty to speak freely, what he had in commands from
the Lieutenant General.

Mr. Peter's spoke in the House, the sum of whose discourse, was as follows.

Mr. Speaker,
I Came from Winchester the last night late, but I had come sooner, had not my
L. Ogle, and his company been so unwilling to part with their sack and strong
beer, of which they drank so liberally at their farwell, that few of them (as it
is their manner) could get up their horses without help, for the agreement was
for their marching out at 3. a Clock but it proved la^e, through their
debaughchery.

My Commands (from the Lieutenant General) are to give this honorable house a
further narative of the Castle of Winchester, being upon the place and a
spectator of Gods good hand in the whole work, as also to present his humble
request to the house in some perticulars; and before I speak to either of them,
if gratitude it self were not sometimes unseasonable, I would (in my own name
and the name of many thousands) ^^ume this honorable house most humble thanks
for our Lieutenant General, in that you suffer (with patience) the vacansie of
his place in this House.

My wish is, that his spirit and that public English spirit of Hamden Pim, and
Str^u^, may be doubled upon your new elected members.

For our Lieutenant General, this I must say: that Judgment and affections in
him are striving for the mastery, I have rarely seen such heights, and depths
consent in one man, that when I look upon the 2. Cheefes of our Army: I
remember Gustavus Adolphus and Oxenstern, and I wish our hopes in these nay not
be so short lived as the Germans hopes in them, were.

More I might say, concerning him that sent me, who is so far above the
world, and lives so little upon the states pay, and minds himself so little;
but that he has enjoined silence to all his friends, in any thing thar might
turn to his onw praise.

For the Castle of Winchester: we begun our batteries upon Saturday morning,
which wrought so ^ff^ctually; that a breach (wherein 30. men might go a breast)
was made: The enemy sallyed out, and beat us off from our gunnes which were
soon recovered again, we played then with our Grenades from our Mortar pieces,
with the best effect that I have seen, which broake down the Ma^sion house in
many places, cut off a Commissary of theirs by the thighs, the most austere,
and wretched instrument in that Country; and at last blew up their flagg of
defiance into the air, and toarre the pinnacle in pieces upon which it stood.

Summons being sent as we entered upon this work, was refused by the L. Ogle
their Governor; and another summons God sent them in the middle of our
battery; his Lady (to whom our Lieutenant General had given leave to come
forth, and had gone some miles out of the town) dyed; by whom the Governor had
during her life, one thousand pounds a y^ar with her, lost by her death.

The chiefest street of the town the enemy played upon: whereby diverse
passengers were wounded, and some killed, in which street my quarters being; I
have that cause to bless God for my preservation.

The Lords day we spent in preaahing and prayer, whilst our gunners were
battering, and at 8. a clock at night we received a letter from the Governor
for a treaty, which I have brought with me.

Colonel H^^mond, and Major General Harrison were sent into the Castle on our
party, Sir Edward Ford, and a Major of theirs, were se^^ to us.

The whole night was spent about it, our men standing upon some special terms
with them, and very desirous were we to to accept Sir Edward Ford: and Bennit
to be our prisoners, by 8. a clock on monday morning it was a greed they should
depart out of the Castle at 5, a clock according to the Articles which the
Lieutenant General has sent by me.

I was forthwith sent into the Castle to take a view of it before my departure,
where I found a piece of ground improved to the b^st advantage, for when we had
entered by our battery we had 6. distinct works, and a draw bridge to pass
through; so that it was doubtl^sse a very strong piece, very well victualled,
as appears by this note, which I crave leave to read.

Then Mr. Peter's read the said Note, of which here follows the Copy.


7. Pieces of Ordnance. 17. Barrels of Powder. 2000. weight of Musket Bullets.
800. Weight of Ma chapter 38. Hogsheads of Bief and Pork. 15000. weight of Cheese.
800. pound of Butter. 140. quarters of Wheat, and Meal. 7000. weight of
Biskets. 112. Hogsheads of strong Beer. 3. Hogsheads of French Wine. 10.
Quarters of Salt. 20. Bushel of Oatmeal. 70. Dozen of Candles. 30. Load of
Wood. 40. Quarters of Charcoal. 30. Bushels of Seacoal, for the Smith. 14.
Sheep. 4. quarters of fresh Bief.
Then Mr. Peter's went on in his Speech, as follows.


Mr. Speaker, The Castle was manned with near 700. men, diverse of them
Reformadoes, the chief men I saw there were Viscount Ogle their Governor, Sir
John Paulet, an old soldier, Sir William Courtney, and Colonel Bennet, also
Dr. C^rle the Bishop of Winchester, who came forth to our quarters in the
morning, with whom I spent an hour or two, who with tears and much
importunity, desired the Lieutenant Generals favor, to excuse his not
accepting of the offer that he made unto him at his first entering the Town; he
desired of me a guard to his lodging, lest the soldiers should use violence to
him and his Chaplain, who were in their long Gowns and Cassocks, and he was
accordingly safely convoyed home.

I do verily believe, that they will hardly bring to Woodstock 200. men: It did
much aff^ct us, to observe what an Enemy we had to deal with, who themselves
being judges, could not choose but say, that our God is not as their God. And
this is the 19. Garrison has been taken this Summer, through Gods goodness.
And he that will not take his share in this common joy, is either stupid or
envious.

Our Brigade is marched to Langford house, by Salisbure, which I hope will not
be long work, and then that Country will be clean, and our men ready to wait
our Generals further Commands. (Doub^lesse) were not the year so far spent,
and our foot thereby not able to lie abroad, we might soon look for the
finishing of this War.

The fruits of what is already done are great, amongst the rest, what I saw
upon the way; all sorts traveling upon their occasions freely to their own
homes, with Carriages and Wanes: many Innes filled with guests. The former face
of things returning upon us in several kinds; yea, now we may ride with
safety, from Dover to the middle of Devonshire.

The Commission I have to this Honorable House, from the Lieutenant General,
which he delivered unto me with much vehemency and sense, was this.

1. That you should be truly informed concerning the payment of the Army, it
being generally reported, they are completely paid, and that Army constantly
enjoined to pay their quarters, in which there has been much care taken, and
by which much has been gained upon the Countries. It is most certain, that of
twenty one Weeks, the Horse are twelve weeks behind; and the foot have
likewise their proportion of sorrow, through want of pay. I know threescore in
one company lying sick, by eating of raw roots and green Apples, through want
of money to buy better food.

It is most humbly desired, that they may not suffer by the State, who are
willing to do so much for it; the hands and feet of a natural body, are not
more apt move for an aching head, then this Army (in every part of it, are) for
this afflicted Kingdom.

I have often wished (if it might be thought good to your wisdoms) that every
County (according to the store of money sessed upon every County) might know
their soldiers, and a Committee of their own reside in the Army to pay them,
it being the way of the Low Countries; whereby the War has been so well
upheld and continued: The frame whereof I have long since given in writing, to
some Members of this Honorable House.

2. The second thing I have in command is, That you be truly informed about
your recruits of men; when we have been promised and expected 4000. we have
received but 900. And upon Friday last, when we were promised 3000. and did not
expect less, we received but fifteen hundred.

It may be easily conceived that such an active Army must needs be a great
spender of men by sickness and otherwise, though blessed be God it appears at
every siege, the enemies sword cuts not off many: at this of Winchester I know
not of above 2 or 3 soldiers lost.

Your recruits are so chargeable in their bringing to the Army, that with half
the money our officers would recruite themselves. And were this Army recruited
to your first intention of 21000. not only England, but I hope Ireland would
soon reap the fruits of their labors.

The last thing I take boldness to commend to this Honorable House is, that
the Garrisons we take in, may be for God, this Honorable House, and the
whole Kingdom, my meaning is, that forthwith some course may be taken, for the
many ignorant and heathenish souls in and about the places aforesaid. This
city is glutted, the contry is famished; we are quarrelling here about the
covering of the house, the foundations whereof are not yet laid in the
country. In this I am the bolder, because of the cries of the people to me in
the places where I have been; and some of Winchester at my departure crying for
help with them of Macedonia. All which I represent to the most serious thoughts
of this Honorable House, and the blessing of peace be upon all your Counsels,
AMEN.

Here follows a Copy of diverse several papers brought to the Parliament by
Mr^ Peter's from Lieutenant General Cromwell.

The Copy of the several Letters that came from Viscount Ogle the Gov^rnour of
the Castle, during the time of the siege.

SIR,
I have received a sad summons, and desire, you that this enclosed may be
conveyed from

WINTON Castle, 4. Oct. 1645. Your Servant, OGLE.


SIR,
Upon the opening of your sad message by your Drum, there was a mistake between
your men and mine, for there was a man making an escape from the castle, at
whom your men and mine did shoot, not knowing in the dark who he was; and the
man is killed.

OGLE.


SIR,
I have received formerly a Letter from you, wherein you desire to avoid the
effusion of christian blood, to which you received my Answer, that I was
willing as your self. But having received no reply to actuate your desires, I
have thought fit to desire a Treaty; whereby we may pitch upon some means,
both for the effecting of that, and the preservation of this place. And that I
may receive your letter with all convenience, I desire that neither Officer or
Soldier of your p^rty may come off their Guards, and I shall take the like
course with mine.

Winten Castle, at eight at night, October 5. 1645. Sir, I am Your Humble
Servant, OGLE.


Castrum WINTON, Articles agreed upon the 5 of October, 1645. between the Right
Honorable William Viscount Ogle, Governor of the Garrison of the Castle of
Winton of the one part, and Colonel Robert H^mmond, and Major Thomas Harrison
on the behalf of Lieutenant General Oliver Cromwell of the other party; for
the surrender of the said Castle.
1. That the Lord Ogle shall deliver up the Castle of Winchester, with all the
Arms, Ordnance, Ammunition, Provision, and all Function of War whatsoever
therein, without any imbeazelment wast or spoil, unto that Officer or Officers
as shall be thereunto appointed by the said Lieutenant General, to morrow
being Monday the 6 of October. by 3 of the clock, after noon.

2. That the said Lord Ogle shall have his own colors, and one hundred fixed
Arms for his Guard, and one hundred men to carry them.

3. That the Lord Ogle and all the Officers in Commission, shall march out of
the said Castle with their own horse and arms, and their own proper goods, unto
Woodstock, thither they shall be safely convoyed.

4. That there shall be allowed to the Lord Ogle and his Officers, six
Carriages for transporting of their goods aforesaid.

5, That all Officers, Gentlemen, Clergymen, and Inhabitants of the city of
Winchester, and all Officers within the Guards (desiring it) may be at their
own time free from all violence and injury of the Parliaments forces.

6. That the Lord Ogle shall give sufficient Hostages for the performance of
the Aricles here constituted on their part to be performed, also for the safe
return of the Convoy.

A Copy of Lieutenant Genrall Cromwels Letter.
SIR,
J Came to Winchester on the Lords day being the 28 of September, with Colonel
Pickering; commanding his own, Colonel Mountagues, and Sir H^rdres Walls
Regiments; after some dispute with the Governor, we entered the town, I
summoned the castle, was denied, whereupon we fell to prepare our b^^teries,
which we could not perf^ct (some of our Guns being out of order) unt^ll Fri^ay
following, our Battery was six Guns; which being finished, aft^r one fier^^g of
them round, I sent him a second Summons for a treaty, which they refused,
whereupon we went on with our work, and made a breach in the wall near the
black Tower; which after about 200 shot we thought stormable, and purposed
on Monday morning to attempt it. On Sunday night about ten of the clock, The
Governor beat a parley, desiring to treat, I agreed unto it, and sent Colnoell
Hammond and Major Harrison in to him, who agreed upon these enclosed Articles.

Sir, This is the addition of another mercy, you see God is not weary in doing
you good. I confess Sir, his favor to you is as visible, when he comes by his
power upon the hearts of your enemies, making them quit places of strength to
to you, as when he gives courage to your soldiers to attempt hard things, his
goodness is in this much to be acknowledged, For the castle was well manned
with 680 horse and foot, there being near 200 Gentlemen, Officers, and their
Servants; well victualled with 15000 way of cheese, very great store of wheat
and beer, near 20 barrels of powder, 7 pieces of Cannon, the works were
exceeding good, and strong. It is very likely it would have cost much blood to
have gained it by storm, we have not lost twelve men: This is repeated to you
that God may have all the praise, for it is all his due.

Sir I rest Your most humble Servant, Oliver Cromwell.
Postscript.
For other things that I am not willing to write, I have entrusted Mr. Peter's
to communicate to you, who was within the place, and an eyewitness to all our
proceedings, and knows the true state of our Army; whom I do pray you to
hear.




FINIS.

