THE Magistrates Authority, IN Matters of Religion; And the Souls Immortality,
Vindicated in two SERMONS Preached at YORK.

By CHRISTOPHER CARTWRIGHT, B.D. and Minister of Gods Word there.

ISAIAH 49.23. And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing
mothers.

Aug. Contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 51. In hoc Reges, sicut eis divinitus
praecipitur, Deo serviunt, in quantum reges sunt, si in suo regno bona jubeant,
mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam
quae ad divinam religionem.

LONDON, Printed for THO. UNDERHILL, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the Bible in great Woodstreet. 1647.

ERRATA.
Page line 14. unto him. P. 8. l. ult. left out all Magistrates, even Heathens
and Infidels have this power, though all have not faculty or ability to use it
as they ought. P. 20. l. 28. is. P. 21. there is an Hebrew Koph for a Mem four
times, any one that can frame the Heb. Characters will easily mend it. P. 28. l.
11. make love have. P. 32. l. 5. execute.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
READER,
THere have been lately vented (in this licentious Age) diverse satirical
Pamphlets, nominating and reviling several Members of the House of Commons, in
one of which entitled, Prima pars de comparatis comparandis, I am thrice
mentioned, p. 19. Colonel Leigh, a man of a fiery disposition, who is generally
made Chairman upon any business that does [pro or con] concern these men
(meaning the Presbyterians) said (as it has been affirmed by such as heard
him) that it was no matter, if there were not one of them suffered to live in
the Land, but were all either put to death or banished, or to the like effect.
p. 26. Mr Leighs fiery speech. p. 39. Leigh that fierce, fiery fariso Solomon
says Prove. 26.4, 5. Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also
be like unto him. Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his
own conceit. He heard that I should speak such words, whence he concludes (and
repeats it three times) that I am of a fiery disposition. But what if those
which reported my speech to him mistook me, and I uttered no such words. I may
safely say that I never spoke those words, for they are far from my judgment.
What my judgment is of such Heretics who raze the foundation, and seduce
others, is to be seen in Print. But for others who err not in Fundamentals,
and are godly, and peaceable, I wish (if ever I come under their power) that I
may but find as much mercy from them as I could willingly show to them. I am
sure some of those who were complained of at the Committee where I was in the
Chair, gave a very good testimony of me, and my carriage toward them. And for
that which he writes that I was generally made a Chairman upon any business (
pro or con) that concerned these men, that is as true as the other, for I was
never Chairman in any other business but this, except for dividing of the
Parishes near Westminster, (and once only at the Committee of Plundered
Ministers.) And had not been Chairman at this Committee at the first (which
procured me so much envy though causlesly) but that I was believe the first
day, that if I would then take the Chair at that time, another would take it
afterward. What therefore this reviling Pamphleter applies to me and others,
that we are not Christians, and have not the mind of Christ, he may (upon a
serious review of his own virulent and unchristian carriage all along in this
Pamphlet) more fitly apply to himself. Let him look that he do not sit in the
Chair of the scornful, and ( Diogenes-like) tax others of those offenses of
which himself is most guilty. I having so fit an opportunity could not but
write this for my own Vindication, and hope all true Christians will exercise
so much charity to me and others, who are unjustly accused, as not to believe us
the sooner faulty, because others are so bold in calumniating.

Thine, Edward Leigh.

To the Christian Reader.
READER,
I Present thee here with two Sermons which I wish may prove as profitable for
thee as they are seasonable for these times; One is concerning the power of the
Magistrate in spiritual things and matters of Religion; the other is to prove
the immortality of the soul. The first was occasioned by the contrary tenet of
some which had relation to the Army, who being in the City of York (where this
worthy Minister Mr Cartwright resides) there indeavored to maintain, that the
Magistrate has no power to punish or restrain any that shall vent never so
false doctrines and heretical opinions; which stirred up the zeal of this
Reverend Divine to choose that Text, Romans 13.4. of purpose, and to handle the
point ex professo, as thou may perceive by the ensuing Sermon, which he
fitted not for the Press, but for his Auditory, aiming chiefly at their
edification and stablishing in the truth. If these Sermons therefore be not so
elaborate as they would have been if put out by the Author, let that be imputed
unto me who presumed, upon that interest I have in him, to publish without his
privity those Sermons. Thou shall find them (like himself) solid and judicious,
and J hope the world shall shortly by a learned Treatise upon Genesis, have
ample experience of the abilities of this my worthy Friend, and of his skill in
the Oriental tongues and Rabbines. The second Sermon was preached to confute
that most pestilent book, ipso titulo execrabilis (as K. James said of Bertius
his book de Apostasia sanctorum) concerning the mortality of the Soul, though
that writer questions the very being of the Soul. Mr. Coleman preaching before
the Parliament said, none but they had to do in the government of the Church;
M. Dell told them, they had nothing at all to do in reforming the Church; M.
Arrowsmith said before them, some took the middle way between these two
extremes; I have declared my opinion elsewhere In my Prolegomena to my
threefold Treatise of Divinity.
concerning the power of the Civil Magistrate in these things; I shall only here
add the determination of two reverend Divines, who cannot but be Authentic
with the opposers of this truth. The first is Dr Ames who propounding this
question, L. 4. de conscientia c. 4. quest. 61.
An Haeretici sint a Magistratu civili puniendi, whether Heretics be to be
punished by the civil Magistrate; thus answers, 1. That Heretics are to be
suppressed by all godly men according to that calling and power which they have
received from God. 2. That the place and office of the Magistrate requires that
he suppress wicked disturbers with the sword or the public and external power,
if need be; quoting those two places Romans 13.4. 1 Timothy 2.2.

3. If the Heretics be manifest and publicly noxious, they ought by the
Magistrate publicly to be punished. 4. Jf they be manifestly blasphemous and
obstinate in those blasphemies, they may also be capitally punished; for
although that Law, Lev. 24.15, 16. does not oblige Christians as it is a law,
yet as it is a doctrine proceeding from God it belongs to the direction of
Christians in causes of the same kind. The other is Mr Cotton The bloody Tenet
washed Co. 58.
of New England, who says, in all civil Nations, whose acts are recorded
either in sacred or profane Authors, their Magistrates have had not only a due
care of justice and honesty, Genesis 47.22. Dan. 3.29 and 6.26 Ezra 7.26. and 6.11.
but a reverend care of Religion also; Jn Athens they had a law against
irreligion, upon which suffered three famous Philosophers, Socrates, Mr Cotton
biid. C. 33.
Theodorus and Protagoras: The reason of the law Deu. 13.9, 10. (which is the
life of the law says he) is of eternal force and equity in all ages, Thou
shall surely kill him, because he has sought to thrust thee away from the Lord
thy God; This reason is of universal and perpetual equity to put to death any
Apostate, seducing Idolater or Heretic who seeks to thrust away the souls of
Gods people from the Lord their God. For that other opinion of the Souls
Immortality, recitasse est refutasse; and here J may apply what the Apostle
says of those which deny the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. if the Soul be not
immortal, then is the Ministers preaching and our faith also vain; but as one
says wittily of the Sadduces who denied the Resurrection, that at the day of
Judgment the Sadduces shall rise in that body in which they denied the
Resurrection of the body, so shall these live with that soul in which they denied
the immortality of the soul, and find, if not before, yet at death that the soul
lives when the body dies, and that man then cease not to be, as the beast;
but only exchangeth his being, and shall be either everlastingly happy or
miserable.

Thy faithful Wel-wisher, EDWARD LEIGH.

ERRATA.
Page 6. line 26. for shine read stir. P. 25. l. 10. for mortal r. immortal.

ROMANS 13.4. For he is a Minister of God to thee for good; but if thou do that
which is evil, fear, for he bears not the sword in vain; for he is the
Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.


AMongst many heterodox and unsound opinions, that are started up in these
times, there is one concerning the power of the Magistrate, viz. that it
reaches only to the 2. Table, civil affairs, not to the first Table, matters
of religion. So that let any hold and practice in religion what they will, let
them vent and publish doctrins never so horrid and blasphemous, yet according
to this Tenet, the Magistrate may not curb nor restrain them, he has nothing
to do to meddle with them. This opinion being most falls and of dangerous
consequence, is newly broached here in this City, York, Jan. 1646.
and openly maintained by some, both in disputation and in the Pulpit. And
therefore I have thought meet to discuss the Point at this time, that if any of
you be ignorant, you may be instructed; if wavering, you may be resolved if
mis-perswaded and possessed with error in this particular, you may be convinced
and reclaimed. To this end I shall endeavor by Gods help to manifest the truth
unto you, and to clear it from those mists that some cast about it, to obscure
it. This premised, I come to the words of the Text, For he is the Minister. etc.

For the coherence of these words, to fetch it no further then needs must, the
Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter begins to treat of the Magistrate, and
the duty which people owe unto the Magistrate. Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers. v. 1. Subjest, viz: either actiuely, if the thing commanded
be lawful, passively if it be unlawful. That this subjection is due unto the
Magistrate, the Apostle proves by two arguments. 1. for the ordainer of the
Magistrate, viz. God; It is God that has ordained him, and therefore people
ought to be subject unto him, and not to resist him; for to resist the
Magistrate, being ordained of God, is to resist Gods ordinance, and so to
provoke Gods indignation. For there is no power, but of God; the powers that
be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists, resists the ordinance
of God; and they that resist, receive unto themselves damnation. v. 1. and 2.
And then, secondly, he proves it by an argument drawn from the end for which
God has ordained the Magistrate, viz: the great good and benefit of people, to
contain and keep them in order, to protect and defend them that do well, and
to correct and punish them that do evil. For rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to evil, Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is
good, and thou shall have praise of the same. For he is the Minister of God.
etc. v. 3.4. Then from these premises he inferrs the conclusion, therefore you
must needs be subject not only for wrath (for fear of punishment) but also for
conscience sake. i. e. out of conscience toward God, who has ordained the
Magistrate and has given him his authority, and that for the preservation and
welfare of those, who are under his authority. Thus I have brought you to the
Text, and somewhat beyond it; and this may suffice to show the coherence of the
words. For the explication of them, much needs not to be spoken, there being no
great difficulty in them.

For he [ viz. the Magistrate, called the power, v. 3. Is the minister of God,]
that is, ordained of God, and subservient unto God, and that in such an eminent
manner that God communicates his own name unto I have said ye are Gods, Psalm.
82.6.

To thee [whosoever thou art, that art under his authority for good] i. e. for
thy good, that thou may do good, and receive good.

But if thou do that which is evil [ viz: the evil of sin: For there is an evil
of punishment, which though it be evil, as evil is taken for painful, yet as
evil is taken for sinful, so it is not evil, but good, if it be inflicted on
those that do deserve it, and by those that have power and authority to inflict
it. In this sense God himself is said to do evil, yea all evil that is done in
this kind, is said to be done by him, who yet can do nothing but what is good,
that is, just and right. Shall there be evil (any evil, viz: of punishment) in
a city, and the LORD has not done it? Amos, 2.6. Be afraid [ viz. of the
power, i.e. the Magistrate] as it is expressed v. 3. If thou will do the evil of
sin, look to suffer the evil of punishment.

For he bears not the sword in vain. [1. The Magistrate is not in vain armed
with power and authority, but to this end, that he may smite and punish such as
do evil, for he is the minister of God, a revenger etc.] Private revenge is
forbidden, Romans 12.19. Avenge not your selves. But the Magistrate being a
public person, and appointed of God to this end, to take vengeance on those
that do evil, he may and ought to do it. This is not against that, Romans 12.19.
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. No, what the Magistrate does by
virtue of his office, to which God has called, and of his authority, wherewith
God has invested him, that is as done by God himself.



This doctrine is clear and evident from the text, and being thus indefinitly
propounded, they with whom I have had somewhat to do already in conference and
dispute, and with whom ( i. with their opinion, I shall still have to do at
this time) they, I say, do not deny, but they limit it, and will have it
understood only in things civil, not in matters of religion. This therefore is
that which I shall apply my self unto, to prove that the Magistrate has a just
and lawful power, as well in things that concern the first, as in things that
concern the 2. Table; as well in matters of religion, as in civil matters. But
that none may mistake, let this be known and considered, that we do not ascribe
such power to the Magistrate, as the Papists do to the Pope. We do not hold,
that the Magistrate may prescribe forms of religion, as he pleases: this was
Ieroboams sin, 1 King, 12.28. etc. Nor that he may perform those things which
belong to the minister, as to preach, baptize, etc. This was it for which Vriah
was Plagued, because he would needs take upon him to execute the Priests
office, 2 Chro. 26.16, etc. But we hold and maintain, that the Magistrate has
a power to erect, preserve and establish that religion which God in his word
has commanded, and to cause both ministers and others to perform those things
(in respect of the outward act) which God does require of them, and to restrain
and punish them, if they transgress; not only in things concerning the 2.
Table, but also in things concerning the first Table. [And this is all that is
meant by that title of supreme head, or supreme governer, which we give unto
the King] which makes me to wonder much atsome (whom otherwise I reverence and
esteem for their works sake) who have lately inveighed sore against this Title,
alleging the censures of Calvin and the centurists upon it, whereas it is well
known, that the English Divines long before these times, have showed that
Calvin and the Centurists did mistake the meaning of the Title, and supposed it
to imply such an exorbitant power, as is attributed to the Pope by the Papists;
so that the true meaning of it is no more, then what they, and all Orthodox
Divines do yield unto the Magistrate. This has been made so clear, that not
only Ject. D. Nowel against Dorman, Dr. Rainolds Confer.
foreign Protestants, but even Rivot in Decal. Heart in the Conf. with D. Rain.
Papists also, some of them have been Satisfied.]

But to return to the point, and the proof of it, against those that would so
limit the Magistrates power, and restrain it to civil affairs.

1. It is a rule, Non est distinguendum, ubi lex non distinguit, does not
distinguish. And therefore the Apostle not so limiting the power of the
Magistrate, we may not so limit it. The Apostle in the text, and the verse
before the text, Speaks of the Magistrate as having power from God to punish
evil doers, and to protect those that do well, he does not limit this to things
that concern the 2 Table, neither is there any ground for this limitation. See
also 1 Pet. 2.14.

Exception 1. Yes, say some, the Apostle in the verses following, v. 6.10. does
limit that which goes before.

Answ. Let that be considered, For, for this cause, etc. verse 6. There the
Apostle only shows, that therefore tribute is paid to Magistrates and Rulers,
because they must apply themselves to the execution of that office to which God
has called them, viz. the ruling and governing of people, the protecting and
prefering of those that do well, and the correcting and punishing of those that
do evil. And hereupon v. 7. he exhorts people to render unto Magistratrs, and
not to them only, but to all, that which is due unto them; Render therefore to
all their dues, tribute to whom, etc. And v. 8. proceeding in his exhortation,
as it is general, and concerns the rendering of that which is due unto all,
he bids, Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another: Intimating that love
is such a debt, that can never be so paid, but still its due. And to shine up to
a careful performing of this duty of love, which all continually owe unto al,
he sets forth the excellency of love, Saying, for he that loves another, has
fulfilled the law. And that love is of such an excellent nature, as that the
whole law (viz: of the 2. Table, of which he speaks; for he speaks of that love
which men owe one to another) is fulfilled in it, this he proves v. 9.10: for
this, Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal etc. Love works no
ill to his neighbor, whence he inferrs, Therefore love is the fulfilling of
the law. Thus the whole Series, and Method of the Apostle's discourse being
considered, it plainly appears that his mentioning of the duties of the 2.
Table, is not to this end, to show that the Magistrate has power only in and
about things of that nature, but quite to another purpose, viz. to prove that
in loving one another is comprehended the sum and substance of that whole law,
namely of the 2 Table, which concerns the duty of men toward one another.

Except, 2. Others therefore fetch the ground of their limitation from another
place, viz: that Mat. 22.21. Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
and to God the things that are Gods.

Answer: But surely that place affoords no ground for it; our Savior there
indeed intimates, that some things belong unto God, which do not belong to
Caesar, (of which we make no question; for faith and affiance, religious
worship, and obsolute obedience in all things are due unto God, not so to
Caesar,) but that it belongs not unto Caesar to intermeddle in matters of
religion, this our Savior there shows not; no, those words, Render unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, and to God, the things that are Gods, were always
of force: there were always, some things (viz. those before specified)
belonging unto God, and not unto Caesar, yet it is most vident and undeniable,
that in some ages Caesar, i. the Prince and Ruler has had, and exercised this
power which we now contend for, and that lawfully and laudably. And so I pass
to another argument drawn from the just practice of good and Godly Magistrates.

2. Therefore I argue thus; The best of the rulers of Gods people of old, have
put forth their authority in matters of religion, and are commended for it. I
will not stand much upon the examples of David and Solomon, not because they
were types of Christ, as some have answered concerning David, and the same may
be said of Solomon also, but because they were Prophets as well as Kings, and
what they did in this kind, for the most part they did not as Kings, but as
Prophets, as appears by 1 Chronicles 9.22. and 28.19. and 2 Chronicles. 8.14. To let pass
therefore these examples, I will only urge the examples of those who were Kings
only, and not Prophets, as of Asa, Jehoshaphat, Ezekiah and Josiah: How Asa put
down Idolatry, and caused the people to enter into a strict and solemn covenant
to serve the Lord, is recorded 2 Chronicles. 15. Of Jehoshaphats care concerning
religion, how he took away the high places and the groves out of Judah, and
sent Priests and Levites throughout the land, to teach and instruct the people,
we read 2 Chronicles. 17. How Ezekiah restored religion, opening the doors of the
Temple, which Ahaz his Father had shut, caused the Priests and Levites to
discharg their offices, and the people generally to keep the passover, etc. we
find 2 Chronicles. 29. and 30. and 31. And so of Josiah, how he destroyed idolatry,
repaired the Temple; and kept a most solemn Passover, 2 Chronicles. 34. and 35. Thus
did al these famous Princes, and that not by any peculiar power and authority,
but such as is common to all Rulers and Magistrates within the compass of their
Jurisdiction. which will further appear by the next argument.

they ought. See to this purpose Ezr. 6.14. and 22. Ezr. 7.21.23.25.26.27. So
whereas Nehemiah caused the chambers belonging to the Priests to be cleansed,
and the Sabbath to be observed etc. Neh. 1.3. He had his commission from
Artaxerxes, Neh 2. See also what a decree Nebucadnezzar made, Dan. 2.29. and
Darius Dan. 6.25, 26.

4. If this power be not granted to the Magistrate, Micahs idolatry, that there
was no King ( i.e. no Ruler, or Magistrate) in Israel, but every one did what
seemed good in his own eyes. Judge. 17.6. And so of the Idolatry of the children
of Dan, Judge. 18.1. In these two places the want of a Magistrate ( who is to
restrain and shame them that do evil, Judge. 18.7.) Is noted as the occasion of
that disorder that was in the Church, even as in two other places, viz. Judge.
19, 1. and 21.25. It is noted as the occasion of that disorder that was in the
Civil state.



Peter struck Ananias and Sapphira with sudden death, Acts 5. And hereby great
fear came upon all the Church, and upon all that heard of it. v. 11. So Paul
smote Elimas with blindness, Acts 13. Whereby the Deputy Sergius Paulus was
astonished, and converted. v. 12. So that the extraordinary power of the
Apostles might well then supply the want of a Christian Magistrate. And for the
times after the Apostles, until Constantine, besides that the Church was
continually under persecution, what a flood of heresies did break in, appears
by the writings of Irenaeus and Tertullian, who lived in those times.

5. It is promised, that in the times of the Gospel, Kings shall be nursing
fathers, and Queens nursing mothers to the Church. Isa. 49.23. But this they
cannot be, except they have power, and put forth their power in matters of
religion, which do especially concern the Church, as well as in Civil matters.

Except. 1. Some answer, that Kings and Queens are promised to be nursing
fathers, and nursing mothers to the Church, in that being converted, they shall
hold forth the grace of Christ unto others.

Reply, But so may any of the Saints do, though of the meanest rank and poorest
condition: its true, the examples of Kings and Queens are more conspicious, and
more taken notice of; but to be nursing fathers and nursing mothers, imports a
power and a care to cherish and maintain, to protect and defend, which is much
more then to hold forth by example. Therefore the Apostle gives this as a
reason, why we should pray, as for all, so more especially for Kings, and those
that are in authority, that under them, ( i. e. under the wings of their
protection) We may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness, and
honesty. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.

Except. 2. Some grant that protection and defense is employed in the titles of
nursing fathers, and nursing mothers; but this protection and defense, they will
have meant only in outward and civil things, not in things belonging to
Religion.

Reply. But 1. To be nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to the Church, as the
Church; must needs imply a protection and defense of the Church in matters of
Religion; for it is Religion which gives being to the Church, and by Religion
it is that the Church does differ from the Civil State or Commonwealth. 2.
Mere heathens and infidels may have, and usually have this benefit by their
Kings and Queens, to be protected and defended in their civil rights and
liberties; but the Prophet speaks of a special benefit, which the Church shall
have by Kings and Queens above others. 3. The Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.2. requires us
to pray for Kings, and those that are in authority, that under them we may lead
a quiet and a peaceable life, as well in all godliness (which concerns Religion)
as honesty.

Zech, 13.3. That if any shall Prophesy falsely to draw away unto Idolatry, his
father and his mother that begat him, shall say unto him, thou shall not live;
for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord; and his father and his mother
that begat him, shall thrust him through when he prophesies. This shows that in
the times of the Gospel (of which times this is Prophesied, as appears by v.
1.) there shall be a restraining and punishing of false Prophets, false teachers
and seducers.

Except. Some answer that all that is here held out unto us, is this, that in
the times of the Gospel, false teachers that go about to draw from Christ, shall
be most odious unto true believers.

Reply. This is not all, but that they shall also be restrained and punished, as
those words plainly import. They shall say unto him, thou shall not live, and
they shall thrust him through.



viz. by the Magistrate, whom they shall inform against those seducers, that so
they may receive condign punishment. A parallel place to this, and which does
serve fully to illustrate this, there is, Deuteronomy. 13.6, 10. If thy brother, the
son of thy mother etc. entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go serve other
Gods etc. Thou shall not consent etc. neither shall thou conceal him; but thou
shall surely kill him, thine hand etc. Mark here, Thou shall surely kill him.
viz. Whosoever thou be'st that art enticed unto idolatry. But how is this
understood? may any one take upon him to kill such as would draw him away from
the true God? No, he must not do it himself, but procure it to be done, by such
as have power and authority to do it, as the words before do show; thou shall
not conceal him. i. thou shall complain of him to the Magistrate, and shall
inform him against him. So the words following show as much, Thine hand shall be
first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the people;
i.e. Thou having witnessed against him, and the Magistrate having condemned
him, thou shall throw the first stone at him. For so the witnesses used to do,
as we see Deuteronomy. 17.7. And mark also that which follows, v. 11. And all Israel
shall hear and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this amongst
you. This reason shows the precept to be moral, and to bind in all ages, Q. d.
The wickedness is exceeding great, and therefore he that is found guilty of it
shall die for it, that so others may fear to do the like.

I will add no more arguments, these may suffice to prove that Magistrates are
ordained of God, for the protecting and preserving of those that do well, and
for the correcting and punishing of those that do evil; and that not in civil
matters only, but also in matters of Religion.



Object. Tit. 3.10. An heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject.
Here, say some, the Apostle requires only that an heretic being obstinate be
rejected. i.e. Excommunicated, cast out of the Church, not restrained and
punished by the Magistrate.

Answ. The Apostle wrote to Titus, and signified what he and the officers of
the Church should do; as for the civil Magistrate, the Apostle had no reason to
mention him, there being as then none but such as were Aliens from Christ and
the Gospel. But does it follow because the Church must reject and excommunicate
an Heretic, that therefore the Magistrate has no power to restrain him from
preaching and publishing Heresy, and to punish him for it? Surely no more,
then it follows, that the magistrate may not punish for incest, because the
Apostle writes to the Church at Corinth to cast out the incestuous person. 1
Cor. 5.

Object. But they object again and say, what punishment does the Gospel appoint
for Heretical teachers and maintainers of false opinions in matters of Religion?

Answ. 1. I may demand also, what punishment does the Gospel appoint for
thieves, murderers, incestuous persons, etc. I do not find the Gospel to
express any punishment to be inflicted by the Magistrate more upon these then
upon the other; expressly nothing, that I know, is prescribed against either,
but by consequence something is prescribed against both; in that the Gospel
does approve, confirm and ratify the Magistrate to be a terror unto evil
works, and a revenger to execute wrath upon those that do evil, Romans 13.3, 4.
which (as has been said) holds as well in things concerning the first as the
second Table.

2. As it is in respect of offenses against the second Table; so it is also in
respect of offenses against the first Table; greater or lesser punishment is to
be inflicted, as the offense is more or less heinous; That place, Zech. 13.3.
being a Prophecy concerning the times of the Gospel, shows, that in some case,
death it self may and ought to be inflicted upon false teachers.

Object. But, say some, if the Magistrate be allowed this power to preserve and
maintain truth in matter of Religion, and to curb and restrain error; he may
either through ignorance or malice, or both, happen to do quite contrary, to
restrain truth and maintain error.

Answ. It may so happen indeed, and has often so happened, otherwise there had
not been so many Martyrs. But what then? The power in it self is good, and
being rightly used does work good, and shall it therefore be denied and
disanulled, because it may be abused, and so work evil? By this reason the
Magistrate shall have no power at all, not so much as in civil things; for he
may abuse and pervert also this power, he may condemn some as being thieves,
murderers, traitors, etc. who are no such men but most innocent persons.

Object. But some object that in the Parable of the tares, Math. 13. where the
master would not let the servants pluck up the tares as they would have done,
but bid them let them grow till the harvest, and then they should be plucked
up. Hence they gather that Heretics and such as maintain false doctrines, whom
they understand by the tares, must not be punished nor restrained, but let
alone until the end of the world, which Christ himself shows to be meant by the
harvest.

Answ. This Parable makes no more for a toleration of Heretics then of
thieves, murderers, and all wicked ones whatsoever; for if we will heed our
Saviors own explication; by the tares are meant generally the children of the
wicked one, v. 38. All things that offend, and they that work iniquity, v. 41.
Object. But are all the workers of iniquity to be let alone until the end of
the world? Answ. No, that is not our Saviors meaning, but the scope of the
Parable is to show, that however some may imagine, yet there will be a mixture
of good and bad here even until the end of the world; and that then, and not
before, shall be a full and perfect separation of the one from the other; The
same is signified by the Parable of a draw-net, Mat. 13.47. -- 50. Thus the
Doctrine being sufficiently confirmed, and the Objections made against it
answered, let us come to the Uses of it.

injurious to his people. 1. Injurious unto God, opposing his ordinance. 2.
Injurious to Gods vicegerent, the Magistrate, devesting him of that power
wherewith God has invested him. 3. Injurious unto Gods people, depriving them
of that benefit which they might and should have by the Magistrate, and for
want thereof exposing them to great and manifold inconveniences.

prove all things and hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. then much
more must Magistrates do it; Though they must not do things of themselves, but
must advise with godly and able Ministers, and be instructed and directed by
them out of Gods Word, yet must they not tie themselves to the dictates of men,
but must have the book of God, the holy Scripture, continually with them, and
exercise themselves diligently therein, and by it try things, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19,
20.
before either they receive them themselves, or cause others to submit unto
them.

the truth, not for the suppressing of it; and that they may be incited and
stirred up to do it. Thus the Apostle exhorts and requires us to pray and make
supplications, as for all, so more especially for Kings and those that are in
authority, that under them we may lead a peaceable and a quiet life in all
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. We may see, and it is worthy to be observed,
that according as the Kings and Rulers of Gods people were good or bad, so
Religion either flourished or decayed; under Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah and
Josiah it flourished: Under Rehoboam, Ahas, Manasses, etc. it decayed.

Jehoiada the high Priest, who had been Tutor to King Joash in his nonage, and
carried himself worthily in that place of dignity and power; at his death they
did him the honor to bury him among the Kings, because he had done good in
Israel both toward God and toward his house, 2 Chronicles. 24.16. So chiefly our
care must be to acknowledge the good hand of God upon us in vouchsafing to give
us such Magistrates, and to make them so instrumental to our good, and to give
him the praise and glory of all; The King granted me (said Nehemiah) according
to the good hand of my God upon me, Nehemiah 2.8. So of Ezra, it is said that
the King granted him all his request (viz. which he made in the behalf of
Jerusalem and the service of God) according to the hand of the Lord his God
upon him, Ezra 7.6. And having rehearsed the decree that the King had made and
the commission that he had given him concerning the worship of God, and the
affairs of the Church, he breaks out into this doxology, Blessed be the Lord
God of our fathers, who has put such a thing as this, in the Kings heart, to
beautify the house of the Lord, which is in Jerusalem: And has extended mercy
unto me before the King and his Counselors, and before all the Kings mighty
Princes, and I was strengthened as the hand of the Lord my God was upon me, Ezra
7.27, 28.

ECCLES. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was; and the
Spirit shall return to God that gave it.


IN the beginning of this Chapter Solomon bids, Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth; and he shows why every one ought to have this care, viz.
because in old age we can neither be so serviceable, neither can our service be
so acceptable; this is signified in those words before the evil days come, and
the years draw nigh, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them: the
days of old age are evil days, i. e. full of trouble and sorrow; in which
sense Jacob said that his days were evil, Genesis 47.9. Old age is subject to
diseases and distempers; Senectus ipsa morbus, it is it self a disease. And
therefore also the years of old age are years wherein a man has no pleasure,
see Psalm. 90.10. and 2 Samuel 19.35. And are we then in old age fit to do God
service? Or is it fit to put off the serving of God until old age? Shall we
think that God will have pleasure in that service which we put off till those
years come, wherein we our selves have no pleasure? Solomon having thus
generally set forth in the first verse how unmeet it is and unreasonable to
cast off the remembrance of God until old age come, he goes on in the next five
verses to describe old age and to set forth the troublesome and uncomfortable
condition of it more particularly: the description is very elegant, but
allegorical, and therefore obscure; I may not now stand to explain it, but must
come to the 7. ver. which I am to insist on, wherein he shows what old age
tends to, and what follows upon it, viz. death and judgment, Then shall the dust
return etc.

Then] viz. when old age has worn and weakened the body and dissolved the frame
and temperature of it.

Shall the dust] i. e. the body which was made of dust, Genesis 2.7.

Return to the earth as it was,] According to that Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of
thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the ground, (or earth); for
out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return.

And the Spirit] i. e. the soul, as the word Spirit is taken 1 Cor. 6.20. and
so in other places.

Shall return unto God] viz. as the Chaldee Paraphrast dothwel interpret it,
(...) i.e. to stand (or appear) in judgment before him, to be judged and
sentenced by him. For it is appointed unto men to dye once, so after this the
judgment, Heb. 9.27.

That gave it) that created it, and infused it into the body, see Genesis 2 7.

The words being sufficiently explained, I come to the Observations to be
gathered from them.

Then shall the dust, i. e. the body, return to the earth, as it was. The
Apostle calls the body, in respect of its condition here, mortal body, Romans
6.12. and so Romans 8.11. Its called a Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14. and 2 Cor.
5.1. A Tabernacle has no foundation as a house has, only is made fast with
cords and stakes, but the cords are soon loosed, and the stakes plucked up, and
so the Tabernacle dissolved. Its said John 1.14. that the word was made flesh,
and (...), we read it, See Beza.
dwelt among us, but the word signifies, to abide in a Tabernacle, it imports
that Christ had a mortal body.

But how comes it to pass, that the body is mortal? did God make it so at
first? No, had man continued such as God first made him, he had never died. His
body indeed being compacted of corruptible matter, was naturally apt to be
corrupted, but by a supernatural power it should have been preserved from
corruption. Augustine speaking of man, as he was at first created of God, says
well, mortalis erat condition corporis animalis, immortalis beneficio
creatoris, i. e. In respect of the natural constitution of his body, he was
mortal, but through the goodness of his creator he was immortal. It was sin
that brought mortallity. What day soever thou do eat thereof [viz. of the
forbidden fruit] (...) dying thou shall die, i. thou shall certainly die; so
God threatened Adam, Genesis 2.17. Not that immediately upon his transgression his
soul should part from his body, but immediately he should become mortal, and
subject to death, as Symmachus did well interpret it, (...), i. thou shall be
mortal. In this sense are the very same words used, 1 King. 2.37 It shall be
(said Solomon to Shimei) that on the day thou go over, and passest over the
brook Kidron, thou shall know for certain, that (...) dying thou shall die,
i.e. thou shall certainly die. Shimei died not that very day but then
immediately his life was forfeited, and he made himself liable to death,
Whenever Solomon should please to inflict it upon him. And thus it was with
Adam upon his eating of the forbidden fruit; presently the sentence of death
passed on him, dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return, Genesis 3.19.

Thus Adam by his transgression made himself mortal. Yea, and not himself only,
but all his posterity also. For all were included in him, and his sin was the
sin of all, and so in him all became mortal. In Adam all die, 1 Cor. 15.22.
viz. because in Adam all did sin. By one man (namely Adam) sin entered into the
world, and by sin death, and so death went over all etc. Romans 5.12.

viz. this, That the soul is immortal; the spirit [doth not go to the earth, as
the body, but] does return to God that gave it.

True it is, there is a death of the soul, a death in sin, Ephesians. 2.1.5. And a
death for sin, Revel. 20.6. It is there called the second death, because there
is another death for sin before it, viz. The death of the body, which death (as
has been showed) came by sin, and for sin; but after this comes a second death
for sin (if sin be not remitted through Christ) viz. The condemnation of the
soul, first, and afterward both of soul and body. The first death is but
temporal, but the second death is eternal.

But this death of the soul, whether in sin, or for sin, is but metaphorically
and improperly called death. The soul dies not so as to cease to be that
substance which it was before; in this respect it is immortal. The body turns
to dust, but the soul subsists, and remains for ever. One in these times has
set forth a book purposely to prove the soul to be mortal in like manner as the
body is mortal, maintaining, that when a man dies, his soul dies as well as the
body. A most gross opinion, and directly contradictory to the Text in hand, and
to many other places of Scripture, which by no art or subtilty can be eluded.
He would evade this Text that we have in hand, by saying, that it imports no
more then what is said, Psalm. 104.29. Thou take away their breath, they die,
and return to their dust. But these places are not so parallel, as he
supposes. For the taking away of the breath, which the Psalmist speaks of,
is a cause of death, and therefore, at least in order of nature before death;
for so the cause is ever before the effect: because God takes away from his
creatures their breath, therefore they die; but here the spirits going to God
is a consequent of death; First, a man dies, and then, as his body goes to the
earth, so his soul goes to God. This clearly argues a subsisting of the soul
when a man is dead, and that the soul does not die together with the body.

The answer which the adversary gives to this place, is to this effect (for it
is somewhat intricate) that therefore Christ told the penitent thief, that he
should that day be with him in Paradise, though it should not be until the
resurrection (for he grants that the body shall rise again, and then the soul
shall be reunited to it, but will have neither soul nor body to live until the
resurrection) because there is but, as it were, a moment betwixt death and the
resurrection, for that while a man is dead, be it never so long, he perceives
no continuance of time, being altogether without sense and feeling. But what if
a man be not sensible of time, is there therefore none for that? The 7 sleepers
that are said to have slept from the time of Decius, to the time of Theodosius,
about 200 years, by this reason may be said to have waked the same day that
they fell asleep. Yea grant this man's opinion of the souls mortality to be true,
and let the words of our Savior be expounded, as he would have them; and what
singular thing was promised to that penitent malefactor? It might as well have
been said to Adam, that that very day that he dyed he should be with Christ in
Paradise (though it should not be of, I know not how many thousand years after)
as it was spoken by our Savior to this Malefactor that was Crucified with him.

We are confident [saith the Apostle] willing rather to be absent from the
body, and present with the Lord. How (I wonder) are we present with the Lord,
when we are absent from the body, if the soul do not remain separated from the
body? certainly if the soul die with the body, we are less present with the
Lord after death, which is meant by absence from the body, then before.
Besides, that very phrase of being absent from the body, implies that something
of us, which can be nothing but the soul, has a subsistence by it self out of
the body, and therefore dies not with the body.

To this place he answers, that the Apostle meant nothing else but the estate
after the resurrection. But how could the Apostle mean that? For is there then
an absence from the body, when as the body rises again, and the soul and it
are again united?

Phil. 1.23. the Apostle says, That he desired to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, which was better for him, then to live still here in this world. And v.
21. that it was gain for him to die. But except the soul be mortal, how could
this be? how could death be gain to him? How could he desire to be dissolved
that he might be with Christ, and so be in a far better estate then here he
could enjoy, if as his body died, so his soul should die also, and should be no
more until the resurrection? Surely then it had been far better for him to live
still, yea (if it were possible) not to die at all, but to remain until Christ's
2 coming, as some upon a mistake of Christ's words supposed John should, Ioh.
21.23

I will add but one place more, viz. That 2 Cor. 12.2.3. where the Apostle
says, that he knew a man in Christ, (meaning without question himself) who was
caught up to paradise, the third heaven, whether in the body, or out of the
body, he could not tell. These words, which the Apostle twice repeateth,
whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell, to what purpose were
they, if the soul could not be separated from the body, and subsist in a state
of separation? They necessarily imply thus much, that the soul is a distinct
substance from the body, and may subsist out of the body. And consequently it
is not mortal, it dies not with the body. But some objections are made which
must be answered.



Totus homo moritur non totum hominis, i. the whole man dies, but not the
whole [not every part] of man; it suffices that one part, viz. the body dies.
For quod convenit parti, convenit etiam toti secundum illam partem, i. That
which agrees to a part, agrees also to the whole in respect of that part. Its
said Genesis 2.7. that God formed man of the dust of the ground; viz. because God
formed the body of man of the dust. As for the soul it was not formed thereof,
but infused, as there its said, that God breathed into man i. man's body] the
breath of life. If man's mortality did prove the mortality of the soul, then
because Christ died, not only his soul, but his divine nature should die also,
which (I think) this Author himself will abhor to say or think; for as man
consists of soul and body, so Christ of the divine and humane nature. And
therefore if Christ might die (as he did) and yet his divine nature be
immortal; then is there no necessity at all, why, because man dies, the soul
therefore must die also.



viz. an exclusion from God and from all happiness: but it is not capable of
such a death, as the body is liable to, viz. a deprivation of all sense and
feeling, and a corruption of the very substance of it, for the soul is a spirit
[as in the Text, and in other places it is termed) and therefore of an
incorruptible nature.

In death there is no remembrance of God; in the grave who shall give him
thanks, Psalm. 6.5.? The grave cannot praise him, death cannot celebrate him,
Isa. 38.18.

viz. to the instruction and edification of others. The living, the living, he
shall praise thee, as I do this day; the father to the children shall make known
thy truth, says Hezekiah there immediately after, Isaiah 38.19. In this
respect the godly have desired to live rather then to die, that they may edify
the Church, and to glorify God, which being dead they could not do. I will not
die, but live (says David, and why? he adds) and declare the works of the
Lord, Psalm. 118.17. See also, Phil. 1.23.24.25.

A living dog is better then a dead Lion. For the living know that they shall
die, but the dead know not any thing. And Eccles. 3.19.20.21. That which
befalls the sons of men, befalls beasts; even one thing befalls them;
as the one dies, so dies the other; yea they have all one breath, so that a
man has no pre-eminence above a beast; for all is vanity. All go unto one
place, all are of the dust, all turn to dust again. Who knows the spirit of a
man that goes upward, and the spirit of a beast that goes downward to the
earth?

Epicures and Atheists, who think there is no other life after this, and
therefore had rather live, though never so basely, then die, though never so
honorably. Certain it is, that the spirit of God means nothing less, then that
the worst alive, are better then the best being dead. For how then are they
blessed that die in the Lord, even whiles they are dead? Apoc. 14.13. How is it
gain to the godly to die, and far better for them then to live? Phil. ^.21.23.
And that very question, who knows the spirit of a man that goes upward, etc.
implies that in truth, the spirit of a man dies not when the body dies, as the
spirit of a beast does; although the Epicure and Atheist, that lives like a
beast, thinks that he shall also die like a beast; that there is no difference at
all betwixt the death of a beast, and the death of a man, but that every way as
the one, so the other dies also, viz. as well in soul, as in body. I pass to
the 3d and last observation.

viz. to be judged by him; for otherwise it is not true of every soul (not of
any soul of the wicked) that it goes to God, viz. so as to live with him, and
to love the blessed fruition of him.

Now that the soul immediately after its separation from the body, comes to
judgment, appears by those places pre-alledged, which show that the souls of
the godly immediately after death, are in blessed happiness; as 2 Cor. 5.8.
Phil. 1.23. Apoc. 14.13. This argues, that judgment does pass immediately upon
the soul, and that it is forthwith adjudged either to its reward, or
punishment. The same also may be proved by that of the rich man and Lazarus,
Luke 16. Which seems not to be (as some suppose) a mere parable, but a
parabolical history, or a history related somewhat after a parabolical manner.
For that 1. Lazarus is there named, whereas in mere parables, the names of
persons spoken of are not mentioned, because the persons are but feigned. And
2. parables are ever drawn from things outward and obvious unto men; whereas
our Savior there speaks of things done in the other world.

Tim. 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the
Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day, viz. of Christ's coming to
judgment in the end of the world. So Col. 3.4. When Christ, who is our life,
shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. By these, and such
like places, it may seem that there is no reward received after death until the
general judgment. And so diverse of the ancients have thought that the souls are
until the last judgment in certain receptacles, neither in pain nor pleasure,
but only in expectation of that which is to come.

just men departed out of this life, are said to be made perfect; Heb. 12.23.
viz. in comparison of what they were here in this world, though in comparison
of what they shall be after the resurrection, they be still imperfect.



I answer, yes; 1. In respect of men, because before only one part of them,
viz. the soul is judged; but the body having been partner with the soul, either
in righteousness, or in sin, meet and requisite it is, that the body also be
partner with the soul, either in the reward, or in punishment. We must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in the body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
evil. 2 Cor. 5.10. The things were done in the body, and therefore, as well the
body as the soul must be rewarded, or punished. Now this in respect of the body
is not til the last judgment. 2. In respect of God also, besides the particular
judgment, which is immediately after death, it is behoveful, that there be a
general judgment, as there shall be in the end of the world; viz. that so Gods
justice may be made manifest. Hereby reason of the prosperity of the wicked,
and the adversity of the godly, the justice of God sometime is questioned, yea
denied. Mal. 2.17. and 3.14, 15. Therefore God will have his justice vindicated
and cleared; All shall discern between the righteous and the wicked etc. Mal.
3.18. But the difference betwixt them immediately after death, is not
discerned, it appears not; the judgment that then passes upon the souls of
men, is secret, and unknown to us. Therefore meet it is that there be another
judgment, a general judgment, wherein all shall be judged, and that in the sight
of all, that so Gods justice may appear unto all. Therefore the Apostle
speaking of the last judgment, calls that day, a day of the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, i. a day wherein the righteous judgment of God shall
be revealed and made manifest to all the world. See Mal. 3. and the last ver.
with Mal. 4. and the two first verses.

To make some Use and application of all.

John desired earnestly that Gaius his body might prosper and be in health, 3 John 2. And S. Paul exhorted Timothy to have a care of his bodily health, 1 Timothy 5.23. But the things that concern the soul are chiefly to be thought of;
the welfare of the soul is principally to be regarded, First seek the Kingdom
of God and his righteousness Mat. 6.33. Good reason, seeing the body is mortal,
but the soul immortal. The body is but [as the Hebrews call it] (...); i. e.
the clothing or covering of man; the soul is the man indeed: Compare Mat. 10.
25 with Luke 9.25. Expende animam, impende in animam. Consider the worth of the
soul, and so take care for the soul. This was the folly of that rich man, Luke
12. when his barns were full, he said Soul take thine ease, eat, drink and be
merry, for thou have much goods laid up for many years. Alas! those goods were
for the body; not for the soul; that might starve in the midst of such plenty.
This is the misery of the wicked, what ever their outward estates be, yet their
inward man, their heart, is little worth; as Solomon tells us, Pro. 10.20. On
the other side this was Paul's comfort, that though his outward man (the body)
perished, yet his inward man (the soul) was renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16
This is the happiness of the godly; that though otherwise they be in adversity
yet their soul prospers, 3 John 2. Though outwardly they be poor, yet
inwardly they are rich, Apoc. 2.9. Thus Lazarus was rich, though otherwise a
poor beggar, and therefore was infinitely more happy then he that had abundance
of the unrighteous Mammon, but wanted the true riches. Labor we therefore for
these riches, spiritual riches, let out hearts be set on these which are
eternal, not on the other that are but temporal. Labor not for the meat that
perishes, but for that meat that endures to everlasting life, John 6.27.

evaded, but there is no evading of Gods judgment; Whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge, Heb. 13.4. Though man do not judge them yet God will: He will
render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2.6. God does sometimes exact
judgments here, but these are but preludia futuri judicii, tokens and
forerunners of the judgment to come; the judgments executed here are temporal,
but that hereafter is eternal, Heb. 6.2. The prosperity or adversity of this
life is but for a moment, but after death comes either that welfare or that woe,
which endures for ever. What can work upon us, what can be of force to make us
circumspect and watchful, if not the consideration of the judgment to come?
Augustine says it was metus mortis and futuri judicii, the fear of death and
of judgment after death that brought him out of the gulf of sin wherein he was
almost swallowed up and drowned. S. Paul also testifies of himself, that
knowing that there shall be a resurrection both of the just and the unjust; he
did exercise himself to have always a conscience void of offense, etc. Act.
24.15, 16. See 2 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. Eccles. 12.13, 14. But if we would be able
to stand in judgment we must not rely on our own righteousness, but renouncing
it as insufficient to justify us before God, we must fly unto Christ and lay
hold on him and his righteousness, see Psa. 143.2. Phil. 3.9 Let us be sure
that we be in Christ, and then we need neither fear death nor judgment after
death; For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1
But let us know and consider, that as there it follows, they only are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. He that says that
he abides in him must himself walk even as he walked, 1 John 2.6. As many as
walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God, Gal. 6.16.

FINIS.

