blazon or coat of arms
The Articles signed by his Highness OLIVER CROMWELL, Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, on Friday the 16. of December,
1653. in presence of the Judges, Barons of the Exchequer, and the Lord Major
and Court of Aldermen, in the Chancery Court in WESTMINSTER HALL.
FIrst, That his Excellency be chief Protector of the three Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

II. That He will call to His assistance Counselors, not under the number of
13. nor above 21.

III. That He shall not act without the advice of his Council.

IV. That there shall be every three years a Parliament called freely chosen to
begin in September next, viz* four hundred, and the number for every County
proportionable.

V. That no Parliament shall adjorn till they have sat above five Months.

VI. When ever any Bill is passed in Parliament, the Lord Protector shall have
twenty days to advise with his Council; if he sign it not in twenty days, it
shall pass without, unless contrary to these Articles.

VII. That no Parliament be dissolved by the Protector, but end every three
years, and the Protector to issue out Warrants.

VIII. All the Crown Reve^^es left to go to the maintenance of the Lord
Protector.

IX. To make Peace or War as He pleases, with the Advice of his Council, in
the intervale of Parliaments; but not to raise money without the Parliament,
unless in extraordinary Causes.

X. Whatsoever goes out in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England,
to go out in the Name of the Lord Protector.

XI. That it is Treason to speak against the present Government.

XII. That all forfeited and confiscated Estates go to the maintenance of the
Lord Protector.

XIII. That all Acts of Parliament made and Estates sold, stand good and be
enjoyed.

XIV. That the Lord Protector have Power to confer Titles of Honor, and to
dispose of the great places of Trust.

XV. That in the intervale of Parliaments, the Lord Protector* with his
Council, do order the Affairs of the Nation.

XVI. That all Articles of War be kept

XVII. That the known Laws of the Commonwealth be continued.

XVIII. That a standing Army be maintained of ten thousand Horse, and twenty
thousand Foot.

XIX That Christian Religion be maintained, such as is contained in the Word of
God.

XX. That all persons shall have liberty of conscience; provided, that they
disturb not the Civil Government, except the Popish and Prelatical party.

XXI. That no Papist of Delinquent in Arms since the year 1649. Elect, or be
Elected a Parliament man, under penalty of forfeiture of one years Revenue, and
the Moity of his personal Estate.

XXII. That the Lord Protector have power to pardon all Offenders, except
Murder.

XXIII. That Writs be issued out in July next for summoning the Parliament,
either by the Protector, or in Course.

XXIV. That when the Protector dies, the Council then sitting shall summon all
the Members of the Council, the major part to elect one to be Protector before
they stir out of the Council Chamber; and the Person so chosen, not to be under
the Age of 21 years; Nor of the Family of the Stewards.

LONDON, Printed for G. HORTON, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill* and in St. PAUL'S Churchyard, MDCLIIL.


