THE SCOTCH Covenant NEWLY REVIVED. IN A Conference between Mr. Crofton and a
Converted Scotch Parson.

Discovering all the whole Mystery of Iniquity carried on by hare-brain'd
Faction under pretense of Reformation.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1661.

THE PREAMBLE.
Mr Crofton being spiritually advertised to invite Mr. Withers to dinner, and
especially to give him thanks (on the behalf on his Church-Commoners) for
remaining so constant to his Principles of sedition, and expressing himself so
freely in Print for the Covenant, whereby by Mr. Crofton thought his own
spurious pamphlets the more strengthened and secured, and his Lungs the better
clarified, and preserved, by that powder of Brimstone, to hold out belching
against all those who would not fall down and worship the Calf-Covenant with
the white face. It happened that an honest Scottish Parson (Rara avis etc.)
having read some of Croftons Pulpit Pasquils, and poisonous Papers against the
Primitive power, and Basis of Church-Governernment, Episcopacy; and conceiving
himself able enough to enter the List against so Ignorant and Weak a Disputant,
enquired for Croftons house, to which he was directed by a Boy where like an
unwelcome or un-sent-for person, he waited till after Dinner; and then Mr.
Crofton, setting his Beard, (as much as there was of it) in Print, ordering his
Band, drawing his Month together, (as you have seen a Milk Wench pictured in a
Land-skip) and putting his Countenance into the precise Model of a vizard,
accosts the Scotch man in these words; What is your will with me? The Parson
somewhat amazed at his State and Formality, answered; Geod feath Mon, I ken no
whot ta speak toll thee, gif tow tekst sike Stat upon thee, Crofton discovering
him by his Tongue to be a Scottish-man, thought he was sent to him upon some
Design from the Kirk; cried him Mercy, took him by the hand, and requested him
to walk with him up stairs, where they had dined; Mr. Crofton desiring Mr.
Withers (his Brother in iniquity) to salute the Parson, as a reverend Member,
and Pillar of their Church: which to do, Mr. Withers likewise sets his face on
the skrewes, and then enquires what news in Scotland: I ken noot sir, quoth
the Parson, and laughed heartily: Mr. Withers (reprehending his error) said, I
mean, in, from, or out of Scotland; they are all one by a Trope; but pray. Sir,
what News out of Scotland, if you will have it so?

Scottish. I Here ne mare than ye aw her, gif ye ha any luggs.


Crofton. But how does the Parliament proceed there?


Scottishman. Marry, mickle we will, they ha brunt the Coov'nant, sir, bethhond o
the Common Hong mon.


Crofton. Oh horrid!


Withers. Oh horrid! Monstra morendum.


Crofton. I Will justify it was an act of sacrilege, a work of the Devil.


Withers. And his damme, a sin against God and man.


Crofton. Nay, a plain sin against the Holy Ghost; for as I sind it, and can
prove it, it is a sin against knowledge, Ergo, a sin against the Holy Ghost, as
I said before.


Withers. A sin unpardonable, and therefore damnable.


Scottishman. Haud, haud, sirs, haud, ne mere Blesfemy, wha med the Coovnant?


Crofton. The select people of God.


Withers. The Righteous of three Nations; like as a threefold cord is the
strongest, so the Covenant was strengthened, and made up with the most
undefiled hands of three Nations.


Scottishman. Haud, haud, sirs, haud, ye gang ta fest: A me saw, the thrads o
that Coord was wop'd in Hell, an yar Coovnant med up o the Deele himsell; I ken
it reit we will sirs, gif ye ha any gress curss an ban it fro yar hoose an yar
saws sirs, an faw to the tra service o Goad sirs; mind ye me; let noot Pride an
siller damm ye sirs, ye ha a gretious King sirs, an a geod Kirk Government noow
sirs, I uphold ye sirs, the lick i ne plece i the Wardd sirs.


Crofton. Yes at Rome sir.


Scottishman. Fi, fi, geod feath yare mickle oout sirs.


Crofton. Where the Whore of Babylon commits daily fornication with the Kings
of the earth.


Withers. And hides all her iniquities in Lawn Sleeves, the Mark of the Beast
is upon her.


Crofton she drinks the blood of the Faithful, and devours the livings of the
Godly; she is more Insatiate then the Sea or the Grave.


Withers Or Hell fire, and choakes worse then brimston.


Scottishman Yare mickle wise sirs, ye ha roab'd a feole latly sirs, mind ye
me an herke ye toll me be avisd sirrs I speak fur aw year geods. yare Coovnant
has med ye aw would sirrs, be avised sirs.


Crofton. The Covenant was a sacred thing, framed to maintain the Church in its
Primitive whiteness and purity.


Withers. Against the pride of the Prelates and the Innovations of Antichrist.


Scottishman. Oout oout faw sham, the faw deele has gin ye a lift, fro Goad
Sirs an noow ye lick Lymmer loones spet at his servants gif ye had ane, fer O
the Loord ye would noot de as ye de Sirs.


Crofton. Why, What do we do Sir?


Withers. I, What do we do Sir?


Crofton. Did not the Covenant receive its Birth in your Country? and were not
your Countrymen the lawful and rightful Fathers of it? and were not we
advertised by Henderson, that man of God;


Scotchman. O the dele mon


Crofton. And many other precious Saints by Letters; I say advertised by
Letters, with holy and powerful sanctifying Reasons that Bishops were not Jure
Divino, that their Calling and Power in the Church was but mere Usurpation,
promoted by the Pope to introduce his Power, and make the Sea of Rome more
glorious; and to that end to second their Brotherly Engagements with us (who
were tender Consciences) made an Inrode into England with the Bible in one
hand, and Sword in the other the very Sword of the Spirit which carried all
before it and punished all from Dan to Barsheba; do you not know this?


Scottishman. Ne be Goad noow ye mack me swer, for aw the tim, the Coovenant
ers wern up i Erms, they wern beten mest bestly i ery plece, an the geod King
ded prosper tol Crumwall (the faw deele splits Crag for it) came wi his
Independent riff raff ragged rogs thaut fooght for the Kirk, but plundered the
Quire oout o hoilly roth the dele a bit ded yar thar Coovenant threve Sirs,
tall than Sirs.


Crofton. You are mistaken sir, Out intentions were geod, Our Cause was geod,
and our success in every place geod.


Scotchman. Ded ye fit foor Goad oor the Deele sirs, oor foor siller sirs,
foor Mammon sirs, the Deels none Cousin sios, ans Damms Munion sirs


Crofton. We fought for the Covenant sir.


Scottishman. Wha the Deele shod ye fit foor that ye had befer sirs?


Crofton. We fought for the keeping and maintaining it.


Withers. And for the Church in general, and against Bishops and Prelates as
we said before.


Scottishman. Ne Ne geod feath, I ken we will enoow what ye foot for firs; Ye
foot een'e anenst the Kirk an foor the Beshops Lands sirs, an foorne year
none pert Master Copton Wrethers ye durst nere leoke a tiny Kitlin ith fece,
yat lick Seint Thief in the Legend; Ye ha threv'e brawly; wi a murren toll ye
a^ Noll grazd a fett Soow i the brech, when he ga you the Statute Office,
whilke ye sauld i the Deeles nam to Master that's o the Duck, Drake Drack,
Master Drake Drack for a power o poonds geod an mickle sterlin siller be the
Mass, an ded ye noot ater ye had plundered the Bishops o thar hoorses and
siller by thar Londs an sa roobd the Kirk i the faw Deels nem an noow de ye
complan o yar paverte i prent; wi a hoorse pox toll ye aw me saw ye pratend
lyolty, an hoow muckle ye ha loov'd the King and Kirk, when ye ha wrote an
speak anenst um lick a ralling rattling rag as towart an enderst among ye toll
ris a new war sirs anenst the piece oath King an Country.


Withers. The Man's mad sure, have you a mind to be beaten Priest?


Scottishman. Wha sall dot, noot sike a limmer Loone, a rabbell rabbell o rim
an noone sense as tou art.


Crofton. I profess you are very uncivil sir.


Scottishman. Ne Ne noot sa, unsele as tow art toll pip, i the Lasses breches
an see aw foor noaught, their very noock an aw, geod feath ye Presbyters are
pintell proud Jacks, ye loove to be pepin in hools an vant your Leachery at
yare fingers ends sirs.


Crofton. You base unworthy man, do you abuse me in my own house?


Scottishman. Nee Nee ye ha abased yar nan sell sir, in yar non hoose an a
brod ta sir, by bringing yar tiny Less tool the stol o Repentance, gif ya
stend se muckle and mayn on yar Covenant, an your Santete, whot med ye sham et
se bestli, but yar loost lick a fawse Loone gis ye are.


Crofton. Get you out of my doors, I profess my fingers tingle at him.


Scottishman. Ne, Ne, tes at another Lass Mon, gang yar ways foor a coople of
Dunces, ye cannoot hald despute worth a Crack.


And so the Scottish parson left them, fuming and fretting that their knaveries
should be so discovered to the world, and gave order to the person aforesaid to
publish this passage, that his Credit might receive no prejudice by their
Quarrelling.

FINIS.

